IV

THE PAST

1

Our past stretches behind us in long perspective.  It slumbers on the
horizon like a deserted city shrouded in mist.  A few peaks mark its
boundary, and soar predominant into the air; a few important acts stand
out, like towers, some with the light still upon them, others half
ruined and slowly decaying beneath the weight of oblivion.  The trees
are bare, the walls crumble, and shadow slowly steals over all.
Everything seems to be dead there, and rigid, save only when memory,
slowly decomposing, lights it for an instant with an illusory gleam.
But apart from this animation, derived only from our expiring
recollections, all would appear to be definitively motionless,
immutable for ever, divided from present and future by a river that
shall not again be crossed.

In reality it is alive; and, for many of us, endowed with a profounder,
more ardent life than either present or future.  In reality this dead
city is often the hot-bed of our existence; and, in accordance with the
spirit in which men return to it, shall some find all their wealth
there, and others lose what they have.


2

Our conception of the past has much in common with our conception of
love and happiness, destiny, justice, and most of the vague but
therefore not less potent spiritual organisms that stand for the mighty
forces we obey.  Our ideas have been handed down to us ready-made by
our predecessors; and even when our second consciousness wakes, and,
proud in its conviction that henceforth nothing shall be accepted
blindly, proceeds most carefully to investigate these ideas, it will
squander its time questioning those that loudly protest their right to
be heard, and pay no heed to the others close by, that as yet, perhaps,
have said nothing.  Nor have we, as a rule, far to go to discover these
others.  They are in us and of us; they wait for us to address them.
They are not idle, notwithstanding their silence.  Amid the noise and
babble of the crowd they are tranquilly directing a portion of our real
life; and, as they are nearer to truth than their self-satisfied
sisters, they will often be far more simple, and far more beautiful too.


3

Among the most stubborn of these ready-made ideas are those that
preside over our conception of the past, and render it a force as
imposing and rigid as destiny; a force that indeed becomes destiny
working backwards, with its hand outstretched to the destiny that
burrows ahead, to which it transmits the last link of our chains.  The
one thrusts us back, the other urges us forward, with a like
irresistible violence.  But the violence of the past is perhaps more
terrible and more alarming.  One may disbelieve in destiny.  It is a
god whose onslaught many have never experienced.  But no one would
dream of denying the oppressiveness of the past.  Sooner or later its
effect must inevitably be felt.  Those even who refuse to admit the
intangible will credit the past, which their finger can touch, with all
the mystery, the influence, the sovereign intervention whereof they
have stripped the powers that they have dethroned; thus rendering it
the almost unique and therefore more dreadful god of their depopulated
Olympus.


4

The force of the past is indeed one of the heaviest that weigh upon men
and incline them to sadness.  And yet there is none more docile, more
eager to follow the direction we could so readily give, did we but know
how best to avail ourselves of this docility.  In reality, if we think
of it, the past belongs to us quite as much as the present, and is far
more malleable than the future.  Like the present, and to a much
greater extent than the future, its existence is all in our thoughts,
and our hand controls it; nor is this only true of our material past,
wherein there are ruins that we perhaps can restore; it is true also of
the regions that are closed to our tardy desire for atonement; it is
true above all of our moral past, and of what we consider to be most
irreparable there.


5

"The past is past," we say, and it is false; the past is always
present.  "We have to bear the burden of our past," we sigh, and it is
false; the past bears our burden.  "Nothing can wipe out the past," and
it is false; the least effort of will sends present and future
travelling over the past to efface whatever we bid them efface.  "The
indestructible, irreparable, immutable past!"  And that is no truer
than the rest.  In those who speak thus it is the present that is
immutable, and knows not how to repair.  "My past is wicked, it is
sorrowful, empty," we say again; "as I look back I can see no moment of
beauty, of happiness or love; I see nothing but wretched ruins . . ."
And that is false; for you see precisely what you yourself place there
at the moment your eyes upon it.


6

Our past depends entirely upon our present, and is constantly changing
with it.  Our past is contained in our memory; and this memory of ours,
that feeds on our heart and brain, and is incessantly swayed by them,
is the most variable thing in the world, the least independent, the
most impressionable.  Our chief concern with the past, that which truly
remains and forms part of us, is not what we have done, or the
adventures that we have met with, but the moral reactions bygone events
are producing within us at this very moment, the inward being they have
helped to form; and these reactions, that give birth to our sovereign,
intimate being, are wholly governed by the manner in which we regard
past events, and vary as the moral substance varies that they encounter
within us.  But with every step in advance that our feelings or
intellect take, a change will come in this moral substance; and then,
on the instant, the most immutable facts, that seemed to be graven for
ever on the stone and bronze of the past, will assume an entirely
different aspect, will return to life and leap into movement, bringing
us vaster and more courageous counsels, dragging memory aloft with them
in their ascent; and what was once a mass of ruin, mouldering in the
darkness, becomes a populous city whereon the sun shines again.


7

We have an arbitrary fashion of establishing a certain number of events
behind us.  We relegate them to the horizon of our memory; and having
set them there, we tell ourselves that they form part of a world in
which the united efforts of all mankind could not wipe away a tear, or
cause a flower to lift its head.  And yet, while admitting that these
events have passed beyond our control, we still, with the most curious
inconsistency, believe that they have full control over us; whereas the
truth is that they can only act upon us to the extent in which we have
renounced our right to act upon them.  The past asserts itself only in
those whose moral growth has ceased; then, and not till then, does it
become redoubtable.  From that moment we have indeed the irreparable
behind us, and the weight of what we have done lies heavy upon our
shoulders.  But so long as the life of our mind and character flows
uninterruptedly on, so long will the past remain in suspense above us;
and, as the glance may be that we send towards it, will it, complaisant
as the clouds Hamlet showed to Polonius, adopt the shape of the hope or
fear, the peace or disquiet, that we are perfecting within us.


8

No sooner has our moral activity weakened than accomplished events rush
forward and assail us; and woe to him who opens the door, and permits
them to take possession of his hearth!  Each one will vie with the
other in overwhelming him with the gifts best calculated to shatter his
courage.  It matters not whether our past has been happy and noble, or
lugubrious and criminal, there shall still be great danger in allowing
it to enter, not as an invited guest, but like a parasite settling upon
us.  The result will be either sterile regret or impotent remorse; and
remorse and regrets of this kind are equally disastrous.  In order to
draw from the past what is precious within it--and most of our wealth
is there--we must go to it at the hour when we are strongest, most
conscious of mastery; enter its domain, and there make choice of what
we require, discarding the rest, and laying our command upon it never
to cross our threshold without our order.  Like all things that only
can live at the cost of our spiritual strength, it will soon learn to
obey.  At first, perhaps, it will endeavour to resist.  It will have
recourse to artifice and prayer.  It will try to tempt us, to cajole.
It will drag forward frustrated hopes and joys that are gone for ever,
broken affections, well-merited reproaches, expiring hatred and love
that is dead, squandered faith and perished beauty; it will thrust
before us all that once had been the marvellous essence of our ardour
for life; it will point to the beckoning sorrows, decaying happiness,
that now haunt the ruin.  But we shall pass by, without turning our
head; our hand shall scatter the crowd of memories, even as the sage
Ulysses, in the Cimmerian night, with his sword prevented the
shades--even that of his mother, whom it was not his mission to
question--from approaching the black blood that would for an instant
have given them life and speech.  We shall go straight to the joy, the
regret or remorse, whose counsel we need; or to the act of injustice we
wish scrupulously to examine, in order either to make reparation, if
such still be possible, or that the sight of the wrong we did, whose
victims have ceased to be, is required to give us the indispensable
force that shall lift us above the injustice it still lies in us to
commit.


9

Yes, even though our past contain crimes that now are beyond the reach
of our best endeavours, even then, if we consider the circumstances of
time and place, and the vast plane of each human existence, these
crimes fade out of our life the moment we feel that no temptation, no
power on earth, could ever induce us to commit the like again.  The
world has not forgiven--there is but little that the external sphere
will forget or forgive--and their material effects will continue, for
the laws of cause and effect differ from those which govern our
consciousness.  At the tribunal of our personal justice, however--the
only tribunal which has decisive action on our inaccessible life, as it
is the only one whose decrees we cannot evade, whose concrete judgments
stir us to our very marrow--the evil action that we regard from a
loftier plane than that at which it was committed, becomes an action
that no longer exists for us save in so far as it may serve in the
future to render our fall more difficult; nor has it the right to lift
its head again except at the moment when we incline once more towards
the abyss it guards.

Bitter, surely, must be the grief of him in whose past there are acts
of injustice whereof every avenue now is closed, who is no longer able
to seek out his victims, and raise them and comfort them.  To have
abused one's strength in order to despoil some feeble creature who has
definitely succumbed beneath the blow; to have callously thrust
suffering upon a loving heart, or merely misunderstood and passed by a
touching affection that offered itself--these things must of necessity
weigh heavily upon our life, and induce a sorrow within us that shall
not readily be forgotten.  But it depends on the actual point our
consciousness has attained whether our entire moral destiny shall be
depressed or lifted beneath this burden.  Our actions rarely die: and
many unjust deeds of ours will therefore inevitably return to life some
day to claim their due and start legitimate reprisals.  They will find
our external life without defence; but before they can reach the inward
being at the centre of that life, they must first listen to the
judgment we have already passed on ourselves; and in accordance with
the nature of that judgment will the attitude be of these mysterious
envoys, who have come from the depths where cause and effect are poised
in eternal equilibrium.  If it has indeed been from the heights of our
newly acquired consciousness that we have questioned ourselves, and
condemned, they will not be menacing justiciaries whom we shall
suddenly see surging in from all sides, but benevolent visitors,
friends we have almost expected, and they will draw near us in silence.
They know in advance that the man before them is no longer the guilty
creature they sought; and instead of bringing hatred, revolt, and
despair, or punishments that degrade and kill, they will come charged
with ennobling, consoling and purifying thought and penance.


10

The things which differentiate the happy and strong from those who weep
and will not be consoled, all derive from the one same principle of
confidence and ardour; and thus it is that the manner in which we are
able to recall what we have done or suffered is far more important than
our actual sufferings or deeds.  No past, viewed by itself, can seem
happy; and the privileged of fate, who reflect on what remains of the
happy years that have flown, have perhaps more reason for sorrow than
the unfortunate ones who brood over the dregs of a life of
wretchedness.  Whatever was one day and has now ceased to be, makes for
sadness; above all, whatever was very happy and very beautiful.  The
object of our regrets--whether these revolve around what has been or
might have been--is therefore more or less the same for all men, and
their sorrow should be the same.  It is not, however; in one case it
will reign uninterruptedly, whereas in another it will only appear at
very long intervals.  It must therefore depend on things other than
accomplished facts.  It depends on the manner in which men will deal
with these facts.  The conquerors in this world--those who waste no
time setting up an imaginary irreparable and immutable athwart their
horizon, those who seem to be born afresh every morning in a world that
for ever awakes anew to the future--these know instinctively that what
appears to exist no longer is still existing intact, that what appeared
to be ended is only completing itself.  They know that the years time
has taken from them are still in travail; still, under their new
master, obeying the old.  They know that their past is for ever in
movement; that the yesterday which was despondent, decrepit and
criminal, will return full of joyousness, innocence, youth, in the
track of to-morrow.  They know that their image is not yet stamped on
the days that are gone; that a decisive deed, or thought, will suffice
to break down the whole edifice; that however remote or vast the shadow
may be that stretches behind them, they have only to put forth a
gesture of gladness or hope for the shadow at once to copy this
gesture, and, flashing it back to the remotest, tiniest ruins of early
childhood even, to extract unexpected treasure from all this wreckage.
They know that they have retrospective action on all bygone deeds; and
that the dead themselves will annul their verdicts in order to judge
afresh a past that to-day has transfigured and endowed with new life.

They are fortunate who find this instinct in the folds of their cradle.
But may the others not imitate it who have it not; and is not human
wisdom charged to teach us how we may acquire the salutary instincts
that nature has withheld?


11

Let us not lull ourselves to sleep in our past; and if we find that it
tends to spread like a vault over our life, instead of incessantly
changing beneath our eye; if the present grow into the habit of
visiting it, not like a good workman repairing thither to execute the
labours imposed upon him by the commands of to-day, but as a too
passive, too credulous pilgrim, content idly to contemplate beautiful,
motionless ruins--then, the more glorious, the happier that our past
may have been, with all the more suspicion should it be regarded by us.

Nor should we yield to the instinct that bids us accord it profound
respect, if this respect induce the fear in us that we may disturb its
nice equilibrium.  Better the ordinary past, content with its befitting
place in the shadow, than the sumptuous past which claims to govern
what has travelled beyond its reach.  Better a mediocre but living
present, which acts as though it were alone in the world, than a
present which proudly expires in the chains of a marvellous long ago.
A single step that we take at this hour towards an uncertain goal, is
far more important to us than the thousand leagues we covered in our
march towards a dazzling triumph in the days that were.  Our past had
no other mission than to lift us to the moment at which we are, and
there equip us with the needful experience and weapons, the needful
thought and gladness.  If, at this precise moment, it take from us and
divert to itself one particle of our energy, then, however glorious it
may have been, it still was useless, and had better never have been.
If we allow it to arrest a gesture that we were about to make, then is
our death beginning; and the edifices of the future will suddenly take
the semblance of tombs.

More dangerous still than the past of happiness and glory is the one
inhabited by overpowering and too dearly cherished phantoms.  Many an
existence perishes in the coils of a fond recollection.  And yet, were
the dead to return to this earth, they would say, I fancy, with the
wisdom that must be theirs who have seen what the ephemeral light still
hides from us: "Dry your eyes.  There comes to us no comfort from your
tears: exhausting you, they exhaust us also.  Detach yourself from us,
banish us from your thoughts, until such time as you can think of us
without strewing tears on the life we still live in you.  We endure
only in your recollection; but you err in believing that your regrets
alone can touch us.  It is the things you do that prove to us we are
not forgotten, and rejoice our manes; and this without your knowing it,
without any necessity that you should turn towards us.  Each time that
our pale image saddens your ardour, we feel ourselves die anew, and it
is a more perceptible, irrevocable death than was our other; bending
too often over our tombs, you rob us of the life, the courage and love
that you imagine you restore.

"It is in you that we are, it is in all your life that our life
resides; and as you become greater, even while forgetting us, so do we
become greater too, and our shades draw the deep breath of prisoners
whose prison door is flung open.

"If there be anything new we have learned in the world where we are
now, it is, first of all, that the good we did to you when we were,
like yourselves, on the earth, does not balance the evil wrought by a
memory which saps the force and the confidence of life."


12

Above all, let us envy the past of no man.  Our own past was created by
ourselves, and for ourselves alone.  No other could have suited us, no
other could have taught us the truth that it alone can teach, or given
the strength that it alone can give.  And whether it be good or bad,
sombre or radiant, it still remains a collection of unique masterpieces
the value of which is known to none but ourselves; and no foreign
masterpiece could equal the action we have accomplished, the kiss we
received, the thing of beauty that moved us so deeply, the suffering we
underwent, the anguish that held us enchained, the love that wreathed
us in smiles or in tears.  Our past is ourselves, what we are and shall
be; and upon this unknown sphere there moves no creature, from the
happiest down to the most unfortunate, who could foretell how great a
loss would be his could he substitute the trace of another for the
trace which he himself must leave in life.  Our past is our secret,
promulgated by the voice of years; it is the most mysterious image of
our being, over which Time keeps watch.  This image is not dead; a mere
nothing degrades or adorns it; it can still grow bright or sombre, can
still smile or weep, express love or hatred; and yet it remains
recognisable for ever in the midst of the myriad images that surround
it.  It stands for what we once were, as our aspirations and hopes
stand for what we shall be; and the two faces blend, that they may
teach us what we are.

Let us not envy the facts of the past, but rather the spiritual garment
that the recollection of days long gone will weave around the sage.
And though this garment be woven of joy or of sorrow, though it be
drawn from the dearth of events or from their abundance, it shall still
be equally precious; and those who may see it shining over a life shall
not be able to tell whether its quickening jewels and stars were found
amid the grudging cinders of a cabin or upon the steps of a palace.

No past can be empty or squalid, no events can be wretched: the
wretchedness lies in our manner of welcoming them.  And if it were true
that nothing had happened to you, that would be the most remarkable
adventure that any man ever had met with; and no less remarkable would
be the light it would shed upon you.  In reality the facts, the
opportunities and possibilities, the passions, that await and invite
the majority of men, are all more or less the same.  Some may be more
dazzling than others; their attendant circumstances may differ, but
they differ far less than the inward reactions that follow; and the
insignificant, incomplete event that falls on a fertile heart and brain
will readily attain the moral proportions and grandeur of an analogous
incident which, on another plane, will convulse a people.

He who should see, spread out before him, the past lives of a multitude
of men, could not easily decide which past he himself would wish to
have lived were he not able at the same time to witness the moral
results of these dissimilar and unsymmetrical facts.  He might not
impossibly make a fatal blunder; he might choose an existence
overflowing with incomparable happiness and victory, that sparkle like
wonderful jewels; while his glance might travel indifferently over a
life that appeared to be empty whereas it was truly steeped to the brim
in serene emotions and lofty, redeeming thoughts whereby, though the
eye saw nothing, that life was yet rendered happy among all.  For we
are well aware that what destiny has given, and what destiny holds in
reserve, can be revolutionised as utterly by thought as by great
victory or great defeat.  Thought is silent; it disturbs not a pebble
on the illusory road we see; but at the crossway of the more actual
road that our secret life follows will it tranquilly erect an
indestructible pyramid; and thereupon, suddenly, every event, to the
very phenomena of earth and heaven, will assume a new direction.

In Siegfried's life, it is not the moment when he forges the prodigious
sword that is most important, or when he kills the dragon and compels
the gods from his path, or even the dazzling second when he encounters
love on the flaming mountain, but indeed the brief instant wrested from
eternal decrees, the little childish gesture, when one of his hands,
red with the blood of his mysterious victim, having chanced to draw
near his lips, his eyes and ears are suddenly opened; he understands
the hidden language of all that surrounds him, detects the treachery of
the dwarf who represents the powers of evil, and learns in a flash to
do that which had to be done.




V

LUCK

1

Once upon a time, an old Servian legend tells us, there were two
brothers of whom one was industrious, but unfortunate, and the other
lazy, but overwhelmingly prosperous.  One day the unfortunate brother
meets a beautiful girl who is tending sheep and weaving a golden
thread.  "To whom do these sheep belong?" he asks.  "They belong to
whom I belong."  "And to whom do you belong?"  "To your brother: I am
his luck."  "And where is my luck then?"  "Very far from here."  "Can I
find it?"  "Yes, if you look for it."

So he wanders away in search of his luck.  And one evening, in a great
forest, he comes across a poor old woman asleep under a tree.  He wakes
her and asks who she is.  "Don't you know me?" she answers.  "It is
true you never have seen me: I am your luck."  "And who can have given
me so wretched a luck?"  "Destiny."  "Can I find destiny?"  "Yes, if
you look long enough."

So he goes off in search of destiny.  He travels a very long time, and
at last she is pointed out to him.  She lives in an enormous and
luxurious palace; but her wealth is dwindling day by day, and the doors
and windows of her abode are shrinking.  She explains to him that she
passes thus, alternately, from misery to opulence; and that her
situation at a given moment determines the future of all the children
who may come into the world at that moment.  "You were born," she says,
"when my prosperity was on the wane; and that is the cause of your
ill-luck."  The only way, she tells him, to hoodwink or get the better
of fortune would be to substitute the luck of Militza, his niece, for
his own, seeing that she was born at a propitious period.  All he need
do, she says, is to take this niece into his house, and to declare to
any one who may ask him that all he has belongs to Militza.

He does as she bids him, and his affairs at once take a new turn.  His
herds multiply and grow fat, his trees are bent beneath the masses of
fruit, unexpected inheritances come in, his land bears prodigious
crops.  But one morning, as he stands there, his heart filled with
happiness, eyeing a magnificent cornfield, a stranger asks him who the
owner may be of these wonderful ears of wheat that, as they sway to and
fro beneath the dew, seem twice as heavy and twice as high as the ears
in the adjoining field.  He forgets himself, and answers, "They are
mine."  At that very instant fire breaks out in the opposite end of the
field, and commences its ravages.  Then he remembers the advice that he
has neglected to follow: he runs after the stranger shouting, "Stop,
come back: I made a mistake: what I told you was not true!  This field
is not mine: it belongs to my niece Militza!"  And the flames have no
sooner heard than they suddenly fall away, and the corn shoots up
afresh.


2

This naive and very ancient image, which might almost serve to-day as
an illustration of our actual ignorance, proves that the mysterious
problem of chance has not changed, from the time of man's first
questioning glance.  We have our thoughts, which build up our intimate
happiness or sorrow; and upon this events from without have more or
less influence.  In some men these thoughts will have acquired such
strength, such vigilance, that without their consent nothing can enter
the structure of crystal and brass, they have been able to raise on the
hill that commands the wonted road of adventures.  And we have our
will, which our thoughts feed and sustain; and many useless or harmful
events can be held in check by our will.  But around these islets,
within which is a certain degree of safety, of immunity from attack,
extends a region as vast and uncontrollable as the ocean, a region
swayed by chance as the waves are swayed by the wind.  Neither will nor
thought can keep one of these waves from suddenly breaking upon us; and
we shall be caught unawares, and perhaps be wounded and stunned.  Only
when the wave has retreated can thought and will begin their beneficent
action.  Then they will raise us, and bind up our wounds; restore
animation, and take careful heed that the mischief the shock has
wrought shall not reach the profound sources of life.  Their mission
extends no further, and may, on the surface, appear very humble.  In
reality, however, unless chance assume the irresistible form of cruel
disease or death, the workings of will and thought are sufficient to
neutralise all its efforts, and to preserve what is best and most
essential to man in human happiness.


3

Redoubtable, multitudinous chance is for ever threading its watchful
way through the midst of the events we have foreseen, and round and
about our most deliberate actions, wherewith we are slowly tracing the
broad lines of our existence.  The air we breathe, the time we
traverse, the space through which we move, are all peopled by lurking
circumstances, which pick us out from among the crowd.  The least study
of their habits will quickly convince us that these strange daughters
of hazard, who should be blind and deaf as their father, by no means
act in his irresponsible fashion.  They are well aware of what they are
doing, and rarely make a mistake.  With inexplicable certainty do they
move to the passer-by whom they have been sent to confront, and lightly
touch his shoulder.  Two men may be travelling upon the same road, and
at the same hour; but there will be no hesitation or doubt in the ranks
of the double, invisible troop whom fortune has ambushed there.
Towards one a band of white virgins will hasten, bearing palms and
amphorae, presenting the thousand unexpected delights of the journey;
as the other approaches, the "Evil Women," whom Aeschylus tells of,
will hurl themselves from the hedges, as though they were charged to
avenge, upon this unwitting victim, some inexpiable crime committed by
him before he was born.


4

There is scarcely one of us who has not been able, in some measure, to
follow the workings of destiny in life.  We have all known men who met
with a prosperity or disaster entirely out of relation to any of their
actions; men upon whom good or bad luck seemed suddenly, at a turn of
the road, to spring from the ground or descend from the stars,
undeserved, unprovoked, but complete and inevitable.  One, we will say,
who scarcely has given a thought to some appointment for which he knows
his rival to be better equipped, will see this rival vanish at the
decisive moment, another, who has counted upon the protection of a most
influential friend, will see this friend die on the very day when his
assistance could be of value.  A third, who has neither talent nor
beauty, will arrive each morning at the Palace of Fortune, Glory or
Love at the brief instant when every door lies open; while another, a
man of great merit, who long has pondered the legitimate step he is
taking, presents himself at the hour when ill-luck shall have closed
the gate for the next half-century.  One man will risk his health
twenty times in imbecile feats, and never experience the least
ill-effect; another will deliberately venture it in an honourable
cause, and lose it without hope of return.  To help the first,
thousands of unknown people, who never have seen him, will be obscurely
working; to hinder the second, thousands of unknown people labour, who
are ignorant of his existence.  And all, on the one side as well as the
other, are totally unaware of what they are doing; they obey the same
minute, widely-distributed order; and at the prescribed moment the
detached pieces of the mysterious machine join, dovetail, unite; and we
have two complete and dissimilar destinies set into motion by Time.

In a curious book on "Chance and Destiny," Dr. Foissac gives various
strange examples of the persistent, inexplicable, fundamental,
pre-ordained, irreducible iniquity in which many existences are
steeped.  As we go through page after page, we feel almost as though we
were being conducted through the disconcerting laboratories of another
world where, in the absence of every instrument that human justice and
reason might hold indispensable, happiness and sorrow are being
parcelled out and allotted.  Take, for instance, the life of
Vauvenargues, one of the most admirable of men, and certainly, of all
the great sages, the most unfortunate.  Whenever his fortune hangs in
the balance, he is attacked and prostrated by cruel disease; and
notwithstanding the efforts of his genius, his bravery, his moral
beauty, day after day he is wantonly betrayed or falls victim to
gratuitous injustice; and at the age of thirty-two he dies, at the very
moment when recognition is at last awaiting his work.  So too there is
the terrible story of Lesurques,[1] in which we see a thousand
coincidences that might have been contrived in hell, blending and
joining together to work the ruin of an innocent man; while truth,
chained down by fate, dumbly shrieking, as we do when wrestling with
nightmare, is unable to put forth a single gesture that shall rend the
veil of night.  There is Aimar de Ransonnet, President of the
Parliament of Paris, one of the most upright of men, who first of all
is suddenly dismissed from his office, sees his daughter die on a
dunghill before his eyes, his son perish at the hands of the
executioner, and his wife struck by lightning; while he himself is
accused of heresy and sent to the Bastille, where he dies of grief
before he is brought to trial.

The calamities that befell Oedipus and the Atrides are regarded by us
as improbable and fabulous; and yet we find in contemporary history
that fatality clings with no less persistence to families such as the
Stuarts, the Colignys,[2] &c., and hounds to their death, with what
almost seems personal vindictiveness, pitiable and innocent victims
like Henrietta of England, daughter of Henry IV., Louise de Bourbon,
Joseph II., and Marie-Antoinette.

And again in another category, what shall we say of the
injustice--unintelligent but apparently almost conscious, almost
systematic and premeditated--of games of chance, duels, battles,
storms, shipwrecks, and fires?  Or of the inconceivable luck of a
Chastenet de Puysegur who, after forty years' service, in the course of
which he took part in thirty battles and a hundred and twenty sieges,
always in the front rank and displaying the most romantic courage, was
never once touched by shot or steel, while Marshal Oudinot was wounded
thirty-five times, and General Trezel was struck by a bullet in every
encounter?  What shall we say of the extraordinary fortune of Lauzun,
Chamillart, Casanova, Chesterfield, &c., or of the inconceivable,
unvarying prosperity that attended the crimes of Sylla, Marius, or
Dionysius the Elder, who, in his extreme old age, after an odious but
fantastically successful life, died of joy on learning that the
Athenians had just crowned one of his tragedies?  Or, finally, of
Herod, surnamed the Great or the Ascalonite, who swam in blood,
murdered one of his wives and five of his children, put to death every
upright man who might chance to offend him, and yet was fortunate in
all his undertakings?


6

These famous examples, which might be indefinitely multiplied, are in
truth no more than the abnormal and historic presentments of what is
shown to us every day, in a humbler but not less emphatic fashion, by
the thousand and one caprices of propitious or contrary fortune at work
on the small and ill-lit stage of ordinary life.

Doubtless, we must, first of all, when closely examining such insolent
prosperity or unvarying disaster, attribute a royal share to the
physical or moral causes which are capable of explaining them.  Had we
ourselves known Vauvenargues, we should probably have detected a
certain timidity, irresolution or misplaced pride in his character
whereby he was disabled from allowing the opportunity to mature or from
seizing it with sufficient vigour.  And Lesurques, it may be, was
deficient in ability, in one knows not what, in that prodigious
personal force that one expects to find in falsely-accused innocence.
Nor can it be denied that the Stuarts, no less than Joseph II. and
Marie-Antoinette, were guilty of enormous blunders that invited
disaster; or that Lauzun, Casanova, and Lord Chesterfield had flung to
the winds those essential scruples that hinder the honest man.  So too
is it certain that although the existence of Sylla, Marius, Dionysius
the Elder, and Herod the Ascalonite may have been externally almost
incomparably fortunate, few men, I fancy, would care to have lurking
within them the strange, restless, blood-stained phantom, possessed
neither of thought nor of feeling, on which the happiness must depend
(if the word happiness be indeed applicable here) that is founded upon
unceasing crime.  But, this deduction being made, and on the most
reasonable, most liberal scale (which will become the more generous as
we see more of life and understand it better, and penetrate further
into the secrets of little causes and great effects), we shall still be
forced to admit that there remains, in these obstinately recurring
coincidences, in these indissoluble series of good or evil fortune,
these persistent runs of good or bad luck, a considerable, often
essential, and sometimes exclusive share that can be ascribed only to
the impenetrable, incontrovertible will of a real but unknown power;
which is known as Chance, Fatality, Destiny, Luck, Fortune, good or
evil Star, Angel with the White Wings, Angel with the Black Wings, and
by many other names, that vary in accordance with the more or less
imaginative, more or less poetic genius of centuries and peoples.  And
here we have one of the most serious, most perplexing problems of all
those that have to be solved by man before he may legitimately regard
himself as the principal, independent and irrevocable inhabitant of
this earth.


7

Let us reduce the problem to its simplest terms, and submit it to our
reason.  First, however, let us consider whether it affects man alone.
We have with us, upon this curiously incomprehensible globe, silent and
faithful companions of our existence; and we shall often find it
helpful to let our eyes rest upon these when, having reached certain
altitudes that perhaps are illusory, giddiness seizes our brain and
inclines us too readily to the idea that the stars, the gods or the
veiled representatives of the sublime laws of the universe, are
concerned solely with us.  These poor brothers of our animal life, that
are so calmly, so confidently resigned, would appear to know many
things that we have forgotten; they are the tranquil custodians of the
secret that we seek so anxiously.  It is evident that animals, and
notably domestic animals, have also a kind of destiny.  They too know
what prolonged and gratuitous happiness means; they also have
encountered the persistent misfortune for which no cause can be found.
They have the same right as we to speak of their star, their good or
bad luck, their prosperity or disaster.  Compare the fate of the
cab-horse, that ends its days at the knacker's, after having passed
through the hands of a hundred brutal and nameless masters, with that
of the thorough-bred which dies of old age in the stable of a
kind-hearted master; and from the point of view of justice (unless we
accept the Buddhist theory, that life in this world is the reward or
punishment of an anterior existence) explanation is as completely
lacking as in the case of the man whom chance has reduced to poverty or
raised to wealth.  There is, in Flanders, a breed of draught-dogs upon
which destiny alternately lavishes her favour and her spite.  Some will
be bought by a butcher, and lead a magnificent life.  The work is
trifling: in the morning, harnessed four abreast, they draw a light
cart to the slaughter-house, and at night, galloping joyously,
triumphantly, home through the narrow streets of the ancient towns with
their tiny, lit-up gables, bring it back, overflowing with meat.
Between-times there is leisure, and marvellous leisure, among the rats
and the waste of the slaughter-house.  They are copiously fed, they are
fat, they shine like seals, and taste in its fulness the only happiness
dreamed of by the simple and ferreting instinct of the honest dog.  But
their unfortunate brethren of the same litter, that the lame
sand-pedlar buys, or the old collector of household refuse, or the
needy peasant with his great, cruel clogs--these are chained to heavy
carts or shapeless barrows; they are filthy, mangy, hairless,
emaciated, starving; and follow till they die the circles of a hell
into which they were thrust by a few coppers dropped into some horny
palm.  And, in a world less directly subject to man, there must
evidently be partridges, pheasants, deer, hares, which have no luck,
which never escape the gun; while others, one knows not how or why,
emerge unscathed from every battue.

They, therefore, are exposed, like ourselves, to incontestable
injustice.  But it does not occur to us, when considering their
hardships, to set all the gods in motion or seek explanation from the
mysterious powers; and yet what happens to them may well be no more
than the image, naively simplified, of what happens to us.  It is true
that we play the precise part, in their case, of those mysterious
powers whom we seek in our own.  But what right have we to expect from
these last more consciousness, more intelligent justice, than we
ourselves show in our dealings with animals?  And in any event, if this
instance shall only have deprived chance of a little of its useless
prestige and have proportionately augmented our spirit of initiative
and struggle, there will be a gain the importance of which is by no
means to be despised.


8

Still further allowance must therefore be made; but yet there
undoubtedly remains--at least as far as the more complex life of man is
concerned--a cause of good or evil fortune as yet untouched by our
explanations, in the often visible will of chance, which one might
almost call the "small change" of fatality.  We know--and this is one
of those formless but fundamental ideas on the laws of life that the
experience of thousands of years has turned into a kind of instinct--we
know that men exist who, other things being equal, are "lucky" or
"unlucky."  Circumstances permitted me to follow very closely the
career of a friend of mine who was dogged by persistent ill-fortune.  I
do not mean to imply by this that his life was unhappy.  It is even
remarkable that the malign influences always respected the broad lines
of his veritable happiness; probably because these were well guarded.
For he had in him a strong moral existence, profound thoughts and
hopes, feelings and convictions.  He was well aware that these were
possessions that fortune could not touch: which indeed could not be
destroyed without his consent.  Destiny is not invincible; through
life's very centre runs a great inward canal, which we have the power
to turn towards happiness or sorrow; although its ramifications, that
extend over our days, and the thousand tributaries that flow in from
external hazards, are all independent of our will.

It is thus that a beautiful river, streaming down from the heights and
ashine with magnificent glaciers, passes at length through plains and
through cities, whence it receives only poisonous water.  For an
instant the river is troubled; and we fear lest it lose, and never
recover again, the image of the pure blue sky that the crystal
fountains had lent: the image that seemed its soul, and the deep and
the limpid expression of its great strength.  But if we rejoin it, down
yonder, beneath those great trees, we shall find that it has already
forgotten the foulness of the gutters.  It has caught the azure again
in its transparent waves; and flows on to the sea, as clear as it was
on the days when it first smilingly leapt from its source on the
mountains.

And so, as regards this friend of mine, although forced more than once
to shed tears, they were at least not of the kind that memory never
forgets, not of those that fall from our eyes as we mourn our own
death.  Every failure, the inevitable disappointment once over, served
only in effect to knit him the closer to his secret happiness, to
affirm this within him, and draw a more sombre outline around it, that
it might thereby appear the more precious, and ardent, and certain.
But no sooner had he quitted this charmed enclosure than hostile
incidents vied with each other in their attacks upon him.  As for
instance--he was a very good fencer: he had three duels, and was
wounded each time by a less skilful adversary.  If he went on board
ship, the voyage would rarely be prosperous.  Whatever undertaking he
put money into was sure to turn out badly.  A judicial error, into
which a whole series of curiously malevolent circumstances dragged him,
was productive of long and serious trouble.  Further, although his face
was agreeable, and the expression of his eyes loyal and frank, he was
not what one calls "sympathetic": he did not arouse at first sight that
spontaneous affection which we often give, without knowing why, to the
unknown who passes, to an enemy even.  Nor was he more fortunate in his
affections.  Of a loving disposition, and infinitely worthier of being
loved than most of those to whom he was sacrificed by the
chance-governed heart of women--here again he met with nothing but
treachery, deceit and sorrow.  He went his way, extricating himself as
best he could from the paltry snares that malicious fortune prepared at
every step; nor was he discouraged or deeply saddened, only somewhat
surprised at so strange a persistence; until at last there came the
great and solitary good fortune of his life: a love that was the
complement of the one that was eager within him, a love that was
complete, passionate, exclusive, unalterable.  And from that moment it
was as though he had come under the influence of another star, the
beneficent rays of which were blending with his own; vexatious events
grew slowly remoter, fewer, warier of attacking him, tardier in their
approach.  They seemed reluctantly to abandon their habit of selecting
him as their victim.  He actually saw his _luck turn_.  And now that he
has gone back, as it were, into the indifferent and neutral atmosphere
of chance common to most men, he smiles when he remembers the time when
every gesture of his was watched by the invisible enemy, and aroused a
danger.


9

Let us not look to the gods for an explanation of these phenomena.
Until these gods shall have clearly explained themselves, there is
nothing that they can explain for us.  And destiny, which is merely the
god of which we know least, has less right than any of the others to
intervene and cry to us, as it does from the depths of its inscrutable
night: "It is I who so willed it!"  Nor let us invoke the illimitable
laws of the universe, the intentions of history, the will of the
worlds, the justice of the stars.  These powers exist: we submit to
them, as we submit to the might of the sun.  But they act without
knowing us; and within the wide circle of their influence a liberty
remains to us still that is probably immense.  They have better work on
hand than to be for ever bending over us to lift a blade of grass or
drop a leaf in the little paths of our anthill.  Since we ourselves are
here the parties concerned, it is, I imagine, within ourselves that the
key of the mystery shall be found; for it is probable that every
creature carries within him the best solution of the problem that he
presents.  Within us, underlying the conscious existence that our
reason and will control, is a profounder existence, one side of which
connects with a past beyond the record of history, the other with a
future that thousands of years cannot exhaust.  We may safely conceive
that all the gods lie hidden within it; that those wherewith we have
peopled the earth and the planets will emerge one by one, in order to
give it a name and a form that our imagination may understand.  And as
man's vision grows clearer, as he shows less desire for image and
symbol, so will the number of these names, the number of these forms,
tend to diminish.  He will slowly arrive at the stage when there shall
be one only that he will proclaim, or reserve; when it shall be
revealed to him that this last form, this last name, is truly no more
than the last image of a power whose throne was always within him.
Then will the gods that had gone forth from us be found again in
ourselves; and it is there that we will question them to-day.


10

I hold therefore that it is in this unconscious life of ours, in this
existence that is so vast, so divine, so inexhaustible and
unfathomable, that we must seek for the explanation of fortunate or
contrary chances.  Within us is a being that is our veritable ego, our
first-born: immemorial, illimitable, universal, and probably immortal.
Our intellect, which is merely a kind of phosphorescence that plays on
this inner sea, has as yet but faint knowledge of it.  But our
intellect is gradually learning that every secret of the human
phenomena it has hitherto not understood must reside there, and there
alone.  This unconscious being lives on another plane than our
intellect, in another world.  It knows nothing of Time and Space, the
two formidable but illusory walls between which our reason must flow if
it would not be hopelessly lost.  It knows no proximity, it knows no
distance; past and future concern it not, or the resistance of matter.
It is familiar with all things; there is nothing it cannot do.  To this
power, this knowledge, we have indeed at all times accorded a certain
varying recognition; we have given names to its manifestations, we have
called them instinct, soul, unconsciousness, sub-consciousness, reflex
action, presentiment, intuition, &c.  We credit it more especially with
the indeterminate and often prodigious force contained in those of our
nerves that do not directly serve to produce our will and our reason: a
force that would appear to be the very fluid of life.  Its nature is
probably more or less the same in all men; but it has very different
methods of communicating with the intellect.  In some men this unknown
principle is enshrined at so great a depth that it concerns itself
solely with physical functions and the permanence of the species;
whereas in others it would seem to be for ever on the alert, rising
again and again to the surface of external and conscious life, which
its fairy-like presence quickens; intervening at every instant,
warning, deciding, counselling; blending with most of the essential
facts of a career.  Whence comes this faculty?  There are no fixed or
certain laws.  We do not detect, for instance, any constant relation
between the activity of the unconsciousness and the development of the
intellect.  This activity obeys rules of which we know nothing.  So far
as we at present can tell, it would seem to be purely accidental.  We
discover it in one man, and not in another; nor have we any clue that
shall help us to guess at the reason of this difference.


11

The probable course pursued by fortunate or contrary chances may well
be as follows.  A happy or untoward event, that has sprung from the
profound recesses of great and eternal laws, arises before us and
completely blocks the way.  It stands motionless there: immovable,
inevitable, disproportionate.  It pays no heed to us; it has not come
on our account, but for itself, because of itself.  It ignores us
completely.  It is we who approach the event; we who, having arrived
within the sphere of its influence, will either fly from it or face it,
try a circuitous route or fare boldly onwards.  Let us assume that the
event is disastrous: fire, death, disease, or a somewhat abnormal form
of accident or calamity.  It waits there, invisible, indifferent,
blind, but perfect and unalterable; but as yet it is merely potential.
It exists entire, but only in the future; and for us, whose intellect
and consciousness are served by senses unable to perceive things
otherwise than through the succession of time, it is as though it were
not.  Let us be still more precise; let us take the case of a
shipwreck.  The ship that must perish has not yet left the port; the
rock or the shoal that shall rend it sleeps peacefully beneath the
waves; the storm that shall burst forth at the end of the month is
slumbering, far beyond our gaze, in the secret of the skies.  Normally,
were nothing written, had the catastrophe[3] not already taken place in
the future, fifty passengers would have arrived from five or six
different countries, and have duly gone on board.  But destiny has
clearly marked the vessel for its own.  She must most certainly perish.
And for months past, perhaps for years, a mysterious selection has been
at work amongst the passengers who were to have departed upon the same
day.  It is possible that out of fifty who had originally intended to
sail, only twenty will cross the gangway at the moment of lifting the
anchor.  It is even possible that not a single one of the fifty will
listen to the insistent claims of the circumstance that, but for the
disaster ahead, would have rendered their departure imperative, and
that their place will be taken by twenty or thirty others in whom the
voice of Chance does not speak with a similar power.  Here we touch the
profoundest depths of the profoundest of human enigmas; and the
hypothesis necessarily falters.  But is it not more reasonable, in the
fictitious case before us--wherein we merely thrust into prominence
what is of constant occurrence in the more obscure conjunctures of
daily life--to regard both decision and action as emanating from our
unconsciousness, rather than from doubtful, and distant, gods?  Our
unconsciousness is aware of the catastrophe: it must be: our
unconsciousness sees it; for it knows neither time nor space, and the
disaster is therefore happening as actually before its eyes as before
the eyes of the eternal powers.  The mode of prescience matters but
little.  Out of the fifty travellers who have been warned, two or three
will have had a real presentiment of the danger; these will be the ones
in whom unconsciousness is free and untrammelled, and therefore more
readily able to attain the first, and still obscure, layers of
intellect.  The others suspect nothing: they inveigh against the
inexplicable obstacles and delays: they strain every nerve to arrive in
time, but their departure becomes impossible.  They fall ill, take a
wrong road, change their plans, meet with some insignificant adventure,
have a quarrel, a love affair, a moment of idleness or forgetfulness,
which detains them in spite of themselves.  To the first it will never
have even occurred to sail on the ill-starred boat, although this be
the one that they should logically, inevitably, have been compelled to
choose.  But the efforts that their unconsciousness has put forth to
save them have their workings so deep down that most of these men will
have no idea that they owe their life to a fortunate chance; and they
will honestly believe that they never intended to sail by the ship that
the powers of the sea had claimed.


12

As for those who punctually make their appearance at the fatal tryst,
they belong to the tribe of the unlucky.  They are the unfortunate race
of our race.  When the rest all fly, they alone remain in their places.
When others retreat, they advance boldly.  They infallibly travel by
the train that shall leave the rails, they pass underneath the tower at
the exact moment of its collapse, they enter the house in which the
fire is smouldering, cross the forest on which lightning shall fall,
entrust all they have to the banker who means to abscond.  They love
the one woman on earth whom they should have avoided, they make the
gesture they should not have made, they do the thing they should not
have done.  But when fortune beckons and the others are hastening,
urged by the deep voice of benevolent powers, these pass by, not
hearing; and, vouchsafed no advice or warning but that of their
intellect, the very wise old guide whose purblind eyes see only the
tiny paths at the foot of the mountain, they go astray in a world that
human reason has not yet understood.  These men have surely the right
to exclaim against destiny; and yet not on the grounds that they would
prefer.  They have the right to ask why it has withheld from them the
watchful guard who warns their brethren.  But, this reproach once
made--and it is the cardinal reproach against irreducible
injustice--they have no further cause of complaint.  The universe is
not hostile to them.  Calamities do not pursue them; it is they who go
towards calamity  Things from without wish them no ill; the mischief
comes from themselves.  The misfortune they meet has not been lying in
wait for them; they selected it for their own.  With them, as with all
men, events are posted along the course of their years, like goods in a
bazaar that stand ready for the customer who shall buy them.  No one
deceives them; they merely deceive themselves.  They are in no wise
persecuted; but their unconscious soul fails to perform its duty.  Is
it less adroit than the others: is it less eager?  Does it slumber
hopelessly in the depths of its secular prison: and can no amount of
will-power arouse it from its fatal lethargy, and force the redoubtable
doors that lead from the life that unconsciously is aware of all things
to the intelligent life that knows nothing?


13

A friend in whose presence I was discussing these matters said to me
yesterday: "Life, whose questions are more searching than those of the
philosophers, will this very day compel me to add a somewhat curious
problem to those you have stated.  I am wondering what the result will
be when two 'lucks'--in other words, two unconsciousnesses, of which
one is adroit and fortunate, the other inept and bungling--meet and in
some measure blend in the same venture, the same undertaking?  Which
will triumph over the other?  I soon shall know.  This afternoon I
propose to take a step that will be of supreme importance to the person
I value above all others in this world.  Her entire future may almost
be said to depend upon it, her exterior happiness, the possibility of
her living in accordance with her nature and her rights.  Now to me
chance has always been a faithful and far-seeing friend; and as I
glance over my past, and review the five or six decisive moments which,
as with all men, were the golden pivots on which fortune turned, I am
induced to believe in my star, and am morally certain that if I alone
were concerned in the step I am taking to-day, it would be bound to
succeed, because I am 'lucky.'  But the person on whose behalf I am
acting has never been fortunate.  Her intellect is remarkably subtle
and profound, her will is a thousand times stronger and better balanced
than my own; but, with all this, one can only believe that she
possesses a foolish or malignant unconsciousness, which has
persistently, ruthlessly, exposed her to act after act of injustice,
dishonesty, and treachery, has robbed her again and again of her due,
and compelled her to travel the path of disastrous coincidence.  Be
sure that it would have forced her to embark on the ship that you speak
of.  I ask myself, therefore, what attitude will my vigilant,
thoughtful unconsciousness adopt towards this indolent and sinning
brother, in whose name it will have to act, whose place, as it were, it
will take?

"How, and where, is the momentous decision being at this moment arrived
at, in search of which I shall so soon set forth?  What power is it
that now, at this very moment, while I am speaking, is balancing the
pros and cons, and decreeing the happiness or sorrow of the woman I
represent?  From which sphere, or perhaps immemorial virtue, from what
hidden spirit or invisible star, will the weight fall that shall
incline the scale to light or to darkness?  To judge by outward
appearance, decision must rest with the will, the reason, the interest
of the parties engaged; in reality it often is otherwise.  When one
finds oneself thus face to face with the problem which directly affects
a person we love, this problem no longer appears quite so simple; our
eyes open wider, and we throw a startled, anxious, in a sense almost a
virgin glance, upon all this unknown that leads us and that we are
compelled to obey.

"I take this step therefore with more emotion, I put forth more zeal
and vigour, than if it were my own life, my own happiness, that stood
in peril.  She for whom I am acting is indeed 'more I than I am
myself,' and for a long time past her happiness has been the source of
mine.  Of this both my heart and my reason are fully aware; but does my
unconsciousness know?  My reason and heart, that form my consciousness,
are barely thirty years old; my unconscious soul, still reminiscent of
primitive secrets, may well date centuries back.  Its evolution is very
deliberate.  It is as slow as a world that turns in time without end.
It will probably therefore not yet have learned that a second existence
has linked itself to mine, and completely absorbs it.  How many years
must elapse before the great news shall penetrate to its retreat?  Here
again we note its diversity, its inequality.  In one man, perhaps,
unconsciousness will immediately recognise what is taking place in his
heart; in another, it will very tardily lend itself to the phenomena of
reason.  There is a love, again, such as that of the mother for her
child, in which it moves in advance of both heart and reason.  Only
after a very long time does the unconscious soul of a mother separate
itself from that of her children; it watches over these at first with
far more zeal and solicitude than over the mother.  But, in a love like
mine, who shall say whether my unconsciousness has gathered that this
love is more essential to me than my life?  I myself believe that it is
satisfied that the step I propose to take in no way concerns me.  It
will not appear; it will not intervene.  At the very moment when I
shall be feverishly displaying all the energy I possess, when I shall
be striving for victory more keenly than were my salvation at stake, it
will be tending its own mysterious affairs deep down in its shadowy
dwelling.  Were I seeking justice for myself, it would already be on
the alert.  It would know, perhaps, that I had better do nothing
to-day.  I should probably have not the slightest idea of intervention;
but it would raise some unforeseen obstacle.  I should fall ill; catch
a bad cold, be prevented by some secondary event from arriving at the
unpropitious hour.  Then, when I was actually in the presence of the
man who held my destiny in his hands, my vigilant friend would spread
its wings over me, its breath would inspire me, its light would dispel
my darkness.  It would dictate to me the words that I must say: they
would be the only words that could meet the secret objections of the
master of my Fate.  It would regulate my attitude, my silence, my
gestures; it would endow me with the confidence, the nameless
influence, which often will govern the decisions of men far more than
the reasons of reason or the eloquence of interest.  But here I am
sorely afraid that my unconsciousness will do none of these things.  It
will remain perfectly passive.  It will not appear on the familiar
threshold.  In its obtuseness, impervious to the fact that my life has
ceased to be self-contained, it will act in accordance with its ancient
traditions, those that have ruled it these hundreds of years; it will
persist in regarding this matter as one that does not concern me, and
will believe that in helping my failure it will be doing me service;
whereas in truth it will afflict me more grievously, cause me more
sorrow, than if it were to betray me at the approach of death.  I shall
be importing, therefore, into this affair, only the palest reflection,
a kind of phantom, of my own luck; and I ask myself with dread whether
this will suffice to counterbalance the contrary fortune which I have,
as it were, assumed, and which I represent."


14

Some days later my friend informed me that his action had been
unsuccessful.  It may be that this reverse was only due to chance or to
his own want of confidence.  For the confidence that sees success ahead
pursues it with a pertinacity and resource of which hesitation and
doubt are incapable; nor is it troubled by any of those involuntary
weaknesses which give so great an advantage to the adversary's
instinct.  And there may probably be much truth also in his manner of
depicting unconsciousness.  For truly, there are depths in us at which
unconsciousness and confidence would seem to blend, and it becomes
difficult to say where the first begins, or the second leaves off.

We will not pursue this too subtle inquiry, but rather consider the
other and more direct questions that life is ever putting to us
concerning one of its greatest problems--chance.  This possesses what
may be called a daily interest.  It asks us, for instance, what
attitude we should adopt towards men who are incontestably unlucky; men
whose evil star has such pernicious power that it infallibly brings
disaster to whatever comes within the range--often a very wide one--of
its baleful influence.  Ought we unhesitatingly to fly from such men,
as Dr. Foissac advises?  Yes, doubtless, if their misfortunes arise
from an imprudent and unduly hazardous spirit, a heedless, quarrelsome,
mischief-making, Utopian or clouded mind.  Ill-luck is a contagious
disease; and one unconsciousness will often infect another.  But if the
misfortunes be wholly unmerited, or fall upon those who are dear to us,
flight were unjust and shameful.  In such a case the conscious side of
our being--which, though it know but little, is yet able to fashion
truths of a different order, truths that might almost be the first
flowers of a dawning world--is bound to resist the universal wisdom of
unconsciousness, bound to brave its warnings and involve it in its own
ruin, which may well be a victory upon an ideal plane that one day
perhaps shall appeal to the unconsciousness also.


15

We ask ourselves, therefore, whether unconsciousness, which we regard
as the source of our luck, is really incapable of change or
improvement.  Have we not all of us noticed how strange are the ways of
chance?  When we behold it active in a small town, or among a certain
number of men within the range of our own observation, the goddess
would seem to become as persistent as a gadfly, and no less fantastic.
Her very marked personality and character will vary in accordance with
the event or being whereon she may fasten.  She has all kinds of
eccentricities, but pursues each one logically to the finish.  Her
first gesture will tell us nothing; from her second we can predict all
that she means to do.  Protean divinity that no image could completely
describe, here she leaps suddenly forth, like a fountain in the midst
of a desert, to disappear after having given birth to an ephemeral
oasis; there she returns at regular intervals, collecting and
scattering, like migratory birds that obey the rhythm of the seasons.
On our right she fells a man and concerns herself with him no further;
on our left she bears down another, and furiously worries her victim.
But, though she bring favour or ruin, she will almost always remain
astoundingly faithful to the character she has once and for all assumed
in a particular case.  This man, for instance, who has been
unsuccessful in war, will continue to be unsuccessful; that other will
invariably win or lose at cards; a third will infallibly be deceived; a
fourth will find water, fire, or the dangers of the street especially
hostile; a fifth will be constantly fortunate or unfortunate in love,
money matters, &c., and so to the end.  All this may prove nothing, but
we may regard it at least as some indication that her realm is truly
within us and not without; and that a hidden force that emanates only
from us provides her with form and with vestment.

Her habits at times will suddenly alter, one eccentricity producing
another; some brusque change of front will give the lie to her
character, to confirm it the instant after in a new atmosphere.  We say
then that "luck turns."  May it not rather be our unconsciousness that
is gradually developing, at last displaying some prudence, attention,
and slowly becoming aware that important events are stirring in the
world to which it is attached?  Has it gained some experience?  Has a
ray of intelligence, a spark of will-power, filtered through to its
lair and hinted at danger?  Does it learn, after years have flown, and
trial after trial has had to be borne, the wisdom of casting aside its
confident apathy?  Can external disaster arouse it from perilous
slumber?  Or, if it always has known what was happening over the roof
of its prison, is it able, after long and painful effort, at last, at
the critical moment, to contrive some sort of crevice in the great
wall, built by the indifference of centuries, that separates it from
its unknown sisters; and does it thus succeed in entering the ephemeral
life on which a part of its own life depends?


16

And yet we must admit that this hypothesis of unconsciousness will not
suffice to account for all the injustice of chance.  Its three most
iniquitous acts are the three disasters--the most terrible of all to
which man is exposed--that habitually strike him before birth: I refer
to absolute poverty, disease (especially in the shocking forms of
physiological degradation and incurable infirmities, of repulsive
ugliness and deformity), and intellectual weakness.  These are the
three great priestesses of unrighteousness that lie in wait for
innocence and brand it, on the threshold of life.  And yet, mysterious
as their method of choice may appear, the triple source whence they
derive these three irremediable scourges is less mysterious than one is
inclined to believe.  We need not look for it in a pre-established
will, in fatal, hostile, eternal, impenetrable laws.  Poverty has its
origin in man's own province; and though we may marvel why one should
be rich and the other poor, we are well aware that the existence, side
by side, of excessive wealth and excessive misery, is due to human
injustice alone.  In this wickedness neither gods nor stars have part.
And as for disease and mental weakness, when we shall have eliminated
from them what now is due to poverty, mother of most of our moral and
physical sorrows, as well as to the anterior, and by no means
inevitable, faults of the parents, then, though some measure of
persistent and unaccountable injustice may still remain, this relic of
mystery will very nigh go into the hollow of the philosopher's hand,
and there he shall, later, examine it at his leisure.  But we of today
shall be wise in refusing to allow our life to be unnecessarily
darkened, or hedged round with imaginary maledictions and foes.

As far as ordinary luck is concerned, we shall do well to believe, for
the moment, that the history of our fortune (which is not necessarily
the history of our real happiness, since this may be wholly independent
of luck) is the history of our unconscious being.  There are more
elements of probability in such a creed than in the assumption that the
stars, eternity, or the spirit of the universe are taking part in our
petty adventures; and it gives more spur to our courage.  And this
idea--even though it may possibly be as difficult to alter the
character of our unconsciousness as to modify the course of Mars or of
Venus--still seems less distant and less chimerical than the other; and
when we have to choose between two probabilities, it is our imperative
duty to select the one that presents the least obstacles to our hopes.
Further, should misfortune be indeed inevitable, there would be I know
not what proud consolation in being able to tell ourselves that it
issues solely from us, and that we are not the victims of a malign will
or the playthings of useless chance that in suffering more than our
brothers we are perhaps only recording, in time and space, the
necessary form of our own personality.  And so long as calamity do not
attack the intimate pride of man, he retains the force to continue the
struggle and accomplish his essential mission: which is, to live with
all the ardour whereof he is capable, and as though his life were of
greater consequence than any other to the destinies of mankind.

This idea is also more conformable to the vast law which restores to
us, one by one, the gods wherewith we had filled the world.  Of these
gods the greater number were merely the effects of causes that reposed
in ourselves.  As we progress we shall discover that many a force that
mastered us and aroused our wonder was only an ill-understood fragment
of our own power; and this will probably become more apparent every day.

And though we shall not have conquered the unknown force by bringing it
nearer or enclosing it within us, there yet shall be gain in knowing
where it abides and where we may question it.  Obscure forces surround
us; but the one that concerns us most nearly lies at the very centre of
our being.  All the others pass through it: it is their trysting-place:
they re-enter and congregate there; and only in the degree of their
relation to it have they interest for us.

To distinguish this force from the host of others we have called it
unconsciousness.  And when we shall have succeeded in studying this
unconsciousness more closely, when its mysterious adroitness, its
antipathies and preference, its helplessness, shall be better known to
us, we shall have most strangely blunted the teeth and nails of the
monster who persecutes us under the name of Fortune, Destiny or Chance.
At the present hour we are feeding it still as a blind man might feed
the lion that at last shall devour him.  Soon perhaps the lion will be
seen by us in its true light, and we shall then learn how to subdue him.

Let us therefore unweariedly follow each path that leads from our
consciousness to our unconsciousness.  We shall thus succeed in hewing
some kind of track through the great and as yet impassable roads that
lead from the seen to the unseen, from man to God, from the individual
to the universe.  At the end of these roads lies hidden the general
secret of life.  In the meanwhile let us adopt the hypothesis that
offers the most encouragement to our existence in this life; in this
life which has need of us for the solution of its own enigmas, seeing
that in us its secrets crystallise the most limpidly and most rapidly.




THE END



[1] His history is concisely summed up by Dr. Foissac as follows:--"On
the eighth Floreal of the year IV. the courier and postillion who were
taking the mail from Paris to Lyons were attacked and murdered, at nine
in the evening, in the forest of Senart.  The assassins were Couriol,
who had taken a seat in the cabriolet by the side of the courier;
Durochal, Rossi, Vidal, and Dubosq, who had come to meet him on hired
horses; and lastly Bernard, who had procured the horses, and took part
in the subsequent distribution of plunder.  For this crime, in which
five assassins and one accomplice shared, _seven_ individuals, within
the space of four years, mounted the steps of the guillotine.  Justice,
therefore, killed one man too many: her sword fell upon one who was
innocent; nor could he have been one of these six individuals, all of
whom confessed their crime.  The innocent man was Lesurques, who had
never ceased to declare that he was not guilty; and all his alleged
accomplices disavowed any knowledge of him.  How then came this
unfortunate creature to be implicated in an affair that was to confer
so sad an immortality upon his name?  Fatality so contrived that, four
days before the crime, Lesurques, who had left Douai with an income of
eighteen thousand livres, and had come to Paris that he might give a
better education to his children, happened to be lunching with a
fellow-townsman named Guesno when Couriol came in and was invited to
join them.  Suspicion having at once fallen upon Couriol, the fact of
this lunch was sufficient to cause Guesno to be put under arrest for a
moment; but as he was able to prove an alibi, the judge, Daubenton,
immediately set him at liberty.  Only, as it was late, Daubenton told
him to come the following day to fetch his papers.

"In the morning of the eleventh Floreal, Guesno, on his way for this
purpose to the Prefecture of Police, met Lesurques, whom he invited to
accompany him; an invitation which Lesurques, who had nothing special
to do, accepted.  While they were waiting in the antechamber for the
magistrate to arrive, two women were shown in who had been asked to
attend in connection with the affair; and they, deceived by Lesurques'
resemblance to Dubosq, who had fled, unhesitatingly denounced him as
one of the assassins, and unfortunately persisted in this statement to
the end.  The antecedents of Lesurques pleaded in his favour; and among
other facts that he cited to prove that he had not left Paris during
the day of the eighth Floreal, he declared that he had been present at
certain dealings that had taken place at a jeweller's named Legrand,
between this last and another jeweller named Aldenoff.  These
transactions had actually taken place on the eighth; but Legrand, on
being requisitioned to produce his books, found that he had by a
clerical blunder inscribed them under the date of the ninth.  He
thought the best thing he could do would be to scratch out the nine and
convert it into an eight.  He did this with the idea that he would
thereby save his fellow-townsman Lesurques, whom he knew to be
innocent, whereas he actually succeeded in ruining him.  The alteration
and substitution were easily detected; from that moment the prosecution
and the jury declined to place the least confidence in the eighty
witnesses for the defence called by the accused; he was convicted and
his property confiscated.  Eighty-seven days elapsed between his
condemnation and execution, a delay that was altogether unusual at that
period; but grave doubts had arisen as to his guilt.

"The Directorate did not possess the right of reprieve; they felt it
their duty to refer the case to the Council of Five Hundred, asking
'whether Lesurques was to die because of his resemblance to a
criminal?'  The Council passed to the Order of the Day on the report of
Simeon; and Lesurques was executed, forgiving his judges.  And not only
had he constantly protested his innocence, but at the moment the
verdict was given Couriol had cried out, in firm tones, 'Lesurques is
innocent!'  He repeated this statement both on the fatal hurdle and on
the scaffold.  All the other prisoners, while admitting their own
guilt, also declared the innocence of Lesurques.  It was only in the
year IX. that Dubosq, his double, was arrested and sentenced.

"The fatality that had attacked the head of the family spared none of
its members.  Lesurques' mother died of grief; his wife went mad; his
three children languished in insignificance and poverty.  The
government, however, moved by their great misfortune, restored to the
family of Lesurques, in two instalments, the five or six hundred
thousand francs which had been so iniquitously confiscated; but a
swindler robbed them of the greater part of the money.  Sixty years
elapsed; of Lesurques' three children two were dead: one alone
survived, Virginia Lesurques.  Public opinion had for a long time
already proclaimed the innocence and the rehabilitation of her
unfortunate father.  She wanted more; and when the law of the 29th June
1867 was passed, authorising the revision of criminal judgments, she
hoped that the day had at last come when she might proclaim this
rehabilitation in the sanctuary of justice; but, by a final fatality,
the Court of Appeal, arguing on legal subtleties, declared by its
decree of 17th December 1868 that no cause had been shown for
re-opening the case, and that Virginia Lesurques had not made good her
claim to revision."

It is as though one were enthralled by a horrible dream, in which some
poor wretch was being delivered into the hands of the Furies.  Ever
since the fatal meal, no less tragic than that of Thyestes, which
Lesurques took at Guesno's house, events have been dragging him nearer
and nearer the gulf that yawns at his feet; while his destiny, hovering
above him like an enormous vulture, hides the light from those who
approach him.  And the circles from above press magically forward to
meet those from below: they advance, they contract, and then, uniting
at last, their eddies blend and fasten upon what is now a corpse.

Here, truly, the combination of murderous fatalities may well seem
supernatural; and the case is typical, it is formidable, it is as
symbolic as a myth.  But there can be no doubt that analogous chains of
circumstances reproduce themselves daily in the countless petty or
ridiculous mortifications of merely ordinary lives which are beneath
the influence of an evil or malicious star.

[2] The misfortunes of the Stuarts are well known; those of the
Colignys are less familiar.  Of these last the author we have already
cited gives the following lucid account:--"Gaspard de Coligny, Marshal
of France under Francis I., was married to the sister of the Constable
Anne de Montmorency.  He was reproached with having delayed by half a
day his attack on Charles V., at a time when such might have been most
advantageously offered, and with having thereby let slip an almost
certain opportunity of victory.  One of his sons, who had been made
Archbishop and Cardinal, embraced Protestantism, and was married in his
red cassock.  He fought against the King at the battle of St. Denis,
and fled to England, where, in the year 1571, a servant of his
attempted to poison him.  He escaped, however, and, seeking
subsequently to return to France, was captured at Rochelle, condemned
to death, and executed.  The Admiral de Coligny, brother of the
Cardinal, was reputed one of the greatest captains of his time: he did
marvels at the defence of Saint-Quentin.  The place, however, was taken
by storm, and he was made a prisoner of war.  Having become the real
leader of the Calvinists, under the Prince de Conde, he displayed the
most undaunted courage and extraordinary fertility of resource; neither
his merit nor his military skill was ever called in question; and yet
he was uniformly unsuccessful in every one of his enterprises.  In 1562
he lost the battle of Dreux to the Duc de Guise; that of St. Denis to
the Constable de Montmorency; and, finally, that of Jarnac, which was
no less fatal to his party.  He endured yet another reverse at
Montcontour, in Poitou, but his courage remained unshaken; his skill
was able to parry the attacks of fortune, and he appeared more
redoubtable after his defeats than his enemies in the midst of their
victories.  Often wounded, but always impervious to fear, he remarked
one day quietly to his friends, who wept as they saw his blood flow:
'Should not the profession we follow cause us to regard death with the
same indifference as life?'  A few days before the Massacre of St.
Bartholomew, Maurevert shot him with a carbine from a house in the
cloister of St. Germain-l'Auxerrois, and wounded him dangerously in the
right hand and left arm.  On the eve of that sanguinary day, Besme, at
the head of a party of cutthroats, contrived to enter the admiral's
house, and ran him several times through the body, then flinging him
out of the window into the courtyard, where he expired, it is said, at
the feet of the Duc de Guise.  His body was exposed for three days to
the insults of the mob, and finally hung by the feet to the gibbet of
Montfaucon.

"Thus, though the Admiral de Coligny passed for the greatest general of
his time, he was always unfortunate and always defeated; while the Duc
de Guise, his rival, who had less wisdom but more audacity, and above
all more confidence in his destiny, was able to take his enemies by
surprise and render himself master of events.  'Coligny was an honest
man,' said the Abbe de Mably; 'Guise wore the mask of a greater number
of virtues.  Coligny was detested by the people; Guise was their idol.'
It is stated that the Admiral left a diary, which Charles IX. read with
interest, but the Marshal de Retz had it flung into the fire.  Finally,
a fatal destiny clinging to all who bore the name of Coligny, the last
descendant of the family was killed in a duel by the Chevalier de
Guise."

[3] It is a remarkable and constant fact that great catastrophes claim
infinitely fewer victims than the most reasonable probabilities might
have led one to suppose.  At the last moment a fortuitous or
exceptional circumstance is almost always found to have kept away half,
and sometimes two-thirds, of the persons who were threatened by the
still invisible danger.  A steamer that goes to the bottom has
generally fewer passengers on board than would have been the case had
she not been destined to go down.  Two trains that collide, an express
that falls over a precipice, &c., carry less travellers than they would
on a day when nothing is going to happen.  Should a bridge collapse,
the accident will generally be found to occur, in defiance of all
probability, at the moment the crowd has just left it.  In the case of
fires in theatres and other public places, things unfortunately happen
otherwise.  But there, as we know, the principal danger does not lie in
the fire, but in the panic of the terror-stricken crowd.  Again, a
fire-damp explosion will usually occur at a time when the number of
miners inside the mine is appreciably inferior to the number that would
habitually be there.  Similarly, when a powder factory is blown up, the
majority of the workmen, who would otherwise all have perished, will be
found to have left the mill for some trifling, but providential,
reason.  So true is this, that the almost unvarying remark, that we
read every day in the papers, has become familiar and hackneyed, as: "A
catastrophe which might have assumed terrible proportions was
fortunately confined, thanks to such and such a circumstance," &c.,
&c.; or, "One shudders to think what might have happened had the
accident occurred a moment sooner, when all the workmen, all the
passengers," &c.  Is this the clemency of Chance?  We are becoming ever
less inclined to credit it with a personality, with design or
intelligence.  There is more reason in the supposition that something
in man has defined the disaster; that an obscure but unfailing instinct
has preserved a great number of people from a danger that was on the
point of taking shape, of assuming the imminent and imperious form of
the inevitable; and that their unconsciousness, taking alarm, is seized
with hidden panic, which manifests itself outwardly in a caprice, a
whim, some puerile and inconsistent incident, that is yet irresistible
and becomes the means of salvation.











End of Project Gutenberg's The Buried Temple, by Maurice Maeterlinck



