CHAPTER IX.--BIBLES


I. THE SOFFEES' BIBLE--THE MUSNAVI.

The Bible of the Soffees, the "Musnavi", teaches that God exists
everywhere and in every thing; that the soul of man, and the principle
of life throughout all nature, are not _from God_, but _of_ God, and
constitute a part of his essence; that nothing exists essentially but
God; and that "all nature abounds with Divine Life." Mr. Malcom, in his
"History of the Moguls" (p. 269), says: "The Soffees are incessantly
occupied in adoring the Almighty, and in a search after truth." They
are passionately fond of poetry and music (two essential elements of
civilization). Their Bible teaches many beautiful moral lessons.

II. THE PARSEES' BIBLE--"BOUR DESOT."

The Parsees' Bible is entitled _Bour Desch_, which means "Genesis; or,
the Beginning of Things." Its cosmogony is similar to that of Moses,
though more definite, and probably written at an earlier period. Its
Eden, or primitive paradise, lasted three thousand years before Kipo
(the Devil) entered, plucked the fruit, handed it to the woman, and thus
caused her downfall, and, after her, that of the whole human race.

III. THE TAMALESE BIBLE.

We have space for but little more than the titles of other Bibles.

The Tamalese "Holy Book" was known as the "_Kalivodkam_," and contains
some excellent moral precepts.

IV. SCANDINAVIAN BIBLE.

Saga, meaning "Wisdom," is the name of the Scandinavian "Inspired
Volume," so called because it was believed to have emanated from the
fountain of divine wisdom.

V. THE KALMUCS' BIBLE.

Kaliocham, the Kalmucs' Bible, was believed to contain in repletion "all
the wisdom of God and man."

VI. THE ATHENIAN BIBLE.

The ancient Athenians had what they claimed to be a "Holy and
God-derived Book," called "The Testament." Dinarchus alludes to it in
his speech against Demosthenes. It was read with deep, solemn awe and
devoutness.

VII. THE CABALISTS' BIBLE.

Yohar, or "Book of Light," the Bible of the Cabalists, relates some
wonderful cures and miracles performed by that sect.




CHAPTER X.--THE MAHOMEDAN BIBLE--THE KORAN.

The Koran, or Alkoran, is the most modern in its origin of 22 in the
list, having been penned six hundred years later than the Christian
Bible. It differs from most other Bibles in being the production of a
single author, and, for this reason, possesses more uniformity of style
and fewer contradictions than most other Bibles. Mahomet did not claim
to be its author, and did not write it, but merely dictated it to his
secretary Zaid. Like the founder of the Christian religion, and nearly
all the other great religions of the world, he was very illiterate.
Incarnate Gods and religious chieftains possess no aspiration to become
scholars, and no taste for science. They were governed by feeling and
the impulse of religious enthusiasm, which have no affinity for science.
Mahomet, however, did not profess to be a God, but merely a prophet. The
Koran, having originated in a later and more enlightened age than the
Christian Bible, possesses some superior features, and, of course, is
superior to still older Bibles. It is more consistent in its teachings
on the subject of temperance, as it does not, like the Christian Bible,
both sanction and condemn the use of intoxicating drinks; but uniformly
forbids the use of it, and even prohibits the manufacture of it. It
also shows more respect for the rights of woman by providing for her
maintenance by dowry. It levies a tax on its disciples of two and
one-fourth per cent for the support of the poor. It enjoins not only
kindness and respect for enemies, but a careful provision for their
wants.

The disciples of the Koran were taught and believed that the Holy Book
was originated in heaven, and had long been preserved there by its
divine author Allah, and, in the fullness of time, was handed down,
chapter at a time, by the angel Gabriel to the prophet Mahomet; and his
scribe Zaid recorded it. The leading doctrines of the Koran are: the
Unity of the Godhead, and the perfection of his attributes; the joys of
paradise, and the terrors of hell; the awful fate of unbelievers in the
Koran. The Day of Judgment is held up as a terror to evildoers and
skeptics, and an encouragement to the faithful. Skeptics, or unbelievers
in the Koran and the Mahomedan religion, are repeatedly consigned to the
same terrible fate (the fires of hell) that Christ consigns the
unbeliever in the Christian religion, and the same as that to which the
founders of other religions doom those who reject or disbelieve their
pretended revelations. The Koran abounds in precepts of a high moral
tone.

Mahomet holds out the idea that Christ was created like Adam, and
therefore was but a man, though a true servant of God. This, he asserts,
was the view of Christ himself. The doctrine that God could have a son,
or that there could be more than one person in the Godhead, was to
him profanity, infidelity, and downright blasphemy. It is repeatedly
denounced in strong terms in the Koran. All prayer and praises to God
are addressed to him in the singular number. I will cite a few texts in
illustration: "Praise be to God, Lord of all worlds, the compassionate
and merciful King. Thee only do we worship, and to thee only do we
cry for help. Guide us in the right path." "The sun is God's noonday
brightness; the moon followeth him: the day revealeth his glory; and
the night enshroudeth him." "He built the heavens, and spread forth the
earth." "And whoso shall fear God, and do good works, no fear shall come
upon them, neither shall they be put to grief. But those who turn away
from him, he will consign to eternal fire." "To those who believe (the
Koran), and do things which are right, hath God promised forgiveness and
a noble recompense."

II. THE MORMONS' BIBLE--THE BOOK OF MORMON; ALSO "THE REVELATIONS OF
JOSEPH SMITH."

This sacred book is claimed to have been found inscribed on gold plates,
situated several feet below the surface of the earth, in Wayne County,
N.Y., in the year 1823, by Joseph Smith, a pious youth, then only
fourteen years of age, who declared he received information with respect
to the existence of the plates and their locality from an angel of the
Lord, with whom he had had frequent intercourse for several years. The
following is a description of the plates and original records composing
the book, as furnished by Orson Pratt, one of the "Latter-day Apostles"
of Jesus Christ: "The records were engraven on plates which had the
appearance of gold. Each plate was not far from seven by eight inches
in length and width, being not quite as thick as common tin. They were
filled on both sides with engravings in Egyptian characters, and bound
together in a volume as the leaves of a book, fastened at one edge with
three rings running through the whole. This volume was something near
six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The characters, or
letters, upon the unsealed part were small and beautifully engraven. The
whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, and
skill in its engravings. With the records was found a curious instrument
called by the ancients 'Urim and Thummim'; which consisted of two
transparent stones, clear as crystal, set in the two rims of a bow. It
was used in ancient times by persons called seers, by means of which
they received revelations of things past or future."

Mr. Smith finally succeeded, with the aid of a profound linguist in
New-York City by the name of Anthon, in translating the whole work into
the English language. Several writers testify that the ground out of
which the records were dug was solid, and covered with a thick and solid
growth of grass, presenting no appearance of having ever been disturbed.
The sect now constitutes about three hundred thousand disciples. The
following testimony to the truth of the story is a voluntary offering by
three witnesses:--

TESTIMONY OF THREE WITNESSES.

BE it known unto all nations, tongues, kindred, and people unto whom
this work shall come, that we, through the grace of God the Father, and
oar Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which contain this record,
which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites.
Men, brethren, and also of the people of Jared. And we also know that
they have been translated by the gift and power of God; for his voice
hath declared it unto Us: wherefore we know of a surety that the work
is true. And we also testify that we have seen engravings which are upon
the plates; and they are shown unto us by the power of God, and not of
man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an angel of God came
down, and that he brought and laid before our eyes, and we beheld and
saw, the plates and the engravings thereon. And we know it is by the
grace of God and our Lord Jesus Christ that we beheld and bare
record that these things are true, and it is marvelous in oar eyes.
Nevertheless the voice of the Lord commanded that we should bear record
of it. Wherefore, to be obedient to the commandments of God, we bear
testimony of these things. And we know, that if we are faithful in
Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found
spotless before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him
eternally in heaven. And the honor be to the Father and the Son and the
Holy Ghost, which are one God. Amen.

Oliver Cowdery.

David Whitmer.

Martin Harris.

MORMON SACRED BOOK, NO. 2--THE BOOK OF DOCTRINES AND COVENANTS; OR, THE
REVELATIONS OF JOSEPH SMITH.

In addition to the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith originated and partly
composed a Book of Doctrines and Covenants, purporting to be a direct
revelation from heaven relative to the temporal government of their
church. It enjoined the support of the poor, the taxation of members,
the establishment of cities and temples, the education of the people,
the emigration of saints, &c. This book has been venerated by the
Mormons as a "holy revelation from God," and hence is, in a strict
sense, a Bible. Its title sufficiently indicates its character. As much
as Christians ridicule the idea of Joseph Smith receiving a revelation
from God, it comes to us with exactly the same authority as the
claimed-to-be revelation of Moses. The evidence in each case is the
same.

III. THE SHAKERS' BIBLE.

The Bible of the Shakers is entitled "A Holy, Sacred, and Divine Roll
from the Lord God of Heaven to the Inhabitants of the Earth, Revealed in
the Society of New Lebanon, Columbiana County, New York, United States
of America." The testimony of eleven mighty angels is given, who are
said to have attended the writing of the Roll. A copy of the Holy Book
has been sent to every king and potentate on earth. Its contents and
style bear some resemblance to the Christian Bible; and it contains
texts which appear to have been drawn from that book, and then altered.
It should be borne in mind that the Shakers also profess to believe in
the Christian Bible, with their own peculiar construction of the book,
like other sects.




