CHAPTER LVIII.--MODERN CHRISTIANITY ONE-HALF INFIDELITY.

When Martin Luther left the Roman-Catholic Church, and adopted the
motto, "Liberty to investigate," he sounded the death-knell of
every orthodox church that should afterwards spring up outside the
jurisdiction of the Pope. Luther was bigotedly orthodox, and something
of a tyrant: but he had more intellectual brain and mind than most men
of his time; and that intellectual ability, though warped by education
and enchained by bigotry and superstition, struggled for freedom as
minds of that character always do. Luther commenced reasoning (most
unfortunate for his orthodoxy); but he had been living in the murky
atmosphere of superstition all his life, and preaching a creed that had
been stereotyped for a thousand years: so that his reasoning powers had
been much weakened, and he had not sufficient intellectual light to see
his way out of the dark prison-house of superstition in which the whole
Christian Church was then enslaved. But he had intellect enough, when
exercised, to convince him there was something wrong in the popular
religion of the times; and he commenced reasoning, though in a very
narrow circle. He did not attack orthodoxy, but only the tyranny of
its misrule and the audacity of the Pope. It was only a reasoning mind
beginning to feel the impulse of intellectual growth. The method which
he adopted--"liberty to investigate"--was a dangerous experiment for
orthodoxy, and will yet prove the death-warrant of all Protestant
churches. The Pope has adopted the only true policy for keeping the
light of the grand truths of science and infidelity from entering the
darkened doors and windows of the Church, and producing schisms and
disputes,--that of binding the intellect in chains, and laying it
at the feet of the Pope. But Luther, by adopting the motto, "Liberty to
investigate," set some orthodox minds to thinking and reasoning; and a
religious mind that is allowed to think for itself will eventually think
and reason its way out of its soul-enslaving creed, or at least make
some progress in that direction. Hence, ever since Luther adopted this
grand motto, the Christian Church (except that part kept in fetters by
the Pope) has been gradually moving every hour since Luther entered upon
this hazardous experiment of allowing religionists to reason and think
for themselves. Orthodoxy has been growing weaker. It is becoming
gradually diluted with the grand truths of science, and now entertains
broader and more enlightened views, Thus this bigoted spirit of
orthodoxy is dying by inches. Its days are numbered; and the last
orthodox Protestant church will die in less than a century.

This is no mere visionary dream or random guess-work: it is a scientific
problem, which can be proved and demonstrated by figures. The progress
of the churches in the past, in permitting the truths of science and the
infidelity of the age to displace its mind-crushing dogmas, and modify
its creeds, furnishes a certain criterion for calculating their final
destiny; and, by this rule, we are assured its years will be few. Let
us look and see what progress the Protestant churches have already made
towards "abandoning the faith once delivered to the saints." Some of
them are much farther advanced in the line of progress than others; and
each new church that has sprung up since the days of Luther dates a new
era in the religious progress and onward march of infidelity; and yet
each one professed to be sound in the faith, and forbid any one to
advance beyond its landmarks. Every one proclaimed, Thus far shalt thou
go, and no farther, in the line of religious progress. We will notice
them in their order. The old Romish Church held all Chris-tians in its
iron grasp for eleven hundred years, and hung its dark curtains in
the moral heavens to exclude the light of science. Reason was held
in chains, and the intellect crushed beneath the foot of popish
infallibility. But, after this night of intellectual darkness, Luther
rebelled, and broke the spell, and set what little intellect there was
left in the Church to thinking.

Its doctrines were heathenish. It taught the infallibility of the Pope,
and the divinity of the Virgin Mary. In this respect they were more
consistent than the Protestant churches; for the divinity of Christ
presupposes the divinity of both his parents, otherwise he would be
half human and half divine. It also teaches the doctrine of election and
reprobation, endless punishment, and other silly superstitions. In this
state of mental darkness Greek literature made an attempt to invade
its ranks and dispel its ignorance with the light of science, but
failed,--not, however, until it had let a few gleams of light into the
intellectual brain of some of the best minds, and set them to thinking.
This caused a few members to reject the infallibility of the Pope, and a
division in the Church was the consequence.

A new Church was instituted, which received the name of "the Greek
Church." Here we find a slight improvement in the Christian creed. The
Greek Christians rejected the doctrine of the infallibility of the Pope,
but still held to the divinity of the Virgin Mary, and all the other
senseless dogmas of the Church. But, as it abandoned one of the most
popular but unreasonable doctrines of the Church, it was an important
step toward advancement. They did not, however, look upon it in that
light, but declared it was the true doctrine of the Bible, and here
planted their stakes, and forbade any further improvement. After
gathering a Church of seventy million souls, another night of
intellectual darkness set in, and continued for four hundred years;
which brings us down to the fifteenth century, when Luther rebelled
against the Pope, and again broke the spell of mental lethargy and
intellectual darkness, and set what little intellectual mind there was
left in the Church to thinking. Another slight improvement was made in
the Christian creed. The Lutherans not only rejected the doctrine of the
infallibility of the Pope but also the divinity of the Virgin Mary, but
here stopped, and planted their stakes, and issued a bull to interdict
further progress; but the ball, once set in motion, can not be stopped.
As well attempt to bind the ocean with a rope of sand as to attempt to
stop the march of thought when one link is broken which binds it to the
Juggernaut of superstition. This is true, however, of but few minds. But
few church-members possess thought and independence enough to advance
faster than their leaders. Luther did not live long enough to outgrow
all the superstitious dogmas in which he had been educated; but he made
such rapid progress in infidelity that he condemned the doctrines
of eleven books of, the Bible, and consequently rejected them; viz.,
Chronicles, Job, Ecclesiastes, Proverbs, Esther, Joshua, Jonah, Hebrews,
James, Jude, and Revelation. He was then an infidel with respect
to eleven books of the Bible; and, had he lived in an age of progress
like the present, he would have become an out-and-out infidel. But
the mass of his followers did not possess minds so susceptible of
intellectual growth: hence they lived and died in faith with the creeds
he made for them. There were, however, a few exceptions to this rule. In
all ages and all religious countries, and under every form of religion,
there have been a few minds gifted with thought and reason beyond that
of the multitude.

A few of this class figured under Lutherism, who eventually, by virtue
of their tendency to mental growth, discovered some defects in his creed
and system of faith. Among this number was Arminius, who rejected the
doctrine of total depravity, original sin, the eucharist, purgatory,
&c., and, with this change of Lutherism, founded what became known as
the Arminian Church: but as no mind and no set of minds in any age have
possessed the mental capacity to discover all error, or to grasp all
truth, so Arminius only outgrew a few of the erroneous dogmas of
the Christian faith, and then stopped, and planted his stakes, and
stereotyped his creed; and any opinion or doctrine that advanced beyond
that was infidelity. He did not live quite long enough to discover
the absurdity of the atonement and an endless hell, and hence those
doctrines are found in his creed; but the change he made in the popular
religion furnishes another indubitable proof of the progress of mind,
and the progressive improvement of the religion of Christianity, and
another proof of the steady progress Christianity has made towards
infidelity. So distinct and marked have been these changes, that they
furnish data for calculating proximately the period when the last
dogma shall drop out of the creeds of the churches, and bring them into
conformity to the teachings of reason and science,--in other words,
when Christianity shall merge into infidelity. And what is meant by
infidelity is the want of faith in the false and morally injurious
dogmas of the superstitious ages.

Another step in the road of religious progress brings us to the
Unitarian Church. Here we find still longer strides in the direction
of the Christian faith towards infidelity. The Unitarians rejected the
doctrine of the divinity of Jesus Christ.

And why? Simply because the founders of that church had expansive
intellectual minds that enabled them to perceive the absurdity and
logical impossibility of the truth of the doctrine. Their enlightened
reasoning powers enabled them to discover these objections to the
doctrine: viz. (1) The impossibility of incorporating an infinite
being into a finite body or into the human body; (2) the absurdity of
considering any being on earth a God while there was acknowledged to be
one in heaven, making at least two Gods; (3) the difficulty of accepting
the Bible history of Christ as furnishing proof of his divinity, while
it invests him with all the qualities of a human being. These and
numerous other absurdities, which are treated of in "The World's Sixteen
Crucified Saviors," lead them to reject the doctrine of the divinity of
Christ, while most other Protestant churches consider a belief in the
doctrine essential to salvation.

Thus they make a long leap towards infidelity. Having intellectually
outgrown the doctrine, they set themselves to work to get it out of the
Bible. This was no difficult task: for as many texts as may be found in
the New Testament in favor of the doctrine, a much larger number may
be cited in opposition to it. And a similar history may be given of the
Universalist Church. It, too, has run into infidelity. The doctrine of
Universal salvation is a beautiful doctrine: it had its origin in the
noblest and kindest feelings of the human mind. Messrs. Murray and
Ballou, founders of the church, were men of broad philanthropy and human
sympathy, and possessed the kindest feelings. Such men could not brook
the idea of endless misery for a single soul in God's universe. They
were also men of a liberal endowment of reason and logical perception,
and hence rejected the doctrine from logical considerations also.
Being intellectual and intelligent men, they became convinced that the
doctrine was wrong. They set themselves to work to get it out of the
Bible. Their object in doing this was more to save the credit of the
Bible than to make it an authority to sustain their own position. The
Bible being a many-stringed instrument, on which you can play any tune,
they found about as little difficulty in disproving the doctrine by the
Bible as others do in establishing the doctrine by that authority. It is
wonderful with what ease and facility a dozen conflicting doctrines
may be drawn from the same text. This is because all human language
is ambiguous, and that of the Bible pre-eminently so; and this fact
demonstrates the absolute impossibility of settling any controverted
theological question by the Bible. Controversialists who should argue a
question before a jury on Bible ground, for a week or a month, should,
in most cases, have a verdict given in favor of both parties; for,
usually, both "beat," and also get beaten. Universalists, taking
advantage of this ambiguity and uncertainty of Bible language, are now
able to show that the doctrine of endless punishment is not taught in
the Book. They succeeded in ruling the doctrine out of all the punitive
terms to be found in "Holy Writ." The word "devil," on being traced
to its origin, was found to be a contraction of "do evil." With this
discovery they cast the "devil" out of their Bible. The word "hell" was
found to be derived from the Saxon word "hole;" and hence, if it have
any application in the case, must mean "Symm's Hole." "Hell-fire"
originally meant a fire kindled in the vicinity of Jerusalem to consume
the offal of the city. And thus, according to Universalism, the doctrine
of future endless torment is no longer a Christian doctrine; and,
whether their position is correct or not, it is rather comforting to
believe that none of us are to be eternally roasted in the future life,
and that even Satan himself has been released from the "painful duty" of
ruling that kingdom. The history of both the Unitarian and Universalist
Churches furnishes evidence of the rapid advancement of Christianity
toward infidelity; and also the conclusion that the natural desires and
moral feelings, and also the reasoning faculties, have much to do in
forming the opinions of Christian professors as to whether certain
doctrines are taught in the Bible,--whether they are scriptural or
antiscriptural. The wish is often father to the belief. Just let a
certain Bible doctrine become repugnant to the natural feelings of some
pious professor, or at war with his enlightened reason, or instinctively
repulsive to his moral sense, and he will find some way to convince
himself that it is not a Bible doctrine. A new light springing up in the
mind has, in many cases, led to new and improved interpretations of the
Bible. It seems strange, indeed, that none of the two hundred millions
of Christian professors have been able to discover that it is the
improvement of the moral and intellectual faculties that has done so
much to improve the doctrines and general teachings of the Bible in
modern times. The old absurdities and heathenish ideas of the Bible
are pumped out by the clerical force-pump, and a new set of ideas
substituted in their place. This keeps it from falling immeasurably
behind the times. It is a work of moral necessity to keep it from being
condemned and set aside, or trampled under foot. Christian professors
can all find abundant scripture to prove any thing they desire to prove;
but let them change their belief, and adopt the opposite doctrine,
and they can find as much scripture to prove that also. There is no
difficulty in making out any kind of a creed or code of faith that may
be desired. Hence a man may change his creed or his conduct as often as
he pleases, and still be a Christian, or fit least pass for one.

Who that is not blinded by priestcraft, or a false religious education,
can not see that it was the natural growth of the moral and intellectual
faculties which gave rise to those new churches to which I have
referred, with their new and improved interpretation of the Bible? Step
by step along the pathway of human progress, the churches are forced
against all resistance to make occasional improvements in their creeds;
but so strong is their resistance to any change, and so determined
to keep their creeds and dogmas unalterably stereotyped, that their
improvements are too slow to suit the most progressive minds amongst
them. Hence they leave the churches to which they have been tied, and
in some cases form new ones, with new creeds, better adapted to the
improved taste and improved moral code of the times. There is not a
Protestant church in existence that does not furnish incontestable
proof that Christian doctrines are perpetually changing. There is not a
Protestant church that is not on the high road to infidelity. They have
all unconsciously broken loose from the old landmarks. There is not one
of them that is not now preaching doctrines which they would fifty or
sixty years ago have denounced as infidelity. This may be to some a
startling statement, but I will prove it.

I have pointed out numerous changes in doctrines made by all the modern
churches, and their rapid tendency to infidelity. I will now show that
the churches from which they emanated, on account of their immobility
and conservativeness, have also made radical changes in their creeds,
and are moving on in the same direction, being pushed forward by the
irresistible tide of modern innovation and improvement. They have made
more or less change in nearly all the doctrines of their creeds. Then
look at the numerous doctrines once regarded as the very essence of
Christianity, which they have entirely abandoned. We will enumerate some
of them: The doctrine of casting out devils; the doctrine of a lake
of fire and brimstone; the doctrine of Christ's descent into hell; the
doctrine of purgatory (these two last-named doctrines, Mr. Sears says,
"were once the doctrines of the Church universal, which nobody called
in dispute"); the doctrine of election and reprobation, fore-ordination;
the doctrine of infant damnation; the doctrine of polygamy, &c. These
were all once regarded as prime articles of the Christian faith; and
most of them were preached by all the churches: and now they are all
abandoned by most of the churches; thus showing that they improve their
creeds as they advance in light and knowledge. Thus the enlightenment of
their own minds leads them to preach more enlightened doctrines, which
they erroneously suppose are the teachings of the Book, when they are
really the product of their own minds. The Indian, when he halloos
to the distant hills and receives back the echo of his own voice,
erroneously supposes some one is responding to him. In like manner,
Christians, when reading and interpreting their Bible, receive the echo
of their own minds, which they mistake for the response of the Bible
writers, and the true meaning of the text. Each new church, springing up
from time to time, is founded on some new interpretation of the Bible,
and flatters itself, that, for the first time since the establishment of
Christianity, it has found the true key for unlocking all the mysteries
and explaining all the doctrines of the Bible; and that all the churches
which preceded it were in the dark, each of which interpreted the same
texts differently, with the same conviction that they had found the true
key for laying open the hidden mysteries of the "word of God." But the
probability is, that if the Bible writers could be called up from their
graves, and interrogated about the matter, they would declare that not
one of the churches had guessed at the real meaning of those texts which
they are quarreling about the meaning of; that they are all far from the
mark; and that they have all saddled a meaning on the texts which the
writers never intended, and never thought of, and would make them smile
to hear of,--though, in many cases, they have made decided improvements
on the original meaning, so as to make them more acceptable to the
enlightened and thinking and intelligent minds of the age. This saves
the Book from being rejected. Did the clergy preach the same doctrine
they did fifty or a hundred years ago, they would find themselves minus
a congregation. It is the improvement they are constantly making in
the Bible that keeps up its reputation, and saves it from the ruinous
criticisms and condemnations of the scientific men of the age. And yet
these changes are wrought unconsciously to the great mass of Christian
professors; and many of them would have been startled had they been told
in early life that the time would come when they would believe as they
do now,--perhaps horrified at the thought,--and would have denounced it
as the rankest infidelity. The question, then, naturally arises here,
Where is the use of erecting standards of faith, when you believe one
thing to-day and another to-morrow? You admit you were mistaken in the
belief you entertained a few years ago; and in a few years more, if you
have a progressive mind, you will admit that your present position is
wrong, and susceptible of improvement. Every Christian professor of much
intelligence makes some improvement in his creed in the course of
his life. Hence it is impossible for him to know what he will believe
to-morrow, or how much more of an infidel he will be than he is to-day.
One change makes way for another. The wheels of progress move steadily
onward: they never stop, and never run backward. It is impossible, after
you have made the slightest change and improvement in your religious
belief, which is a step in the direction of infidelity, to know how many
steps you will take in the future. You may resolve and re-resolve, as
most religious professors do, that there shall be no change in your
present views; but that will not prevent it. One change proves not only
the possibility, but the probability, of another change. Martin Luther
once believed, like Rev. Dr. Cheever of New York that, "There is not the
shadow of a shade of error in the Bible from Genesis to Revelation;"
and yet he afterwards found eleven books of the Bible so full of errors,
that he decided they were not divinely inspired, and rejected them from
his creed: and, had he lived fifty years later, he might have rejected
all the other books of the Bible, and become as rank an infidel as Paine
and Voltaire. They became infidel to the whole Bible in the same way he
became infidel to nearly a fourth of it. The mind which loosens itself
from the trammels of its early education, and begins to think for
itself, has launched its bark on the sea of infidelity. One free thought
is one step toward infidelity; that is, a disbelief in the dogmas,
superstitions, and traditions of the dark ages. It is just as useless
and just as foolish for a man to resolve he will never be an infidel, as
to resolve it shall never rain, or that the hair on his head shall never
turn gray; for he has just as much control over one as the other.

We have shown that the Protestant churches are sailing out on the ocean
of infidelity, and are making steady progress in that direction; and
it is only a question of time when they will be entirely infidel. It is
true, that, owing to the conservative character of the church creeds,
and the inveterate hostility the priests have ever manifested to
changing them, upon the assumption that they are too holy and too sacred
to be criticised and too perfect to be improved, the churches have made
slow progress in the way of improving their creeds compared with what
would have been witnessed in this respect under a more liberal and
tolerant spirit. Owing to this impediment the improvement in Christian
doctrine has not kept pace with improvements in other things. The
progress in the arts, science, agriculture, political economy, the
mechanic arts, the fine arts, &c., has far outstripped the improvement
of our religious institutions, and their relinquishment of the errors
and superstitions of the past, and nothing but the most absolute
compulsion by the moral force of the progressive spirit of the age
has induced the churches to make any improvement in their creeds and
doctrines. The spirit of improvement is manifested in every department
of business, and in all our numerous institutions but that of our
religion. When it comes to that, it is.

"Hands off! there shall be no changes here." It must still continue to
wear the same old garments it has worn for nearly two thousand years,
though they have become musty, soiled, and worn, and directly opposed
to the spirit of the age. In view of this strongly opposing conservative
spirit, it is remarkable that so much improvement has been realized
in our national religion as we now witness. This improvement has been
effected more by the process of changing the meaning of words and
language than that of changing the text by a new translation, as I have
already shown. This surgical operation has been inflicted upon thousands
of texts; and so frequently and so generally has this expedient been
adopted by churches to get rid of the errors of the "Holy Book," that
the meaning of some texts has been changed hundreds of times. There is
one text in Galatians (iii. 20), which, Christian writers inform us, has
received no less than two hundred and forty interpretations at different
times by different writers; that is, two hundred and forty guesses have
been made at the meaning of this one text. "Revelation" is defined as
"the act of making known." But what is made known by a book, one text of
which you have to guess two hundred and forty times at the meaning of,
and then don't know whether it is right or not? And this is but a sample
of many texts scattered through the Book, which have been overburdened
with meanings in a similar manner in order to get a sufficient amount of
science and sense into them to make them acceptable to the enlightened
minds of the age. This renovating and revolutionizing process makes
Christianity a mere system of guess-work, and salvation a mere
lottery-scheme; and thousands, in view of this ambiguity and
precariousness, have come to the conclusion that it is easier to find
what is right in any question of morals, without recourse to the Bible,
than it is to find out what the Bible writers desired to teach in the
case. Why, then, waste such a vast amount of time in attempting to find
out the meaning of thousands of texts, as many Christian writers have
done in all ages of the Church, when, if the meaning could be determined
with certainty, there would be but little accomplished by it? For, after
all, we have to test the truth of the doctrine or precept by our own
experience, in the same manner they proved it,--if they proved it at
all. There has been time enough wasted in this kind of speculation to
build the Pyramids; and the world is no wiser or better for it. As there
is no certain rule for interpreting one text in the Bible (and every
word originally written in Hebrew had from four to forty meanings),
we may guess at the meanings till our heads are gray, and then die
in doubt. To show how the meaning of Bible texts has been improved by
successive constructions, I will cite one case. For more than a thousand
years the various texts which refer to casting out devils were accepted
as literally true. It was supposed they mean just what they say, and
that "the old fellow" (King Beelzebub) is to be cast out of the inner
man,--body, head, horns, and hoofs. But, when the age of reason dawned
upon the world, it began to be discovered that the notion of casting
out devils was an old heathen tradition, and too senseless for sensible
people to believe in. Hence, to save the credit of the Book and the
credit of the Church, casting out devils was interpreted to mean
cast-ing out our evil propensities, which, although a perversion of the
meaning of the writer, was an improvement on the original. The further
acquisition of scientific knowledge, accelerated by the invention of
the printing-press, revealed the fact that man never parts with his
evil propensities, or any other propensities, however much they may
be subdued. Hence Bible-mongers set themselves to work to ferret out
another meaning for the text. They finally decided that casting out
devils means _restraining_ our evil propensities. This, although far
from the meaning of the writer, is another improvement on "God's perfect
revelation." In this way, step by step, this and thousands of other
texts have been improved from time to time by successive translations
and interpretations, until "God's Book" has become partially purged of
the errors it would seem he put into it; and it may yet, in this way,
become a sensible book.

The interpretation of the Bible has been (as already stated) an art in
all Christian countries for ages. The original object was to obtain the
meaning of the Bible writers; but, in modern times, the object seems to
be to obtain a meaning to suit the reader, without much regard to the
meaning of the writer.

This statement may be, to some readers, rather startling; but there can
be no question of its truth. Some of our most popular Christian writers
have avowed it, though in rather an indirect way. Hear what the Rev.
John Pye Smith, the leading Christian clergyman of England, and one of
the ablest and most popular in all Christendom, says with respect
to Bible interpretations: "I would advise the clergy everywhere to
interpret the Bible according to the spirit of the age." Most wonderful
advice truly, and a dead shot at the Bible. Let it be understood, then,
that, according to this Christian divine, Bible readers hereafter are to
pay no attention to the plain and obvious meaning of the Bible language,
or to the writer's intended meaning (which is the only true meaning),
but force a meaning into the text which you know will be acceptable
"to the spirit of the age;" that is, to men of reason and of scientific
attainments. The Bible, then, is to be venerated henceforth, not for
what it teaches, but for what it ought to teach, or what the fanciful
reader would have it teach. Verily, verily, we have fallen upon strange
times when "God's word," like a nose of wax, is to be molded into any
shape to suit "the spirit of the times;" but don't let it be supposed
that the Rev. John Pye Smith is the only Christian professor who makes
God's infallible revelation succumb to the good sense and intelligence
of the age,--"the spirit of the times." There is not an orthodox
clergyman, not a Christian church, and scarcely a Christian professor,
who does not make the Bible a mere tool in that way. None of them, in
all cases, accept the literal meaning of the Bible. None of them take
the dictionary for a guide in all cases to determine the meaning of the
words of the text. As we have said, there is not an orthodox church or
clergyman who does not frequently abandon the dictionary, and travel
outside of it, and coin a new meaning of his own for many of the
words of the Bible, and ingraft into those words a meaning they never
possessed before. They thus assume a license that would not be tolerated
with respect to any other book; and yet, notwithstanding these countless
alterations and changes in "God's unchangeable word,"--changes in the
language, changes in the meaning of its words, changes by translation,
changes in the import of its doctrine, and changes in the teaching of
its precepts; yet millions cling to it as "God's perfect, unalterable
revelation," his "pure and unadulterated word." They seem to take the
same view of it the old lady did of the carving-knife, which, although
it had been mended sixteen times, had had seven new blades and nine new
handles, yet it was the same old keepsake which her father had given
her forty years before. The Bible, in like manner, has been altered
and amended by fifty translations and a hundred and fifty thousand
alterations, according to the learned Dr. Robinson of England, and is
still believed by millions to be the same old book,--just as God gave it
to man. What superstitious infatuation! It is an instructive fact, which
we will note here, that all this labor of amending and enlightening the
Bible is the work of the very best minds in the churches,--the growing,
thinking, intellectual minds in those institutions; minds that are in a
state of unrest, that are hungering and thirsting for something better;
minds which are unconsciously struggling to get free from the trammels
of priestcraft and superstition, and the religious creeds in which they
were educated, and are unconsciously aspiring for something better,
something higher, holier, and purer, but can not give up the idolized
Book which has been so long enwrapped among their heart-strings that
it has seemingly become a part and parcel of their souls. Hence, rather
than abandon it and leave it behind them, they prefer to remodel and
reconstruct it, and bring it up to their own moral standard, and thus
make a better and more sensible thing of it than God himself did in the
first place; that is, assuming that he had any thing to do with it.
And they generally put newer and better ideas into the Book, and better
morals, than they ever got out of it; and finally, in many cases,
outgrow the current theology, and become more enlightened, more
intelligent, and more useful members of society, than they were in any
period of their lives.




