CHAPTER XXXIX.--FORGIVENESS FOR SIN, AN IMMORAL DOCTRINE.

The doctrine of divine forgiveness for sin is another illogical and
immoral doctrine of the orthodox school, as well as that of heathen
nations, which a logical analysis and the practical experience of nearly
all religious countries show has been pernicious in its effects upon the
morals of society. A little reflection must convince any unbiased mind
that, while men and women are taught to believe that the consequences
of sin or crime can be arrested or mitigated by an act of forgiveness
by the divine Law-maker, they will feel the less restrained from the
commission of crime and wickedness. They naturally look upon it as a
sort of license for the indulgence of their passions and propensities.
They are taught that none of the evil consequences of wrong-doing
can follow them to another world if they repent in time, and ask
forgiveness. This they accept as a broad license to take their swing
in vice and villainy. And thus they are partially demoralized by the
doctrine. Much more rational is the doctrine of the Swedenborgians and
Harmonialists, that every sin or wrong act we commit makes its impress
upon the soul, or immortal spirit, which will be carried with it to the
life eternal, and will there long operate to impair the happiness, and
retard the spiritual growth, of every person who in this life indulges
in crime or immoral conduct. They teach us that the character we form
for ourselves on this plane of existence will be carried with us to the
spirit-world; that our character undergoes no radical change by merely
passing through the gates of death. Hence, whatever defective moral
qualities we permit to de incorporated into our characters here will
operate to sink us to a lower plane of happiness in the after-death
world. This is a plausible and rational doctrine, to say the least,
and can have no effect to demoralize the community, as the sentiments
breathed forth by some of the orthodox hymns have evidently done.

     "There is a fountain filled with blood,
     Drawn from Immanuel's veins;
     And sinners plunged beneath that flood
     Lose all their guilty stains."

Could any doctrine be more demoralizing than that here set forth,--that
the deep-dyed stains of a life of crime, debauchery, and wickedness can
all be wiped out by the simple act of plunging into a pool of blood, or
rather by believing that the atoning blood of Christ will cleanse from
all sin? The same idea is incorporated into Watts's well-known hymn,--

     "While the lamp holds out to burn,
     The vilest sinner may return."

The idea here set forth is shocking to the moralist, as well as
demoralizing in its effects on the community. "The vilest sinner" must
feel very little concern about "returning" to the path of virtue, or
abandoning his wicked deeds, while the conviction is established in his
mind that he is losing nothing by leading such a life, and will have
nothing to do at the end of a long life of the most shocking crimes,
villainies, and vices, to escape entirely their legitimate punitive
consequences, but to take a flip in "the blood of Jesus." Every
scientific moralist can see very plainly that the world can never be
reformed while such license for sin and wickedness is issued from the
Christian pulpit. Practically speaking, God could not forgive a sin. An
act of forgiveness implies that the legitimate consequence of the evil
deed or sinful act can be set aside, and escaped. The principles of
moral science teach us that this is impossible. It demonstrates that
the moral law is a part of our being; and, consequently, an act
of forgiveness for the violation or that law could not suspend its
operation, or stop the infliction of its penalty upon the perpetrator.
It could then, of course, effect nothing. Hence it will be seen that
no sin can be forgiven, but must work out its legitimate consequences.
Scientifically speaking, the law is the cause, and the penalty the
effect: when the cause is set in operation, the effect must follow.
It would be as easy to arrest the thunderbolt in its descent from the
clouds as to evade the penalty of this law. God could not if he would,
and would not if he could, forgive the violation of his laws. He could
not, because he has wisely arranged those laws to operate without his
interference. On the other hand, he would not if he could, because it
would encourage their future and further violation. And then a God
who would confer on us an inclination to commit certain acts, and then
require us to ask his forgiveness for committing them, would not be a
very consistent being. Forgiveness is, theologically speaking, "a free
ticket to Heaven." Buy a through ticket of the priest, and you can go on
"the strait-line" road, direct to the orthodox "house of many mansions,"
without having to switch off at any station to unload your burden of
sins. "All is well that ends well" is their motto. The orthodox clergy
tell the most vile and debauched villain and bloody assassin, after he
has inhumanly butchered and murdered his innocent and virtuous wife,
can, by an act of repentance and forgiveness, swing from the end of the
hangman's rope directly into a heaven of pure and unalloyed bliss, and,
with his fingers all dripping with human blood, join the white-robed
saints in shouting, "Glory hallelujah to the Lord God and the Lamb for
ever and ever!" Spare me, oh, spare me, from ever believing in such a
demoralizing religion as this!




CHAPTER XL.--CAN GOD BE SUBJECT TO ANGER?

All Bibles, and nearly every religious nation known to history, have
taught that God often gets angry at the creatures of his own
creation. But, in the light of modern science, nothing could be more
transcendently absurd, or more absolutely impossible, than that a being
possessing all knowledge--a being infinite in power, infinite in wisdom,
and filling all space throughout the boundless universe--should be a
victim to the weakness and ungovernable impulse of passion. The very
idea is revolting and blasphemous, and presents to every reflecting and
unbiased mind a self-evident impossibility. The emotion of anger
can only be the weakness of finite and imperfect beings. It is
self-evidently impossible for a being possessing infinite perfection,
and consequently infinite self-government, to cherish the feeling of
anger for a moment, as the following consideration will show:--

1. The modern study of mental philosophy has demonstrated anger to be a
species of moral weakness; and hence it could not, for a single moment,
occupy a mind possessing infinite perfection. A being, therefore, who
is assumed to possess such a weakness is self-evidently not a God, but
merely an imaginary being, fit only to be worshiped by ignorant slaves.

2. The practical experience of every person demonstrates anger to be a
species of unhappiness, and often of absolute misery; and the indulgence
of this passion not only makes the possessor unhappy, but destroys the
happiness of every one around him. If, therefore, God were an angry
being, instead of heaven being a place or state of happiness, it would
be the most miserable place imaginable; for God is represented by the
Christian Bible as getting angry every day (see Ps. vii. 11), and so
angry that the "fury comes up in his face." As a Yankee would say, "He
gets mad all over." I frankly confess I don't want to live in such a
heaven, or with such a God. Indeed, it would be no heaven at all for
anybody; for heaven is a state of happiness.

3. In the third place, the modern study of the science of philosophy
has discovered that anger is a species of disease, which may result in
mental and even physical suicide if carried far enough. It produces
a congested state of the blood-vessels of the brain, which, if not
arrested in its progress, will produce death. Dr. Gunn, in his work on
domestic medicine, reports several cases in which an inquest was held
over a dead body by a coroner's jury, and the verdict rendered, "Came
to his death in a fit of anger." However irreverent, the thought forces
itself upon us, that such a verdict might be given over the dead body
of Jehovah if we were compelled to believe all we read of his getting
angry; for it is a scientific deduction that can not be resisted, that,
if anger can produce death in one being, it may in all beings subject to
its influence.

4. Again: as the result of the study of mental philosophy, anger is now
known to be a species of insanity. It deranges, more or less, all the
faculties of the mind, and often disqualifies the possessor for doing
any thing right, or acting rationally, while under its influence. It
often causes him to act without reason or judgment, and is liable to
drive him to the commission of crime. As well think of entering the cage
of a tiger as to take up our abode in a heaven ruled by such a God,--a
heaven controlled by a God bereft of reason by the ungovernable action
of his own passions. We could not be happy in such a heaven: we should
be constantly under the influence of fear and apprehension, lest he
should become enraged, and his vengeance fall upon us. Where there is
fear there is no heaven or happiness. If, as the Bible tells us, he is
liable to repent, he might experience this mental perturbation at any
time, and repent for having admitted us into the heavenly kingdom, and
consequently expel us. Under such circumstances our motives would be
very much weakened for laboring to reach such a heaven, not knowing
that we should be permitted to remain there a single hour. How supremely
ridiculous, when logically analyzed, is the conception of an angry God!
It is entirely behind the age, and adapted only to the lowest stages
of barbarism; and yet thousands of Christian clergymen preach this
demoralizing doctrine from the pulpit every sabbath day. It is
demoralizing, because no person can believe in an angry, sin-punishing
God, without cherishing such feelings in his own bosom. It is impossible
for him to avoid it. Indeed, he has no motives for trying to avoid it;
but, on the contrary, he possesses the strongest motives for cultivating
such feelings. For Archbishop Whately says, "Religious people always
try to be like the God they worship." They consider it not only their
privilege, but their duty, to imitate him. Hence, if they believe he
gets mad occasionally, and pours out his vengeance upon his offending
children (his disobedient subjects), they will naturally feel like
following his example, and be cruel and revengeful to those who excite
their anger. This preaching the doctrine of an angry God has a tendency
to foster vengeful and vindictive feelings amongst the people; when, if
the clergy would preach only a God of infinite love, infinite goodness,
infinite perfection in all his attributes, we should soon see a marked
change in society. Kindness, love, and good-will would be manifested
between man and man; and cruel, vengeful, and vindictive feelings would
gradually die out, and be numbered amongst the things which have been
and are not. Then would the kingdom of peace be established on earth,
and the millennium be ushered in. But we can not expect the priests
to be better than their God, nor the people to be better than their
priests. "Like God like priest, and like priest like people." The priest
deals out damnation upon the people to be like his God; and the people
follow in his foot steps, and exercise cruel and revengeful feelings
toward each other. It seems astonishing that such an immoral and
blasphemous doctrine should have been so long and so extensively
tolerated in professedly enlightened countries, as it is evident it
must have had a bad effect; and past experience proves it has had
a demoralizing effect upon the people where the doctrine has been
preached. It furnishes an illustration of the omnipotent power of
custom.




