CHAPTER V.--TWENTY-SEVEN BIBLES DESCRIBED.


THE HINDOO BIBLES.

I. THE VEDAS.

The Veda is considered to be the oldest sacred book of the Hindoos,
and is evidently the oldest Bible now extant. There is a vast amount
of evidence to prove that it was written long before the time of Moses,
which establishes the fact that it borrowed nothing from the Jews or
Jewish writings. They purport to be the inspired utterances of very
ancient and holy saints and prophets, known as Rishis, who received
them directly from the mouth of the great God Brahma about nine thousand
years ago, after they had existed in his mind from all eternity. These
"holy men," by their devout piety and unreserved devotion to the cause
of God and religion, it was believed, had attained to true holiness and
heavenly sanctity. The Vedas treat of the attributes of God, and his
dealings with the human race; his invisibility and spirituality; his
unchangeableness, omniscience, omnipotence, and omnipresence; the
nature and binding force of his laws; the doctrine of future rewards
and punishments; frequent and wonderful display of divine power, called
miracles, &c. It contains, likewise, many noble, lofty, and beautiful
moral precepts. It also treats, to some extent, of astronomy, medicines,
and government. The May number of "The New-York Tribune" for 1838
contains a very interesting account of the recent translation of the
Vedas into the English language, from which we will make a few extracts:
"The whole of the Veda is now being published for the first time by
the East-India Company, by which the reader will learn that most of
the odious things which have been charged to it are false. They are
not found therein. They are Christian forgeries; such as the burning of
widows on the funeral pile of their husbands, the marriage of
children, the doctrine of caste, &c. None of these things are taught
or countenanced by the Vedas. The man who believes in the Vedas
approximates to a Christian." (Mark this statement, Christian reader!)
Mr. Greeley further says: "The highest authority for the religion of the
Brahmins is the Vedas. The most elaborate arguments have been framed
by its devout believers to establish its divine origin and absolute
authority. They constantly appeal to its authority, and, in controversy
with Mahomedan and Christian missionaries" (Mahomedans have
missionaries among them, observe), "they invariably fall back on the
Vedas,--referring to it with great confidence in support of any thing
they wish to establish as divine. There is no doctrine of Christianity
which has not been anticipated by the Vedas." What is that you say,
Mr. Greeley? "They have all the doctrines of Christianity!" Is that
possible? All the holy and inspired doctrines of Jesus Christ, the great
divine Lawgiver and Savior of the world, found in an old heathen
Bible, written more than two thousand years before a single line of
the doctrines of Christ was penned! Here is one of the most astounding
announcements ever made to the world. The reader, perhaps, will suppose
that Mr. Greeley was an infidel; but here, again, is something most
astonishing: Mr. Greeley was up to this time a sound member of a
Christian church, and withal a truthful writer. Such an announcement
ought to have startled the whole Christian world, and set them to
investigating the matter. But, like the disciples of all the heathen
religions, they are immovably fixed in the errors of their faith, and
turn a deaf ear to all criticism, and all honest inquiry relating to the
truth of its claims. Such is the tenacity of their inherited convictions
of being right, their assumption of infallibility, their aversion and
opposition to investigation, that, if every line of their Bible was a
falsehood, but few of them would find it out.

There are four works which come under the name of Vedas, known as the
Rig Veda, Yojur Veda, Sama Veda, and Atharva Veda.

Each of these Bibles is constituted of various books, probably the work
of different writers. Each Veda is accompanied by psalms or hymns, known
as the "Sanhita," and also by a sort of prose treatise or commentary,
called the "Brahmana," which possesses a ritualistic or didactic
character,--all of which were believed to be inspired. "Never has the
theory of inspiration," says Mr. Amberly, "been pushed to such extremes
as in the case of the Vedas. They were believed by some to be the direct
creation of Brahma," while the hymns which accompany them were claimed
to be the inspired productions of holy men and prophets (Rishis).
The Vedas was the standard authority in all cases; and any doctrine,
opinion, or statement at variance with the Vedas was to be rejected as
false. "And as for a contradiction in the Holy Book," says Mr. Amberly,
"the thought was not to be entertained for a moment as possible." Such
a conclusion they ascribed to the reader's wrong interpretation of its
language. Such was the extreme veneration in which the book was held,
that every text, word, and even syllable, was counted. A Brahmin was not
allowed to marry till after he had devoted several years to studying the
Holy Book; And, to attain to complete holiness, the disciple must commit
the Rig Veda to memory, or read it through on his bended knees. The
Vedas represent God as being "one and indivisible," and "merciful to
sinners." And Brahmins and Budhists, when they pray for sinners or
for their enemies, manifest a spirit of kindness and forgiveness not
equalled by Christians.

The Budhists had many churches and many priests, who taught the people
to lead virtuous lives, and to avoid the commission of every species of
crime, including the use of intoxicating drinks. And in no other system
was ever benevolence and charity, and also chastity, more emphatically
enjoined, or more consistently practiced. The Vedas teach that every
good act has its reward, and every bad act its punishment. Its disciples
are taught that many saviors (Avators) have appeared on earth at
different periods to suffer and die for the people; the last of
which was Salavahana, cotemporary with Christ. God Sakia is of great
veneration amongst them, and prayers are often addressed to him. Many
tales are told of his goodness, self-denial, suffering, and sacrifice
for the people, which leads to the conclusion that he was a pure,
holy, and unselfish being. He gave utterance to many noble and morally
exalting precepts. His principal precepts were comprised in six
commandments:

1. "Not to kill any living creature." 2. "Not to steal." 3. "Not to
commit unchastity." 4. "Not to lie." 5. "Not to drink intoxicating
drinks." 6. "Not to lay up treasures upon earth." These are a few of his
leading precepts, and which he himself practiced. In the observance
of the last precept, he and his followers have excelled almost every
Christian on earth, as their Bible contains the same precept, but none
of them try to practice it. Hence the Hindoos are in this respect much
better Christians than the Christians themselves. Here it may be noted
that the Hindoos, like the disciples of the Christian faith, have had
various ecclesiastical councils to settle the canon of their Bible or
some controverted doctrinal questions. One of the most noted of these
councils was called under the reign of King Asoka in the year 246 B.C.
It was constituted of seven hundred "learned and accomplished priests."
But they could not stop the progress of infidelity, as they essayed to
do. It continued to increase till another council was called under the
reign of King Kanishka, and another revision of the sacred text took
place. But, as in Christian and Mahomedan countries, it tended rather
to unsettle than to settle the popular faith. Nothing can arrest the
intelligence and growth of progressive minds. Skepticism and
infidelity will continue to increase whenever the mind is unfettered by
priestcraft, till the last credal institution is swept from the face of
the earth, and ceases to curse the human family.

II. THE INSTITUTES OF MENU.

"The Code of Menu," or "Institutes of Menu," constitutes another sacred
book of the Hindoos. The Rev. Mr. Allen says of it: "It is a code of
religious and civil laws, and makes a part of the Hindoo Scriptures." It
is in many respects similar to the Vedas, and is almost equal to it
in age; and, like the Vedas, it is a standard of faith and a guide for
moral action. Hindoos call it _Menu Darma Shastra_, "the ordinances of
God." "As these ordinances, or divine laws," says Mr. Allen, "profess to
be of divine origin, kings have no authority to change them. Their duty
was to administer their governments according to their teachings." All
classes of people were required to live up to them. "In these respects,"
says Mr. Allen (p. 366), "they resemble the laws given by Moses, and
contained in the Old Testament." These Institutes treat on the subject
of creation, the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, and also
define many of the duties of life.

III. RAMAYANA.

With respect to age, the Ramayana is generally ranked next to the Code
of Menu, and is equally adored as a holy and inspired book, and "may be
classed," says Mr. Allen, "with the Hindoo Scriptures." It treats of the
war in Heaven, in which the dragon, or serpent-devil, was cast to the
earth. To put an end to his ravages here, the Savior and incarnate God
Chrishna was sent down. Christ, we are told, "came to destroy the devil
and his works." Col. Sherman tells us, in his "Recollections of an
Indian Official," that "the people (Hindoos) assured us this Bible
was written, if not by the hand of the Deity himself, at least by his
inspiration; and, if asked if any absurdity that may be pointed out in
the book be true, they reply with great _naivete_, 'Is it not written
in the Holy Book? and how could it be there, and not be true?'"--exactly
the same defense that is often set up for the Christian Bible by its
educationally warped admirers. It is believed the great Hindoo prophet,
Vyas, wrote much of this Bible, or "Inspired Poem," as some call it.

IV. THE MAHABARAT.

The origin of this sacred book is considered to be very nearly co-eval
with that of the Ramayana. It has an appendix, or epistle, called the
"_Bagkavat Gita_." which, on account of its high tone of spirituality,
has attracted much attention in Europe. The Hindoos believe the Mahabrat
is highly inspired, and that every event noticed in it was recorded
before it took place; thus making it in the highest degree prophetic.
"Its author, they claim," says Mr. Allen, "is no other than the
incarnate God Chrishna, of whose life it treats." That profound Oriental
scholar, Mr. Wilkins, thinks this and the other sacred books of India
are more than three thousand years old, as is evidenced by sculptures in
solid rocks.

V. THE PURANS, OR PORANAS.

Some Hindoo Holy Scriptures, when arranged together in one book, are
known as the _Barta Skastra_, of which the Poranas constitute a part.
The last-named work treats of the creation of the world, and its final
destruction and future renovation, the "great day of judgment," Divine
Providence, &c.; also the ordinances and rules for worship, &c.

VI. ANALOGIES OF THE BRAHMIN AND JEWISH RELIGION.

Brahminism and Judaism are each old forms of religion. Each was
superseded by a new and improved form of religion. Each has a story of
creation. Jehovah and Brahma both created the sun, moon, and stars (so
believed by millions).

1. The spirit of both moved upon the face of the waters.

2. The world is spoken in to existence by both Jehovah and Brahma.

3. The Hindoos had an Adimo and Iva, the Hebrews an Adam and Eve.

4. In each case every thing is to produce after its kind.

5. Man is in each case the last and crowning work of the whole creation.

6. Both stories set man as a ruler over subordinate creation.

7. Light in each case was spoken into existence.

8. Jehovah and Brahma each occupied six days in the work of creation.

9. There is a primitive paradise and state of moral purity in each
story.

10. A tree whose fruit produced immortality is noticed in each
cosmogony.

11. A serpent figures in each, and outwits Brahma and Jehovah.

12. Man in each partakes of the fruit of the tree of knowledge.

13. The doctrine of the fall is found in each account. The means for
man's restoration is provided in each case.

14. Each sacred legend has a story of a war in heaven.

15. The soul is the breath of life, or breath of God, in each cosmogony.

16. Labor is imposed as a curse in each case.

17. A moral code of ten commandments is found in each system. Not to
kill is a command in each decalogue. Stealing is interdicted in each
decalogue. Adultery is condemned in each. Bearing false witness is
forbidden by each.

18. Both Brahmins and Jews lost their "Holy Law," or "Laws of God." One
had a Hilkiah, and the other a Bisheu, to find the law.

19. Each had an established order of priesthood. The priesthood was
hereditary in each case: a tribe or family furnished the priests in each
case.

20. Both claimed to be God's pet and holy, or peculiar, people; and both
styled other nations barbarians or aliens.

21. Both holy nations were forbidden to marry with others; and both were
too holy to eat with barbarians.

22. Each had a ceremonial law prescribing numerous rites. The church
ceremonies were performed by priests in each.

23. The priests were forbidden to eat meat in both cases.

24. Both Jews and Brahmins worshiped by bloody sacrifices. Both had
their favorite sacred animals. Animal sacrifices were by each to arrest
public calamities.

25. One interdicted beef, and the other pork, as food.

26. Both prescribed purification after touching dead bodies; and each
religion had a law of purification. Bathing was a mode of purification
in each religion.

27. Each has its "holy" places, times, days, cities, mountains, rivers,
&c. India, as well as Judea, was considered a holy land.

28. Each had its holy ground. Both drew off their shoes on entering
upon holy ground or holy places.

29. Both had their holy days, and the same in most cases.

30. Mount Mera was no less holy than Mount Sinai or Mount Horeb. Jordan
was a sacred river in one case, and Ganges in the other. Jerusalem was a
"holy" city with the Jews, and Benares with the Hindoos.

31. Holy fasts and feasts were a part of each religion. Both made u holy
feast at full moon.

32. Each had its holy fires.

33. Both had their holy mysteries kept sacredly guarded.

34. Each prepared and kept holy water for ceremonial purposes.

35. Both anointed themselves with "holy ointment."

36. Each claimed to have the only true and "holy faith."

37. "Holy temples" were familiar terms to each. Their temples were
constructed in a similar manner. Each had a "_sanctum sanctorum_," or
"holy of holies." Only the holy priest of both entered the interior
sanctum.

38. Both had their drink-offerings (called _turpin_ by the Hindoos).

39. Both sprinkled their door-posts with blood.

40. One had a scape-goat, and the other a scape-horse.

41. Both taught that the sins of the father were visited upon the
children.

42. Religious pilgrimages were practiced by each.

43. Both acknowledge and teach one supreme God. Inferior deities, or
angels, are believed in by each. God's omniscience, omnipotence, and
omnipresence are taught in both Bibles.

44. God is represented to be invisible by each. And "God is a spirit,"
and infinitely wise and good, is taught in each.

45. To love God supremely is recommended by each.

46. Both taught that God was a God of power, and assisted them in their
battles.

47. Both taught that a knowledge of God is essential.

48. Silent meditation upon the Lord is recommended by each.

49. God was to each a refuge in danger and trouble.

50. The government of each was a theocracy, God the executive.

51. Both religions were constituted largely of external rites. In each
the priest was the expounder of the holy books and laws. "Patriarchs"
was one of the sacred orders of each system. Holy "prophets" figure
conspicuously in each system. Both priests and people were in each case
believed to be inspired.

52. And each had its witnesses to prove the truth and fulfillment of its
prophecies.

53. Both held their Holy Bibles as an inspired guide of right and wrong.

54. One Bible was from Jehovah, and the other from Brahma.

55. Ezra was inspired to compile the Jewish Bible, and Vyas the Brahmin.

56. Each religious order had a holy ark containing something sacred.

57. A story of a deluge is found in the Bible of each.

58. The corruption or wickedness of society caused the flood in each
case.

59. The Brahmins had their patriarch Satyavrata, answering to Noah.

60. Each was forewarned of the flood.

61. Eight persons were saved in each case.

62. In each story a large vessel is prepared. Animals were saved by
pairs in each case. A rainbow is spoken of in each flood story.

63. For Shem, Ham, and Japhet, the Hindoos have a Sherma, Charma, and
Jyapheta.

64. Charma was condemned to be "a servant of servants," like Ham.

65. Human life was in each traditionally spun out to nearly a thousand
years.

66. One day a thousand years with God, in each system.

67. Both have stories of persons ascending to heaven.

68. Budha was cast into the fiery furnace like the three holy children.

69. Musavod was a giant in strength like Samson.

70. Rhambha was changed to a pillar of stone, like Lot's wife to salt.

71. Mahendra was carried through the air like Habakkuk.

72. A story of Budha answers to that of Darnel in the lions' den.

73. Idolatry is discouraged, but occasionally practiced by each

74. Witchcraft was believed in by each.

75. Here are presented eighty-eight striking analogies.


VII. ANTIQUITY OF INDIA.

Having presented a long list of analogies between the Hindoo and Jewish
religions, we will proceed to prove the prior existence of the Hindoo
system, and leave the reader to deduce his own inferences. "In times
coeval with the earliest authentic records," says a writer, "the Hindoos
calculated eclipses, and were venerated for their attainments in some of
the arts and sciences." According to the learned astronomer Baily,
their calculations in astronomy extended back to the remote period of
seventeen hundred years before Moses; and some of the ancient monuments
and inscriptions of India bespeak for its religion a very remote
antiquity. Some of our modern learned antiquarians have expressed
the opinion that the Sanscrit language of the Brahmins is the oldest
language that can be traced in the history of the human race. They also
state that this language was extant before the Jews were known as a
nation; and neither it nor their religion has _ever_ been known to
_change_. These facts are sufficient to establish the existence of
the Brahmin and Budhist systems of religion long prior to the earliest
records of the Jewish nation.

Note.--Here we desire to call the attention of the reader to the very
remarkable statement of Col. Dow in his "History of India." He tells us
that "the Hindoos give a _very particular account of the origin_ of the
Jewish religion" (pref. v.). They say that a pious Hindoo by the name of
Rajah Tara apostatized from the faith, for which he was banished to the
West, where he established a system of religion, which became afterwards
known as the Jewish religion. Tura only needs a change of one letter to
make Tera, the father of Abraham. Let the reader make a note of this.




