CHAPTER IV.--THE BEAUTIES AND BENEFITS OF BIBLES.

Thebe is displayed in all Bibles a devout recognition of moral
principles, and a strong manifestation of moral feeling. The disciples
of all Bibles manifest an ardent aspiration for something higher,
something nobler,--a mental struggle to reach a higher plane. This moral
aspiration is displayed in almost every chapter; and there are in all
Bibles veins of beautiful thought coursing through their pages. All
of them contain moral precepts which are in their nature elevating and
ennobling, and which, if practically recognized, would have done much to
improve the morals and enhance the happiness of their disciples; and all
Bibles are valuable as fragments of religious history, and as indicating
the state of religion and morals of the people who originated them.
Their numerous outbursts of religious feeling indicate the depth of
their devotion; while their many noble moral aphorisms indicate an
appreciation of, and a desire for, a higher moral life than they were
able to practice because of the strength of their animal feelings. This
is especially true of the Jews, and also of the early Christians. They
had a partial perception of a true moral life, and a desire at times to
practice it; but that desire was counteracted and held in check by their
still stronger animal natures and animal propensities.

A HIGHER PLANE OF DEVELOPMENT HAS BEEN ATTAINED.

There can be no question, from the light derived from the twofold
avenues of science and history, but that the great principle of
universal progress, which is carrying every thing forward to a higher
plane and state of perfection, has elevated the most advanced nations of
the present age _beyond and above_ the religion and morals prevalent in
the world when the Jewish and Christian Bible was written, which makes
it very unsuitable for the _present_ advanced state of society.
An investigation of the science of anthropology discloses the very
significant and important fact, that the religious feelings of the
founders and early representatives of the Jewish and Christian religions
were under the control of their animal natures, which accounts for their
frequent use of obscene language, and their frequent indulgence in
the practice of every species of crime with the full sanction of the
principles of their religion. And they cherished the conviction that
those things had the divine sanction.

LOOK AT THE DIFFERENCE.

The moral and religions feelings of the early Jews and Christians
_co-operated_ with their _animal propensities_; and the _latter held
supreme sway_ over the former: while the moral and religions feelings
of the most advanced minds of the present day co-operate, not with the
_animal_, but with the _intellectual_. This makes a very important and
very marked difference, and makes the semi-animal religion of the past
very unsuitable for the present age. Please note this point, friendly
reader.

BIBLE WRITERS HONEST.

It may readily be conceded that the writers and compilers of all Bibles
were honest, and that all the errors which those Bibles embrace, and the
crimes which they sanction, were honestly believed to be right, and in
accordance with the will of God. For all sacred history teaches us, as
an important lesson of human nature, that no errors are too gross,
no crimes too enormous, no statements too false or absurd, no
contradictions too glaring, and no stories too preposterous or too
ridiculous, to receive the fullest indorsement of the most honest and
pious minds, and to be even cherished by them as _God-given_ or divinely
revealed _truths_, when such has been their teaching every day of their
lives, in connection with the habitual _suppression_ of the voice of
reason, and the inherited conviction of their truth deeply implanted in
the mind, derived from a thou sand preceding generations. A strong and
unyielding cord of religious conviction thus grows in the human mind,
which no reason, no philosophy, and no science can ever sever or even
shake. It becomes a moral canker, which no remedy can reach, or arrest
in its progress. It seems to grow into the very heartstrings. Such is
the strength of religious prejudice, such the weak side of human nature.
Three hundred millions of people believe in the Hindoo religion, one
hundred millions in the Chinese religion, two hundred millions in the
Mahomedan religion, and one hundred and fifty millions in the Christian
religion,--all for the same reasons, because their parents so believed,
and taught them, and their neighbors still believe it; and surrounding
influences have caused them to continue in their erroneous belief.

After the illuminating rays of the sun of science had to some extent
dispelled the religious errors of our early education, the case was so
plain, that we entered upon the work of trying to convince others, with
sanguine hopes of success. But experience has established the conviction
in our mind, that if every text of the Christian Bible were a falsehood,
and every line of their creeds an absurdity, there are many devout
admirers of the book who could never be made to see it, because they
are ruled by their _religious feelings_, and not by their _reasoning
faculties_; and hence they will live and die in their moral and
religious errors. But we rejoice in the omnipotent power of truth, which
will finally dispel all error from progressive minds.

GENERAL CLAIMS OF BIBLES.

More than twenty sacred books have been found in varions countries,
which, if not in all cases denominated Bibles, have at least been
venerated and used as such, and, properly speaking, are Bibles. Hence
we shall call them Bibles. The list in this chapter comprises nearly
all which recent research has brought to light. A brief synopsis of
the character and contents of each will be presented, so far as a
comparative view with the Christian Bible seems to make it requisite.

All of these Bibles possess some common characteristics:--

1. All of them were claimed to be inspired.

2. All were claimed to be an embodiment of wisdom and knowledge far
transcending the ordinary attainments of man.

3. All were penned by inspired men, who were shielded from the
possibility of erring while writing them.

4. Each Bible is a finality in religious knowledge.

5. Each one is an authority from which there is no appeal.

6. It is a sin to question or doubt the truth of any of them, or to
suggest the possibility of their containing errors.

7. Some of them were written by God, some by angels, and others by
inspired men.

8. Each one points out the only safe and certain road to heaven.

9. He who is a disbeliever in any one of these holy books is an infidel.

10. Each one is to effect the salvation of the whole human race.




