CHAPTER XXIV.--CIRCUMCISION A HEATHEN CUSTOM.

I. Circumcision is a very ancient rite, and of heathen origin, though we
are told in Genesis that it was a command of God to Abraham; and it was
nationalized by Moses. It was considered by the Jews a very important
religious rite, and has been practiced by them from their earliest
history. So highly was this ordinance esteemed amongst them, that it
was in some cases performed twice. According to Herodotus and Diodorus,
instead of the Jews getting the command direct from God, they borrowed
the custom of the Assyrians; and Josephus silently assents to its truth;
and J. G. Wilkinson says, "It was established in Egypt long before
Joseph was sold into that country," which furnishes evidence of its
existence before the time of Moses.

Among the Jews this rite was performed on the eighth day after birth:
all converts to their religion, and all servants, had to submit to the
ordinance.

Jerome says that in his day a majority of the Idumæans, Moabites,
Ammonites, and Ishmaelites were circumcised. The ancient Phoenicians
also observed this rite, and the aboriginal Mexicans likewise. The
Mahomedans also practice it; and, although the Koran does not enjoin it,
it has been practiced wherever that religion has been adopted. The rite
is performed on both sexes in Arabia. This rite was practiced by the
early Christians. Even the wise Paul gave practical sanction to this
ordinance in the case of Timothy. The Coptic and Abyssinian Christian
churches still observe the custom. A circumcision festival was
established in the Church, and kept on the 1st of January in
commemoration of the circumcision of Jesus.

The toleration of this rite by the Jews and Christians shows that they
were dwelling on the animal plane,--that they had not risen to that high
state of spirituality which would lead them to abandon such heathenish
ordinances and customs. It is so repulsive to refined society, that some
civilized nations have enacted laws interdicting the custom. Yes, this
senseless, cruel, heathenish rite has to some extent been abandoned, and
must ere long entirely disappear from the earth. It can not withstand
the lights of science and civilization: it is a childish, senseless,
obscene, vulgar, heathenish, cruel, and disgusting superstition.

II. FASTING AND FEASTING.

A total ignorance of the laws of health is indicated as existing amongst
the disciples of all the ancient religions by the alternate extremes of
fasting and feasting. The latter is injurious to health, and the former,
also, if long continued, as was frequently the case. But the subject
of health did not occupy the minds of religious enthusiasts. They knew
nothing of the laws of health, and cared less if possible. Fasting is
reported, In some cases, as extending to an incredible period of time,
continuing in some cases for months. Hindoos often fasted for a week,
and in some cases, if reports are time, for several weeks. Pythagoras
of Greece fasted, it is said, forty days. Both the fasts and the feasts
were generally held to signalize or celebrate some astronomical epoch;
such as the changes of the moon, changes in the seasons, &c. The ancient
representatives of the Christian faith were much given to fasting, as
were also some of the Jews; but, at the present day, Christians, with
others, are more addicted to feasting than fasting, although fasting
is enjoined by the Bible both by precept and practice. In this respect
modern Christianity bears no resemblance to ancient Christianity.




CHAPTER XXV.--HOLY MOUNTAINS, LANDS, CITIES, AND RIVERS.


I. HOLY MOUNTAINS.

Those who have read the Christian Bible are familiar with the fact that
the ancient Jews and early Christians had their holy mounts and holy
mountains, and that they are often referred to in the Bible. Mount Sinai
and Mount Horeb were to the Jews consecrated spots. They called forth
their highest feelings of veneration; they occupied a place in their
devout meditations, similar to that of heaven in the mind of the
Christian worshiper. It may be said to have been a substitute for heaven
with the Jews; for they knew no other heaven, and dreamed of no other in
their earlier history. And Mount Zion was a place equally sacred in the
devout meditations of the early Christians. All the Oriental nations had
their holy mountains before the Jews were known to history: Merau was
the holy mount of the ancient Hindoos; Olympus, of the Greeks; Athos,
of the Egyptians. It is therefore evident that the founders of the
Christian religion borrowed the idea of attaching sacredness to
mountains. Several of Christ's important acts were represented as having
been performed on mountains. His sermon was delivered on a mount; his
march into Jerusalem was from the "Mount of Olives." Luke says he went
and abode in the Mount of Olives (xxi. 87). The Devil took him up into
an exceeding high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the
world; and, finally, his earthly career culminated on Mount Calvary.
"Holy hill," holy mount, and holy mountain--the most important of which
was Mount Zion--are terms often used in the Old Testament. History
discloses very fully the origin of the custom of attaching sacredness to
hills and mountains. One writer says it was partly from the conviction,
that, the higher the earth ascends, the nearer it approaches the
residence of the Gods; and consequently they would the more certainly
hear the prayers and invocations of mortals. Prophets, seers, and
anchorites were accustomed, from these considerations, to spend much
time on the hills and mountains. In view of these facts, we may conclude
that all persons acquainted with history will acknowledge that the Jews
and Christians derived the tradition of regarding hills and mountains
as "holy" from the Orientals, and that it is consequently a heathen
tradition.

II. HOLY LANDS AND HOLY CITIES.

Jerusalem was the principal holy city of both Jews and Christians; and
Palestine was their holy land.. Here, again, we find them anticipated by
heathen nations. Thebes was the holy city of Egypt, Ida the holy city of
India, Rome the holy city of the Greeks and Romans, Mecca the holy city
of the Mahomedans. And, like the early Christians who spent much time in
visiting Jerusalem, the Mahomedans make frequent pilgrimages to Mecca.
Syria was the holy land of the Chaldeans and Persians, Wisdom the holy
land of the Hindoos, and Benares the principal "holy city." And these
holy places they visited very frequently, going in large companies,
singing hymns, and reciting texts from their holy books as they
traveled. And Christians in the time of Constantine spent much time in
traveling to and from Jerusalem and the Holy Land, prompted by the same
superstitious notions and feelings. Here we observe another analogy
in the religious customs of the Jews, Christians, and heathens, all of
which were derived from ancient India.

III. HOLY RIVERS AND HOLY WATER.

Holy rivers were quite numerous among the devotees of the ancient
religions. Ganges, in India, appears to have been the first river
invested with the title of "holy." Its waters were used for the rite of
baptism, and were supposed to impart a spiritual life to the subject of
immersion. Jordan and the Euphrates were regarded as sacred by the Jews,
and the former was the chosen stream for the rite of baptism by that
nation.. Even Christ appears to have believed he could receive some
spiritual benefit by being dipped beneath its waves. The Nile was a
sacred river in Egypt, and many repaired to it for spiritual benefit.
Thus the origin of holy rivers and holy waters is plainly indicated to
be of heathen origin.




