CHAPTER XXXIV.--PRIMEVAL INNOCENCY OF MAN NOT TRUE.

The tradition so universally prevalent among the disciples of all the
Oriental systems of religious faith, as well as those of a more modern
origin, and which is still a conspicuous element of the Christian
system,--that man commenced his career in a state of moral
perfection,--is so obviously at war with every principle of
anthropology, and every page of human history tending to demonstrate the
moral character of the primitive inhabitants of the earth, that I shall
employ but little time and space in exposing its absurdity and falsity.

1. All the organic remains of the _earliest_ types of the human species
that have been found demonstrate conclusively that man started on the
animal plane with animal feelings, propensities, and habits, almost
totally devoid of moral feelings, and "consequently victim to his
passions, propensities, and lusts."

Where, then, were his moral purity and angelic holiness? The idea is a
mere chimera.

2. It is now a settled problem in mental science that the character of
every species of animate being corresponds with its organization;
that the organic structure of the being, whether dead or alive, always
indicates its true character. If it possesses the form and type of the
tiger it will always be found with the disposition and habits of the
tiger; or, if it is a sheep in form, it will be a sheep in character.
There is no deviation from this rule. Hence, when we find the bones of
the early types of the human species resembling those of the lower order
of animals, there is no escaping the conclusion that they possessed an
analogous character.

3. Look, then, at the fact that the skulls and facial bones of human
beings, found embedded in the rocks of Gibraltar, belonging to a
race which naturalists have decided existed upon the earth sixty-five
thousand years ago, closely approximate those of an animal. They
possessed retreating foreheads, prognathous jaws, extremely coarse
features, and skulls nearly an inch in thickness; hands resembling those
of a monkey, feet resembling those of a bear, and cranial receptacle
showing a very small amount of moral brain. Now, it is evident that
this early race, with such a gross, brutal organization, could not
have possessed fine moral sensibilities and lofty virtue, purity, and
perfection.

4. And we find that nations whose organizations indicate a higher moral
character are of more modern origin, as shown by their organic remains
being found in more recently formed strata,--the tertiary formation.
It is thus scientifically demonstrated that man's tendency toward moral
perfection is inversely to the remoteness of time,--that, the nearer we
retrace his history to his origin, the lower position he occupies in the
scale of morals.

5. We will cite one more historical fact to establish this theory The
existence of a tribe of negroes has been traced (as stated in Chap. 16.)
to near the date of Noah's flood, whose organization indicates a very
near approach to the animal; thus showing, that, if they are descendants
of Adam, he himself must have possessed an inferior or defective moral
organization and character.

6. Let the reader, after noting these facts, read the history of the
practical lives of the earliest races or nations whose deeds have been
recorded, and he will find they sustain the same proportion; that
their defective moral character corresponds (_ceteris paribus_) to
the remoteness of the era in which they lived. The history of the
Jews themselves illustrates and corroborates the proposition, as the
character of the modern Jews is far superior to those of the era of
Abraham and Moses.

7. Once more: The fact that the moral character of nearly all nations
is constantly improving, proves beyond question that man once occupied
a much lower plane, and that, instead of falling from a state of moral
purity, he is constantly ascending toward that condition.

8. The current belief of man's primitive moral perfection is easily
traced to its origin. Nearly all the Oriental nations had a tradition
of a "golden age," when the most sublime and unalloyed bliss was the lot
and enjoyment of the _genus homo_. But the serpent that beguiled Eve to
eat of the forbidden fruit in Eden, the serpent who stole the recipe
of immortal life in Assyria, the entering of Typhon into the golden
paradise of Osirus in Egypt, the opening of Pandora's box in Greece, the
piercing of the evil egg by Ahrimanes in Chaldea, the machinations of
the snake in India, of the lizard in Persia, and the demon in Mexico,
seem to have all had an agency in defeating the omniscient designs of
Deity, and placing the reins of government in the hands of the world's
omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient evil genius, thus prostrating
for ever the great and glorious plans of Infinite Wisdom.




CHAPTER XXXV.--ORIGINAL SIN AND FALL OF MAN.

Having shown that man commenced his earthly career on a low moral and
intellectual plane, and that therefore the assumption of his original
moral perfection is a fallacy, the correlative dogma of his fall into a
state of moral depravity falls to the ground of its own weight. It would
be a work of supererogation to attempt to show that man never fell in a
moral sense, after having shown that he never occupied an elevated moral
position to fall from. It is self-evident that he could not fall if
there was no lower position for him to fall to; and this has been
shown. Nevertheless we will expose its absurdity from other logical
stand-points. According to the Westminster Catechism, "God placed man in
the garden of Eden, and forbade him to eat of the fruit of the tree
of knowledge; and, because he disobeyed, he became the victim of God's
eternal wrath, an accursed and totally depraved being." Such doctrine
is not only morally revolting, but replete with logical absurdities. We
will recount some of them:--

1. God formed and fashioned man, according to the Bible, after his own
image, the product of his infinite wisdom; and if he had not possessed
infinite wisdom, which must enable him to do every thing to perfection,
he had had an eternity to study the matter, and get it fully matured, so
as to make every thing work in harmony, and endow every sentient being
with happiness.

2. And, as happiness is the highest end and aim of every living being,
it is hence evident that, where there is a want of happiness, there is a
want of perfection in the being who established such a state of things;
and such a being could not by any possibility be infinitely good and
infinitely wise.

3. A few points considered will show very clearly, that, if man sinned
and fell, God has to sustain the responsibility of it. We are told that
God made man; and, being all-wise, he would, of course, endow him with
exactly such faculties and inclinations and appetites as were best
adapted to his situation, and calculated to make him happy. But,
according to orthodoxy, God had planted a tree near the spot where he
placed Adam, and furnished it with some beautiful and luscious fruit,
and implanted in man an appetite and relish for it, and, as if to
tantalize him with perpetual hanger, forbade him to eat the fruit; and
apparently, for fear Adam would obey his command and abstain from eating
the fruit, he created a serpent-devil to persuade him (or rather his
wife) with bland smiles (assuming that a snake can smile, which is
rather doubtful) to partake of the fruit, and satisfy their appetites.
All this appear's to have been the work of their Creator, and not
theirs. But the conspicuous features of the absurdity do not stop here.

4. We are told that the prohibition to eat the fruit was issued to Adam
before Eve was released from her imprisonment in Adam's side, or from
performing the functions of a rib-bone, before she became a woman and a
wife; and it is not even implied that it was intended to extend to her.
Why, then, in the name of God, should such curses be heaped upon her
devoted head for eating the fruit when she had not been forbidden to do
so? And it does not appear to have been wrong in any sense, only that
Jehovah had issued an order forbidding it.

5. Jehovah professed great sympathy for Adam's lonely condition, and
made a help meet for him; and yet the first meat she helped him to, it
would seem, damned him and his posterity for ever. In view of this fact,
it is probable Adam would have preferred to let her remain a bone in his
side.

6. Here let it be noted that Adam and Eve were ignorant and
inexperienced beings. They had had no experience in any thing, and hence
could not know that such an act, or any other act, was wrong and sinful.

7. Nor could Adam know what the word "die" meant when Jehovah told him
he would die the day he ate the fruit, as he had seen nothing die.

8. It may here be said in reply, that they should, in their ignorance,
have obeyed the command which was given them To this we reply, they did
obey the command of one being. God told them not to eat, and the serpent
told them to eat, the fruit; and, not having lived with or had any
experience with either of those omnipresent beings, how could they know
what would be the consequence of obeying or disobeying either of them?
This question of itself is sufficient to settle the matter. They
could not possibly know, with no experience in either case, that the
consequence would be more serious or more fatal in disobeying Jehovah
than the serpent.

9. And as they got their eyes open by eating the fruit, and did not die
as Jehovah told them they would (while the serpent told them they
would not), it is not to be wondered at that ever after they and their
posterity should be more inclined to serve the serpent-devil than
Jehovah, seeing that all the happy consequences which the former
predicted as the result of eating the fruit were realized, while those
of Jehovah were falsified. For proof see chap. 53.

10. The most artful sophistry can not disguise the fact that the
doctrine of moral depravity is a slanderous imputation upon divine
mercy, goodness, and justice, and challenges not only his goodness, but
his good sense.

11. And every page of history and every principle of science demonstrate
it to be both false and demoralizing.

Man _fell up_, and not _down_.




