CHAPTER VII.

 _Of the second way to hinder peace.—Affrightments, the general nature
 and burden of them, in several particulars.—What are the ways by
 which he affrights: 1. Atheistical injections. Observations
 of his proceeding in them; 2. Blasphemous thoughts; 3.
 Affrightful suggestions of reprobation. Observations of his
 proceedings in that course; 4. Frightful motions to sin;
 5. Strong immediate impressions of fear; 6. Affrightful
 scrupulosity of conscience._


The next rank of troubles by which the devil doth endeavour to
molest us, I call _affrightments_. It is usual for those that speak
of temptations, to distinguish them thus: Some are, they say,
enticements, some are affrightments; but then they extend these
affrightments further than I intend, comprehending under them all those
temptations of sadness and terror, of which I am next to speak. But
by affrightments, I mean only those perplexities of spirit into which
Satan casts men, by overacting their fears, or astonishing their minds,
by injecting unusual and horrid thoughts against their consents.[327]
Some there are that have thought those temptations, of which the
apostle complains, 2 Cor. xii. 7, ‘There was given me a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me,’ were of this kind—that
is, horrid injections frequently repeated, as men deal their blows in
fighting. Gerson, speaking of these, tells us they sometime come from
the sole suggestion of Satan troubling the fancy, and saying, Deny God,
curse God; and then adds, such was the thorn in the flesh given to the
apostle.[328] But whether this was the trouble of the apostle, or some
other thing—for several things are conjectured, and nothing can be
positively proved—we are sure, from the sad experience of many, that
such troubles he doth often give; which I shall first explain in the
general, and then give a particular of these frightful injections.

1. To explain the nature and burden of this kind of trouble, I shall
present you with a few observations about them. As,

[1.] These astonishing thoughts are purely _injections_, such as _Satan
casts into the mind, and not what the mind of itself doth produce_; as
one expresseth it, they are more darting than reflecting. Not but that
our natural corruption could of itself beget blasphemous or atheistical
thoughts; but when they have their rise from ourselves solely, they
do not so startle us. Having some share at least of our consent going
along with them, they appear not so strange. But in this case in hand,
Satan is the agent, and men are the sufferers, their understandings
and souls being busied all the while to repel them, with the utmost
of their reluctances. And to those that do thus strive against them,
making resistance with all their strength, with tears and prayers, they
are only their afflictions, but not their sins. For the thoughts are
not polluted by the simple apprehension of a sinful object, no more
than the eye is defiled by beholding loathsome and filthy things; for
then should the mind of Christ have been defiled, when Satan propounded
himself blasphemously as the object of his worship; his mind as truly
apprehended the meaning of that saying, ‘fall down and worship me,’ as
ours can do, when he casts such a thing immediately into our thoughts.
Which is a consideration to be observed diligently by those that meet
with such sad exercise. If they do truly apprehend that they are but
their sufferings, and that God will not charge the sin upon them, they
will more easily bear and overcome the trouble.

These injections are commonly impetuous and sudden, frequently compared
to lightning; and this is usually made a note of distinction betwixt
wicked, blasphemous thoughts rising from our natural corruption, and
darted in by Satan; the former being more leisurely, orderly, and
moderate, according to the usual course of the procedure of human
thoughts, the latter usually accompanied with a hasty violence, subtly
and incoherently shooting into our understandings, as lightning into a
house; so that all the strength we have can neither prevent them nor
expel them, nor so much as mitigate the violence of them.

[3.] They are also for the most part _incessant and constant troublers
where they once begin_. Though Satan hath variety, in regard of the
matter of these amazing injections—for sometimes he affrights one
man with blasphemous thoughts, another with atheistical thoughts, a
third with grievous, unusual temptations to sin, as murder, &c.—yet
usually he fixeth his foot upon what he first undertakes. And as
cunning huntsmen do not change their game that they first rouse, that
they may sooner speed in catching the prey; so what frightful thought
Satan begins the trouble with, that he persists in, and is withal so
vehement in his pursuit, that he gives little intermission. He makes
these unwelcome thoughts haunt them like ghosts, whithersoever they
go, whatsoever they do; he will give solemn onsets it may be twenty or
forty times in a day: and at this rate he continues, it may be for some
considerable time, so that they are not quit of the trouble for several
months, or it may be years.

[4.] The matter of these affrightments are things _most contrary
to the impressions of nature or grace, and therefore most odious
and troublesome_. When he is upon this design, things that are most
contrary to the belief and inclination of men are best for his purpose;
as men that intend to affright others choose the most ugly vizors,
the strangest garbs and postures, and make the most uncouth, inhuman
noises; and the more monstrous they appear, the better they succeed in
their purposes. Yet Satan doth not always choose the very worst, for
then most of the troubles of this kind would be about the same thing;
but he considers the strength of our persuasions, our establishment in
truths, the probability or improbability of an after game with us; and
accordingly sometimes refuseth to trouble us with injections, contrary
to what we are most firmly rooted in, choosing rather that which,
though contrary to our thoughts and resolves, we have not been fixed
in without a great deal of labour, and which, if there be occasion,
might most fitly be charged upon us as our own, so that, whereas other
suggestions would be slighted as apparent malice and scarecrows, these
are most afflicting, as being an assault against such a fort which
costs us much to rear, and which we are most afraid to lose, and most
liable to his accusation after a long continuance, as being the issue
of our own unsettledness.

[5.] The first and most obvious effects of these injections are
_the utmost abhorrency of the mind_—which presently startles at the
appearance of such odious things—_and the trembling of the body,
sometimes to an agony and fainting_. The invasion of one single
injection hath put some into such a heart-breaking affrightment,
that they have not recovered themselves in a whole day’s time. This
trembling of the body and agony of the mind are the usual consequences
of anything that is surprising, strange, and fearful; and therefore is
trembling of the body made by divines a mark to discover that these
hideous, blasphemous thoughts are cast in by Satan, and have not their
rise from our own hearts; for the horror of the mind is usually so
great, when it is spoken to in this language, that it cannot bear
up under its astonishment and trouble. Yea, those very men that are
otherwise profane, and can with boldness commit great iniquities,
cannot but shake, and inwardly conceive an unspeakable hatred at these
monstrous suggestions.[329]

[6.] _These affrightments are more common than men are usually aware
of._ They are by some thought to be rare and extraordinary; but this
mistake ariseth from the concealment of these kind of troubles. Those
that are thus afflicted are often ashamed to speak to others what
they find in their own hearts; but if all would be so ingenuous as to
declare openly what fearful imaginations are obtruded upon them, it
would appear that Satan very frequently endeavours to trouble men this
way.

[7.] _These are very grievous burdens, and hard to be borne upon many
accounts._

_First_, Who can well express _the inward torture and molestation
of the mind_, when it is forced against its own natural bent and
inclination to harbour such monsters within itself! How would nature
reluct and abominate the drinking down of noisome puddled water, or the
swallowing of toads and serpents! And hence was it that persecutors in
their devilish contrivances invented such kind of tortures. And what
less doth the devil do when he forceth blasphemies upon their thoughts,
and commits a rape by a malicious violence upon their imaginations?
David, under these temptations, Ps. lxxiii. 21, cries out, ‘Thus my
heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins:’ and it cannot be
otherwise, for the reason already mentioned. Nature abhors to be
forced to what is most contrary to itself, and so doth grace. Now the
things by which Satan works these affrightments are contrary to nature
or grace, or both together; and as they will strive to the utmost of
their ability to cast out what is so opposite to them, so must the
devil to the utmost of his ability, if he would carry his design,
strengthen himself in his force, and from hence, as when fire and
water are committed together, ariseth a most troublesome conflict;
and indeed if there were a compliance of our consent, there would be
no affrightment; neither can this kind of temptation be managed except
there be the utmost dissent of the mind. If any think there is no
great ground for these temptations, because some of the particulars by
which he is said to affright men are natural to us, as, for instance,
atheistical thoughts, which are by some called the master-vein of our
original corruption, and by others said to be in the heart of every man
naturally, and then consequently not so troublesome as is imagined,
&c.; I answer, that when divines call these or blasphemous thoughts
natural, they do not mean that they are natural impressions engraven
on us by creation,—for they assert the contrary; that it is a natural
and unextinguishable impression upon every man that there is a God,
&c., and usually give in this for proof, that the greatest atheists
in fear and extremity will manifest a secret belief of a deity, by
calling out, O God, &c.,[330] or by some other posture, as Caligula by
hiding himself when it thundered,—but they mean only that our natural
corruption may produce these thoughts, and that they are the natural
issues thereof; and therefore Perkins, in answer to a question of this
nature, tells us that these two thoughts, ‘there is a God,’ and ‘there
is no God,’ may be, and are both, in the same heart.[331] Now as this
will give us the reason why Satan doth make choice of these thoughts
to trouble us withal, which may also rise from ourselves—which I have
hinted before, and shall presently again touch upon—so it tells us
still that whether these thoughts arise from our own corruption or from
Satan, our natural impressions are strong against them, and withal that
they cannot be so affrightful but when Satan doth manage them, and
when the contrary impressions of nature are awakened to give strong
resistance, and then that struggling must be as the tearing of our
bowels, and still the worse in that we are incessantly pursued, Satan
still casting back with unwearied labour the same thoughts as they are
repulsed and rejected, as soldiers that besiege cities use to cast over
the walls their fired grenades.

_Second_, These are also grievous, _as they set the mind upon the rack,
and stretch it under laborious and doubtful inquiries after the grounds
or causes of this kind of trouble_, for the heart, astonished with such
cursed guests against his will, presently reflects upon God and itself
What have I done, and wherefore am I thus disquieted with monsters?
Why doth the righteous Lord suffer Satan to break open my heart, and
fill me with such fearful thoughts? But when men’s inquiries are not
so high, but detained in a consideration of the nature of the trouble
and manner of its working, without looking up to the providence of God,
then are their troubles increased.

_Third_, As these injections necessitate men, in their own defence, _to
oppose and every way to resist, it is an increase of the burden_. What
pleadings are they put to, what defiances, what endeavours to call off
the thoughts! and all to little purpose; while the trouble continues
they are forced to lie in their armour, and to be constantly in their
ward.

_Fourth_, And yet are they further troublesome _in the after-game that
Satan plays by these thoughts_. It is not all of his design to affright
men, but he usually hath another temptation to come in the rear of
this, and that is to turn these affrightments into accusations, and by
urging them long upon the hearts of men, to make them believe that they
are their own thoughts, the issues of their own natural corruption; and
after men are by continual assaults weakened, their senses and memory
dulled, their understanding confounded, &c., they easily conclude
against themselves. The tempter imputes all the horrid blasphemy to
them, boldly calls them guilty of all; and because their thoughts have
dwelt long upon such a subject, and withal knowing that corrupt nature
of itself will lead men to such horrid blasphemies or villainies—which
makes it probable that it might be their own fault, and for this reason
Satan makes choice of such injections as may in the accusation seem
most likely to be true—being strongly charged as guilty, they yield;
and then begins another trouble more fearful than the former.[332]
Oh, what sad thoughts have they then of themselves, as the most vile
blasphemous wretches! Sometimes they think that it is impossible that
other men’s hearts should entertain such intolerable things within them
as theirs, and that none was ever so bad as they; sometimes they think
that if men knew what vile imaginations and monstrous things are in
their minds, they would in very zeal to God and religion stone them, or
at least exclude them from all commerce with men; sometimes they think
their sin to be the sin against the Holy Ghost; sometimes they think
God is engaged in point of honour to shew upon them some remarkable
judgment, and they verily look for some fearful stroke to confound
them, and live under such a frightful expectation. These and many more
to this purpose are their thoughts, so that these temptations are every
way troublesome, both in their first and second effects.

Thus I have in the general expressed the nature of these affrightments.
What the particular injections are by which he studies to affright men,
I shall next declare. They are principally six:

1. _Atheistical thoughts._ By injecting these into the mind he doth
exceedingly affright men, and frequently for that end doth he suggest
that there is no God, and that the Scriptures are but delusive
contrivances, &c. Concerning these I shall note a few things; as,

[1.] Though there be an observable difference betwixt _atheistical
injections and temptations to atheism_, not only in the design—Satan
chiefly intending seduction in the latter, and affrightment by the
former—but also in the manner of proceeding—(for when he designs
chiefly to tempt to atheism, he first prepares his way by debauching
the conscience with vicious or negligent living,—according to Ps. xiv.
1, that which makes men ‘say in their hearts there is no God,’ is
this, that ‘they are corrupt, and have done abominable works’—and in
this method was famous Junius tempted to atheism: but when he chiefly
intends to affright, he sets upon men that by a watchful and strict
conversation cut off from him that advantage)—yet he doth so manage
himself that he can turn his course either way, as he finds probability
of success after trial; for he presseth on upon men most where he finds
them most to yield, so that those who were but at first affrighted may
at last be solemnly persuaded and urged to believe the suggestion to be
true if they give him any encouragement for such a procedure.[333]

[2.] _Contemplative heads and great searchers_ are usually most
troubled in this manner, partly because they see more difficulties than
other men, and are more sensible of human inability to resolve them,
and partly because God, who will not suffer his children to be tempted
‘above what they are able,’ doth not permit Satan to molest the weaker
sort of Christians with such dangerous assaults.

[3.] _Persons of eminent and singular holiness may be, and often are,
troubled with atheistical thoughts, and have sad conflicts about them_,
Satan labouring, where he cannot prevail for a positive entertainment
of atheism, at least to disquiet their minds by haunting them with
his injections, if not to weaken their assent to these fundamental
truths, in which he sometimes so prevails, that good men have publicly
professed that they have found it a harder matter to believe that there
is a God than most do imagine.

[4.] _Satan lies at the catch in this design, and usually takes men
at the advantage, suddenly setting upon them, either in the height of
their meditations and inquiries into fundamental truths_—for when they
soar aloft, and puzzle themselves with a difficulty, then is he at
hand to advise them to cut the knot which they cannot unloose—_or in
the depth of their troubles_—for when men cannot reconcile the daily
afflictions and sufferings which they undergo, with the love and care
of God toward his children, then it is Satan’s season to tell them that
there is no supreme disposer of things. In both these cases the devil
leaps upon them unawares, like a robber out of a thicket, who, if he
do not wound them by the dart of atheistical injection, at least he is
sure to astonish them, and to confound them with amazement. For,

[5.] _Sometimes he pursues with wonderful violence, and will dispute
with admirable subtlety, urging the inequality of providence, the
seeming contradictions of Scripture, the unsuitableness of ordinances
to an infinite wisdom and goodness, with many more arguments of
like kind_; and this with such unexpected acuteness and seeming
demonstration, that the most holy hearts and wisest heads shall not
readily know what to answer, but shall be forced to betake themselves
to their knees, and to beg of God that he would rebuke Satan, and
uphold them that their faith fail not. Nay, he doth not only dispute,
but by urging, and with unspeakable earnestness threaping,[334] the
conclusion upon men, doth almost force them to a persuasion, so that
they are almost carried off their feet whether they will or no; which
was the very case of David when the devil pursued him with atheistical
thoughts on the occasion of the prosperity of wicked men, and his
daily troubles: Ps. lxxiii. 2, ‘My feet were almost gone, my steps had
well-nigh slipped.’

[6.] Yet for all this he sometimes _lays aside his sophistical
subtlety, and betakes himself to an impudent importunity_; for
sometimes he insists only on one argument, not changing that which
he first took up, nor strengthening his suggestion with variety of
arguments, but by frequent repetition of the same reason persists to
urge his injected atheism. This gives no discovery of any deep reach
if he designed to persuade—for it is scarce rational to imagine that
serious men, who by many arguments are fully persuaded there is a God,
should readily lose their hold upon the appearance of one objection—but
it shews that he purposeth only to molest. And this appears more
evidently, when he contents himself with weak and trivial arguments,
which the afflicted party can answer fully, and yet cannot for all that
quit themselves of the trouble; for instance, it is not very many years
since a serious and pious person came to me, and complained that he
could not be at rest for atheistical thoughts that perpetually haunted
him; and upon a particular inquiry into the cause and manner of his
trouble, he told me the first rise of it was from his observation, that
I had interpreted some scriptures otherwise than he had heard some
others to have done; but withal he added that he knew the reason of his
perplexity was but silly, and that which he could easily answer; this
being no just charge against the Scripture, whose sense and truth might
for all that be one, and uniform to itself, but only an implication of
human weakness appearing in the different apprehensions of expositors;
yet notwithstanding he affirmed he could not shake off the trouble,
and that his thoughts were ever urged with the same thing for a long
time together. Nay, such is his impudency in this kind of trouble, that
those who know it is the best way not to dispute fundamentals with
Satan, but with abhorrency to reject him—after the example of Christ,
with a ‘get thee behind me, Satan’—and accordingly do with their
utmost strength reject them, yet they find that he doth not readily
desist.

How sad is this trouble! how are pious persons affrighted to see the
face of their thoughts made abominably ugly and deformed by these
violent and unavoidable injections! It is not only wearisome to those
that know it to be solely Satan’s malice, but it often proves to be an
astonishing surprisal—like that of a traveller who, while he passeth
on his way without foresight or thought of danger, is suddenly brought
to the top of a great precipice, where, when he looks down to the vast
deep below, his head swims, his heart pants, his knees tremble, and
the very fear of the sudden danger so confounds him that he is through
excessive dread ready to fall into that which he would avoid; so are
these amazed at so great hazards before them. Satan could not by all
his art prevail with them to abandon the holy ways of God in exchange
for the pleasures of sin, and now they seem to be in danger to lose all
at once; and yet it is more affrightful by far to those that charge,
through Satan’s cunning, all this atheism upon themselves.

2. Another affrightful injection is that of _blasphemous thoughts_, as
that God is not just, not compassionate; that scriptures and ordinances
are but low and sorry things, &c.

That Satan doth delight to force such thoughts upon men, is evident,

[1.] _From his nature._ He is a blasphemous spirit, and withal so
malicious, that whatsoever is in his cursed mind he will be ready to
vent upon all occasions.

[2.] _From his practice_; for where he can obtain the rule over men’s
imaginations, as in some distracted persons, and those that are
distempered with fevers, he usually makes them vomit forth oaths,
cursings, and blasphemies, and this he doth to some that, while they
have had the use of their reason, have not been observed to give their
tongue the liberty of swearing or cursed speaking.

[3.] _From his professed design in the case of Job_, concerning whom he
boasted to God himself that he would make him curse him to his face,
and accordingly tempted him by his wife to curse God and die.

[4.] _From the sad experience of those that have suffered under this
sad affliction_: for many have complained of blasphemous thoughts;
and those whom he cannot conquer he will thus trouble. Neither need
we think it strange that the devil can impress blasphemies upon the
imaginations of men against their wills, when we consider that he could
make Saul, in his fits, to behave himself like an inspired person, and
cause him to utter things beyond and unsuitable to his disposition,
after the rate and manner of those raptures which idolatrous priests
used to be transported withal. _Bacchatur vates._ [Virgil.][335] This,
in 1 Sam. xviii. 10, is called Saul’s prophesying, when the ‘evil
spirit from the Lord vexed him;’ and is the same with that which is
spoken concerning Baal’s priests: 1 Kings xviii. 29, ‘They prophesied
until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice’—that is, they
were exercised with trances and rapturous furies, in which they uttered
strange sounds and speeches. How easily, then, may Satan possess the
fancies of men with blasphemies! so that the unwilling may be troubled
with them, and those that are deprived of the benefit of reason, may,
from the power of the impression upon their imagination, vent them with
a kind of unwillingness.

Melancholy persons do very frequently meet with this kind of trouble,
Satan having a great power upon their imagination, and great
advantages, from the darkness of that humour, to make the fear arising
from such thoughts the more astonishing, and to delude them into an
apprehension that they are guilty of all that passeth through their
thoughts, and also to work this perplexity to more dismal effects.
In these kind of men he doth play the tyrant with such injections,
abusing them to such a height as if they were his vassals and slaves,
whose thoughts and tongues were in his and not their own keeping; and
so strongly doth he possess them with this perplexity sometimes, that
all the counsels, reasonings, or advice of others cannot in the least
satisfy or relieve them; yet, notwithstanding, I have known several
under this affliction who, when by physic the state of their bodies
hath been altered, have found themselves at ease immediately, the
trouble gradually and insensibly ceasing of itself.

Others there are that have great vexation from these thoughts, and
these are commonly such as by some long and grievous pain, sickness,
or other crosses, have their spirits fretted and imbittered; then is
Satan ready to suggest that God is cruel or regardless of his people;
and these thoughts are the more dreadful because fretting and murmuring
spirits have a natural tendency to think harshly of God; so that Satan
in this case doth with the more boldness obtrude these suggestions upon
them, finding so great a forwardness toward such imaginations, and
also with greater severity he doth reflect upon them, as being in some
likelihood compliant and consenting.

When other persons—not so concerned as these two sorts of men above
mentioned—are assaulted with blasphemous thoughts, the fits are less
permanent, and, because they easily discover the design and author of
them, not highly affrightful, though still troublesome.

The burden of these injections are much like the former, very sadly
afflicting. For who can easily bear the noise of Satan while he
shouts continually into their ears odious calumnies and blasphemous
indignities against God? David could not hear wicked men blaspheme
God but it was ‘as a sword in his bones,’ exceeding painful. The
impressions of nature, that teach us to revere and honour God; the
power of education, that confirms these impressions; the persuasion
of faith, that assures us of the reality and infinite excellency
of a Godhead; and the force of love, that makes us more sensibly
apprehensive of any injury or dishonour done to him whom we love above
all;—all these do suffer by these violent incursions of Satan, and the
sufferer finds himself to be pained and tortured in these noble parts.
How grievous must it be to a child of God to have his ear chained to
these intolerable, ingrateful reproaches!—especially when we consider
that the devil will in this case utter the most dreadful blasphemies he
can devise, which will still add to the affliction—for even those men
that through habit can well bear ordinary petty oaths, will yet startle
at outrageous prodigious swearing—and therefore whatever covert and
consequential blasphemies may be to some men, these impudent, hideous
abuses of the holy and just God must needs sadly trouble those that
are forced to hear them. And the more constant the greater trouble.
Who would not be weary of their lives that must be forced to undergo
this vexation still without intermission? And yet the devil can advance
the trouble a little higher by the apparatus or artificial[336] dread
which he puts upon the temptation in the manner of the injection; as
the roaring of the lion increaseth terror in the beasts of the field,
who without that would tremble at his presence; and as the thundering
and lightning at the giving of the law increased the fear of Israel,
so when Satan is upon this design, he shakes as it were the house, and
makes a noise that the fright may be increased.

3. _Suspicious fears of being excluded out of God’s eternal decree of
election is another of his affrightments._ This is when Satan boldly
takes upon him to determine God’s secret counsel concerning any man;
peremptorily asserting that he is none of God’s elect. In which case
he often doth only inject the suspicion confidently, without offer of
proof; or if he use arguments, they never amount to a proof of his
assertion; neither is it possible they should, for these are among
‘God’s secrets,’ and out of Satan’s reach, though possibly they may
prove the person to be not converted at present. So that this kind of
trouble differs exceedingly from those disquiets of temptation which
frequently men suffer about their state of regeneration. And indeed the
question should not be confounded, it being of great concern to men
when their peace is assaulted to be able to observe the difference
betwixt these two assertions, ‘Thou are not elected,’ and ‘Thou art not
yet regenerated.’ Seeing—the latter being granted—there yet remains
a hope of the probability or possibility of that man’s conversion
afterwards. The suspicions of non-conversion are more common, and not
so dangerous; nay, in unregenerate persons the fears of their being yet
in that condition, being joined with diligence and care to avoid the
danger, are necessary and advantageous; but the former being granted,
all hopes are, together with that concession, laid off, which must
needs make the affrightment intolerable. In this we may observe,

[1.] That Satan, for the better management of this design, doth not
only inject these suspicions _in the most dreadful language_—as, ‘Thou
art a lost and damned wretch, hopelessly miserable to all eternity; God
hath not elected thee to life, but prepared for thee, as a vessel of
wrath, the lake of fire and brimstone for ever,’ &c.—but also he doth
assert them with the highest peremptoriness imaginable, as if he had
authority from God to pronounce a sentence of condemnation against a
man. This must needs amaze the afflicted unspeakably.

[2.] In this he also _observes his advantages_; for there are some men
so sadly suited to this design, that Satan comes better to speed upon
them than others. Usually he fixeth his eyes,

_First, Upon young persons at their first serious attendances upon, and
considerations of, Scripture truths._ Their hearts are then tender.
Youth hath a natural tender-heartedness. We find them coupled together
in Rehoboam’s character: 2 Chron. xiii. 7, ‘When Rehoboam was young and
tender-hearted.’ And they are apt to receive strong impressions. When
those who were formerly mindless of their spiritual concern begin to be
serious, they can no sooner fall upon a consideration of those weighty
doctrines, that there are sheep and goats, some saved and some damned,
that the blessed are few in comparison of the many that take the broad
way to destruction, and that these were from eternity ordained unto
life, and these only, &c.; no sooner, I say, begin they to ponder these
things, but Satan is ready with his suspicion, ‘And what dost thou know
but thou art one of these excluded wretches? If but few are saved, a
thousand to one thou art none of them; for why should God look upon
thee more than another?’ These are his first essays[337] with young men
beginning to be serious, in which afterward he proceeds with greater
boldness as he seeth occasion.

_Secondly_, He also doth this to persons that are _some way quickened
to a devotional fear of God and care of their souls, but withal are
ignorant, and not able distinctly to apprehend and orderly to range
the doctrines of the Scriptures into a due consistency with one
another_. Their careful fears make them inquire into what God hath
said concerning the everlasting state of men; and before they can be
able to digest the principles of religion, Satan sets some truths
edgeways against them, which put them into great affrightment; while,
through their ignorance, other truths, appointed and declared for
the satisfaction of the minds of those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, cannot come in to their relief. How startling must the
truths of God’s election be when they stand forth alone, and are not
accompanied with the invitations of the gospel, that promise pardon and
acceptance to all that will come in and submit to Christ! Satan usually
holds such kind of men to the consideration of those truths that have
the most dismal aspect; and while they are stopped there, they can draw
forth no other conclusions than these, that they are in hazard, and,
for aught they know, utterly lost.

_Third_, Satan hath also this plot against those that by some _grievous
iniquity, or long continuance in sin, have highly provoked the Lord_.
Here he useth arguments from the heinousness of their iniquity: Thou
art a reprobate, because thou hast committed these great evils, these
are marks of damnation, &c.; which arguments, though they be of no
value, and no way proving that for which they are brought, yet Satan
injecting suspicions, and their own consciences in the meantime justly
accusing, they so sink under their fear that they suffer Satan to make
what conclusion he will, and then they subscribe to it.

_Fourth_, Above all, _melancholy persons give the devil the greatest
advantage to raise affrightments_. That distemper naturally fills
men with sad thoughts, and is credulous of the worst evil that can
be objected against him that hath it. Of itself, it can create
the blackest conceits and saddest surmises, and then believes its
own fancy. When Satan strikes in with this humour—_finguntque
creduntque_—they are the more confirmed in their suspicions; and the
fright is the greater, because they are as incredulous of what is good,
if it be told them, as they are apt to believe what is evil, and to
believe it, because they fear it, _dum timet credit_,—though no other
reason were offered: but much more when Satan, in a prophetic manner,
foretells their misery, and assures them they must never be happy.

[3.] The suspicions which the devil hath by these advantages _raised
up, he doth endeavour to increase, and to root them deeply in the
minds of them upon whom he hath thus begun_. And indeed, by frequent
inculcating the same thing, with his continued peremptoriness of
asserting the certainty of their non-election, he at last brings
up very many to a full persuasion that it is so; and besides other
arts that he may have, or exercise in this particular, he commonly
practiseth upon men by perverting the true intendment and use of the
doctrine of election. That there is such a thing as election, and
that of a determinate number, are truths undeniable; and the end of
their discovery in the gospel is the comfort and confirmation of the
converted. Here they may see God’s unchangeable love to them—how much
they stand engaged for the freeness of grace, and that the foundation
of God is sure, &c.; for to this purpose doth our Saviour improve these
doctrines, John xvii. 6, 7, 9, 12, 15, 16. But nothing of this is
spoken to discourage any man from his endeavours, neither can any man
prove that he or any other is excluded out of the decree of election,
except in case of the sin against the Holy Ghost; neither is it
possible for the devil to prove any such thing against any man; neither
ought any to suppose himself not elect; but on the contrary, if he is
willing to forsake sin, and desirous to be reconciled to God, he ought
to apprehend a probability that he is elected, because the proffer of
Christ is made to all that will receive him. And therefore should men
stop their ears against such suggestions, and not dispute that with
Satan, but rather hearken to the commands, exhortations, and promises
of Scripture, it being most certain that these ‘secret things belong
to God,’ Deut. xxix. 29, and are no man’s rule to walk by, seeing
‘revealed things only belong to us;’ all this the devil perverts, for
he endeavours to make election the immediate object of our faith, and
our rule to walk by, as if it were necessary that every man knew God’s
eternal purpose concerning him before he begin his endeavours. And as
he argues some men into a perverse carelessness upon the ground of
election, making them to conclude that if they are ordained to life,
they shall be saved, though they live wickedly; if they be not, they
shall be damned, though they endeavour never so much to the contrary;
so he also argues some, from this doctrine, into terrible fears
of damnation, because they cannot be assured aforehand that their
names are written in heaven. And these dreadful suspicions he doth
labour to strengthen by some men’s unwary handling of the doctrine
of non-election. When some preachers unskilfully urge the dangerous
signs of reprobation, or speak severely of God’s decrees, without due
caution and promise of mercy to all penitent sinners; or when some,
unskilful in the methods of comforting the distressed in conscience,
because they are not able to shew the afflicted their condition, or to
speak ‘a word in season’ to quiet their minds, and to direct them what
course to take, do usually refer them to God’s decree, and tell them,
If God have decreed them to salvation, they shall be saved; Satan doth
industriously hold them there; by this means he leads them from their
promises and their duty, and keeps them musing and poring upon election
till they are bewildered, and cannot find the way out. Thus have
several continued under their affrightments for many years.

[4.] We may observe, That when Satan hath brought them into this snare,
_he doth tyrannically domineer over them_. He doth deride them under
their trouble, and mock at them when their fear comes upon them. And
because now the very thought or hearing of election is as a dagger to
the heart, and a ‘dreadful sound in their ears,’ he delights to repeat
it to them; for the very naming of the word becomes as dreadful as the
sentence of condemnation to a malefactor, being always accompanied with
this reflection, Oh how miserable am I that have no part nor portion in
it! Besides, he doth busy their minds with imaginary representations
of hell, and sets before them, as in a scheme, the day of judgment,
the terrors of the damned, the sentence against the goats on the left
hand, the intolerable pains of everlasting burnings, and that which is
the misery of all these miseries, the eternity of all. Thus he forceth
their meditations, but still with application to themselves; neither
doth he suffer them to rest in the night, but they are terrified with
sad dreams, and the visions of the night do disquiet them.

[5.] _How grievous this affrightment is_, I should next observe; but
that is partly expressed in the aforegoing particulars, and may yet
more fully appear by a consideration of these three things:

_First, That a man hath nothing dearer to him than his soul._ Alas!
that cannot be counterbalanced by the gaining of the whole world, and
to have no hope or expectancy of its salvation must needs be terribly
affrightful!

_Second, These suspicions of non-election prevailing, all promises and
comforts are urged in vain, and they commonly return them back again to
those that offered them with this reply_, ‘They are true and useful to
those unto whom they appertain, but they belong not unto me.’ Nay, all
means are rejected as useless. If such be advised to pray or read, they
will in their fit of affrightment refuse all; upon this reason, that
they are not elected. And then to what purpose, say they, is prayer,
or any endeavours? For who can alter his decree? And, indeed, if their
affrightments continued at a height without intermission, they would
never do anything; but this is their help, that some secret underground
hopes which they espy not, do revive, at least sometimes, and put them
upon endeavours which, through God’s blessing, become means of better
information.

_Third_, Though Satan’s injections of non-election be altogether
unproveable, and withal so terrifying, that it might be supposed men
should not be forward in their belief of so great an unhappiness; yet
can he prevail so far _that the persons above named—especially the
melancholy—are made to believe him, and this chiefly by possessing
their imaginations with his frequent confident affirmations_. We see
it is a common practice to teach birds musical notes and sounds, which
is only by constant repetition, till a strong impression is made upon
their fancy; and thus may one man impose upon the imagination of
another with his songs or sayings; for what we hear often we cannot
forbear to repeat in our thoughts, being strongly fixed upon our
fancy. No wonder, then, if Satan, by often repeating, ‘Thou art not
elected, thou art damned,’ &c., do form so strong an impression upon
the imagination, that poor amazed creatures learn to say after him,
and then take the echoes of their fancy to be the voice of conscience
condemning them. Now, then, if the unhappiness suspected be the
greatest beyond all comparison, if these suspicions entertained cut off
all succours of comfort that may arise from the promises of God and the
endeavours of man, if Satan can prevail with men to entertain them with
any persuasion—as we see he can—how dreadfully will these persuasions
recoil upon a man! And thus will his thoughts run, ‘I am persuaded I am
not elected; and if not elected, then comforts and prayers are all in
vain; and if these be in vain, there is no possibility of salvation,
nor the least hope of a _who knows_, or a _peradventure_; and if that,
oh unspeakably miserable!’ Under these astonishing thoughts doth Satan
exercise their hearts by suspicions of non-election. But,

4. Sometimes he takes another course to affright men, and that is by
_injecting motions of some abominable sin or evil into their minds,
to the commission whereof he seems strongly to solicit_; yet not with
any full intention or expectation of prevalency, but with a purpose
to molest and disquiet. And for that end, he commonly chooseth such
sins as are most vile in their own nature, and most opposite to the
dispositions of men. Thus he injects thoughts of uncleanness to a
chaste person; thoughts of injustice and wrong to a just man; thoughts
of revenge and cruelty to a weak man; thoughts of rejoicing in the loss
and misery of others to the merciful man. Or else he injects motions
to such sins wherein formerly men have been overtaken, but have been
made bitter by deep repentance; the very thoughts whereof are now
become most loathsome. And sometimes he pursues men with thoughts of
self-murder, even while there is nothing of discontent or trouble in
their minds to second such a temptation. By this manner of proceeding
he creates great affrightments to the hearts of men. For,

[1.] _These are strange surprisals_; and persons under this kind
of trouble cannot but be amazed to find such thoughts within them,
which are most contrary to their dispositions, or their most serious
resolves. The chaste person tempted to uncleanness, or the just man to
revenge; the humble person urged to the same sin that cost him so dear,
&c.; they wonder at their own hearts, and while they mistake these
temptations, by judging them to be the issues of their own inclination,
with astonishment they cry out, Oh, I had thought that I had mortified
these lusts, but what a strange heart have I! I see sin is as strong in
me as ever! And I have cause to fear myself, &c.

[2.] And this is yet a greater trouble, because usually Satan takes
them _at some advantage of an offered occasion or opportunity_, then
he gives them a sudden push, and with importunity urgeth them to take
the time. This often affrights them into trembling, and their fears do
so weaken their purposes that their hazards are the greater, in that
they are astonished into an inactivity. So that in this case the men of
might do not readily find their hands.

[3.] Neither are these motions _sudden and transient glances, which
perish as soon as they are born_, though it be a very frequent thing
with Satan to cast in motions into the heart for trial sake, without
further prosecution; but he, in this case, pursues with frequent
repetitions, following hard after them, to the increase of the
affrightment. So that for a long time together men may be afflicted
with these messengers of Satan to buffet them; and though they may pray
earnestly against them that they may be removed, yet they find the
motions continue upon them. Which must needs be a hateful annoyance
to an upright heart, that doth know it to be only Satan’s design to
affright; much more must it afflict those that do not perceive the
contriver and end of such motions, but judge them to be the natural
workings of their own evil heart.

5. Satan can also affright men _by immediate impressions of fear
upon their minds_. He can do much with the imagination, especially
when persons are distempered with melancholy, for such are naturally
fearful, and any impressions upon them have the deepest, most piercing
operation. They are always framing to themselves dismal things, and
abound with black and dark conceits, surmising still the worst, and
always incredulous of what is good. Hence it is that sometimes men are
seized upon by fearfulness and trembling, when yet they cannot give any
tolerable account of a cause or reason why it should be so with them.
And others are excessively astonished with the shadows of their own
thoughts upon the meanest pretences imaginable.

That this is the work of Satan doth appear by unquestionable evidence.
This was that ‘evil spirit’ which God sent between Abimelech and the
men of Shechem, Judges ix. 23. God permitted Satan, for the punishment
of them both, to raise fears and jealousies in the heart of Abimelech
against the men of Shechem, and in the hearts of the men of Shechem
against Abimelech. They were mutually afraid of one another, and
these fears wrought so far, that they were, for the prevention of a
supposed danger, engaged in treacherous conspiracies, to the real ruin
of them both. The ‘evil spirit’ that vexed Saul, 1 Sam. xvi. 14, was
nothing else but sudden and vehement fits of terror and inward fear,
which the devil raised by the working up of his melancholy. For we may
observe these fits were allayed by music; and also we might see by his
disposition out of his fits, and by his carriage in them, that inward
fears were his tormentors; for, 1 Sam. xviii. 9, it is noted that Saul
eyed David, that is, his jealous fears began to work concerning David,
of whom it is said expressly, ver. 12, ‘that he was afraid because the
Lord was with him,’ and when the evil spirit came upon him his heart
was exercised with these fears, and accordingly he behaved himself
when he cast the javelin at David with a purpose to slay him. Upon any
occasion, of trouble especially, the devil was at hand to heighten his
affrightment, insomuch that when the supposed Samuel told him of his
death, 1 Sam. xxviii. 20, he was afraid to such a height that he ‘fell
straightway all along on the earth, and there was no strength in him.’
Neither must we suppose that Satan in this kind of working is confined
only to wicked men; for there is nothing in this manner of affrightment
which is inconsistent with the condition of a child of God, especially
when God gives him up to trial or correction. Nay, many of God’s
servants suffer under Satan’s hand in this very manner. Let us consider
the troubles of Job, and we shall find that though Satan endeavoured
to destroy his peace by discomposure of spirit, by questioning his
integrity, by frightful injections of blasphemous thoughts, yet all
these he vanquished with an undaunted courage, the blasphemy he
rejected with abhorrency, his integrity he resolved he would not
deny so long as he lived, his losses he digested easily with a sober
composed mind, blessed God that gives and takes at pleasure; and yet he
complains of his fears, and his frequent surprisals thereby, insomuch
that his friends take notice that most of his trouble arose from
thence: chap. xxii. 10, ‘A sudden fear troubleth thee;’ and he himself
confesseth as much, ix. 34, ‘Let not his fear terrify me ... but it
is not so with me.’ So that it appears that Job’s inward distress was
mostly from strong impressions of affrighting fears.

These fears impressed upon the mind must needs be an unexpressible
trouble. There is nothing that doth more loosen the sinews and joints
of the soul, to the weakening and utter enfeebling of it in all its
endeavours, than fears; it scatters the strength in a moment. And
besides the present burden, which will bow down the backs of the
strongest, these fears have a special kind of envious magnanimity
in them. For (1.) they come by fits, and have times of more fierce
and cruel assaults, yet in their intervals they leave the heart in a
trembling fainting posture; for the devil gives not over the present
fit till he hath rent them sore, and left them, as he did the man’s son
in Mark ix. 26, ‘as one dead’: so that it is no more to be reckoned
compassion and gentleness in Satan toward the afflicted that their fits
are not constant, than it can be accounted tenderness or kindness in a
tyrant who, when he hath racked or tormented a man as much as strength
will bear without killing out of hand, gives over for a time that the
party might be reserved for new torments. (2.) These fits usually
return at such times as the party afflicted seems to promise himself
some little ease, being designed to give the greater disappointment in
intercepting his expected comforts. Sleep and meat are the two great
refreshments of the distressed; these times Satan watcheth for his
new onsets. Job found it so in both cases; his meal-times were times
of trouble: chap. iii. 24, ‘My sighing cometh,’ that is, the fits of
sighing return, ‘before I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the
waters,’ And his sleeping-times were no better: vii. 13, ‘When I say,
My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint; then thou
scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions: so that
my soul chooseth strangling, and death rather than life.’ (3.) These
fears do make them feel the weight, not only of real present evils,
but of all others which the imagination can represent to them. So that
the sight or hearing of any sad thing afflicts them with surmises that
this will be their case. Hence are they full of misgiving thoughts.
Sometimes they fear that they shall at last fall off from God into some
scandalous sin, to the dishonour of God and religion, as that they
shall be apostates, and turn openly profane; sometimes they fear they
shall meet with some signal devouring judgment by which they shall one
day perish, as David said in the like case, ‘I shall one day perish by
the hand of Saul,’ [1 Sam. xxvii. 1.] Thus are they crucified betwixt
their present burden and future expectations of evil.

6. The last, and indeed the meanest, engine for the working of
affrightment, is _scrupulosity of conscience_. Satan vexeth the
conscience and distracteth the mind, by raising up _needless,
groundless fears concerning a man’s practice_. Where the ignorance
of men or their timorous dispositions do encourage Satan to this
enterprise, there he multiplies scruples upon them; so that, though
they assent to the doing of anything as good or lawful, yet are they
constantly affrighted from it by a suspicious fear that it may be
otherwise.

This kind of trouble takes in almost all kind of actions. It extends
to the way of a man’s calling, the way of his management of it, the
rates he takes and the prices he gives for his commodities; our very
natural actions of sleeping, eating, drinking, company, recreation,
are not unconcerned. In all which the devil affrights the timorous
conscience that, _it may be_ he hath offended: if he buys or sells,
he is disquieted with a _maybe_ that he hath sold too dear, or bought
too cheap; if he eats or sleeps, he fears he hath been excessive, a
sluggard or a glutton: thus are some men molested in everything they do.

Neither is this kind of affrightment to be despised; for though often
it is a groundless fear, and so appears to be to discerning Christians,
yet those that are under this molestation think it bad enough. Though
it be not as a rack, that afflicts with violent pains, yet it is
as those kinds of punishments which at first are nothing, but by
continuance do tire men out with little ease, and so at last become
intolerable. Besides, this is a multiplying trouble; for one scruple
begets another, and by continuance of scrupling, the conscience grows
so weak and unsteady, that everything is scrupled, and the man brought
to a continual affrightment of doing wrong in every action. Neither
can all men make use of the remedy that is prescribed for the cure of
this distemper, which is, that when such scruples cannot be removed by
reason, then either men should forbear the thinking upon such things
from whence scruples are apt to arise, or they should break them down
by violence, and go over the belly of their scruple to the performance
of their action. I deny not but that something may be done and
endeavoured this way; but any may see that it is not easy for every one
to do either of these: so that this is also a troublesome evil, from
which it is not easy to be discharged.




