PART III.

_Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted
of the devil._—MAT. iv. 1.




CHAPTER I.

 _The first circumstance of the combat—The time when it happened—The
 two solemn seasons of temptation—The reasons thereof._


I shall here consider the great temptation which it pleased our Lord
Christ to submit unto, as a most famous instance for confirmation and
illustration of the doctrine of temptations already handled.

The first verse sets down several remarkable circumstances of this
combat, all of them matter of weight and worth: as,

1. First, _The time when this fell out_; not as a loose and accidental
emergency, but as particularly made choice of both by God and Satan,
being most fit and proper for the design which each of them were
carrying on. This is expressly noted in Mat. iv. 1, ‘_Then_ was Jesus
led up;’ but more full in Mark i. 12, ‘_Immediately_ the Spirit driveth
him into the wilderness;’ manifestly directing us to expect something
worthy of our observation in that circumstance. Neither can we miss of
it, when the things unto which this directs us are so fully related
immediately before. For we find in both these evangelists, which speak
so exactly of the time of these temptations, that Christ was baptized
of John. This was in order to the fulfilling the righteousness of his
office. As the priests under the law, when they came to be thirty
years old, entered upon their function by washings, or baptizings and
anointings:[362] so Christ, that he might answer his type, beginning to
be about thirty years of age, was solemnly inaugurated into the great
office of the mediatorship by baptism, and the extraordinary descending
of the Holy Ghost, by which he was ‘anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows.’ To this solemn instalment the Father adds an
honourable testimony concerning him, ‘This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased,’ Luke iii. 23. Immediately after this was he carried
to the place of combat. Hence we may infer,

_Obs._ 1. _That our entering upon a special service for God, or
receiving a special favour from God, are two solemn seasons which
Satan makes use of for temptation._ Often these two seasons meet
together in the same person at the same time. Paul, after his rapture
into the third heaven, 2 Cor. xii. 2, 7, which, as some conceive,
was also upon his entrance upon the ministry, was buffeted by ‘the
messenger of Satan.’

Sometime these two seasons are severed; yet still it may be observed
that the devil watcheth them. When any servant of God is to engage in
any particular employment, he will be upon him. He assaulted Moses by
persecution, when he was first called to deliver Israel. As soon as
David was anointed, immediately doth he enrage the minds of Saul and
his courtiers against him. It was so ordinary with Luther, that he
at last came to this, that before any eminent service he constantly
expected either a fit of sickness, or the buffetings of Satan. He is
no less sedulous in giving his assaults when any child of God hath
been under peculiar favours or enjoyments. The church, after a high
entertainment with Christ, is presently overcome by a careless, sleepy
indisposition, Cant. v. 1, 2.

Though this may seem strange, yet the harshness of such a providence
on God’s part, and the boldness of the attempt on Satan’s part, may be
much taken off by the consideration of the reasons hereof.

(1.) First, _On Satan’s part_. It is no great wonder to see such an
undertaking, when we consider his fury and malice. The more we receive
from God, and the more we are to do for him, the more doth he malign
us. So much the more as God is good, by so much is his eye evil.

(2.) Secondly, There are in such cases as these several advantages,
which, through our weakness and imperfection, we are too apt to give
him; and for these he lieth at the catch.

[1.] As first, _Security_. We are apt to grow proud, careless, and
confident, after or upon such employments and favours; even as men are
apt to sleep or surfeit upon a full meal, or to forget themselves when
they are advanced to honour. Job’s great peace and plenty made him, as
he confesseth, so confident, that he concluded he should ‘die in his
nest,’ chap. xxix. 18. David enjoying the favour of God in a more than
ordinary measure, though he was more acquainted with vicissitudes and
changes than most of men, grows secure in his apprehension, that he
‘should never be moved,’ Ps. xxx. 6; but he acknowledgeth his mistake,
and leaves it upon record as an experience necessary for others to
take warning by, that when he became warm under the beams of God’s
countenance, then he was apt to fall into security; and—this it seems
was usual with him in all such cases—when he was most secure, he was
nearest some trouble or disquiet. ‘Thou didst hide thy face’—and then
to be sure the devil will shew his—‘and I was troubled.’ Enjoyments
beget confidence; confidence brings forth carelessness; carelessness
makes God withdraw, and gives opportunity to Satan to work unseen. And
thus, as armies after victory growing secure, are oft surprised; so are
we oft after our spiritual advancements thrown down.

[2.] Secondly, _Discouragement and tergiversation_ is another thing
the devil watcheth for. By his assaults he represents the duty
difficult, tedious, dangerous, or impossible, on purpose to discourage
us, and to make us fall back. No sooner doth Paul engage in the gospel
than the devil is upon him, suggesting such hazards as he knew were
most prevalent with our frail natures, if he had not been aware of him,
and refused to hearken to what flesh and blood would have said in the
case, Gal. i. 16. When God honoured Moses with the high employment of
delivering Israel, the hazard and danger of the work was so strongly
fixed upon his thoughts, that he makes many excuses: one while pleading
his inability and insufficiency, ‘Who am I, that I should go to
Pharaoh?’ Exod. iii. 11. Another while he urgeth Israel’s unbelief, and
a seeming impossibility to satisfy them of his commission, Exod. iv. 1.
After that he deviseth another shift, ‘I am not eloquent,’ ver. 10. And
when all these subterfuges were removed, Satan had so affrighted him
with the trouble and difficulty of this undertaking, that he attempts
to break away from his duty: ver. 13, ‘Send by the hand of him whom
thou wilt send;’ that is, spare me and send another: and till the
anger and displeasure of God was manifested against him, he submitted
not. In Jonah the temptation went higher. He, upon the apprehensions
mentioned, ran away from his service, and puts God to convince him by
an extraordinary punishment. And when Satan prevails not so far as
wholly to deter men by such onsets, yet, at least, he doth dishearten
and discourage them, so that the work loseth much of that glory,
excellency, and exactness, which a ready and cheerful undertaking would
put upon it.

[3.] Thirdly, _The fall or miscarriage of the saints at such times
is of more than ordinary disadvantage_, not only to others—for if
they can be prevailed with to lay aside their work, or to neglect
the improvement of their favours, others are deprived of the benefit
and help that might be expected from them—but also to themselves.
A prevailing temptation doth more than ordinarily prejudice them
at such times. The greatness of the disappointment under special
service, the unworthy neglect and unanswerableness to special favours,
are extraordinary provocations, and produce more than ordinary
chastisements, as we see in Jonah’s affliction, and the spouse’s
desertion.

(2.) Secondly, As we have seen the reason of Satan’s keenness in
taking those opportunities, so may we consider the reasons of _God’s
permission_, which are these:—

[1.] First, Temptations at such seasons are permitted for more eminent
_trial of the upright_. On this account was Job tempted.

[2.] Secondly, _For an increase of diligence, humility, and
watchfulness_. If these privileges and mercies will not discourage
Satan, what will? And if Satan so openly malign such enjoyments, we may
be awakened to hold them faster and set a double guard upon them.

[3.] Thirdly, _For a plentiful furniture of experience_. Temptation
is the shop of experience. Luther was so great a gainer by this,
that he became able so to speak to the consciences and conditions of
his hearers, that the thoughts of their hearts were manifested by
his speaking, as if he had had an intelligencer in their own bosoms.
Hence did he commend prayer, meditation, and temptation as necessary
requisites for the accomplishment of a minister.

_Applic._ This may administer matter of counsel to us in both cases
aforementioned, if we be put upon eminent employments or receive
eminent favours.

1. First, _We must not be so secure as to think Satan will be asleep
that while, or that we are beyond danger_. While we are receiving
kindnesses, he is devising plots and laying snares. With privileges and
mercies expect exercises and hazards.

2. Secondly, in particular, _We may receive something of advice from
this consideration in reference to both cases_.

(1.) If God is about to employ us in any service,

[1.] We have little need to be _confident of our abilities or
performance_, when we know that temptations wait for us.

[2.] We must not only be sensible of our weakness, that we be not
confident; but we must be _apprehensive of the strength and power of
God to carry us through_, that we be not discouraged.

[3.] We must see our _opposition_, that we may be watchful; and yet
must we refuse to give it the least place of consideration in our
debates of duty, lest it sway us against duty or dishearten us in it.

(2.) If God be pleased to honour us with peculiar favours, then,

[1.] Though we must improve them to the full, yet must we not feed on
them without fear.

[2.] We must not stay in the enjoyment or play with the token, but look
to the tendency of such favours and improve them to duty, as to their
proper end.




