CHAPTER III.

 _Of Satan’s power.—His power as an angel considered.—That he lost not
 that power by his fall.—His power as a devil.—Of his commission.—The
 extent of his authority.—The efficacy of his power.—The advantages
 which he hath for the management of it, from the number, order, place,
 and knowledge of devils._


_That Satan’s power is great_, is our next inquiry; where,

1. First, We will consider his power _as an angel_. In Ps. ciii.
20 angels are said ‘to excel in strength;’ and in ver. 21, as also
Ps. cxlviii. 2, they are called ‘God’s host;’ which is more fully
expressed, 1 Kings xxii. 19, ‘I saw the Lord sitting upon his throne,
and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on
his left;’ which phrase, though it import their order and observance,
yet undoubtedly the main of its intendment is to set forth their
power, as hosts are the strength of kings and nations. God himself,
in putting on that title, ‘The Lord of hosts,’ makes it an evidence
of his incomprehensible power, that such armies of strong and mighty
creatures are at his command. But this only in the general. That which
comes nearer to a particular account of their strength, is that notion
of a spirit, by which they are frequently described, ‘He maketh his
angels spirits; his ministers flaming fire,’ Ps. civ. 4. The being
of a spirit is the highest our understanding is able to reach, and
that it shews a being very excellent, is manifest in this, that God
is pleased to represent himself to us under the notion of a spirit;
not that he is truly and properly such, but that this is the most
excellent being that falls under our apprehension. Besides that the
term ‘spirit’ raiseth our understanding to conceive a being of a high
and extraordinary power, it doth further tend to form our conceptions
to some apprehensions of their nature. [1.] From the knowledge that we
have of our own spirits. That our spirit is of a vast comprehension
and activity, our thoughts, desires, reasonings, and the particular
undertakings of some men of a raised spirit, do abundantly evidence.
[2.] In that it represents a spiritual being, freed from the clog and
hindrance of corporeity. Our own spirits are limited and restrained by
our bodies, as fire, an active element, is retarded and made sluggish
by matter unapt to serve its proper force, as when it is in a heap of
earth; which is also sufficiently pointed at in that opposition betwixt
flesh and blood, and principalities and powers, Eph. vi.; shewing
that flesh and blood are a disadvantage and hindrance to the activity
of a spirit. A spirit then, as incorporeal, may be conceived to move
easily without molestation, quickly, imperceptibly, and irresistibly.
[3.] This is yet further illustrated by the similitude of wind and
fire, which are, to the common experience of all, of very great force.
And it is yet further observable that the Scripture sometime speaks
of the power of angels in the abstract, choosing rather to call them
‘powers’ than powerful, ἐξουσίαι, Col. i. 16; clearly shewing that
angels are beings of vast strength, as indeed the actions done by them
do abundantly testify. Such was the destroying Sennacherib’s hosts in
a night, the opening the prison doors for Peter, the carrying Philip
in the air, and such other acts, which tend to the protection of the
faithful, or punishing of the wicked.

Though this may fully satisfy us that angels excel in strength, yet the
Scripture suggests another consideration relating to the office and
employment of angels, where their commission shews not only a liberty
for the exercise of this power, but also doth imply such a power as
is fit to be commissionated to such acts. These invisible beings are
called thrones, dominions, principalities, powers, Col. i. 16. It is
indeed a task beyond a sober undertaking to distinguish these words,
and to set their true bounds and marks of difference. This Augustine
acknowledged;[79] yet may we hence conclude, [1.] That these words
imply a very great authority in angels; [2.] A power and strength
suitable to their employment, and that God furnished them with power
answerable to the work which he intended for them, in his moving the
heavens, and governing the world, &c. However, in some cases, God
works by instruments every way disproportionable to the service, ‘that
the excellency of the power might be of God,’ [2 Cor. iv. 7;] yet, in
the ordinary way of his working, he puts an innate, suitable force
in creatures, for the acts to be done by them; as there is an innate
power in the wind to blow, in the fire to burn, in herbs and plants for
medicinal uses. Thus may we conceive of angels, that God using them
as his host, his ‘ministers to do his pleasure,’ he hath endowed them
with an innate natural power for those great things which he doth by
them, which must not be supposed in the least derogatory to the power
of God, in his ways of mercies or judgments, seeing all the strength
of angels is originally from God. Hence is it that all the names of
angels which we read of in Scripture carry this acknowledgment in their
signification; Michael thus unfolds itself, ‘Who is like God;’ Gabriel
thus, ‘The glory of God and therefore may we suppose them not so much
the proper names of angels, but, as Calvin noteth, _Nomina ad captum
nostrum indita_, Names implying God’s great power in them.[80]

Such a powerful spirit is Satan by creation. But because it will be
doubted lest his fall hath bereaved him of his excellency, and cast
him down from his strength, I shall evidence that he still retains the
same natural power. To which purpose it is not unfit to be observed,
[1.] That the same terms and names which were given to good angels,
to signify their strength and commission, Col. i. 16, and ii. 10, are
also given to Satan, Eph. vi. 12. Devils are called ‘principalities,’
‘powers,’ ‘rulers;’ and Col. ii. 15, they have the same names which
in ver. 10 were given to good angels, ‘he spoiled principalities and
powers.’ [2.] The Scripture gives particular instances of Satan’s
power and working: as his raising tempests in the air, commanding fire
from heaven—both which he did in prosecution of his malice against
Job; his carrying the bodies of men in the air—as he did with Christ,
hurrying him from the wilderness to the mountain, from thence to the
pinnacle of the temple; his breaking chains and fetters of iron, Mark
v. 4; his bringing diseases—instances whereof were that crooked woman
whom Satan had bowed together, Luke xiii. 16, and the lunatic person,
Luke ix. 31, with a great many more. [3.] It is also observable that,
notwithstanding, Satan’s fall hath made an alteration as to the ends,
uses, and office of his power; yet, nevertheless, God makes use of
this strength in him, not only as an executioner of wrath against his
enemies—as when he vexed Saul by this evil spirit; and through this
lying spirit, gave up Ahab to be deluded into his ruin, and inflicted
plagues upon Egypt, by sending evil angels among them, 1 Sam. xvi. 14;
1 Kings xxii. 21; Ps. lxxviii. 49—but also for the trial of his own
servants. Thus was Job afflicted by Satan, and Paul buffeted by his
messenger.

2. Secondly, This power of his, as _a devil_, falls next under our
consideration, wherein are divers particulars to be noted: as,

(1.) First, _His commission and authority_. If any put that question to
him which the Jews did to Christ, ‘By what authority dost thou these
things?’ or, ‘Who gave thee this authority?’ we have the answer in John
xii. 24, and xvi. 11, where he is called, ‘the prince of this world;’
and accordingly the Scripture speaks of a twofold kingdom, of light
and of darkness; and in this we hear of Satan’s seat or throne, of his
servants and subjects. Yea, that which is more, the Scripture speaks
of a kind of deity in Satan; he is called ‘the god of this world,’ 2
Cor. iv. 4; which doth not only set forth the intolerable pride and
usurpation of Satan in propounding himself as such, so drawing on poor
blind creatures to worship him, but also discovers his power, which
by commission he hath obtained over the children of disobedience,
[Zanchius.] Hence doth he challenge it as a kind of right and due from
the poor Americans, and others, that they should fall down and worship
him; and upon this supposition was he so intolerably presumptuous in
offering the kingdoms of the world to Christ for such a service and
worship.

If it be questioned what Satan’s authority is, I shall answer it thus:—

[1.] First, His authority is not _absolute or unlimited_. He cannot do
what he pleaseth, and therefore we do find him begging leave of God for
the exerting of his power in particular cases, as when he was ‘a lying
spirit’ in the mouth of Ahab’s prophets, and in every assault he made
upon Job; nay, he could not enter into the swine of the Gadarenes till
he had Christ’s commission for it.

[2.] Secondly, _Yet hath he a commission in general_—a standing
commission, as petty kings and governors had under the Roman emperor,
where they were authorised to exercise an authority and power,
according to the rules and directions given them. This is clearly
signified by those expressions, ‘they are captives at his will,’ [2
Tim. ii. 16,] and ‘given up to Satan,’ [1 Tim. i. 20,] as persons
excommunicated; and when men are converted, they are said to be
‘translated from his power,’ and put under another jurisdiction, in the
‘kingdom of Christ,’ [Col. i. 13.] All which would have been highly
improper, if a commission for Satan, and an authority for those works
of darkness, had not been signified by them.

Next, let us view the _extent of this authority, both as to persons and
things_. In relation to persons, the boundary of his kingdom reacheth
as far as darkness. He rules in ‘the dark places of the earth,’ or
the darkness of this _world_; and therefore his kingdom is hence
denominated ‘a kingdom of darkness.’ This extends, we may well imagine,
as far as heathenism reacheth, where he is worshipped as God, as far as
any darkness of Mohammedanism stretcheth itself, as far as the darkness
of infidelity and blindness upon the hearts of unconverted men; which,
if summed up together, must needs take up the greatest part of the
world by far; which is acknowledged, not only by that large expression
world, ‘prince of the world,’ &c., but also by that prophetic speech of
Rev. xi. 15, ‘The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
Lord and his Christ,’ which acknowledgeth they had not been so before,
in the sense wherein we now speak.

Neither is his kingdom so bounded but that he also can, when allowed,
make excursions and inroads into the kingdom of Christ, so far as to
molest, disturb, and annoy his subjects; as the kings of any nation,
besides the power which they exercise in their proper jurisdiction, may
molest their neighbours. And Christ so far permits this as is useful to
his own designs, yet still with straiter reserves and limitations to
Satan, and a resolved rescue and conquest for his own people.

If we inquire the extent of his power in relation to things, we find
the air in a peculiar manner permitted to him; so that he is named
by it, as by one of his chief royalties, ‘the prince of the power of
the air.’ We find also death, with the powers of it, given up to him;
so that this is a _periphrasis_ of him, ‘He that hath the power of
death,’ Heb. ii. 14. And if we take notice of his large proffer to
Christ of the kingdoms of the world, ‘All this will I give thee,’ we
may imagine that his commission reacheth far this way, as rewards and
encouragements to his service; which we will the readilier entertain
when we find that, by God’s allowance, wicked men have their ‘portion
in this life,’ and that these are called ‘their good things.’[81]

3. Thirdly, Let us proceed a step further, to _the efficacy of this
authority_; which also,

(1.) First, _Upon wicked men is no less remarkable than is his
commission_. He is called ‘the strong man,’ [Luke xi. 21,] in reference
to their hearts, which he fortifies, as so many castles and garrisons,
against God. He also ‘rules in them’ without control; his suggestions
and temptations are as laws to them; he ‘fills their hearts,’ Acts
v. 3, with his designs, and raiseth their affections to a high and
greedy pursuit of them; he works in them, and by an inward force doth
hurry them on to achieve his enterprises, in all this ensnaring and
captivating them ‘at his pleasure,’ Eph. ii. 2; 2 Tim. ii. 26.

(2.) Secondly, _The saints, which are subjects of another kingdom, are
still fearing, complaining, watching, praying, and spreading out their
hands, with lifting up their eyes to heaven for help against him_. They
complain of violence and restless assaults from him; they are sensible
that he can suggest evil thoughts, and follow them with incessant
importunities; that he can draw a darkness upon their understanding by
bribing their wills and affections against them; that he can disturb
their duties, and that because of him they cannot do the good they
would. Many a fear doth he beget in their hearts; many a disquiet hour
have they from him; their flesh hath no rest, and happy are they if
they escape from him without broken bones; many excellent ones have
been cast down by him, and for a time have been like dead men. It is
sad to see so just a person as Lot under his feet; so choice a saint
as David wounded almost to the death; so high an apostle as Peter, by
force and fear from him, to open his mouth with curses and imprecations
in the denial of his Saviour; to say nothing of the buffetings of
others, which was sufficiently wearisome to Paul, and described by
‘a thorn in the flesh,’ 2 Cor. xii. 7; which, if a learned man think
right, is compared, by a metaphor, to those sharp stakes upon which
Christians were cruelly spitted and burnt.[82]

(3.) Thirdly, _His quick and ready accomplishment_ is a further proof
of the efficacy of his power. No sooner had God given him a commission
in reference to Job, but he quickly raiseth the tempest, brings down
the house, slays his children, brings fire from heaven; and, which
would seem strange, hath the troops of the Sabeans and Chaldeans at his
beck, as if they had been listed under his known command; so that in a
little time he puts his malice into act.

(4.) Fourthly, If any would slight all this, as being the force of
principalities and powers against flesh and blood, we may see he
hath so much strength and confidence _as to grapple with an angel of
light, as he did in the contesting for Moses his body_, Jude 9. This
was a created angel, else he durst not sure have brought a ‘railing
accusation;’ but in that he strove, and railingly accused, it shews he
wanted not a daring boldness to second his commission and power.

4. Fourthly, It will be also requisite to lay open the _advantages he
hath in the management of all this power_, which are great; as,

(1.) First, _The multitude of devils_. That there are many is not
denied, upon the evidence of seven cast out of Mary Magdalene, and
the legion which were settled in one poor man at once. It may be we
may not credit the devil’s own account of his strength so much as to
believe that their number was exactly answerable to a Roman legion,
which, if some speak right, was 6666; yet there being so plain an
allusion to a Roman legion, and the Scripture in the recital favouring
it so far as to consent to a truth in that part of the story, we can
do no less than conclude that the number of devils in that person was
a very great number, and so great, that the similitude of legion was
proper to express it by. Besides, if the Scripture had been silent in
this particular, our reason would have clearly drawn that conclusion
from such premises as these, that he is the ‘god’ of the world, and
rules in the ‘children of disobedience;’ for whatsoever we conceive of
his power, we cannot think him omnipotent or omnipresent, these being
the incommunicable attributes of the great Creator of all things, in
which no creature can share with God. Being then assured that he is
the tempter of all men, and that he cannot be in all places at once,
we must needs apprehend the devils to be many, as is signified by that
expression, ‘the devil and his angels.’

(2.) Secondly, He hath also an advantage for the executing of his
designs, from _that order, which from the fore-mentioned grounds
we must be forced to conceive to be among devils_. I know the bold
determination of the order of angels by Dionysius is justly rejected,
not only by Irenæus and Augustine,[83] but also by the generality of
protestants, who upon that and other grounds of like presumption do
reject that author as not being the true Dionysius the Areopagite.
Neither do some of our protestant authors, as Chamier and others, admit
the government of angels to be monarchical, which supposition the
papists would gladly make use of, as a foundation whereon to establish
the universal headship of the pope, being a thing which Dionysius
himself, as Chamier affirms, never dreamt of.[84] Yet do none of these
authors deny an order among the angels, but willingly grant it, as
clearly implied from the term _archangel_ used by Paul, 1 Thes. iv.
16,[85] and from their being called God’s host or army, where order is
necessary for the right management of their strength, and confusion
the way to the ruin of their designs. The thing they dislike is, the
bold and peremptory determination of the particular orders among them,
and the assignment of the several charges, employments, and stations
to each; which whosoever shall do, must needs be guilty of ‘intruding
into things which he hath not seen.’[86] It would upon the same score
be a presumptuous folly to make such a determination of the several
ranks and particular employments of devils. Yet this hindereth not,
but with a warrantable sobriety we may believe in the general that
there is an order among the devils. Not only do these expressions,
‘Beelzebub the prince of devils,’ ‘the devil and his angels,’ and in
that they are called ‘principalities and powers,’ warrant us so to
think, but the fore-mentioned considerations about the multitude of
devils will force our reason to an assent: for if they must be many,
because all mankind is sensible of their assaults, they must have also
an order in the management of their temptations—without which their
designs of cruelty and malice must, at least in great part, fall to
the ground.[87] Neither do I know well how those authors may be justly
blamed, who proceed a little further in their suppositions, to tell
us, as most probable,[88] that these infernal spirits do share the
world among them, and are allotted to several countries and places, as
their own proper charge and jurisdiction; for what other interpretation
those passages in Dan. x. 13 can receive I cannot see: the prince of
the kingdom of Persia withstanding the angel one and twenty days; and
his help in that opposition from Michael, cannot, if things be well
weighed, be properly understood of Cambyses the son of Cyrus, or a
contest with any man. However, if we let this go as a thing uncertain,
because this interpretation is denied by some,[89] yet that which is
spoken of their order in the general, and the advantage these spirits
have against us upon that consideration, seems to be past denial.

(3.) Thirdly, The advantage _of place among armies is reckoned much_.
Satan seems to have something this way as an advantage of ground,
in that he is styled spiritual wickedness in high places.[90] What
advantage high places may be to devils and spirits we cannot further
imagine, than that they, being thus above us and about us in the air,
see and know our ways and actions, and so receive information from
thence for their malicious proceedings against us.

(4.) Fourthly, But his greatest advantage is from _his knowledge_,
which I shall a little explain in the following chapter.




