CHAPTER XI.

 _That lust darkens the mind.—Evidences thereof.—The five ways by
 which it doth blind men: First, By preventing the exercise of
 reason.—The ways of that prevention: (1.) Secrecy in tempting;
 Satan’s subtlety therein; (2.) Surprisal; (3.) Gradual
 entanglements._


That Satan doth entice us by stirring up our lust, hath been
discovered; it remains that I next speak to the second thing
propounded, which was,

That by this power of lust he _blinds and darkens our mind_. That the
lusts of men are the great principle upon which Satan proceeds in
drawing on so great a blindness as we have spoken of, I shall briefly
evince from these few observations:—

1. First, _From the unreasonableness and absurdity of some actions
in men otherwise sufficiently rational_. He that considers the acts
of Alexander, in murdering Calisthenes, for no other crime than
defending the cause of the gods, and affirming that temples could
not be built to a king without provoking a deity; and yet this so
smoothed, if Quintus Curtius represent him right, that he seemed to
flatter Alexander with an opinion of deification after his death;[188]
whosoever, I say, shall consider this cruelty, will condemn Alexander
as blind and irrational in this matter; and yet no other cause can be
assigned hereof, but that his lust after glory and honour darkened his
reason. The like may be said of his killing Hephæstion’s physician,
because _he_ died. The brutal fury of that consul, that made a slave
to be eaten up with lampreys, for no other fault than the breaking of
a glass, can be ascribed to nothing else but the boiling over of his
passion. A sadder instance of this we have in Theodosius senior, who,
for an affront given to some of his officers in Thessalonica, commanded
the destruction of the city, and the slaughter of the citizens to
the number of seven thousand, without any distinction of nocent
and innocent.[189] This blind rage the historian notes as the fruit
of violent and unbridled lust in a man otherwise just and gracious.
Thousands of instances of this nature might be added. But,

2. Secondly, If we consider _the known and visible hazards to life
and estate, and, that which is more, to that part of them which is
immortal_; upon all which men do desperately adventure, upon no other
ground or motive than the gratifications of their lusts,—we may easily
conclude that there is a strange force and power in their passions to
blind and besot them; and this, notwithstanding, is the common practice
of all men, where grace, as the only eye-salve, doth not restore the
sight. The heathens in all these practices of filthiness and folly,
recorded Rom. i. 29, they had so far a discovery of the danger, if
they had not imprisoned that truth and light in unrighteousness, ver.
18, that they knew the ‘judgment of God, that they which commit such
things are worthy of death,’ ver. 32. Yet, notwithstanding, the vanity
of their imaginations, influenced by lust, darkened their heart so much
that they did ‘not only do these things,’ of so great vileness and
unspeakable hazard, ‘but had pleasure in those that did them.’

3. Thirdly, The blinding power of lust is yet more remarkable, _when we
see men glorying in their shame, and mounting their triumphal chariots
to expose themselves a spectacle to all, in that garb of deformity
which their lusts have put them in_. It is a blindness to do any act
against the rules of reason, but it is a far greater blindness for men
to pride themselves in them. What have the issues of most wars been,
but burning of cities, devastations of flourishing kingdoms, spilling
the blood of millions, besides all the famine and other miseries that
follow; yet these actions, that better beseem tigers, lions, and savage
brutes, than men of reason, are honoured with the great, triumphant
names of virtue, manhood, courage, magnanimity, conquest, &c. If the
power and humour of their lusts of vainglory and revenge had not quite
muffled their understandings, these things would have been called by
their proper names of murder, cruelty, robbery, &c.; and the actors of
such tragedies, instead of triumphal arches and acclamations of praise,
would have been buried under heaps of ignominy and perpetual disgraces,
as prodigies of nature, monsters of men, and haters of mankind.

4. Fourthly, But there is yet one evidence more plain and convincing;
_when our lusts are up, though reason offer its aids to allay the
storm, yet the wisest of men, otherwise composed and calm, are so far
from taking the advantage of its guidance, that oftentimes they trample
upon it and despise it_; and as if lusts, by some secret incantation,
had made them impenetrable, they are not capable of its light and
conduct, and can make no more use of it than a blind man can do of a
candle. To this purpose, let us observe the carriage of disputants.
If men do any way publicly engage themselves in a contest of this
nature, though truth can be but on the one side, yet both parties
give arguments and answer objections with equal confidence of victory,
and a contempt of the reasons and strength of each other’s discourses;
and this proves so fatal to him that maintains the mistake or untruth,
that not one of a thousand hath the benefit and advantage for the
finding of truth, which free and unprejudiced bystanders may have;
so true is that, _Omne perit judicium cum res transit in affectum_,
When affections are engaged, judgment is darkened. It is a thing of
common observation, that when men are discoursed into anger and heat,
they presently grow absurd; are disabled for speaking or understanding
reason, and are oft hurried to such inconveniences and miscarriages,
that they are ashamed of themselves; when they cool, and the fit is
over, _Impedit ira animum_, &c. To all this might be added the power of
lust in persons voluptuous, who dedicate themselves to the pleasures of
the flesh. Those that ‘serve divers lusts and pleasures,’ their slavish
estate, their base drudgery, do clearly evince that lust unmans them,
and puts out their eyes. Mark Antony by this means became a slave to
Cleopatra; never did a poor captive strive more to obtain the good-will
of his lord than he to please this woman, insomuch that, besotted
with his lust, he seemed to want that common foresight of his danger,
which the smallest measure of reason might have afforded to any, and
so dallied himself into his ruin. From all these considerations and
instances, it appears our lusts afford such vapours and mists that our
reason is darkened by them, or rather they are like a dose of opium,
that strongly stupifies and binds up the senses. But yet it remains
that the various ways by which our lusts do blind us be particularly
opened, and they are five. (1.) Our lusts blind us by preventing the
use and exercise of reason. (2.) By perverting it. (3.) By withdrawing
the mind from it. (4.) By disturbing it in its operation. And (5.) By a
desperate precipitancy; all which I shall more fully explain.

I. First, Our lusts blind us _by preventing and intercepting the
exercise of light and reason_; and Satan in this case useth these
deceits:—

1. First, He endeavours so to _stir up our lust as yet to conceal his
design_. Secrecy is one of his main engines. He doth not in this case
shew his weapon before he strikes; and indeed his policy herein is
great. For, [1.] By this means he takes us at unawares, secure, and
unprepared for resistance. [2.] We are often ensnared without noise,
and before our consideration of things can come in to rescue us. [3.]
If he get not his whole design upon us this way, yet he oft makes a
half victory. By this means he procures a half content or inclination
to sin, before we discover that we are under a temptation; for when the
foundation of a temptation is laid unespied, then we awaken with the
sin in our hand, as sleeping men awake sometime with the word in their
mouths. If any question, How can these things be? How can he steal a
temptation upon us with such secrecy? I answer, he can do it these
three ways:—

(1.) First, He sometimes after _a careless manner, and as it were by
the by, drops in a suggestion into our hearts, and that without noise
or importunity, giving it as it were this charge, ‘Stir not up nor
awaken him;’_ and then he sits by to observe the issue, and to see if
the tinder will take fire of itself. Thus many a motion thrown into our
hearts, as it were accidentally, ere ever we are aware, begets a sudden
flame.

(2.) Secondly, He sometimes _fetcheth a compass, and makes a thing far
different to be a preamble or introduction to his intended design_.
Thus by objects, employments, discourse, or company, that shew not any
direct tendency to evil, doth he insensibly occasion pride, passion,
or lust. How slyly and secretly doth he put us upon what he intends
as a further snare! How unawares, while we think of no such thing,
are we carried sometime upon the borders of sin, and into the enemy’s
quarters! Satan in this acts like a fowler, who useth a stalking-horse,
as if he were upon some other employment, when yet his design is the
destruction of the bird.

(3.) Thirdly, Another way of secrecy is his raising _a crowd of
other thoughts in the mind, and while these are mixed and confusedly
floating in the understanding or fancy, then doth he thrust in among
them the intended suggestion_; and then suffering the rest to vanish,
he by little and little singles this out as a more special object of
consideration, so that we cast a sudden glance upon this, and we are
often taken with it before we consider the danger. In this Satan doth
as soldiers, who take the advantage of a mist to make a nearer approach
to their enemies, and to surprise them before discovery of the danger.
This he doth with us while we are in a musing fit or a melancholy dream.

2. A second deceit for the preventing of a serious consideration
is _sudden surprisal_. In the former he endeavoured to conceal the
temptation while he is at work with us, but in this he shews the
temptation plainly, only he sets upon us without giving of us warning
of the onset; but then he backs it with all the violent importunity
he can, and by this he hinders the recollecting of ourselves and the
aid of reason. This course Satan only takes with those whose passions
are apt to be very stirring and boisterous, or such as, being his
slaves and vassals, are more subject to his commands. Thus a sudden
provocation to an angry man gives him not time to consider, but carries
him headlong. A surprise of occasion and opportunity is frequently
a conquest to those that have any earnestness of hope, desire, or
revenge. Surely David was taken at this advantage in the matter of
Bathsheba. And here we may note that good men upon such a sudden motion
do yield, without any blow or struggling, to that which at other times
they could not be drawn to by many reasons.

3. Thirdly, Consideration is prevented by _gradual entanglements_.
Satan so orders the matter that sin creeps on upon us as sleep, by
insensible degrees. For this end sometimes he dissembles his strength,
and sets upon us with lower temptations, and with less force than
otherwise he could. He knows we are not moved to extremes, but by steps
and habits; are not confirmed, but by gradual proceedings. To take too
great strides may sometime prevail at present; but the suddenness and
greatness of the alteration begetting a strangeness on the soul, may
occasion after-thoughts and recoiling. Therefore he tempts first to
thoughts, then to a delight in these thoughts, then to the continuation
of them, then to resolve, and so on to practice. And in like manner,
he tempts some to make bold with a small matter, which shall scarce
come under the notion of wrong; then to a greater, and so gradually to
higher things, and thus he insensibly brings on a thievish inclination
and practice. For the same end sometimes he shews his skill in the
management of occasions; he imperceptibly hooks men into sin by drawing
them first to be bold with occasions; he tells them they may sit at
the ale-house, and yet not be drunk; that they may keep familiarity,
and yet not be lewd; that they may look upon a commodity, and yet not
steal; and when the occasions are by this means made familiar to them,
then he puts them on a step further, but by such slow motions that the
progress is scarce discerned till they be in the snare.




