CHAPTER IX.

 _Of his fourth way to hinder peace, by spiritual distresses. 1.
 The nature of these distresses; the ingredients and degrees of them.
 Whether all distresses of soul arise from melancholy. 2.
 Satan’s method in working them; the occasions he makes use of, the
 arguments he urgeth, the strengthening of them by fears. 3.
 Their weight and burden explained in several particulars.—Some
 concluding cautions._


The last sort of troubles by which Satan overthrows the peace of the
soul, are _spiritual distresses_. These are more grievous agonies of
soul, under deepest apprehensions of divine wrath, and dreadful fears
of everlasting damnation, differing in nature and degree from the
former sorts of troubles; though in these Satan observes much-what the
same general method which he used in spiritual troubles last mentioned.
For which cause, and also that these are not so common as the other, I
shall speak of them with greater brevity. Herein I shall shew—1. Their
nature; 2. Satan’s method in working them: 3. Their weight and burden.

1. The nature of spiritual distresses will be best discovered by a
consideration of those ingredients of which they are made up, and of
the different degrees thereof.

(1.) As to the ingredients, there are several things that do concur for
the begetting of these violent distresses. As,

[1.] There is usually a _complication of several kinds of troubles_.
Sometimes there are outward troubles and inward discomposures of spirit
arising from thence; sometimes affrightments of blasphemous thoughts
long continued, and usually spiritual troubles, in which their state or
condition have been called to question, have gone before. Heman, who is
as famous an instance in this case as any we meet withal in Scripture,
in Ps. lxxxviii., seems not obscurely to tell us so much; his ‘soul
was full of troubles,’ ver. 3; and in ver. 7 he complains that God had
afflicted him ‘with all his waves.’ And that these were not all of the
same kind, though all concurred to the same end, he himself explains,
ver. 8, 18, where he bemoans himself for the unkindness of his friends:
‘Thou hast put away mine acquaintance; lover and friend hast thou put
far from me.’

[2.] These troubles drive at _a further end than any of the former_;
for their design was only against the present quietness and peace
of God’s children, but these design the ruin of their hopes for the
future. They are troubled, not for that they are not converted, but for
that they expect never to be converted. This is a trouble of a high
nature, making them believe that they are eternally reprobated, cut off
from God for ever, and under an impossibility of salvation.

[3.] These troubles have _the consent and belief of the party_. In
some other troubles Satan disquieted the Lord’s servants by imposing
upon them his own cursed suggestions, violently bearing in upon them
temptations to sin and blasphemy, or objections against their state of
regeneration, while in the meantime they opposed and refused to give
consent; but in these Satan prevails with them to believe that their
case is really such as their fears represent it to be.

[4.] They are troubles of _a far higher degree than the former_; the
deepest sorrows, the sharpest fears, the greatest agonies. Heman, Ps.
lxxxviii. 15, 16, calls them ‘terrors even to distraction:’ ‘While I
suffer thy terrors, I am distracted; thy fierce wrath goeth over me,
thy terrors have cut me off.‘

[5.] There is also God’s deserting of them in a greater measure than
ordinary, by withdrawing his aids and comforts. And, as Mr Perkins
notes, ‘If the withdrawing of grace be joined with the feeling of God’s
anger, thence ariseth the bitterest conflict that the soul of a poor
creature undergoes.’[348]

(2.) As to the different degrees of spiritual distresses, we must
observe—That according to the concurrence of all or fewer of these
ingredients, for they do not always meet together, though most
frequently they do; and according to the higher or lower degrees in
which these are urged upon the conscience, or apprehended and believed
by the troubled party, _these agonies are more or less; and accordingly
we may distinguish them variously_. As,

[1.] Some are desperate terrors _of cursed reprobates under
desperation_. These terrors in them are, in the greatest extremity,
the very pit of misery, of the same nature with those of the damned
in hell, ‘where the worm that never dies,’ is nothing else but the
dreadful vexation and torment of an accusing conscience.[349] They are
commonly accompanied with blaspheming of God, and an utter rejection
of all means for remedy; and though they sometimes turn to a kind of
secure desperation,—by which, when they see it will be no better, they
harden themselves in their misery, and seek to divert their thoughts—as
Cain did, betaking himself to the building of cities; and Esau, when
he had sold his birthright, despised it, and gave himself up to the
pursuit of a worldly interest;—yet sometimes these terrors end in
self-murder, as in Judas, who being smitten with dread of conscience,
went and hanged himself. We have many sad instances of these desperate
terrors. Cain is the first we read of; and though the account the
Scriptures give of him be but short, yet it is sufficient to let us see
what his condition was—Gen. iv. 11-16. First, He was cursed from the
earth. Of this part of his curse there were two branches: 1. That his
labour and toil in tillage should be great and greatly unsuccessful;
for thus God himself explains it, ver. 12, ‘When thou tillest the
ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength,’ The
earth was cursed with barrenness before to Adam, but now to Cain it
hath a double curse. 2. That he should be a man of uncertain abode in
any place: ‘A fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth;’ not
being able to stay long in a place by reason of the terrors of his
conscience. His own interpretation of it, ver. 14, shews that herein
lay a great part of his misery: ‘Thou hast driven me out this day from
the face of the earth.’ By which it appears that he was to be as one
that was chased out of all society, and as one that thought himself
safe in no place. Secondly, He was ‘hid from the face of God’—that
is, he was doomed to carry the inward feeling of God’s wrath, without
any expectation of mercy. Thirdly, His mind being terrified under the
apprehension of that wrath, he cries out that his ‘sin was greater
than it could be pardoned,’ or that his ‘punishment was greater than
he could bear; ‘for the word in the original signifies both sin and
punishment, עון. Take it which way you will, it expresseth
a deep horror of heart. If in the former sense, then it signifies a
conviction of the greatness of his sin to desperation; if in the latter
sense, then it is no less than a blasphemous reflection upon God, as
unjustly cruel. Fourthly, This horror was so great, that he was afraid
of all he met with, suspecting everything to be armed with divine
vengeance against him: ‘Every one that findeth me shall slay me,’ Or if
that speech was a desire that any one that found him might kill him,
as some interpret,[350] it shews that he preferred death before that
life of misery. It seems, then, that God smote him with such terror
and consternation of mind, and with such affrightful trembling of
body, for his bloody fact, that he was weary of himself, and afraid of
all men, and could not stay long in a place. By these tokens, or some
other way, God sets his mark upon him, as upon a cursed miscreant, to
be noted and abhorred of all. Such another instance was Lamech, of
whom the same chapter speaks: 1. The sting of conscience was so great,
that he is forced to confess his fault—the interpretations of those
that take it interrogatively, ‘Have I slain?’ or, ‘If I have, what
is that to you?’ &c., are upon many accounts improper, much more are
those so that take it negatively—which, whether it were the abomination
of polygamy, as some think, by which example he had destroyed more
than Cain did; or if it were murder in a proper sense, as the words
and context plainly carry it, it is not very material to our purpose.
However, God smote him with horror, that he might be a witness against
himself. 2. He accuseth himself for a more grievous sinner and more
desperate wretch by far than Cain: ‘If Cain,’ ver. 24, ‘shall be
avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.’ Which is as
much as to say, that there was as much difference betwixt his sin and
Cain’s, as betwixt seven and seventy-seven. 3. It seems also, by his
discourse to his wives, that he was grievously perplexed with inward
fears, suspecting, it may be, his very wives as well as others might
have private combinations against him; for the prevention whereof, he
tells them by Cain’s example of God’s avenging him. These two early
examples of desperation the beginning of the world affords; and there
have been many more since, as Esau and Judas. Of late years we have
the memorable instance of Francis Spira, one of the clearest and most
remarkable examples of spiritual horror that the latter ages of the
world were ever acquainted with. Yet I shall not dare to be confident
of his reprobation, as of Cain’s and Judas’s; because the Scripture
hath determined their case, but we have no such certain authority to
determine his.

[2.] _There are also distresses from melancholy_; which may be further
differenced according to the intenseness or remissness of the distemper
upon which they depend. For sometimes the imagination is so exceedingly
depraved, the fears of heart so great, and the sorrows so deep, that
the melancholy person, crying out of himself that he is damned, under
the curse of God, &c., appears to be wholly besides himself, and his
anguish to be nothing else but a delirious, irrational disturbance.
There are too many sad instances of this. Some I have known that for
many years together have laboured under such apprehensions of hell and
damnation, that they have at last proceeded to curse and blaspheme
God in a most dreadful manner, so that they have been a terror to
all their friends and acquaintance. And though sometimes they would
fall into fits of obstinate silence, yet being urged to speak, they
would amaze all that were about them with the confident averment of
their damnation, with horrible outcries of their supposed misery and
torments, and with terrible rage against heaven. Some in this distemper
will fancy themselves to be in hell already, and will discourse as if
they saw the devils about them and felt their torture. Such as these
give plain discovery by their whole carriage under their trouble,
and some concomitant false imaginations about other things—as when
they fancy themselves to be in prison or sentenced to death, and that
torments or fire are provided for them by the magistrate, &c.—that
it is only melancholy perverting their understanding that is the
cause of all their sorrow. Others there are who are not altogether
irrational, because in most other things their understanding is right;
yet being driven into melancholy upon the occasion of crosses or other
outward afflictions, they at last fix all their thoughts upon their
souls; and now their fancy becoming irregular in part, the whole of
the irregularity appears only in that wherein they chiefly concern
themselves. Hence they misjudge themselves, and condemn themselves to
everlasting destruction; sometimes without any apparent cause; and
sometimes they accuse themselves of such things as they never did. They
fear and cry out they are damned, but they cannot give a particular
reason why they should entertain these fears, neither can they shew
any cause why they should refuse the comforts of the promises that
are offered; but they say they know or are persuaded it is so, upon
no better account than this, It is so, because it is so. Or if they
give reasons of their imagination, they are commonly either feigned or
frivolous; and yet in all other matters they are rational, and speak or
act like men in their right minds. Of both these kinds of desperation I
shall speak nothing further. It is enough to have noted that such there
are, because the cure of the former is impossible, and the cure of the
latter doth wholly depend upon physic.

_Quest._ Some may possibly question, Whether all extraordinary agonies
of soul, upon the apprehension of eternal damnation, be not the fruits
of melancholy? And if not, then what may the difference be betwixt
those that proceed from melancholy, and those that are properly the
terrors of conscience?

_Ans._ As to the first part of the question, I answer, _First, That all
spiritual distresses are not to be ascribed to melancholy_. For,

[1.] There are some melancholy persons who are never more free from
spiritual troubles—though frequently accustomed to them at other
times—than when, upon the occasion of some special trouble, or sickness
threatening death, there is _greatest cause to fear such onsets upon
the increase of melancholy_. Some such I have known.

[2.] Sometimes these distresses come _suddenly, their conscience
smiting them in the very act of sin_; and these persons sometimes
such as are not of a melancholic constitution. Spira was suddenly
thunderstruck with terrors of conscience upon his recantation of some
truths which he held; and so were some of the martyrs.

[3.] Sometimes terrors that have continued long, and have been very
fierce, _are removed in a moment_. Now it is not rational to say that
melancholy only occasioned all such troubles, wherein bodies that are
not naturally of that complexion—and some such have been surprised
with terrors of conscience; if we will take a liberty to suppose an
accidental melancholy we must of necessity allow some time; and,
usually, some precedaneous[351] occasion to mould them into such a
distemper. Neither do the fears of melancholy cease on a sudden, but
abate gradually, according to the gradual abatement of the humour.
To say that Cain’s or Judas’s despair were the invasions of strong
melancholy, is not only beyond all proof, but also probability. Neither
is it likely that David, whose ruddy countenance and inclination to
music are tokens of a sanguine complexion, was always melancholic under
his frequent complaints of spiritual trouble.

[4.] They that read the story of Spira, and observe _his rational
serious replies_ to the discourses that were offered him for his
comfort and his carriage all along, will have no cause to conclude
his trouble to be only melancholy; neither did the sober judicious
bystanders ascribe his distress to any such cause.

[5.] _The agony of Christ upon the cross_, under the sense of divine
wrath for our sins, though it were without desperation, is an
undeniable proof that there may be deep sense of God’s displeasure upon
the soul of man, which cannot be ascribed to melancholy.

Second, I answer, That it is not to be denied but that God _may make
use of that humour as his instrument, for the increase and continuance
of terrors upon the consciences of those whom he thinks fit to punish,
for any provocation, with spiritual desertion_, as he made use of that
distemper to punish Saul and Nebuchadnezzar. I speak not here of those
distresses which are nothing else but melancholy, such as those before
mentioned, of which physicians have given us frequent histories,[352]
though in this case the secret ways of God’s providences are to be
adored with humble silence; but of those terrors of conscience which
have a mixture of melancholy to help them forward, yet so as that the
judgment and reason are not thereby perverted. Spira, when his case was
hastily concluded by an injudicious friend to be a strong melancholy,
made this reply, Well, be it so, seeing you will needs have it so;
for thus also is God’s wrath manifested against me. Which shews, [1.]
That he believed God doth sometimes manifest his wrath against man by
melancholy. And [2.] That he denied this to be his condition; for he
still concluded that God sent the terrors of his wrath immediately upon
his conscience, as the sentence of his just condemnation for denying
Christ. Now when God doth make use of melancholy, as his instrument
in Satan’s hand, to make the soul of man more apprehensive of his sin
and God’s wrath—though he doth not always make use of this means, as
hath been said—while he still preserves the understanding from false
imaginations, the distress is still rational, and we have no cause
to make any great difference betwixt these troubles that have such a
mixture of melancholy, and such as have not. Neither must we say that
then it is in the power of the physician to remove or mitigate such
spiritual distresses. For if God see it fit to make use of melancholy
for such a purpose, he can suspend the power of physic, so that it
shall not do its work till God hath performed all his purpose. And
the unsuccessfulness of remedies in this distemper, while it seems to
be wonderfully stubborn in resisting all that can be done for cure,
is more to be ascribed, in some cases, to God’s design, than every
physician doth imagine.

As to the latter part of the question, _How the terrors of melancholy
and those of conscience are to be distinguished?_ I shall only
say this; that, as I said, we are not much concerned to make any
distinction where the distressed party acts rationally. It is true
something may be observed from these mixtures of melancholy; and thence
may some indications be taken by the friends of the distressed, which
may be of use to the afflicted party. Physic in this case is not to
be neglected, because, though God may permit that distemper in order
to the terror of the conscience, we are not of God’s counsel, to know
how high he would have it to go, nor how long to continue; but it is
our duty, with submission to him, to use all means for help. However,
seeing the physician is the only proper judge of the bodily distemper,
it were improper to speak of the signs of melancholy in these mixed
cases, to those that cannot make use of them. And as for these
distresses of melancholy that are irrational, they are of themselves
so notorious, that I need not give any account of them. There is
usually a constitution inclining that way, and often the parents or
friends of the party have been handled in the same manner before; or
if their natural temper do not lead them that way, there is usually
some cross, trouble, disappointment, or the like outward affliction,
that hath first pressed them heavily, and by degrees hath wrought them
into melancholy, and then afterward they come to concern themselves for
their souls; as that woman in Plater’s observations, who being long
grieved with jealousy upon grounds too just, at last fell into grievous
despair, crying out that God would not pardon her, that she was damned,
that she felt hell already and the torments of it, &c.[353] Or there
are some concomitant deliriums, imaginations apparently absurd or
false, &c., all which give plain discoveries of irrational distresses.
And if there remained any doubt concerning them, the consideration of
all circumstances together, by such as are sober and judicious, would
easily afford a satisfaction.

(3.) Having now confined the discourse to the spiritual distresses
of God’s children, that are not so oppressed with melancholy as to
be misled with false imaginations, I must next, concerning these
distresses, offer another observable distinction, which is this: _That
they are either made up of all the five forementioned ingredients, or
only of some of them, and so may be called total or partial_, though in
each of these there may be great differences of degrees.

[1.] _Sometimes then the children of God may be brought into total
distresses of conscience, even with desperation, and, that which is
more hideous, with blasphemy_, if Mr Perkins his observation hold true,
who tells us, ‘that they may be so overcharged with sorrow as to cry
out they are damned, and to blaspheme God:’[354] and we have no reason
to contradict it, when we observe how far David went in his haste
more than once. And whatever may be the private differences betwixt
these and the reprobates in their agonies—as differences there are,
both in God’s design, and their hearts, though not visible—yet if we
compare the fears, troubles, and speeches of the one and the other
together, there appears little or no difference which bystanders can
certainly fix upon. If it seems harsh to any that so horrid a thing as
despair should be charged upon the elect of God, in the worst of their
distresses, it will readily be answered: _First, That if we suppose
not this, we must suppose that which is worse_. If we like not to say
that God’s children may fall into despair, we must conclude, very
uncharitably, that they that fall into despair are not God’s children.
_Second_, It is easy to imagine a difference _betwixt partial and
total despair, betwixt imaginary and real_. The children of God, under
strong perturbation of spirit, may imagine themselves to do what they
do not, and so may bear false witness against themselves—professing
that all their hope of salvation is lost, when yet the root of their
hope may still remain in their hearts undiscovered. The habit may be
there when all visible acts of it are at present suspended, or so
disguised in a crowd of confused expressions that they cannot be known;
or, if they have real distrust of their salvation, yet every fit of
real diffidence is not utter desperateness; neither will it denominate
a man to be totally desperate, any more than every error, even about
fundamentals, will denominate a man a heretic.[355] For as it must be
a pertinacious error in fundamentals that makes a heretic, so it must
be a pertinacious diffidence that makes a man truly desperate. _Third_,
But _sometimes the children of God have only partial distresses_. That
is, they may have a great measure of some of the ingredients, without
mixture of the rest. Particularly, they may have a great measure of
the sense of divine wrath and desertion, without desperation. The
possibility of this is evident, beyond exception, in the example of
our blessed Saviour, when he cried out, ‘My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me?’ [Mat. xxvii. 46.] None can ascribe desperation to
him without blasphemy; and if they should, the very words, ‘_My_ God,
_my_ God’—expressing his full and certain hope—do expressly contradict
them. Such an instance of spiritual distress without desperation I take
Heman to be. How high his troubles were is abundantly testified in Ps.
lxxxviii.; and yet that his hope was not lost appears not only by his
prayer for relief in the general—for hope is not utterly destroyed
where the appointed means for help are carefully used—but by the
particular avouchment of his hope in God, in the first verses of that
psalm, ‘O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before
thee.’

(4.) The last difference of spiritual distresses which I shall observe
is this, that some are more _transient fits and flashes of terror under
a present temptation, which endure not long; others are more fixed
and permanent_. The less durable distresses may be violent and sharp
while they hold. Temptations of diffidence may strongly possess a
child of God, and at first may not be repelled; and then before their
faith can recover itself, they vent their present sad apprehensions of
their estate, as Jonah did, chap. ii. 4, ‘I said, I am cast out of thy
sight,’ Many such fits David had, and in them complained at this rate,
‘Why hast thou forsaken me? why castest thou off my soul?’ Ps. xxxi.
22, ‘I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes.’ Ps.
cxvi. 11, ‘I said in my haste, All men are liars;’ which was a great
height of distrust, and too boldly reflecting upon God’s faithfulness,
considering the special promises that God had made to him. Such sharp
fits were those of Bainham and Bilney, martyrs, whose consciences were
so sorely wounded for recanting the truth which they professed, that
they seemed to feel a very hell within them.

The more fixed distresses, as they are of longer continuance, so they
are often accompanied with the very worst symptoms; for when in these
agonies, no sun nor star of comfort appears to them for many days, all
hope that they shall be saved seems to be taken away, [Acts xxvii.
20;] and being tired out with complaints and importunities, without
any answer, they at last reject the use of means. Some have lain many
years—as the paralytic man at the pool of Bethesda—without cure; some
from their youth up, as Heman complains. Some carry their distresses
to their death-bed, and it may be are not eased till their souls are
ready to depart out of their bodies, and then they often end suddenly
and comfortably. Some I could tell you of, who on their death-bed,
after grievous terrors, and many outcries concerning their miseries
of ‘blackness and darkness for ever,’ lay long silent; and then on a
sudden brake out into raptures of joy and adoring admiration of the
goodness of God, using that speech of the apostle, Rom. xi. 33, ‘Oh
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!’ Others
go out of the world in darkness, without any appearance of comfort.
Such an instance was Mr Chambers, as the story of his death testifies,
mentioned by Mr Perkins, in his treatise ‘Of Desertions,’ of whom this
account is given: that in great agonies he cried out, ‘he was damned,’
and so died. The case of such is surely very sad to themselves, and
appears no less to others; yet we must take heed of judging rashly
concerning such. Nay, if their former course of life hath been
uniformly good—for who will reject a fine web of cloth, as one speaks,
for a little coarse list[356] at the end—especially if there be any
obscure appearance of hope—as that expression of Mr Chambers, ‘Oh
that I had but one drop of faith!’ is by Mr Perkins supposed to be—we
ought to judge the best of them. We have seen the nature of spiritual
distresses in the ingredients and differences thereof. We are now to
consider,

2. Satan’s method in procuring them: which consists, (1.) In the
occasions which he lays hold on for that end. (2.) In the arguments
which he useth. (3.) In the working up of their fears, by which he
confirms men in them.

(1.) _As to the occasions_, he follows much _the same course which hath
been described before in spiritual troubles_; so that I need not say
much, only I shall note two things:—

[1.] That it makes much for Satan’s purpose, if the party against
whom he designs _have fallen into some grievous sins_. Sins of common
magnitude do not lay a foundation suitable to the superstructure
which he intends. He cannot plausibly argue reprobation or damnation
from every ordinary sin; but if he finds them guilty of something
extraordinary, then he falls to work with his accusations. The most
usual sins which he takes advantage from, are, as Mr Perkins observes,
those against the third, sixth, and seventh command; sometimes those
against the ninth. Murder, adultery, perjury, and the wilful denial
of truth against conscience, are the crimes upon which he grounds his
charge, but most usually the last. Upon this, the distressed Spira, and
some of the martyrs. As for the other, the more private they are, Satan
hath oft the more advantage against them, because God’s secret and
just judgment will by this means ‘bring to light the hidden things of
darkness,’ [1 Cor. iv. 5,] and force their consciences to accuse them
of that which no man could lay to their charge, that he might manifest
himself to be ‘the searcher of the hearts, and trier of the reins,’
[Rev. ii. 23.] Thus have many been forced to disclose private murders,
secret adulteries, and to vomit up, though with much pain and torture,
that which they have by perjury or guile extorted from others.

[2.] Where Satan hath not these particular advantages, he doth
endeavour to prepare men for distresses, _by other troubles long
continued_. All men that are brought to despair of their happiness,
must not be supposed to be greater sinners than others. Some are
distressed with fears of eternal damnation, that are in a good measure
able to make Job’s protestation in these cases, chap. xxxi. 9, &c.,
that their ‘heart hath not been deceived by a woman;’ that they have
not laid wait at their neighbour’s door; that they have not lift up
their hand against the fatherless, when they saw their help in the
gate; that their land doth not cry against them, nor the furrows
thereof complain; that when they saw the sun when it shined, or
the moon walking in brightness, their heart hath not been secretly
enticed, nor their mouth kissed their hand; that they rejoiced not in
the destruction of him that hated them, nor lift up themselves when
evil found him, &c. Notwithstanding all which, their fears are upon
and prevail against them. But then before Satan can bring them to
consent to such dismal conclusions against themselves, they must be
extraordinarily fitted to take the impression; either tired out under
great afflictions, or long exercised with fears about their spiritual
estates, without intermixture of comfort or ease, or their faculties
broken and weakened by melancholy. Any of these give him an advantage
equivalent to that of great sins. For though he cannot say to these,
Your sins are so enormous, that they are, considered themselves
together with their circumstances, sad signs of reprobation; yet he
will plead that God’s carriage towards them doth plainly discover that
he hath wholly cast them off, and left them to themselves, without hope
of mercy.

(2.) _As for the arguments which he useth_, they are much-what from
the same topics which he maketh choice of in bringing on spiritual
troubles. Only as he aims at the proof of a great deal more against
God’s children, than that they are not converted; so accordingly he
screws up his mediums for proof to a higher pin. His arguments are,

[1.] _From scriptures wrested or misapplied._ His choice of scriptures
for this purpose, is of such places as either seem to speak most sadly
the dangerous and fearful estate of men, according to the first view
and literal representation of them, through the unskilfulness of those
that are to be concerned; or of such places as do really signify the
miserable unhappiness of some persons, who through their own fault have
been cut off from all hope, and the possibility of the like to some
others for the future. So that, in framing arguments from Scripture,
the devil useth a twofold cunning. _First_, There are some scriptures
which have the word _damnation_ in them, applied to some particular
acts and miscarriages of men, when yet their intendment is not such
as the word seems to sound, or as he would make them to believe. Now
when he catcheth a child of God in such acts as are there specified,
if he finds that his ignorance or timorousness is such as may render
the temptation feasible, he presently applies damnation to them, by
the authority of those texts. For instance, that text of Rom. xiv. 23,
hath been frequently abused to that end, ‘He that doubteth, is damned
if he eat.’ The word ‘damned’ there, strikes deep with a weak, troubled
Christian that is not skilful in the word of righteousness. For whether
Satan apply it to sacramental eating, as sometimes he doth to the
ignorant, though contrary to the purpose of the text, or to doubting
in the general, he makes this conclusion out of it: ‘Thou doubtest, or
thou hast eaten the sacrament doubtingly, therefore there is no hope
for thee; thou art damned.’ Whereas all this while, the devil doth but
play the sophister in the abuse of the signification of words. For
that scripture evidently relates to the difference that then was in
the church, about eating those meats that were unclean by Moses’s law;
in which case the apostle doth positively declare, that the difference
betwixt clean and unclean meats is taken away; so that a Christian
might with all freedom imaginable eat those meats that were formerly
unclean, with this proviso, that he were ‘fully persuaded in his own
mind,’ [Rom. xiv. 5.] The necessity of which satisfaction, he proves
from this, that otherwise he should offend his own conscience, which
in that case must needs condemn him, and that is the damnation that is
there spoken of; as is more evident by comparing this verse with the
next foregoing, ‘Happy is he that condemneth not himself.’ But he that
doubteth, doth condemn himself, because ‘he eats not of faith,’—that
is, from full persuasion of the lawfulness of the thing. This scripture
then hath nothing at all in it to the purpose for which Satan brings
it. It doth not speak of any final sentence of condemnation passed
upon a man for such an act; all and the utmost that it saith, is only
this, that it is a sin to go against the persuasion of conscience, and
consequently it puts no man further off salvation than any other sin
may do; for which, upon repentance, the sinner may be pardoned.

Another text which Satan hath frequently abused, to the very great
prejudice of many, is that of 1 Cor. xi. 29, ‘He that eateth and
drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself.’ With
this scripture he insults over the humble, fearful Christian, who is
sensible of his unworthiness of so great a privilege. Sometimes he
keeps him off long from the sacrament of the Lord’s supper, upon this
very score that such an unworthy wretch ought not to make such near
and familiar approaches to Christ. And if at last he is persuaded
to partake of this ordinance, then, taking advantage of the party’s
consciousness of his great vileness, and the very low thoughts which
he entertains of himself, he endeavours to persuade him that now he
hath destroyed himself for ever, and run upon his own irrecoverable
damnation. Thus he pleads it, Can anything be more plain than that thou
hast eaten and drunken unworthily? Thy own conscience tells thee so;
and can anything be more positively asserted than this, that he that
doth so, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself? What then canst
thou think of thyself, but that thou art a damned wretch? Neither do I
speak barely what may be supposed Satan would say in this matter, but
what may be proved by many instances he hath said and urged upon the
consciences of the weak, who have from hence concluded, to the great
distress of their souls, that by unworthy receiving of the sacrament
they have sealed up their own condemnation; and all this by abusing
and perverting the sense of this text. For the unworthy receiving doth
relate to the miscarriages which he had taxed before, and it implies
a careless, profane eating; such as might plainly express the small
or unworthy esteem that they had in their hearts for that ordinance.
And the damnation there threatened is not final and irrevocable
damnation, but temporal judgment; as the apostle himself doth explain
it in the next verses; ‘For this cause many are sickly.... And if
we would judge ourselves we should not be judged.’ That is, as he
further explains it, we should not be thus chastened or afflicted; and
the word translated ‘damnation’ doth signify judgment—κρῖμα. At the
furthest, if we should take it for the condemnation of hell, all that
is threatened would be no more than this: that such have deserved,
and God in justice might inflict the condemnation of hell for such an
offence; which is not only true of this sin but of all others, which
still do admit of the exception of repentance. All this while this is
nothing to the poor humbled sinner, that judgeth himself unworthy in
his most serious examination and greatest diligence. Satan here plays
upon the unexactness of the translation, and the ignorance of the party
in criticisms; for it is not every one that can readily answer such
captious arguments.

[2.] But he hath another piece of cunning, which is this: _He doth by a
singular kind of art, threap upon men some scripture that really speaks
of eternal condemnation, without any sufficient evidence in matter of
fact for the due application of them, only because they cannot prove
the contrary_. His proceeding herein is to this purpose. First, After
he hath prepared his way, by forming their minds to a fearful suspicion
of their estate, he sets before them such scriptures as these: God
hardened the heart of Pharaoh: he hath prepared ‘vessels of wrath,
fitted for destruction.’ Christ prayed not ‘for the world:’ and that
concerning the Jews, ‘He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts.’ Secondly, He confidently affirms that they are such. Thirdly,
He puts them to prove the contrary, and herein he sends them to the
search of God’s eternal decrees; in which art Satan, like an _ignis
fatuus_, leads them out of the way. And though he cannot possibly
determine what he affirms, he shifts off the positive proof from
himself, and leaves it upon them to make out, that they are not thus
determined of by God’s unchangeable purpose. And because the tempted,
under so great a cloud, have no such persuasion of their present graces
as may enable them to make sure their election by the fruits of their
vocation, they are beaten off from their hold, and are brought to
believe that the argument is unanswerable. Because they cannot say they
are converted, they conclude they must be damned, overlooking the true
answer that they might make, by keeping close to the possibility or
probability that they may be converted, and so escape the damnation of
hell. This general hope being of such high concern to the distressed,
for it is the first thing that must relieve them till better evidence
come in, it is Satan’s great policy to cheat them of it, which he often
doth by this method now declared.

(2.) Satan doth mainly endeavour _to misrepresent God to troubled
souls, and from thence he draweth out arguments against them_. In the
former case of spiritual troubles, he misrepresents God, in that he
represents only some attributes of his, not only distinct from, but
in opposition to others, by which he labours to conceal the sweet and
beautiful harmony that is among them; and also to make one attribute
an argument against the comfortable supporting considerations which
another would afford. He insists upon God’s justice without respect
of mercy, upon his holiness without any regard of his gracious
condescensions to the infirmities of the weak. But when it is his
business to bring any under spiritual distresses, he then misrepresents
God at a higher rate, and sticks not to asperse him with abominable
falsehoods. There are two lies which he commonly urgeth at this time:—

[1.] He represents God as _a cruel tyrant, of a rigorous, unmerciful
disposition, that delights himself in the ruin and misery of men_. To
this purpose he rakes together the harshest passages of the Scripture,
that speak of God’s just severity against the wilful obstinate
sinners, that stubbornly contemn his offers of grace. God indeed hath
cleared himself of this aspersion, by solemn oath, Ezek. xxxiii. 11,
‘As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live.’ Yet the
tempted will sooner believe Satan’s suggestion than God’s oath; partly
because the sense of their vileness doth secretly sway them to think
there is reason that he should be so; partly because their fears
incline them to suspect the worst; and partly the uneasy tossings of
their mind long continued reviveth the natural frowardness of the
spirit against God. Which, how apt it is, when fretted with vexation,
to entertain harsh thoughts of God, may be seen in the answer of the
slothful servant to his lord, who returned his talent back again
unimproved, with a reflection importing that his master was such as
none could please; so severe that he was discouraged from making any
attempt of serving him acceptably: Mat. xxv. 24, he said, ‘Lord, I
knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown,
and gathering where thou hast not strawed.’

[2.] He belies God further, by representing him as _designing the
ruin and misery of the tempted person in particular_. He would make
him believe that God had a particular spleen, as it were, against him
above other men, and that in all his dealings with, or concerning
him, he is but as a ‘bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret
places,’ [Lam. iii. 10,] ready to take any advantage to cut him off.
And accordingly he gives no other interpretation of all the ways of
God but such as make them look like tokens of final rejection of those
that are concerned in them. If there be upon them outward afflictions,
he tells them these are but the forerunners of hell; if they lie under
inward sense of wrath, he calls that the first-fruits of everlasting
vengeance; if any particular threatening be impressed upon their
consciences by the Spirit of God, in order to their humiliation and
repentance, he represents it as God’s final sentence and absolute
determination against them. If for caution God see it fit to set before
them the examples of his wrath, as it is very frequent for him to do,
lest we ‘should fall after the same example of unbelief,’ 1 Pet. ii.
6; 1 Cor. x. 6, Satan perverts this to that which God never intended,
for he boldly asserts that these examples prognosticate their misery,
and that God signifies by them a prediction of certain unavoidable
unhappiness.

This must be observed here, that these misrepresentations of God are
none of Satan’s primary arguments; he useth them only as fresh reserves
to second others. For where he finds any wing of his battalions ready
to be beaten, he comes up with these supplies to relieve them. For
indeed these considerations of God’s severity in the general, or
of his special resolve against any in particular, are not of force
sufficient to attack a soul that is within the trenches of present
peace; they are not of themselves proper mediums to produce such a
conclusion. Though we suppose God severe, except we should imagine him
to be a hater of mankind universally, we cannot thence infer the final
ruin of this or that individual person. And besides that these are
unjustifiable falsehoods, they cannot make the final damnation of any
one so much as probable till the heart be first weakened in its hopes
by fears or doubtings, raised up in it upon other grounds. Then indeed
men are staggered, either by the deep sense of their unworthiness,
or some sad continuing calamity, and the seeming neglect of their
prayers. If Satan then tell them of God’s severity, or that, all his
providences considered, he hath set them up as a ‘mark for the arrows
of his indignation,’ they are ready to believe his report, it being so
suitable to their present sense and feeling.

[3.] Satan also fetcheth arguments from _the sins of God’s children,
but his great art in this is by unjust aggravations to make them
look like those offences which by special exception in Scripture are
excluded from pardon_. The apostle, 1 John v. 16, tells us of a ‘sin
that is unto death;’ that is, a sin which, if a man commits, he cannot
escape eternal death, and therefore he would not have such a sinner
prayed for. That the popish distinction of venial and mortal sins is
not here intended, some of the papists themselves do confess.[357]
What he means by that sin he doth not tell us, it being a thing known
sufficiently from other scriptures. The note of unpardonableness is
indeed affixed to sins under several denominations; the sin against
the Holy Ghost Christ pronounceth unpardonable, Mat. xii. 31. Total
apostasy from the truth of the gospel hath no less said of it by the
apostle when he calls it ‘a drawing back to perdition,’ Heb. x. 39.
Whether these be all one, or whether there is any other species of sin
irremissible besides that against the Holy Ghost, it is not to our
purpose to make inquiry. Whatever they are in themselves, Satan in this
matter makes use of the texts that speak of them distinctly, as we
shall presently see. But, besides these, the Scriptures speak of some
that were ‘given up to vile affections, and to a reprobate mind,’ Rom.
i. 26, 28. And of others that were given up ‘to hardness of heart,’
Mat. xiii. 14; Acts xxviii. 26. Now whosoever they are of whom these
things may be justly affirmed, they are certainly miserable, hopeless
wretches. Here then is Satan’s cunning, if he can make any child of God
believe that he hath done any such act, or acts of sin, as may bring
him within the compass of these scriptures, then he insults over them,
and tells them over and over again that they are cut off for ever.

To this purpose he aggravates all their sins. And,

_First_, If he find them guilty of _any great iniquity, he fixeth upon
that, and labours all he can to make it look most desperately, that so
he may call it the sin against the Holy Ghost_; and in this he hath a
mighty advantage, that most men are in the dark about that sin, all
men being not yet agreed whether it be a distinct species of sin, or a
higher degree of wilfulness relating to any particular sin. Upon this
score Satan can lay the charge of this sin upon those that apostatize
from the truth, and through weakness have recanted it. Thus he dealt
with Spira, with Bilney, with Bainham, and several others. There is so
near a resemblance in these sins of denying truths to what is said of
the unpardonable sin, that these men, though they were scholars and
men of good abilities, yet they were not able to answer the argument
that the devil urged against them, but it prevailed to distress them.
Upon others also hath Satan the advantage to fix this accusation; for
let the species of the sin be what it will, if they have anything of
that notion, that the sin against the Holy Ghost is a presumptuous act
of sin under temptation, they will call any notorious crime the sin
against the Holy Ghost, because of the more remarkable aggravating
circumstances that have accompanied such a fact.

_Second, He aggravates the sins of God’s children from the wilfulness
of their sinning._ It is a thing often too true that a child of God may
be carried by a violent impetus, or strong inclination of affection,
to some particular iniquity, where the forwardness of desires that
way, by a sudden haste, do stifle those reluctancies of mind which
may be expected from one endowed with the Spirit of God, whose power
upon them doth ordinarily sway them ‘to lust against the flesh.’ But
it is more ordinary to find a temptation to prevail, notwithstanding
that an enlightened mind doth make some resistance; which, because
it is too feeble, is easily borne down by the strong importunities of
Satan, working upon the inclinations of the flesh. Both these cases
are improved against them over whom Satan hath got any advantage of
doubting of their estate. If they have resisted but ineffectually, or
not resisted at all, he chargeth them with the highest wilfulness, and
will so aggravate the matter that they shall be put in fear, not only
that there can be no grace—where sin hath so much power as either to
control so much light and endeavours, or hath so subjected the heart
to its dominion that it can command without a contradiction—but that
they can have no hope; that they that sin with so high a hand should
ever enter into God’s rest. And to this purpose he commonly sets
before them that text of Heb. x. 26, ‘If we sin wilfully after that
we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more
sacrifice for sins.’ Or that of Heb. vi. 4, ‘It is impossible for
those who were once enlightened, ... if they fall away, to renew them
again to repentance.’ Both which places speak indeed, at least, such
a difficulty as in common use of speech is called an impossibility,
if not an utter absolute impossibility, of repentance and pardon.
But then the sinning wilfully or falling away there mentioned, is
only that of total apostasy; when men that have embraced the gospel,
and by it have met with such impressions of power and delight upon
their hearts, which we usually call common grace, do notwithstanding
reject that gospel as false and fabulous, and so rise up against it
with scorn and utmost contempt, as Julian the apostate did. If now
the true intendment of those scriptures were considered by those that
are distressed with them, they might presently see that they were put
into fear, where no such cause of fear was. But all men have not this
knowledge, nor do they so duly attend to the matter of the apostle’s
discourse as to be able to put a right interpretation upon it. Upon
such Satan imposeth his deceitful gloss, and tells them: Wilful sinners
cannot be restored to repentance; but you have sinned wilfully; when
sin was before you, you rushed into it without any consideration, as
the horse into the battle; or when God stood in your way with commands
and advice to the contrary, when your consciences warned you not to
do so great wickedness, yet you would do it. You were as those that
break the yoke and burst the bonds. Upon this supposition, that these
texts speak of wilful sinning in the general, how little can be said
against Satan’s argument! How many have I known that have been tortured
with these texts, judging their estate fearful, because of their
wilfulness in sinning! who upon the breaking of the snare of Satan’s
misrepresentation, have escaped as a bird unto the hill.

_Third_, When either of the two former ways will not serve the
turn—that is, when he meets with such against whom he hath nothing of
notorious wickedness to object, or such as have a better discerning
of Scripture than so to be imposed upon—he labours _to make a charge
against them, from the number of their miscarriages_. Here he takes
up all the filth he can, and lays it upon one heap at their door.
It is indeed an easy thing for Satan to set the sins of a child of
God in order before him, and to bring to mind innumerable evils,
especially to one that is already awakened with a true discovery of
the corruption of nature and the vileness of sin. In which case the
more a man considers, the more he will discover; and sins thus set
in battle array, though they be not more than ordinary heinous, yet
being many, have a very dismal appearance. Satan’s design in this is
to bring men under the affrightments which seem most proper to be
raised from a perverse aspect of the third rank of scriptures, which a
little before I pointed at. For the word of God, speaking of the final
estate of men, doth not only discover the hopeless condition of some
as to eternal life from some particular acts of sin, but also the sad
estate of others from the manner, degrees, and frequency of sinning.
The heathens, because they improved not the knowledge of God, which
they had from the works of creation, neither making those inferences
in matters relating to his worship, which those discoveries did
direct them unto, nor behaving themselves in full compliance to those
rules of virtuous conversation which they might have drawn from these
principles, and unto which in point of gratitude they were obliged:
Rom. i. 21, ‘They glorified him not as God, neither were thankful;
therefore God gave them to a reprobate mind.’ And generally, concerning
all others, the Scripture teacheth us that a return to a profane
fleshly life, after some reformation, hath a greater hazard in it than
ordinary, as appears by the parable in Mat. xii. 45, ‘Seven more wicked
spirits re-enter;’ where one that was cast out is received again; and
‘the last state of that man is worse than the first.’ So also 2 Pet.
ii. 20. To this purpose is that of Solomon concerning the danger of
continuance in sin, after many reproofs: Prov. xxix. 1, ‘He that being
often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy.’ These, and many such like scriptures, Satan hath
in readiness, which he plies home upon the consciences of those that
are troubled with the sense of sin; telling them that their hearts
and ways being continually evil, notwithstanding all the courses that
God hath taken to reclaim them; that they having so long neglected so
great salvation, or that after having seemed to entertain it, became
more sinful than before—which they will easily believe, because they
are now more sensible of sin, and more observant of their miscarriages
than formerly—there can be no question but they are given up to vile
affections; and like the ground that bears nothing but ‘briars and
thorns, they are rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burned,’ [Heb. vi. 8.] The wound that is made with this weapon is not
so easily healed as some others already mentioned; because though Satan
do unduly wrest these passages to such failures in the children of
God as have little or no affinity with them, for they only speak of
falling into open profaneness with contumacy, yet they that have deep
convictions, accompanied with great fears, do usually think that there
are none worse than they are. And though they will grant that some
others have more flagitious lives, yet they think they have hearts so
desperately wicked, that they must needs be under as great hazards as
those whose lives seem to be worse.

[4.] There is but one argument more that carries any probability of
proof for everlasting condemnation, and that is from _a hard and
impenitent heart_. How Satan will manage himself to make a child of God
believe that he hath such a heart, is our last observation relating to
his sophistry. And it is this: he unjustly aggravates the discomposures
of the spirits of those that are troubled for sin, and from thence
draws his arguments of irrecoverable damnation, pleading that their
hearts are seared, hardened, uncapable of repentance, and consequently
of heaven. That final impenitency will conclude damnation is certain;
and that some have been given up to such a judicial hardness long
before death, that they could not repent, may not only be evidenced
from the threatening of God to that purpose, Mat. xiii. 15, ‘Make the
heart of this people fat,’ &c., but also from the sad instances of
Pharaoh, of whom it is said, that ‘God hardened his heart;’ and the
Jews who were blinded, Rom. xi. 8, ‘God hath given them the spirit of
slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear.’ But still the art lieth in this, How to make a child of God
believe that it is so with him. For this purpose he must take him at
some advantage, he cannot terrify him with this argument at all times.
While he is acting repentance with an undisturbed settled frame of
heart, it is not possible to make him believe he doth not, or cannot
repent; for this were to force him contrary to sense and experience.
But he must take him at some season which may, with some probability,
admit of his plea, and nothing is more proper for that design than a
troubled heart; so that he hath in this case two things to do:

_First_, He disquiets the soul into as great a height of confusion as
he can. That, _second_, when he hath melted it into heaviness, and torn
it into pieces, he may work upon its distractions.

There are many things that fall out in the case of great anxiety
of mind, that are capable of improvement for the accomplishment of
this design. As, 1. _Distracting troubles bring the heart under the
stupidity of amazement._ Their thoughts are so broken and disjointed,
that they cannot unite them to a composed, settled resolution in
anything; they can scarce join them together to make out so much as
might spell out their distinct desires or endeavours; they scarce know
what they are doing, or what they would do. 2. _They also poison the
thoughts with harsh apprehensions against God._ Great distresses make
the thoughts sometimes recoil against the holy Lord with unseemly
questionings of his goodness and compassion; and this puts men into
a bad sullen humour of untowardness, from whence, through Satan’s
improvement, arise the greatest plunges of despair. 3. Most usually in
this case _the greatest endeavours are fruitless and dissatisfactory_.
Satan, though he be no friend to duty, doth unseasonably urge them
to repent and pray; but it is because they cannot do either with any
satisfaction, and then their failures are matter of argument against
them. For if they resolve to put themselves upon a more severe course
of repentance, and accordingly begin to think of their sins, to number
them, or to aggravate them, they are usually affrighted from the
undertaking by the heinous appearance of them. They cannot, they dare
not think of them; the remotest glimpse of them is terrible to an
affrighted conscience; the raising of them up again in the memory, like
the rising of a ghost from the grave, is far more astonishing than the
first prospect of them after commission. So true is that of Luther,
‘If a man could see sin perfectly, it would be a perfect hell.’ If
they set themselves to beg their pardon by earnest prayer, they are
so distracted and confused in prayer, that their prayers please them
not; they come off from the duty more wounded than when they began. Or
if in any measure they overcome these difficulties, so that they do
pray and confess their iniquities, then they urge and force a sorrow or
compunction upon themselves, but still to a greater dissatisfaction.
For it may be—and this usually happens in greater distresses—they
cannot weep, nor force a tear, or if they do, still they judge their
sorrow is not deep enough, nor any way suitable to the greatness of
their sin. 4. To all these Satan sometimes makes a further addition of
trouble, _by injecting blasphemous thoughts_. Here he sets the stock,
with an intention to graft upon it afterward. When all these things
are thus in readiness, then comes he to set fire to the train, and
thus he endeavours to blow up the mine. Is not thy heart hardened to
everlasting destruction? How canst thou deny this? Art thou not grown
stupid, and senseless of all the hazards that are before thee? Here he
insists upon the amazement and confusion of their spirit; and it is
very natural for those that are drunk with the terrors of the Almighty,
to think themselves stupid, because of the distraction of their
thoughts. I have known several that have pleaded that very argument to
that purpose. Satan goes on: What greater evidence can there be of a
hardened heart than impenitency? Thou canst not mourn enough. Thou hast
not a tear for thy sins, though thou couldst weep enough formerly upon
every petty occasion; nay, thou canst not so much as pray for pardon.
Is not this not only a heart that doth not, but that cannot repent?
Besides, saith he, thou knowest the secret thoughts that thy heart is
privy to; do they not boil up in thy breast against God? Art thou not
ready to tax him for dealing thus with thee? What is this untowardness,
but desperate obdurateness? And if with all these there be blasphemous
injections, then he tells him it is a clear case that he is judicially
hardened; in that he acts the part of the damned in hell already. By
all, or some of these deceits, the devil doth often prevail so far with
men, that they conclude their heart to be so obstinate, so stupid,
that it is impossible that it should be ever mollified or brought into
a penitential frame, and consequently that there is no hope of their
salvation.

(3.) There is but one thing more, besides the occasions which he takes,
and the arguments which he makes use of, relating to Satan’s method for
the procurement of spiritual distresses, and that is his endeavour to
strengthen these arguments by the _increase of fears in their hearts_.

What Satan can do in raising up misgiving, tormenting fears, hath been
said; and how serviceable this is to his design, I shall shew in a few
particulars, having only first noted this in the general, that as his
design in these distresses is raised to express his utmost height of
malice against men—in pushing them forward to the greatest mischief, by
excluding them totally from the lowest degree of the hope of happiness,
and by persuading them of the inevitable certainty of their eternal
misery—so he doth endeavour, by the strongest impressions of fear,
to terrify them to the utmost degree of affrightful amazement, and
consequently the effects of that fear are most powerful; for,

[1.] By this means _the spirits of men are formed and moulded into
a frame most suitable for the belief and entertainment of the most
dismal impressions that Satan can put upon them_. For strong fears,
like fire, do assimilate everything to their own nature, making them
naturally incline to receive the blackest, the most disadvantageous
interpretations of all things against themselves, so that they have no
capacity to put any other sense upon what lies in their way, but the
very worst. Hence are they possessed with no other thoughts but that
they are remediless wretches, desperate miscreants, utterly forsaken
of God. They are brought into such a woeful partiality against their
own peace, that they cannot judge aright of any accusation, plea,
or argument that Satan brings for a proof of their unhappiness; but
being filled with strong prejudices of hell, they think every sophism
a strong argument, every supposition a truth, and every accusation
conclusive of no less than their eternal damnation; insomuch that their
fears do more to discomfit them than all Satan’s forces. ‘A dreadful
sound being in their ears,’ [Job xv. 21,] their strength fails them at
the appearance of any opposition; as when fear comes upon an army they
throw away their weapons, and, by an easy victory, give their backs
sometimes to an inconsiderable enemy.

[2.] Men thus possessed with fear do not only receive into their own
bowels every weapon which Satan directs on purpose to the wounding
and slaying of their hopes, but by a strange kind of belief _they
imagine everything to be the sword of an enemy_. All they hear or meet
with turns into poison to them, for they think everything is against
them—promises as well as threatenings, mercies as well as judgments,
and that by all these, one as well as another, God, as with a flaming
sword turning every way, doth hinder their access to the tree of life.
Bilney the martyr, as Latimer in his sermons reports of him, after
his denial of the truth, was under such horrors of conscience, that
his friends were forced to stay with him night and day. No comforts
would serve. If any comfortable place of Scripture was offered to
him, it was as if a man should cut him through with a sword. Nothing
did him good; he thought that all scriptures made against him, and
sounded to his condemnation. Neither is it so rare a thing for fears
to form the imagination into such misshapen apprehensions, as that we
should think such instances to be only singular and unusual; but it
is a common effect of terror, which few or none escape that are under
spiritual distresses. The blackness of their thoughts make the whole
Scripture seem black to them. The unfit medium through which they look
doth discolour every object. So that the book of life, as Mrs Kath.
Bretterge in the like case expressed herself concerning the Bible,
seems to be nothing else but a book of death to them.[358]

[3.] From hence it follows _that no counsel or advice can take place
with them_. Excessive fears do remove their souls so far from peace,
that they will not believe there is any hope for them, though it be
told them. The most compassionate, serious admonitions of friends,
the strongest arguments against despair, the clearest discoveries of
the hopes that are before them, &c., effect but little. While they
are spoken, it may be, they seem to relieve them a little; but the
comfort abides not with them, it is soon gone. Though they cannot
answer the arguments brought for them, yet they cannot believe them;
as if their souls were now deprived of all power to believe anything
for their good: suitable to that expression of Spira, in answer to his
friends that laboured to comfort him, ‘I would believe comfort, but
cannot; I can believe nothing but what is contrary to my comfort,’
Nay, when they are told that many others have been under the like
dreadful apprehensions of everlasting misery who have at last been
comforted—and by manifold experience we find that it is the greatest
ease to distressed souls to hear, especially to speak with some that
have been in the like case, for this will oft administer some hope that
they also may be at last comforted, when the most comfortable promises
of the Scripture are a terror to them;—yet this doth [not] effect the
least ease for them sometimes, because some are so wholly possessed
with unalterable prejudice against themselves, that they think none are
or ever were like them. They compare themselves to Judas and Cain, and
think their iniquity to be aggravated by many circumstances far beyond
the pitch of them. Thus Spira judged of himself: ‘I tell you,’ saith
he, ‘my case is mine own, it is singular, none like it.’

[4.] Though fears make the soul unactive to anything of comfort,
because they wholly destroy its inclination and alter its bias to hope,
yet, on the contrary, _they make it very nimble and active to pursue
the conclusions of misery which they have helped to frame_, for the
spring of all the faculties of the soul are bent that way. Hence it
is that those who are possessed with these agonies will eagerly plead
against themselves, and with an admirable subtlety will frame arguments
against their peace, coin distinctions, and make strange evasions
to escape the force of any consolation that may be offered to them.
Their understandings are, as it were, whetted by their fears to an
unimaginable quickness. Who would not wonder to hear the replies that
some will give to the arguings of their friends that labour to comfort
them! What strange answers Spira gave to those that pleaded with him!
How easily he seemed to turn off the example of Peter denying Christ,
and those scriptures that speak of God’s love to mankind, &c., may be
seen at large in his narrative.

[5.] Fears by a strange kind of witchcraft do not only make them
believe that they shall be unhappy, but also will at last persuade them
_that they feel and see their misery already_. How astonishingly doth
Spira speak to this purpose: ‘I find he daily more and more hardens
me; I feel it.’ Answerable to this, I remember, was the case of one
who was long imprisoned in deep distresses. He told me that he verily
believed that scripture of Isa. lxvi. 23, 24 was fulfilled upon him,
‘From one sabbath to another shall all flesh come to worship before me,
and they shall go forth and look upon the carcases of the men that have
transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall
their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh.’
To his own feeling he had the torments of conscience, and the sense of
divine wrath was as a burning fire within him, and to his apprehension
every look from others was a gazing upon him as a monster of misery,
‘abhorred of all flesh.’

The nature of spiritual distresses, and Satan’s method in working
them, being explained, the last thing promised is now to be opened.
This is,

3. The burden and weight of these distresses, which how grievous, how
intolerable it is, may be sufficiently seen in what hath been already
said, and may be further evidenced in the particulars following:—

[1.] _Those that are wounded with these fiery darts do at first usually
conceal their wound and smother their grief, being ashamed to declare
it_, partly because some great transgression, it may be, hath kindled
all this fire in their bosoms, and this they are unwilling to declare
to others; partly because they suspect—though no one remarkable sin
hath occasioned these troubles—that the discovery of their case will
expose them to the wonder and censures of all that shall hear of them.
By this means the fire burns with greater vehemency. Their sore runs
continually, and having none to speak a word in season for the least
relief, it becomes more painful and dangerous; as bodily distempers,
concealed by a foolish modesty from the physician, increase the
trouble and hazard of the patient. Here have they many strugglings
within themselves, many attempts to overcome their fears, but all
in vain. They sit alone and keep silence, they flee the company and
society of men, they labour after solitary places where they may weep
with freedom, if their tears be not yet dried up, or at least where
they may pour out their complaints against themselves. They meditate
nothing but their misery, they can fix their thoughts upon nothing
else, they ‘chatter as a crane or swallow, they mourn as a dove,’ they
are as ‘a pelican in the wilderness, as an owl in the desert,’ but
still without ease. They are but as those that are ‘snared in dens and
prison-houses,’ who the longer they lie there have the less patience to
bear the present unhappiness, and the less hope to be delivered from it.

[2.] _When they are tired out with private conflicts, and have no rest
or intermission of trouble, then at last they are forced to speak; and
having once begun to open their troubles, they care not who knows it._
If there be any heinous sin at the bottom, their consciences are forced
to confess it. Wickedness, that was once sweet in his mouth, ‘is turned
in his bowels, it is the gall of asps within him,’ Job xx. 14, 15. Thus
doth God make men to vomit up what they had swallowed down. Terrors
chase away all shame, they can now freely speak against their sin with
the highest aggravations. And if their consciences have not a heinous
crime to accuse them of in particular, yet in the general they will
judge and condemn themselves as the most stubborn, sinful, or hardened
wretches, justly branded with indelible characters of the wrath of God.
However, the distress becomes greater; if they truly accuse themselves
of any particular sin, that vomit is not without a violence offered to
nature which otherwise would cover its shame. It cannot be done without
sickness, straining, and torture; and when it is done, they take it for
granted that every one passeth the same judgment upon them which they
do upon themselves; and the frequent speaking doth confirm their minds
in their fearful expectations. For what men do accustom themselves to
assert, that they do more confidently believe. If they only complain of
themselves in the general, with any intentions of procurement of pity,
as is usual for the distressed to do, yet while they cry out to others,
‘Is this nothing to you, all you that pass by? Is there any sorrow like
to my sorrow?’ &c., [Lam. i. 12,] still they think their ‘stroke is
heavier than their groaning,’ [Job xxiii. 2;] and their cry to others
doth strongly fix this apprehension in themselves, that none can be
more miserable than they. Thus are they brought to Job’s condition:
chap. xvi. 6, ‘Though I speak, my grief is not assuaged; and though I
forbear, what am I eased?’

[3.] All this while they are under _an expressible[359] sense of divine
wrath_. Heman speaks his apprehensions of it under the similitude of
the most hideous and dismal comfortless imprisonment: Ps. lxxxviii.
6, ‘Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.’
David, in Ps. cxvi. 3, compares it to the ‘sorrows of death,’ and—the
highest that human thoughts can reach—‘the pains of hell.’ ‘The
sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me;
I found trouble and sorrow.’ Well might they thus judge, all things
considered; for sin, that then lies heavy upon them, is a great weight,
‘a burden,’ saith David, ‘greater than I can bear,’ especially when it
is pressed on by a heavy hand: ‘Thy hand presseth me sore.’ Sin makes
the greatest wound, considering the conscience, which is wounded by it,
is the tenderest part, and of exquisite sense. Hence the grief of it
is compared to the pain of a running, fretting ulcer, that distempers
the whole body: ‘My wounds stink and are corrupted; my sore ran in
the night, and ceased not.’ Or to the pain of broken and shattered
bones: Ps. xxxviii. 3, ‘There is no soundness in my flesh, because
of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my
sin.’ The instrument also that makes the wound is sharp, and cuts deep:
‘It is sharper than a two-edged sword,’ [Heb. iv. 12;] but when the
weapon is poisoned,—and Satan hath a way to do that,—then it burns,
making painful, malignant inflammations. The wrath of God, expressed
to the conscience, brings the greatest terror: ‘Who knows the power
of thine anger?’ Ps. xc. 11. It is impossible for the most trembling
conscience, or most jealous fears, to go to the utmost bounds of it;
neither can we apprehend any torture greater. The rack, tortures, fire,
gibbets, &c., are all nothing to it. Hence it is that those who were
afraid of suffering for truth, when by this means they were brought
under these distresses, could then be willing to suffer any torment on
the body; yea, and heartily wish to suffer much more, so that these
tortures might be ended. Thus it was with Bainham martyr,[360] who,
in the public congregation, bewailed his abjuration of the truth; and
prayed all his hearers ‘rather to die by and by, than do as he had
done.’ But that of Spira seems almost beyond belief. Thus speaks he
to Vergerius, ‘If I could conceive but the least spark of hope of a
better estate hereafter, I would not refuse to endure the most heavy
weight of the wrath of that great God, yea, for twenty thousand years,
so that I might at length attain to the end of that misery.’ What
dreadful agonies were these that put him to these wishes! But it is
less wonder, if you observe what apprehensions he had of his present
trouble, he judged it worse than hell itself. And if you would have a
lively exposition of David’s expression, ‘The pains of hell,’ &c., you
may fetch it from this instance: ‘My present estate,’ saith he, ‘I now
account worse than if my soul, separated from my body, were with Judas
and the rest of the damned; and therefore I desire rather to be there
than thus to live in the body.’ So that if you imagine a man crushed
under the greatest weight, wounded in the most tender parts, and those
wounds provoked by the sharpest corrosives, his bones all disjointed
and broken, pined also with hunger and thirst, and in that case put
under the highest tortures; yet you have but a very shadow of divine
wrath. Add to all these, according to Spira’s wish, twenty thousand
years of hell itself, yet all is nothing to that which a distressed
mind supposeth; while the word _eternity_ presents the soul with the
total sum of utmost misery all at once. Oh, unexpressible burden of a
distressed mind! who can understand it truly, but he that feels it? How
terribly is the mind of man shaken with terrors, as the wilderness by a
mighty wind! which not only produceth violent motions, but also hideous
noise, murmur, and howling.

[4.] This burden upon the mind _forceth the tongue to vent its sorrow
in the saddest accent of most doleful outcries_. Their whole language
is lamentation; but when the pangs of their agonies come upon them, for
their distresses have their fits, then they speak in the bitterness of
their souls. Oh, said Bainham, I would not for all the world’s good
feel such a hell in my conscience again. One, formerly mentioned, in
these distresses cries out, ‘Woe, woe, woe, a woeful, a wretched,
a forsaken woman!’[361] It would surely have made a man’s hair to
stand upright for dread to have heard Spira roaring out that terrible
sentence, ‘How dreadful is it to fall into the hands of the living
God!’ [Heb. x. 31.] Or to have heard his reply to him that told of
his being at Venice: ‘O cursed day!’ saith he, ‘O cursed day! Oh that
I had never gone thither, would God I had then died!’ &c. The like
outcries had David often: Ps. xxi. 1, ‘My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words
of my roaring?’ And Heman, Ps. lxxxviii. 14, ‘Lord, why castest thou
off my soul, why hidest thou thy face from me?’ It is true David’s
and Heman’s words have a better complexion than those others last
mentioned; but their disquiet of heart seems, at some times, to have
urged their expressions with impetuous violence; as those passages seem
to say, Ps. xxxviii. 8, ‘I have roared by reason of the disquietness
of my heart;’ Ps. xxxii. 3, ‘My bones waxed old through my roaring all
the day long;’ Job iii. 24, ‘My roarings are poured out like water,’ If
their lamentations were turned into roarings, and those roarings were
like the breaking in of a flood, and that flood of so long continuance
that it dried up the marrow of the bones, we may safely imagine that
they were not so much at leisure to order their words, but that their
tongues might speak in that dialect which is proper to astonishment and
distress.

[5.] Though the mind be the principal seat of these troubles, _yet
the body cannot be exempted from a co-partnership in these sorrows_.
Notwithstanding, this is so far from abating the trouble, that it
increaseth it by a circulation. The pains of the body, contracted by
the trouble of the mind, are communicated again to the fountain from
whence they came, and reciprocally augment the disquiet of the mind.
The body is weakened, their ‘strength poured out like water;’ they are
‘withered like grass,’ pined as ‘a skin,’ become as a ‘bottle in the
smoke.’ Thus David frequently complains: Ps. xxii. 14, he describes
himself as reduced to a skeleton, ‘I am poured out like water, and all
my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax; it is melted in the
midst of my bowels. My strength is dried up like a potsherd; my tongue
cleaveth to my jaws; and thou hast brought me to the dust of death.’
Neither is this his peculiar case, but the common effect of spiritual
distresses: Ps. xxxix. 11, ‘When thou with rebukes dost correct man for
iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth.’

[6.] Being thus distressed for their souls, they cast off _all care
of their bodies, estates, families, and all their outward concerns
whatsoever_. And no wonder, for being persuaded that they have made
shipwreck of their souls, they judge the rest are not worth the saving.

[7.] Giving all for lost, they usually cast about for some ease to
their minds, _by seeking after the lower degrees of misery, hearing or
supposing that all are not tormented alike, they endeavour to persuade
themselves of a cooler hell_. This, if they could reach it, were but
poor comfort, and little to their satisfaction; but, as poor as it is,
it is usually denied to them, for while they judge themselves to be the
greatest sinners, they cannot but adjudge themselves to the greatest
torments; and these endeavours being frustrated, they return back to
themselves, as now hopeless of the least case, worse than before. Now
they fix themselves upon the deep contemplations of their misery. Oh,
think they, how great had our happiness been if we had been made toads,
serpents, worms, or anything but men; for then should we never have
known this unhappiness; and this begets a thousand vain wishes. Oh that
we had never been born! or that death could annihilate us! or that as
soon as we had been born, we had died! as Job speaks: chap. iii. 11,
12, ‘Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when
I came out of the belly?’ for then had we not contracted so much guilt.
‘Or that the mountains and hills could fall upon us, and cover us from
the face of our judge,’ [Rev. vi. 16.]

[8.] When all their hopes are thus dashed, and, like a shipwrecked
man on a plank, they are still knocked down with new waves, all their
endeavours being still frustrated, they seem to themselves to be able
to hold out no longer; then they _give over all further inquiries, and
the use of means, they refuse to pray, read, hear_. They perceive, as
Spira said, that they pray to their own condemnation, and that all is
to no purpose. They are ‘weary of their groanings,’ Ps. vi. 6; their
‘eyes fail with looking up;’ their ‘knees are feeble;’ their hands hang
down; and as Heman: Ps. lxxxviii. 4, 5, ‘They count themselves with
those that go down to the pit, free among the dead, like the slain that
lie in the grave, whom God remembereth no more.’ Thus they lie down
under their burden, and while they find it so hard to be borne, it is
usual for them to come to the utmost point of desperateness, Satan
suggesting and forwarding them. Sometimes they open their mouths with
complaints against God, and blaspheme. And, as the last part of the
tragedy, being weary of themselves, they seek to put an end to their
present misery, by putting an end to their lives.

I have presented you with Satan’s stratagems against the peace of
God’s children. The remedies against these and other subtleties of our
grand enemy I shall not offer you, because many others have done that
already, to whose writings I must refer you. Some principal directions
I have pointed at in the way, and in the general, have done this for
the help of the tempted, that I have endeavoured to shew them the
methods of [the] tempter, which is no small help to preserve men from
being thus imposed upon, and to recover out of his snare those that
are. It is a great preservative from sickness, and no mean advantage to
the cure, to have a discovery of the disease, and the causes of it. I
shall conclude these discoveries with a caution or two.

[1.] _Let none think worse of the serious practice of holy strictness
in religion, because these spiritual distresses do sometimes befall
those that are conscientiously careful in the ways of God, while the
profane and negligent professors are strangers to such trials._ These
troubles are indeed very sad, but a senseless, careless state is far
worse. These troubles often end very comfortably, whereas the other
end—except God make them sensible by conviction of their sin and
danger—in that real misery, the fears whereof occasion these sorrows to
God’s children. And the danger of spiritual troubles is not so great as
is that of a hardened heart; nay, God frequently makes use of them to
prevent eternal ruin—for one that goes roaring to the pit, there are
thousands that go laughing to hell.

[2.] _Let none slight or scoff at these tremendous judgments._ It
is too common with men, either to ascribe spiritual troubles to
melancholy, as if none were ever thus concerned, but such, as by too
much seriousness in religion, are become mad—a fair pretence for
carelessness—or to a whining dissimulation. To the former I have
said something before, and as for the latter I shall only reply, in
the words of Spira, to one that objected hypocrisy to him: ‘I am a
castaway, a vessel of wrath; yet dare you call it dissembling and
frenzy, and can mock at the formidable example of the heavy wrath of
God that should teach you fear and terror. But it is natural to the
flesh to speak, either out of malice or ignorance, perversely of the
work of God,’

[3.] _Let none be afraid of this Goliath, let no man’s heart faint
because of him._ A fear of caution and diligence to avoid his snares
is a necessary duty—‘Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the
devil,’ &c., [1 Pet. v. 8]—but a discouraging, distrustful fear is a
dishonourable reflection upon God’s power and promises to help us, and
upon the captain of our salvation, who goeth out before us. Let us hold
on in the practice of holiness, and not be afraid. ‘The God of peace
shall tread down Satan under our feet shortly,’ [Rom. xvi. 20.] Amen.




NOTE.

 Agreeably to Note at beginning, there will be found below the more
 specific title page of Part III.—G.


  _DÆMONOLOGIA SACRA_:

  OR, A

  TREATISE

  OF

  Satans Temptations.

  The Third Part.

  CONTAINING

 An Account of the Combate betwixt Christ and Satan, in _Matth_. 4.
 Wherein the deep Subtilty of Satan, in managing those Temptations, is
 laid open, as the grand Instance of the Sum of his Policy in all his
 Assaults upon Men; Leading to a consideration of many Temptations in
 particular, and of special directions for Resistance.

  By _R. G._

  Heb. 4. 15.
  —_He was Tempted in all points like as we are, yet without Sin._

  _London_, Printed by _J. D._ for _Richard Randel_, and _Peter
  Maplisden_, Booksellers in _New-Castle_ upon _Tine_, 1677.




