CHAPTER VI.

 _Of Satan’s cruelty.—Instances thereof in his dealing with wounded
 spirits, in ordinary temptations of the wicked and godly, in
 persecutions, cruelties in worship.—His cruel handling of his slaves._


He that shall consider his malice and power, must unavoidably conclude
him to be cruel. Malice is always so where it hath the advantage of
a proportionable strength and opportunity for the effecting of its
hateful contrivances. It banisheth all pity and commiseration, and
follows only the dictate of its own rage, with such fierceness, that it
is only limited by wanting power to execute. We may then say of Satan,
that according to his malice and power such is his cruelty. The truth
of this will be abundantly manifested by instances: as,

1. First, _From his desperate pursuits of advantage upon those whose
spirits are wounded_. The anguish of a distressed conscience is
unspeakably great, insomuch that many are, as Heman, Ps. lxxxviii.
15, ‘even distracted, while they suffer the terrors of the Almighty.’
These, though they look round about them for help, and invite all
that pass by to pity them, ‘because the hand of the Lord hath touched
them,’ [Job xix. 21,] yet Satan laughs at their calamity, and mocks
at them under their fears, and doth all he can to augment the flame.
He suggests dreadful thoughts of an incensed majesty, begets terrible
apprehensions of infinite wrath and damnation, he aggravates all
their sins to make them seem unpardonable. Every action he calls a
sin, and every sin he represents as a wilful forsaking of God, and
every deliberate transgression he tells them is ‘the sin against the
Holy Ghost.’ He baffles them in their prayers and services, and then
accuseth their duties for intolerable profanations of God’s name; and
if they be at last affrighted from them, he then clamours that they
are ‘forsaken of God’ because they have forsaken him. He, as a right
Baal-zebub,[132] rakes in their wounds, as flies are ever sucking where
there is a sore. Their outcries and lamentations are such music to him,
that he gives them no rest; and with such triumph doth he tread upon
those that thus lie in the dust, that he makes them sometimes accuse
themselves for that which they never did, and in derision he insults
over them in their greatest perplexities, with this, ‘Where is now thy
God?’ [Ps. xlii. 3,] and ‘Who shall deliver thee out of my hand?’ This
were enough to evidence him altogether void of compassion. But,

2. Secondly, He shews no less cruelty _in his usage of those that are
his slaves_. The service that he exacts of those that are his most
willing servants, is no less than the highest cruelty; and not only
[1.] in regard of the misery and destruction which he makes them work
out for themselves, which is far greater than where men are forced by
the most brutish tyrants to buy their own poison or to cut their own
throats, because this is unspeakably less than the endless miseries
of eternal torments; but [2.] also in regard of the very slavery and
drudging toil of the service which he exacts from them. He is not
pleased that they sin, but the vilest iniquities most contrary to God
and most abominable to man, as the highest violations of the laws of
nature and reason, are the things which he will put them upon, where
there are no restraints in his way. He drave the heathens, as Paul
testifies, Rom. i., to affections so vile and loathsome, that in
their way of sinning they seemed to act rather like brutes than men,
their minds becoming so injudicious that they lost all sense of what
was fit and comely. Neither [3.] doth this satisfy his cruelty, that
the worst of abominations be practised, but he urgeth them to the
highest desperateness in the manner of performance, and so draws them
out to the front of the battle, that they might contemn and outdare
God to his face. He will have them sin with a high hand, and in the
highest bravado of madness to rush into sin as ‘the horse into the
battle.’ This cruelty of Satan were yet the less if he only brought
them forth presumptuously in some one or two set battles upon special
occasions; but [4.] he would have this to be their constant work,
the task of every day, upon the same score that Ahithophel advised
Absalom to an open and avouched defilement of his father’s concubines,
that so the breach betwixt them and God might be fixed by a resolute
determination, and consequently that their hands might be strong and
their hearts hardened in rebellion against God. And [5.] that Satan
might not come short of the utmost of what cruelty could do, we may
yet further observe, that though sinners offer themselves willingly
enough to conflict against God in the high places of the field, yet,
as not satisfied with their forwardness, he lasheth and whips them on
to their work, and sometime overdrives them in their own earnestness.
Haman was so hurried and overborne with violent hatred against Mordecai
and the Jews, that his own advancement and the marks of singular
favour from the king availed him not, as to any satisfaction and
present contentment, Esther v. 13. Ahab, though king of Israel, is so
vehemently urged in his desires for Naboth’s vineyard, that he covered
his face and grew sick upon it, [1 Kings xxi. 1, _seq._] Thus as
galley-slaves were they chained to their oar, and forced to their work
beyond their own strength.

3. Thirdly, There is also a cruelty seen in _his incessant provokings
and force upon the children of God_, while he urgeth his loathed
temptations upon them against their will. When I consider Paul’s outcry
in this case, Rom. vii. 15, 19, ‘That which I do, I allow not; the evil
which I would not, that do I,’ &c., my thoughts represent him to me,
like those Christians that were tortured in the trough, where water was
poured by a continued stream upon their mouths, till the cloth that lay
upon their lips was forced down their throats; or like those that had
stinking puddle-water by a tunnel poured into their stomachs, till they
were ready to burst; and surely he apprehended himself to be under very
cruel dealing by Satan when he cried out, ‘O wretched man that I am!
who shall deliver me?’ If we seriously consider the mind and endeavours
of those children of God that are striving against sin, and have cast
it off as the most loathsome abominable thing, when Satan urgeth them
to evil with his incessant importunities, it is as if they were forced
to eat their own excrements, or to swallow down again their own vomit;
for the devil doth but as it were cram these temptations down their
throats against their will.

4. Fourthly, If we cast our eye upon _the persecutions of all ages_, we
shall have thence enough to charge Satan withal in point of cruelty,
for he who is styled ‘a murderer from the beginning,’ [John viii. 44,]
set them all on foot. It is he that hath filled the world with blood
and fury, and hath in all ages, in one place or other, made it a very
shambles and slaughter-house of men. [1.] Can we reckon how often
Satan hath been at this work? That is impossible. His most public and
general attempts of this kind are noted by histories of all ages.
The persecutions of Pharaoh against Israel, and of the prevailing
adversaries of Israel and Judah against both or either of them, are
recorded for the most part in Scripture. The persecutions of the Roman
emperors against Christianity are sufficiently known, and what is yet
to come who can tell? A great persecution by Antichrist was the general
belief and expectation of those that lived in Austin’s time, and long
before; but whether this be one more to the ten former persecutions,
that so the parallel betwixt these and Pharaoh’s ruin in the Red Sea
after his ten plagues might run even, be only to be looked for, or
that others are also to be expected, he thinks it would be presumption
and rashness to determine.[133] But, however, his particular assaults
of this nature cannot be numbered: how busy is he still at this work
in all times and places! insomuch that ‘He that will live godly in
this world must suffer persecution,’ 2 Tim. iii. 12. But [2.] If we
withal consider what inventions and devices of cruelty and torture he
hath found out, and what endless variety of pains and miseries he hath
prepared, a catalogue whereof would fill a great deal of paper, we can
do no less than wonder at the merciless fury and implacable rage of him
that contrived them. Satan, the great engineer, doth but give us the
picture of his mind in all those instruments of destruction. And when
we see amongst tyrants ways of torturing every member of the body, and
arts of multiplying deaths, that so those that perish by their hands
might not have so much as the mercy of a speedy despatch, but that they
might feel themselves to die, we may reflect it upon Satan, in Jacob’s
words to Simeon and Levi, ‘Cursed be his anger, for it is fierce; and
his wrath, for it is cruel,’ [Gen. xlix. 7.] [3.] But if we consider
what instruments he useth, and against whom, we shall see cruelty in a
higher exaltation. Had he used some of the beasts of the earth, or some
of his apostate associates, to persecute and afflict the innocent lambs
of Christ, it might have been much excused from the natural instinct or
cursed antipathy of such agents; or had he used only the vilest of the
children of men to act his tragical fury, the matter had been less; but
as not content with common revenge, he persecutes men by men, though
all of one blood and offspring, and so perverts the ends of nature,
making those that should be the comforts and support of men to be the
greatest terror and curse to them—a thing which nature itself abhors,
and in regard of which, that the impressions of pity might be more
permanent and efficacious, God forbade Israel to ‘seethe a kid in the
mother’s milk,’ [Exod. xxiii. 19;] nay, he hath prevailed with some
of good inclinations and rare accomplishments—for such were some of
the persecuting emperors—to be his deputies for authorising the rack,
for providing fire and faggot, and, which is strange, hath prevailed
so far with them, that they have been willing to open their ears to
the most palpable lies, the grossest forgeries, the most unreasonable
suggestions that known malice could invent; and then after all, when
they were drawn out to butchery and slaughter by multitudes, they have
made such spectacles—which might make impressions upon an iron breast
or an adamant heart—only advancements of their jollity; and as Nero
upon the sight of flaming Rome took his harp and made melody, so have
these tormenting furies fired, by the help of combustible matter,
multitudes of such harmless creatures, and then taken the opportunity
of their light for their night sports. And yet, methinks, the devil
hath discovered a keener fury when he hath made them rage against the
dead, and dig their graves, and revenge themselves upon their senseless
ashes, and when they could do no more, seek to please themselves by
executing their rage against their pictures or statues; which actions,
though they might be condemned for follies, yet are they evidences of
highest fury, which commonly destroys the judgment, and sacrificeth
wit, reason, and honour upon the altar of revenge. That the devil
should so poison man’s nature that he should thus rise up against his
fellow, that carries the same specific being with himself, shews enough
of his temper against man, but never more than when he prevails against
the engagements of kindness, blood, affinity, and relation, to raise a
man’s enemies out of his own house, ‘the father against the son, and
the son against the father, the daughter against the mother, and the
mother against the daughter,’ [Mat. x. 35;] for this is little less
than an unnatural mutiny of the members against the body.

5. Fifthly, We have yet a more visible instance of his cruelty in
_his bloody and tyrannical superstitions_. Look but into the rites
and ways of his worship among the heathen in all ages and places, and
you will find nothing but vile and ridiculous fooleries, or insolent
and despiteful usages. In the former he hath driven men to villainous
debaucheries, in the latter to execrable cruelties. Of the latter I
shall only speak; though in the former, by debasing man to be his
laughing-stock, he is cruel in his scorn and mockery. Here I might
mention his tyrannical ceremonies of the lower order, such as touch not
life; such were their tedious pilgrimages, as in Zeilan; their painful
whippings, as of the youth of Lacedæmon at the altar of Diana; of
their priests, and that with knotted cords upon their shoulders, as at
Mexico and New Spain; their harsh usages in tedious fastings, stinking
drenches, hard lyings upon stones, eating earth, strict forbearances
of wine and commerce, their torturings and manglings of their bodies
by terrible lancings and cuttings for the effusion of blood, 1 Kings
xviii.; their dismembering themselves, plucking out their eyes,
mangling their flesh, to cast in the idol’s face, sacrificing their
own blood, as did the priests of Bellona and Dea Syria.[134] So did
the kings of New Spain at their election, as Montezuma the Second,
who sacrificed by drawing blood from his ears and the calves of
his legs.[135] In Narsinga and Bisnagar they go their pilgrimages
with knives sticking on their arms and legs till the wounded flesh
festered. Some cast themselves under the wheels of the waggon on which
their idol is drawn in procession.[136] Yet are all these but small
matters in comparison of the bloody outrages committed upon mankind
in the abominable custom of sacrificing men to him. Of this many
authors give us a large account.[137] The Lacedæmonians to avert the
plague sacrifice a virgin; the Athenians, by the advice of Apollo’s
oracle, sent yearly to King Minos seven males and so many females to
be sacrificed to appease the wrath of the god for their killing of
Androgeus. The Carthaginians, being vanquished by Agathocles, king of
Sicily, sacrificed two hundred noblemen’s children at once. The Romans
had every year such sacrifices of men and women, of each sex two, for
a long time; and this was so common among the wiser pagan nations,
that whensoever they fell into danger, either of war, sicknesses,
or of any other calamity, they presently, to expiate their offences
against their supposed incensed gods, and to clear themselves of their
present miseries or dangers, sacrificed some mean persons, who for
this reason were called καθάρματα, expiations,[138] and to this doth
the apostle allude in 1 Cor. iv. 13, as Budæus, Stephanus, Grotius,
and many others think; as if he should say, we are as much despised
and loaded with cursings as those that are sacrificed for public
expiation. But what cruel usage may we expect for the poor barbarous
nations of the world, where he had all possible advantages for the
exercise of his bloody tyranny! Many sad instances of this kind are
collected by Purchas in his Pilgrimage, in his discourses of Virginia,
Peru, Brasilia, Mexico, Florida, and other places, whose stories of
this subject are so terrible, and occur so frequently, that they are
almost beyond all belief,[139] all which for brevity’s sake I omit,
contenting myself to note one instance or two out of the Scripture: 2
Kings iii. 27, the king of Moab ‘took his eldest son that should have
reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt-offering upon the
wall.’ This he did, according to the customs of the Phœnicians and
others, being reduced to great straits, as supposing by this means,
as his last refuge, to turn away the wrath of his God. Of Ahaz it is
recorded, 2 Chron. xxviii. 3, that ‘he burnt his children in the fire,
after the abominations of the heathen.’ That this was not a lustration
or consecration of their children, though that also was used, but a
real sacrificing, is without doubt to Josephus, who expresseth it thus:
‘He offered his son as an holocaust,’ [ὁλοκάυστωσε.] But whatever Ahaz
did, it is certain the children of Israel did so; ‘They offered their
sons and daughters to devils,’ Ps. cvi. 37. And if the ‘sacrifices
of the dead’ which they ate in the wilderness, mentioned ver. 28, be
understood of the feasts which were made at ‘the burning of their
children,’ as some think[140]—though many understand it of their
senseless dead gods or their deceased heroes, or for their deceased
friends—then this cruelty had soon possessed them. However, possess
them it did, as appears also by the description of their devouring
Moloch, which the Jewish Rabbins say was a hollow brazen image in
the form of a man, saving that it had the head of a calf, the arms
stretched in a posture of receiving; the image was heated with fire,
and the priest put the child in his arms, where it was burnt to death;
in the meantime a noise was made with drums, that the cries of the
child might not be heard, and hence was it called Tophet, from _toph_,
which signifies a drum; so that the name and shape of the image shews
that it was used to these execrable cruelties.[141]

These Scripture evidences, if we were backward to credit what histories
say of this matter, may assure us of the temper and disposition of
Satan, and may enable us to believe what bloody work he hath made in
the world, which I shall briefly sum up in these particulars:—

[1.] First, These inhuman, or rather, as Purchas calls them, over-human
sacrifices, were practised in most nations. Not only the Indians,
Parthians, Mexicans, &c., but Æthiopians, Syrians, Carthaginians,
Grecians, Romans, Germans, French, and Britons used them.

[2.] Secondly, These cruelties were acted not only upon slaves and
captives, but upon children, whose age and innocency might have
commanded the compassions of their parents for better usage.

[3.] Thirdly, These sacrificings were used upon several occasions, as
at the sprouting of their corn, at the inauguration, coronation, and
deaths of their kings and noblemen, in time of war, dearth, pestilence,
or any danger; in a word, as the priests in Florida and Mexico used to
say, whenever the devil is hungry or thirsty, that is, as oft as he
hath a mind.

[4.] Fourthly, In some places the devil brought them to set times for
those offerings; some were monthly, some annual. The Latins sacrificed
the tenth child; the annual drowning of a boy and a girl in the lake of
Mexico; the casting of two yearly from the _Pons Milvius_[142] at Rome
into Tiber, are but petty instances in comparison of the rest.

[5.] Fifthly, We cannot pass by the vast number of men offered up at
one time. So thirsty is Satan of human blood, that from one or two, he
hath raised the number incredibly high. In some sacrifices five, in
some ten, in some a hundred, in some a thousand have been offered up.
It was the argument which Montezuma, the last Emperor of Mexico, used
to Cortez to prove his strength and greatness by, that he sacrificed
yearly twenty thousand men, and some years fifty thousand. Some have
reserved their captives for that end, others have made war only to
furnish themselves with men for such occasions.

[6.] Sixthly, There are also several circumstances of these diabolical
outrages that may give a further discovery of his cruelty, as that
these miserable creatures thus led to be butchered have been loaden
with all the cursings, revilings, and contumacious reproaches as a
necessary concomitant of their violent deaths. Thus were those used who
were forced to be the public καθάρματα, or expiation, for the removal
of common calamities. Death also was not enough, except it had been
most tormenting in the manner of it, as of those that suffered by the
embracements of Moloch. The joy and feastings of such sacrificings,
which were in themselves spectacles of mourning and sorrow, were
cruelties to the dead, and a barbarous enforcement against the laws
of nature in the living. But the dashing of the smoking heart in the
idol’s face, and the pulling off the skins from the massacred bodies,
that men and women might dance in them, were yet more cruel ceremonies.
And lastly, In those that have been prepared for those solemnities,
by delicious fare, gorgeous ornaments, and the highest reverence or
honours, as was the manner of several countries; yet was this no other
than Satan’s insulting over their miseries, of which we can say no
otherwise, than that his tenderest mercies are cruelties.

[7.] Seventhly, I may cast into the account, that in some places
Satan, by a strange madness of devotion, hath persuaded some to be
volunteers in suffering these tortures and deaths. Some have cast
themselves under the chariot-wheels of their idols, and so have been
crushed to pieces.[143] Some sacrifice themselves to their gods: first
they outcut off several pieces of their flesh, crying every time, ‘For
the worship of my god, I cut this my flesh;’ and at last say, ‘Now do
I yield myself to death in the behalf of my god,’ and so kills himself
outright.

[8.] Eighthly, It is wonderful to think that the devil should, by
strange pretexts of reason, have smoothed over these barbarous
inhumanities, so that they have become plausible things in the
judgments of those miserable wretches. In piacular sacrifices they
believed that except the life of a man were given for the life of
men, that the gods could not be pacified.[144] In other sacrifices,
both eucharistical and for atonement, they retained this principle,
‘that those things are to be offered to the gods that are most
pleasing and acceptable to us; and that the offering of a calf or
a pigeon was not suitable to such an end.’ This maxim they further
improved by the addition of another of the same kind, ‘that if it
were fit to offer a human sacrifice, it must also be innocent, and
consequently little children are the fittest for such a purpose.’
And some have also conjectured that the devil hath not been awanting
to improve the example of Abraham sacrificing his son, or the law in
Lev. xxvii. 28, or the prophecies concerning the death of Christ,
as the great sacrifice of atonement, to justify and warrant his
hellish cruelty.[145] In some cases cruelty hath arisen from the very
principles of reverence and love which children have to parents, and
friends to friends: as in Dragoian, when any are sick, they send to
their oracle to know whether the parties shall live or die; if it be
answered they shall die, then their friends strangle them and eat them;
and all this from a kind of religious respect to their kindred, to
preserve, as they imagine, their flesh from putrefaction, and their
souls from torment.[146] The like they do at Javamajor, when their
friends grow old and cannot work, only they eat not their own friends,
but carry them to the market and sell them to those that do eat
them.[147]

[9.] Lastly, Let us call to mind how long the devil domineered in
the world at this rate of cruelty. When the world grew to a freer
use of reason and greater exercise of civility, they found out ways
of mitigation, and changed these barbarous rites into more tolerable
sacrifices; as in Laodicea, they substituted a hart to be sacrificed
instead of a virgin; in Cyprus, an ox was put instead of a man; in
Egypt, waxen images instead of men. Images of straw at Rome were cast
into Tiber in the place of living men; and the terrible burnings of
Moloch, which was not peculiar only to the nations near to Canaan, but
was in use also at Carthage, and found in the American islands by the
Spaniards; the like brazen images were also found in Lodovicus Vives
his time, by the French, in an island called by them Carolina.[148]
These were at last changed into a _februation_,[149] and instead of
burning their children, they only passed them betwixt two fires; but
it was long before it came to this. In the time of Socrates, human
sacrifices were in use at Carthage, and they continued in the Roman
provinces till the time of Tertullian, Eusebius, and Lactantius; though
they had been severely forbidden by Augustus Cæsar, and afterward by
Tiberius, who was forced to crucify some of the priests that dared to
offer such sacrifices, to affright them from those barbarous customs.
In other places of the world, how long such things continued, who can
tell, especially seeing they were found at Carolina not so very long
since?

How impossible is it to cast up the total sum of so many large
items! When these terrible customs have had so general a practice in
most nations, upon so many occasions, upon such seeming plausible
principles; when such great numbers have been destroyed at once, and
these usages have been so long practised in the world, and with such
difficulty restrained, what vast multitudes of men must, we imagine,
have been consumed by Satan’s execrable cruelty!

6. Sixthly, There remains one instance more of the devil’s cruelty,
which is yet different from the former, which I may call his _personal
cruelties_; because they are acted by his own immediate hand upon
certain of his vassals, without the help or interposure of men, who,
in most of the fore-mentioned cases, have been as instruments acted by
him. Here I might take notice of his fury to those that are possessed.
Some have been as it were racked and tortured in their bodies, and
their limbs and members so distorted, that it hath been not only
matter of pity to the beholders to see them so abused, but also of
admiration[150] to consider how such abuses should be consistent
with their lives, and that such rendings and tearings have not quite
separated the soul from the body. In the Gospels we read of some such
‘cast into the fire, and into the water,’ [Mat. xvii. 15;] others,
conversing ‘with tombs and sepulchres,’ in the cold nights ‘without
clothes;’ and all of them spoken of as creatures sadly tormented, and
‘miserably vexed.’ The histories of later days tell us of some that
vomited crooked pins, pieces of leather, coals, cloth, and such like;
of others snatched out of their houses, and tired even to fainting,
and waste of their spirits, as Domina Rossa, mentioned by Bodin, with
a great many more to this same purpose. We may take a view of his
dealing with witches, who, though he seem to gratify them in their
transportations from place to place, and in their feastings with music
and dancings, are but cruelly handled by him very often. The very work
they are put upon—which is the destruction of children, men, women,
cattle, and the fruits of the earth—is but a base employment; but the
account he takes of them, of the full performance of their enterprizes,
and the cruel beatings they have of him, when they cannot accomplish
any of their revenges, is no less than a severe cruelty. He gives them
no rest unless they be doing hurt; and when they cannot do it to the
persons designed, they are forced to do the same mischief to their
own children or relations, that they may gratify their tyrannical
master. Bodin relates the story of a French baron, [p. 180,] who was
afterward put to death for witchcraft, that after he had killed eight
children, was at last upon a design of sacrificing his own child to the
devil. And if at any time they grew weary of so execrable a slavery,
or confess their wickedness, they are so miserably tormented that they
choose rather to die than live. And what else but cruelty can these
slaves expect from him, when the ceremonies of their entrance into that
cursed service betokens nothing else; for their bonds and obligations
are usually writ or subscribed with their own blood; and some magical
books have been writ with the blood of many children; besides, the
farewell that they have of him at their usual meetings, is commonly
this thundering threatening, ‘Avenge yourselves, or you shall die.’
All these particulars are collected from the confessions of witches by
Bodin, Wierus, and others.

But leaving these, let us further inquire into Satan’s carriage toward
those that in America and other dark and barbarous places know no
other god, and give their devoutest worship to him. To those he is
not so kind as might be expected; but his constant way is to terrify
and torment them, insomuch that some know no other reason of their
worship but that he may not hurt them. And since the English colonies
went into these parts, these Americans have learned to make this
distinction between the Englishman’s God and theirs, that theirs is an
evil god, and the other a good God; though that distinction in other
places is in the general far more ancient, where they acknowledge two
gods, one good, the other bad; and the worse the god is, the saddest,
most mournful rites of sacrificing were used, as in caves, and in the
night—the manner of the worship fitly expressing the nature of the
god they served.[151] Our countrymen have noted of the natives of New
England, that the devil appeared to them in ugly shapes, and in hideous
places, as in swamps and woods. But these are only the prologue to
the tragedy itself, for they only serve to impress upon the minds of
his worshippers what cruelties and severities they are to expect from
him; and accordingly he often lets them feel his hand, and makes them
know that those dark and dismal _preludiums_ are not for nothing. For
sometimes he appears to the worshippers, tormenting and afflicting
their bodies, tearing the flesh from the bones, and carrying them away
quick[152] with him; sometimes six have been carried away at once, none
ever knowing what became of them.[153] By such bloody acts as these he
kept the poor Americans in fear and slavery; so that as bad a master
as he is, they durst not but pay their homage and service to him. All
these particulars being put together, will shew we do the devil no
wrong when we call him cruel.




