CHAPTER XII.

 _Of Satan’s perverting our reason.—His second way of blinding.—The
 possibility of this, and the manner of accomplishing it directly,
 several ways; and indirectly, by the delights of sin, and by
 sophistical arguments; with an account of them._


II. Secondly, The second way by which Satan blinds us through the
power of lust is by _perverting and corrupting our reason, drawing it
to approve of that which it first disapproved_. That our lusts have
such a power upon the understanding to make such an alteration, need
not seem strange to those that shall consider that the Scripture,
propounding the knowledge of the highest mysteries, doth positively
require, as a necessary pre-requisite to these things, that we ‘lay
aside all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness,’ James i. 20,—in
these terms, noting the loathsome defilement of our lusts,—that so we
may ‘receive the engrafted word;’ strongly implying that our lusts have
a power to elude and evade the strongest reasons, and to hinder their
entertainment: which our Saviour notes to have been also the cause of
the Jews’ blindness, ‘How can ye believe, which receive honour one of
another?’ John v. 44. Their lusts of honour stood in their light, and
perverted their reason.

But because this may seem to some almost impossible, that lusts should
turn our sun into darkness, I shall a little explain it.

The understanding doth usually, if practice of sin have not put out its
light, at the first faithfully represent to our mind the nature of good
and evil in matters of temptation and duty; yet its power in this case
is only directive and suasive to the will, not absolutely imperative.
The will must follow the understanding’s dictate, but is not under any
necessity of following its first advice; it is the _ultimum dictamen_,
the last dictate, that it is engaged to follow. However the will, in
the case last mentioned, be dependent upon the understanding, yet the
understanding doth also, _quoad exercitium_, depend upon the will, and
as to the act of consideration, is under its command; so that after the
understanding hath faithfully represented the evil of a sin, the will
can command it to another consideration, and force it to new thoughts
and consultations about it; in which case the will doth prompt the
understanding, tells it what verdict it would have it to bring in, and
so doth really solicit and beg for a compliance.

The understanding is ductile and capable of being bribed, and therefore
suffers its right eye to be put out by the will, and as a false witness
or a partial judge gives sentence as the will would have it; and thus,
as one observes,[190] the understanding and will are like Simeon and
Levi, brethren in evil, mutually complying with and gratifying each
other.

The possibility of lusts perverting our understanding being discovered,
the way and manner how lust doth thus corrupt it, is needful to be
opened.

Lust exerciseth this power under the management of Satan, directly and
indirectly.

1. First, _Our reason is directly perverted when it is so far wrought
upon as to call that good, which is indeed plainly and apparently
evil_. So great a corruption is not common and ordinary, neither can
the heart of man be easily drawn to go so palpably against clear light
and evidence. It is therefore only in some cases and in some persons,
either of weaker faculties or of extraordinary debauched principles,
that Satan can work up lust to give so great a darkness. However, it is
evident that Satan useth these deceits in this thing.

(1.) First, He strives, where the matter will bear it, _to put the
name of virtue or good upon actions and things that are not so_. This
temptation doth most appear in those things that are of a doubtful and
disputable nature, or in those actions which in their appearance or
pretensions may seem to be virtuous. Whatever sin is capable of any
paint or varnish, that he takes the advantage of. Saul’s sacrificing
was a great iniquity, and yet the pretence of the general goodness of
the action, being in itself commanded, and the supposed necessity of
Saul’s doing it, because Samuel came not, were considerations upon
which his understanding warranted to him that undertaking. Paul’s
persecution, though a real gratification of his envious lustings, by
his blinded understanding was judged duty. What more common than for
worldly-mindedness and covetousness to be called a faithful and dutiful
care for the provision of our families! Lukewarmness is often justified
under the notion of moderation and prudence; and anything that can but
pretend any kindred to or resemblance of good, our lusts presently
prevail for an approbation and vindication of it.

(2.) Secondly, Satan useth _the advantage of extremes for the
corrupting of our understandings_. To this purpose he doth all he can
to make such an extreme odious and displeasing, that so we may run upon
the contrary as matter of duty. Many there are whose heads are so weak,
that if they see the danger of one extreme, they never think themselves
in safety till they fly to a contrary excess, and then they think the
extreme they embrace needs no other justification than the apparent
evil of what they have avoided. Satan knowing this, like the lapwing,
makes the greatest noise when he is furthest from his nest, and in much
seeming earnestness tempts us to something that is most cross to our
temper or present inclination; or endeavours to render something so to
us, not with any hopes to prevail with us there, but to make us run as
far from it as we can into another snare, and also to make us believe
that we have done well and avoided a temptation, when indeed we have
but exchanged it.

(3.) Thirdly, He directly binds our understandings in sinful practices,
by engaging us _to corrupt opinions which lead to wicked or careless
courses_. Satan with great ease can put men upon sin, when once he hath
prevailed with them to receive an error which directly leads to it.
Corrupt principles do naturally corrupt practices, and both these may
be observed to meet in those deluded ones whom the Scripture mentions,
‘that denied the only Lord God, and Jesus Christ, turning also the
grace of God into lasciviousness,’ Jude 4; false teachers that brought
in ‘damnable heresies,’ counted it ‘pleasure to riot,’ had ‘eyes full
of adultery, and could not cease from sin,’ 2 Pet. ii. 1, 13, 14. With
what confidence and security will sin be practised, when an opinion
signs a warrant and pleads a justification for it!

(4.) Fourthly, In actions whose goodness or badness is principally
discoverable _by the ends upon which they are undertaken, it is no
great difficulty for Satan to impose upon men a belief that they act
by ends and respects which do not indeed move them at all_; and in
this case men are so blinded that they do not, or will not know or
acknowledge they do evil. The matter of the action being warrantable,
and the end being out of the reach of common discovery, they readily
believe the best of themselves; and looking more at the warrantableness
of the nature of the act in the general than at their grounds and
intentions, they think not that they do evil. This was a fault which
Christ observed in the disciples when they called for ‘fire from
heaven upon the Samaritans,’ Luke ix. 55. The thing itself Elias had
done before, and Christ might have done it then, but they wanted the
spirit of Elias, and therefore Christ rejects their motion as unlawful
in them, who considered not that a spirit of passion and revenge did
altogether influence them; and instead of shewing a just displeasure
against the Samaritans, he shews that Satan had blinded them by their
lust, and that the thing they urged was so far from being good, that
it was apparently evil, in that they were acted by ‘another spirit’
than they imagined. This way of deceit is very common. How often may
we observe Christians pretending conscientious dissatisfactions about
the actions of others, when the private spring that animates them is
some secret grudge that lies at the bottom; and yet because the thing
wherein they are dissatisfied may truly deserve blame, they are not apt
to condemn themselves, but think they do well.

2. Secondly, _Lusts also pervert our reason and knowledge indirectly_;
and this is, when we are not so far blinded as to believe the thing
unto which we are tempted, to be good absolutely; yet notwithstanding,
we are persuaded of some considerable goodness in it, and such as may
for the present be embraced. For this purpose Satan hath ready these
two engines:—

(1.) First, He sets before us _the pleasures, profits, and other
delights of sin_. These he heightens with all his art and skill, that
he may fix in our minds this conclusion, that however it be forbidden,
yet it would conduce much to our satisfaction or advantage if it were
practised; and here he promiseth such golden ends and fruits of sin as
indeed it can never lead unto, inviting us in the words of the harlot,
‘I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works,
with fine linen of Egypt. I have perfumed it with myrrh, aloes, and
cinnamon. Come, let us take our fill of these delights,’ Prov. vii.
16. Thus he set upon Eve, ‘Take this fruit, and ye shall be as gods.’
Thus he attempted Christ himself, ‘All these will I give thee,’ [Mat.
iv. 9,] proffering the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.
The pleasures of sin are Satan’s great bait, and these strongly invite
and stir up our lusts; yet because the fear of the danger may stick
in the heart, ‘It is pleasant, but oh I dare not,’ saith the sinner,
‘I fear the hazard or the evil that may follow:’ therefore Satan hath
his other engine at hand to blind us, and to carry our minds from such
considerations; and that is,

(2.) Secondly, _His sophistical arguments_, by which the danger may be
lessened. Of these his quiver is full: as,

[1.] First, He urgeth that the sin tempted to _is little_. ‘But a
little one;’ it is not, saith he, so great a matter as you make it;
there are other sins far greater, and these also practised by men that
profess as much as you. Thus he would shame us, as it were, out of our
fear, by calling it severity, niceness, or an unnecessary preciseness.
If this prevail not,

[2.] Secondly, He hath then another argument: Oh, saith he, be it so,
that it is a little more than ordinary, yet it is but once; taste or
try it; you need not engage yourselves to frequent practice, you may
retreat at pleasure. But if the fear of the danger prevail against
this, then,

[3.] Thirdly, He labours to put us under _a kind of necessity of
sinning, and this he pleads as a justification of the evil_. It is
not altogether right, but you cannot well avoid it. This plea of
necessity is large; occasion, example, command of others, strength of
inclination, custom, and what not, are pleaded by him in this case.
Some particularly reckon them up;[191] and rather than some men will
acknowledge the evil, they will blame God’s decree, as if they were
necessitated by it, or his providence, as Adam, ‘The woman that thou
gavest me, she gave me of the tree.’ David’s bloody resolve against
the house of Nabal seems to be justified by him, from Nabal’s great
ingratitude, ‘In vain have I kept all that this fellow hath in the
wilderness,’ &c., 1 Sam. xxv. 21; and as one engaged by a necessity of
repaying such wrongs and affronts, doth he determine to cut them off.
Aaron, when he was taxed by Moses about the golden calf, excuseth the
matter by a pretended necessity of doing what he did upon the violent
importunity of such a heady people, Exod. xxxii. 22; and that when
Moses was not to be found, ‘Thou knewest the people, that they are set
on mischief.’ This that he urged to Moses Satan no doubt had urged to
him, and he had acquiesced in it as something that he thought would
excuse, or at least mitigate the offence. Yet if the sinner break
through this snare,

[4.] Fourthly, He comes on with _a softer plea of infirmity_, and
endeavours to persuade men that they may yield under pretence of being
forced, and that their strivings and reluctances will lessen the evil
to an apparent sin of infirmity; and thus he bespeaks them, Have not
God’s children infirmities? They sin, though with reluctancy, and
dost not thou resist?—doth not the fear that is in thy heart shew an
unwillingness? Mayest thou not plead, the evil that I would not do,
that do I? If thou yield, will not God account it a rape upon thine
integrity? If this arrow stick not,

[5.] Fifthly, Then he _extenuates the offence by propounding some
smaller good or convenience that may follow that evil_. And this,
though it be a way of arguing directly contrary to that rule, ‘Do
not evil that good may come,’ yet it oft proves too successful; and
it is like that common stratagem of war, when, by the proposal of a
small booty in view, the enemies are drawn out of their hold into a
fore-contrived danger. Thus Satan pleads, This one act of sin may put
you into a capacity of honouring God the more. Some have admitted
advancements and dignities against conscience, upon no better ground
but that they might keep out knaves, and that they might be in a
condition to be helpful to good men. Surely the devil prevailed with
Lot by this weapon, when he offered the prostitution of his daughters
to the lusts of the Sodomites, that the strangers, as he thought them,
might be preserved; by this evil, thinks he, a greater may be avoided.
Herod’s conscience could not at first consent to the cutting off the
head of John Baptist, but when Satan suggests the obligation of his
oath, he concludes that in the killing of John he should escape the
violation of the oath. Thus a pretended good to come becomes a pander
to a present certain iniquity. Now if after all these arguings the
conscience carrieth an apprehension of danger, then,

[6.] Sixthly, He plainly disputeth _the possibility of the escape of
danger, though the sin be committed_. All the insinuations of pleasure
and advantage by which Eve was tempted could not at first blot out her
fears of the consequence of that transgression; it did stick in her
mind still, ‘lest we die;’ then Satan plainly denieth the danger she
feared: ‘Ye shall not surely die.’ ‘The threatening,’ saith he, ‘it may
be, was but for trial, or without a strict and positive purpose in God
to execute it; there is no certainty that God was in good earnest when
he spake so.’ The devil usually urgeth the mercy of God, the merits of
Christ, his promises of pardon, the infirmities of the saints, their
sins and repentances, &c.; from all these drawing this conclusion,
that we may venture upon the temptation without any apparent hazard.
It is but repenting, saith he, and that is an easy work to a gracious
soul. God is ready to be reconciled, even to a prodigal son; he is
not so cruel as to cast away any for a small matter; he that waits to
be gracious will not lie at catch for opportunities and occasions to
destroy us; he that delights not in the death of a sinner will not
delight to take strict exceptions against every failing.

If Satan can prevail with us to extenuate the sin, to slight the
hazard, or any way to lessen it upon any of the forementioned accounts;
then having possessed us before with high apprehensions of delights and
satisfactions in the sin, he quickly persuades to accept the motion, as
having a conveniency and advantage in it not to be despised: and thus
doth he indirectly pervert our reason; which is the second way by which
he blinds us through the working of our lust.




