CHAPTER XVI.

 _Of Satan’s third grand policy for maintaining his possession; which
 is his feigned departure: (1.) By ceasing the prosecution
 of his design; and the cases in which he doth it. (2.) By
 abating the eagerness of pursuit; and how he doth that. (3.) By
 exchanging temptations; and his policy therein.—The advantage he seeks
 by seeming to fly.—Of his fourth stratagem for keeping his possession,
 which is his stopping all ways of retreat; and how he doth that._


Besides the two former designs, of finishing sin, and keeping all
in quiet, by which the devil endeavours to maintain his possession,
he hath a third grand subtlety, which is this: he keeps his hold by
feigning himself dispossessed and cast out. Of this we have a full
account: Luke xi. 24, ‘When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man,
he walketh through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he
saith, I will return unto my house whence I came out.’ Christ had there
noted that it is Satan’s great principle to do nothing by which his
kingdom may be divided or undermined. Satan will not be divided against
himself, and yet very seasonably he tells us, that for an advantage he
will seem to quit his interest, and upon design he will sometimes so
carry himself that he may be deemed and supposed to be ‘gone out of a
man;’ as those that besiege forts or walled towns do sometimes raise
the siege and feign a departure, intending thereby to take a sudden
advantage of the carelessness of the besieged. In the explanation of
this policy, I shall, (1.) Shew how many ways he feigns a departure.
(2.) Upon what designs he doth it.

There are three ways whereby Satan seems to forsake his interest:—

1. First, He frequently _ceaseth the prosecution of a design, which
yet he hath in his eye and desire, when he perceives that there are
some things in his way that render it not feasible_; nay, he forbears
to urge men to their darling sins, upon the same score: and who would
not think Satan cast out in such a case? When a man spits out the
sweet morsel which heretofore he kept under his tongue, and sucked a
sweetness from it; when men of noted iniquities abstain from them,
and become smooth and civil, who would not think but that the unclean
spirit were gone? This way and course he puts in practice in several
cases.

[1.] First, When he perceives some _extraordinary occasion puts any of
his subjects into a good mood or humour of religion_. Wicked men are
not ordinarily so highly bent upon evil ways, but that they may be at
some times softened and relaxed. Pharaoh, who is most eminently noted
for a heart judicially hardened, at the appearance of the plagues upon
himself and Egypt, usually relented somewhat, and would confess he had
sinned, and that fit would continue upon him for some little time. But
very frequently it is thus with others; an extraordinary occasion melts
and thaws down the natural affections of men, as a warm day melts the
snow upon the mountains, and then the stream will for a time run high
and strong, at which time Satan sees it is in vain to urge them. Thus
men that receive an eminent kindness and deliverance from God, what is
more common than for such men to say, Oh, we will never be so wicked
as we have been, we will never be drunk more, the world shall see us
reformed and new men! These are indeed good words, and yet though Satan
knows that such expressions are not from a good heart,—as that of
Deut. v. 29 implies, ‘They have well said, Oh that there were such an
heart in them!’—he nevertheless thinks it not fit then to press them
to their usual wickedness at that time; for natural affections raised
high in a profession of religion will withstand temptations for a fit,
and therefore he forbears till the stream run lower. What a fit of
affection had the Israelites when their eyes had seen that miraculous
deliverance at the Red Sea! What songs of rejoicing had they! what
resolves never to distrust him again! Ps. cvi. 12, ‘Then believed they
his words, they sang his praise.’ Satan doth not presently urge them
to murmuring and unbelief, though that was his design, but he stays
till the fit was over, and then he could soon tempt them to ‘forget his
works.’ How like a convert did Saul look, after David had convinced him
of his integrity, and had spared his life in the cave! 1 Sam. xxiv.
16, and xxvi. 21. He weeps, and acknowledgeth his iniquity, justifies
David, owns his kindness, and seems to acquiesce in his succession to
the kingdom. The devil had, no question, a great spite at David, and it
was his great design to stir up Saul against him, and yet at that time
he could not prevail with him to destroy David, though he might easily
have done it; he was then in a good mood, and Satan was forced to give
way to necessity, and to seem to go out of Saul for the present.

[2.] Secondly, He also ceaseth from his design when he sees he cannot
fit his temptation with a _suitable opportunity_. What could be more
the devil’s design, and Esau’s satisfaction, than to have had Jacob
slain? Esau professeth it was the design of his heart, and yet he
resolves to forbear so long as his father Isaac lived: Gen. xxvii. 41,
‘The days of my father’s mourning are at hand; then, but not till then,
will I slay my brother Jacob.’ The devil often sows his seed, and yet
waiteth and hath long patience, not only in watering and fitting the
hearts of men for it, but also in expectancy of fit opportunities;
and in the meantime, he forbears to put men upon that which time and
occasion cannot fitly bring forth to practice. The prophet, Hosea
vii. 4, speaks of that people as notoriously wicked, ‘they are all
adulterers;’ but withal, he observes that they forbare these enormous
abominations for want of fit seasons, ‘their heart was as an oven
heated by the baker,’ sufficiently enflamed after their wickedness,
and yet the baker, after he had kneaded the dough, prepared all the
groundwork of the temptation, ceased from raising, sleeping all the
night till all was leavened; that is, though their hearts were enraged
for sin, yet the devil doth wait till occasions present themselves,
and becomes in the meantime like one asleep. Now while the devil
thus sleeps, the fire that is secretly in the heart, being not seen,
men gain the good opinion of converts with others, and often with
themselves, not knowing what spirit they are of, because Satan ceaseth,
upon the want of occasions, to tempt and provoke them.

[3.] Thirdly, Our adversary is content to forbear, when he perceives
that _a restraining grace doth lock up the hearts and hands of men_.
When ‘a stronger than he cometh,’ who can expect less but that he
should be more quiet? That God doth restrain men sometime when he doth
not change them, needs no proof; that Satan knows of these restraints,
cannot be denied. Who can give an account of these communings and
discourses that are betwixt God and Satan concerning us? His pleadings
in reference to Job were as unknown to Job, till God discovered them,
as his pleadings concerning ourselves are to us. Besides, who can tell
how much of God’s restraining grace may lie in this, of God’s limiting
and straitening Satan’s commission? Now the devil hath not so badly
improved his observations, but that he knows it is in vain to tempt
where God doth stop his way and tie up men’s hands. Abimelech was
certainly resolved upon wickedness when he took Sarah from Abraham,
Gen. xx. 2, and yet the matter is so carried for some time, how long
we know not, as if the devil had been asleep, or forgot to hasten
Abimelech to his intended wickedness; for when God cautions him, ‘he
had not come near her,’ ver. 4. The ground of all this was neither in
the devil’s backwardness nor Abimelech’s modesty, but Satan lets the
matter rest, because he knew that ‘God withheld him, and suffered him
not to touch her.’

[4.] Fourthly, When men are under _the awe and fear of such as carry an
authority in their countenances and employments for the discouraging
of sin_, Satan, as hopeless to prevail, doth not solicit to scandalous
iniquities. Much of external sanctity and saintlike behaviour ariseth
from hence. The faces and presence of some men have such a shining
splendour, that iniquity blusheth and hideth its head before them.
Sin dare not do what it would; so great a reverence and esteem of
such persons is kept up in the consciences of some, and so great an
awe and fear is thence derived to others, that they will not or dare
not give way to an insolency in evil. The Israelites were generally
a wicked people, yet such an awe they had of ‘Joshua, and the elders
that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the Lord,’
Josh. ii. 7, that Satan seemed to be cast out all their days. Who could
have thought Joash had been so much under Satan’s power, that had
observed his ways all the time of Jehoiada the priest? 2 Chron. xxiv.
2, ‘Then he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord.’ Satan
was content to let him alone, because Jehoiada’s life and authority
did overawe him; but after his death Satan returned to his possession,
‘and the king hearkened to the princes of Judah, and served groves and
idols,’ ver. 17. The like is observed of Uzziah, 2 Chron. xxvi. 5.
The reverence that he had for Zechariah, who had understanding in the
visions of God, discouraged the tempter from soliciting him to those
evils which afterward he engaged him in, ver. 16. Satan is willing,
when he perceives the awe and authority of good men stands in his way,
rather to suspend the prosecution of his design, than, by forcing it
against so strong a current, to hazard the shipwreck of it.

[5.] Fifthly, He also makes as if he were cast out when he perceives
_the consciences of men are scared by threatened or felt judgments_.
He forbears to urge them against the pricks when God draws his sword
and brings forth the glittering spear. Balaam’s ass would not run
against the angel that appeared terribly against him in his way. The
devil knows the power of an awakened conscience, and sees it in vain
to strive against such a stream; and when it will be no better he
withdraws. As great a power as the devil had in Ahab, when he was
affrighted and humbled he gave way, and for that season drave him not
on to his wonted practice of wickedness. He also carried thus to the
Ninevites, when they were awakened by the preaching of Jonah. Then
we see them a reforming people, the devil surceased to carry them
into their former provocations. How frequently is this seen among
professors, where the word hath a searching power and force upon them!
Sin is so curbed and kept under, that it is like a root of bitterness
in winter, lying hid under ground, Satan forbearing to act upon it
or to improve it, till the storms and noise of judgments cease, and
then usually it will ‘spring up and trouble them,’ Heb. xii. 15. If
Satan hath really lost his hold, he ceaseth not to molest and vex
even awakened consciences with urgent solicitations to sin; but if he
perceive that his interest in the hearts of men remains sure to him and
unshaken, then, in case of affrightment and fear of wrath, it is his
policy to conceal himself, and to dissemble a departure.

[6.] Sixthly, Satan is also forced to this by the _prevailing power of
knowledge and principles of light_. Where the gospel in profession and
preaching displays abroad his bright beams, then whatever shift men
make to be wicked in secret, yet ‘the light is as the shadow of death
to them,’ and it is even ‘a shame to speak of these things in public,’
Eph. v. 12. Here Satan cannot rage so freely, but is put to his shifts,
and is forced to be silent, whilst the power of the gospel cuts off
half his garments. Men begin to reform; some are clean escaped from
error, 2 Pet. ii. 18; others abandon their filthy lusts and scandalous
sins, and so ‘escape the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,’ ver. 20. Yet under all these
great alterations and appearances of amendment, the devil is but
seemingly ejected; for in the place mentioned, when the light declines,
those that were escaped from error, and those that had fled from sinful
pollutions, were both entangled again and carried to the same pitch,
and a great deal further, of that sin and error in which they had been
formerly engaged.

These are the six cases in which Satan ceaseth the prosecution of his
design, which was his first policy in feigning himself to be cast out;
but he further dissembles a flight when he thinks it not fit to cease
wholly,

_By abating his pursuit_, by slacking his course; and this he doth,

[1.] First, When he tempts still, but yet _less than formerly_. So
great is his cunning and patience, that when he cannot get what he
would have, he contents himself with what he can get, rather than lose
all. He desires that men would give up themselves fully and freely to
his service; but if they like not this, he is willing to take them, as
one speaks, as retainers, and to suffer them to take a liberty to come
and go at pleasure.[196] He hath two main ends in tempting men to sin:
one is to avenge himself upon God, in open defiance and dishonour of
his name; the other is the ruin and perdition of souls. If he could,
he would have these two ends meet in every temptation; yet he pleaseth
himself with the latter when he cannot help it, and in that too he
satisfies himself sometimes with as small an interest as may be, so
that his possession and interest be but preserved. He knows that one
sin loved and embraced brings death for its wages. A leak unstopped and
neglected may sink the ship as well as a great storm; and therefore
when he perceives the consciences of men shy and nice, he is willing
they come to him, as Nicodemus came to Christ, by night in private, and
that by stealth they do him service.

[2.] Secondly, He sometimes offers men _a composition, and so keeps his
hold privately, by giving them an indulgence and toleration to comply
with religious duties and observations_. Pharaoh condescended that
Israel should go and serve the Lord in the wilderness, upon condition
that their wives, children, and substance were left behind. So Satan
saith to some, ‘Go and serve the Lord,’ only let your heart be with me;
leave your affections behind upon the world. That serious warning of
Christ, ‘Ye cannot serve two masters; ye cannot serve God and mammon,’
evidently shews that the devil useth to conceal his interest in the
hearts of sinners by offering such terms; and that men are so apt to
think that Satan is gone out when they have shared the heart betwixt
God and him, that they stand in need of a full discovery of that cheat,
and earnest caution against it. The devil was forced to yield, that
Herod should do many things at the preaching of John; yet he maintained
his possession of his heart, by fixing him in his resolved lust in the
matter of Herodias: and this gives just ground of complaint against the
generality of sinners, ‘Ye return, but not to me, not with your whole
hearts: have ye fasted to me? have ye mourned to me? they come and sit
as my people, but their hearts are after their covetousness,’ [Ezek.
xxxiii. 31.]

[3.] Thirdly, Satan hath yet another wile by which he would cheat men
into a belief that he is cast out of the heart; and this is a subtle
way that he hath _to exchange temptations_. How weak and childish are
sinners that suffer themselves thus to be abused! When they grow sick
and weary of a sin, if the devil take that from them, and lay in the
room of it another as bad, or the same again, only a little changed and
altered, they please themselves that they have vomited up the first,
but consider not that they have received into their embracement another
as bad or worse. Concerning this exchange, we may note two things:—

_First_, That sometimes he attains his end by exchanging _one heinous
sin for another as heinous, only not so much out of fashion_: as
the customs and times and places give laws and rules for fashions,
according to which the decencies or indecencies of garbs and garments
are determined, so is it sometimes with sin. Men and countries have
their darling sins; times and ages also have their peculiar iniquities,
which, in the judgment of sinners, do clothe them with a fitness and
suitableness. Sometimes men grow weary of sins, because they are
everywhere spoken against; because men point at them with the finger.
The devil in this case is ready to change with them. Drunkenness hath
in some ages and places carried a brand of infamy in its forehead;
so hath uncleanness and other sins. When sinners cannot practise
these with credit and reputation, then they please themselves with an
alteration. He that was a drunkard is now, it may be, grown ambitious
and boasting; he that was covetous is become a prodigal or profuse
waster; the heart is as vain and sottish as before, only their lusts
are let out another way, and run in another channel. Sometimes lusts
are changed also with the change of men’s condition in the world.
Poverty and plenty, a private and a public station, have their peculiar
sins. He that of poor is made rich leaves his sins of distrust, envy,
or deceitful dealing, and follows the bias of his present state to
other wickednesses equally remarkable, and yet may be so blinded as to
apprehend that Satan is departed from him.

_Secondly_, We may observe that Satan exchangeth sins with men in such
_a secret private manner, that the change is not easily discovered_;
and by this shift he casts a greater mist before the eyes of men. Thus
he exchangeth open profaneness into secret sins: filthiness of the
flesh into filthiness of the spirit. Men seem to reform their gross
impieties, abstaining from drunkenness, swearing, adulteries; and
then, it may be, they are taken up with spiritual pride, and their
hearts are puffed up with high conceits of themselves, their gifts and
attainments; or they are entangled with error, and spend their time in
‘doting about questions that engender strife rather than edifying,’ [1
Tim. vi. 4;] or they are taken up with hypocrisies. Thus the Pharisees
left their open iniquities, washing the outside of the cup and platter,
Mat. xxiii. 26; and instead of these, endeavoured to varnish and paint
themselves over, so that in all this change they were but as graves
that appeared not, Luke xi. 44. Or they acquiesce in formality and the
outwards of religion; like that proud boaster, ‘Lord, I thank thee I am
not as other men are,’ &c., [Luke xviii. 11.] In all these things the
devil seems cast out and men reformed, when indeed he may continue his
possession; only he lurks and hides himself under ‘the stuff,’ [1 Sam.
x. 22.] These ways of sinning are but finer poisons, which, though not
so nauseous to the stomach, nor so quick in their despatch, yet may be
as surely and certainly deadly; such fly from the iron weapon, and a
bow of steel strikes them through.

Having thus explained the three ways by which Satan pretends to depart
from men, I must next shew his design in making such a pretence of
forsaking his habitation.

[1.] First, That all this is done by him only _upon design_, may be
easily concluded from several things hinted to us in the fore-cited
place of Luke xi. As (1.) He doth not say that the devil is ‘cast
out,’ as if there were a force upon him, but that he ‘goeth out;’
it is of choice, a voluntary departure. (2.) That his going out in
this sense is notwithstanding irksome and troublesome to him. The
heart of man, as one observes,[197] is a palace in his estimation,
and dispossession, though upon design, is as a ‘desert’ to him, that
affords him little ease or rest. (3.) That his going out is not a
quitting of his interest; he calls it ‘_his_ house’ still: ‘I will
return to _my_ house,’ saith he. (4.) He takes care in going out to
lock the door, that it may not be taken up with better guests; he keeps
it ‘empty’ and tenantable for himself: he tempts still, though not so
visibly, and strives to suppress such good thoughts and motions as
he fears may quite out him of his possession. (5.) He goes out, _cum
animo revertendi_, with a purpose of returning. (6.) His secession
is so dexterously and advantageously managed, that he finds an easy
admittance at his return, and his possession confirmed and enlarged:
‘they enter in and dwell there.’

[2.] Secondly, _The advantages that he designs by this policy are
these chiefly_: (1.) By this means men are dangerously confirmed _in
their securities_. Thus the Pharisee blessed himself, ‘Lord, I thank
thee,’ &c. They please themselves with this supposition, that the devil
is cast out; and upon this they cease their war and watchfulness. As
Saul, when he heard that David had escaped, ‘went not out to seek after
him;’ so these trouble not themselves any further to inquire Satan’s
haunts in their hearts. Thus he sits securely within, whilst they
think he is fled from them. (2.) By this means also he fits men as
instruments _to serve his turn in other works of his_. He must have,
in some cases, handsome tools to work withal. All men are not fit
agents in persecution, either to credit it, or to carry it through with
vigour and zeal; for this end he seems to go out of some, that under
a smoother and profession-like behaviour, when they are stirred up to
persecute, the rigour might seem just. Thus ‘devout and honourable
women’ were stirred up to persecute Paul and Barnabas, Acts xiii. 50.
The devil had gone out so far, that they had gained the reputation of
devout, and then their zeal would easily take fire for persecution,
and withal put a respect and credit upon it; for who would readily
suspect that to be evil or Satan’s design, which is carried on by
such instruments? Besides, if he at any time intends to blemish the
good ways of God by the miscarriages of professors, he fetcheth his
arrow out of this quiver usually; if he brings a refined hypocrite to
a scandalous sin, then doth the mouth of wickedness open itself to
blaspheme ‘the generation of the just,’ as if none were better. Such
agents could not be so commonly at hand for such a service, if Satan
did not in the ways aforementioned seem to go out of men. (3.) It
is another part of his design, after a pretended departure, to take
the advantage of their security, to return with greater strength
and force. This Christ particularly notes, ‘Then taketh he seven
spirits worse than himself,’ &c. Such, as Peter tells us, being ‘again
entangled, are totally overcome, and their latter end is worse with
them than their beginning,’ 2 Pet. ii. 20. How many might I name, if it
were convenient, that I have known and observed, exactly answering this
description of the apostle, that have for some years left off their
wicked ways, and engaged for a profession of religion; and yet at last
‘have returned like the dog to his own vomit again’! The devil, when he
fights after the Parthian manner—_Terga vertentes metuendi Parthi_—is
most to be feared; when he turns his back, he shoots most envenomed
arrows, and whom he so wounds, he commonly wounds them to the death.

The fourth and last stratagem of Satan for the keeping his possession,
is _to stop the way, to barricade up all passages, that there may be no
possibility of escape or retreat_. When he perceives that his former
ways of policy are not sufficient, but that his slaves and servants are
so far enlightened in the discovery of the danger that they are ready
to turn back from him, then he bestirs himself to oppose their revolt;
and as God sometimes ‘hedgeth up the way’ of sinners with ‘thorns,’
that they should not follow their old lovers, so doth Satan, Hosea ii.
6; to which purpose,

[1.] First, He endeavours to turn them off such resolutions, by
threatening _to reduce them with a strong hand_. Here he boasts and
vaunts of his power and sinners’ weakness; as Rabshakeh did against
Hezekiah, ‘What is that confidence wherein thou trustest? have the gods
of Hamath and Arpad,’ &c., ‘delivered their land out of my hand?’ [2
Kings xviii. 33, 34.] Have those that have gone before you been able to
deliver themselves from me? Have they been able to rescue themselves?
Did I not force those that were stronger than you? Did I not make David
number the people? Did I not overcome him in the matter of Uriah?
Did I not compel Peter to deny his Lord, notwithstanding his solemn
profession to the contrary? And can you think to break away from me so
easily? By this means he would weaken their heart, and enfeeble their
resolutions, that they might sit down under their bondage, as hopeless
ever to recover themselves from his snare: but if these affrightments
hinder not, if, notwithstanding these brags, sinners prepare themselves
to turn from sin to God; then,

[2.] Secondly, He _improves all he can that distance which sin hath
made betwixt God and them_. Sins of ordinary infirmity and common
incursion do not so break the peace of God’s children, as sins of a
higher nature do. Even in the saints themselves, we may observe, after
notorious transgression, (1.) That the acquaintance and familiarity
betwixt God and them is immediately broken. What a speedy alteration is
made! How suddenly are all things changed! God hides himself. The sun
that shined but now, and did afford a very comfortable and cherishing
heat, before we are aware, is now hid in a cloud. Our warmth and
refreshments are turned into cold and chillness. There is also a change
on our part, and that suddenly. As in the resurrection, we shall be
changed ‘in the twinkling of an eye;’ so here, in a moment, our joys
flag and decay, our delights grow dull, our activity is impaired, we
are bound and frozen up, and it is altogether winter with the soul.
(2.) It may be noted, that this begets an enstrangement in us, and we
so carry it as if we had resolved not to renew our league with God; for
though we are not altogether so desperate as to make formal resolutions
of continuing in sin, of casting off God, and bidding an everlasting
farewell to our former acquaintance; though we do not say, We will
now undo ourselves quite, and harden ourselves in our rebellion; yet
sin hath left us in such a maze, and filled us with so many damps
and misgiving thoughts, that we do not think of returning; we are
at a stand, and like a mighty man astonished that cannot find his
hands. We perceive we have lost so much, and have run into such great
unkindnesses, that, like broken merchants, nothing is more irksome and
tedious than to review our ways, or look into our debt-books. Instead
of this, we endeavour to divert our thoughts, to cast off care, as
if we conceived that time would eat it out, and that then of course
we might fall into the old channel of freedom and comfort. (3.) When
we return at last, oh, with what bashfulness and amazedness do we
appear at our next supplications! what blushing, what damps, what
apology! Nay, sometimes as the man without the wedding garment, ‘we are
speechless!’ [Mat. xxii. 12.] How rightly doth such a man resemble the
publican confessing, and the prodigal supplicating. While consulting
what to say for himself, he now begins to feel with what sense and
feeling the prophets and holy men of old used to express themselves
in their confessions, ‘We blush, we are ashamed, astonished, and
confounded.’ This distance sin makes betwixt saints and God sometimes;
but betwixt God and the unconverted it is far greater. Now, when either
an unconverted sinner or a fallen saint puts himself to look to God for
reconciliation, then doth the devil labour to improve this for their
hindrance. That he accuseth us to God, is evident by Satan’s standing
at Joshua’s right hand, Zech. iii. 1. How he accuseth God to us we
know. He tells us it is in vain to seek to make up our peace after
so great provocations; urging that he is ‘a jealous God,’ ‘of pure
eyes,’ highly resenting the affronts we have given him, &c. Nay, he
goes so high this way, that God is put to it in Scripture, of purpose
to furnish us with an answer to these objections, to proclaim that he
is ‘slow to anger,’ ‘not easily provoked;’ that if men return from the
evil of their ways, he will ‘return to them,’ ‘accept,’ and ‘pity’
them, &c.

[3.] Thirdly, If this divert them not, but that they still persist
in their resolves, then he _follows after them with a high hand_;
sometimes, as Pharaoh did with Israel, he grows severe and imperious
with them, and redoubles the tale of their bricks. He forceth them to
higher and more frequent iniquities. Sometimes, as the same Pharaoh,
he musters up all his chariots and horsemen to pursue after them,
and in the highest diligence imaginable he brings forth his greatest
power, besetting them on all sides with temptations and allurements
of pleasures and delight. Where he perceives his time to be short,
and his power shaken, he comes down in resolves to try his utmost
strength. And hence it is that converts complain, that when they begin
in earnest to look after God, they are most troubled with temptations.
Besides this, whatever he can do to make them ‘drive heavily,’ [Exod.
xiv. 25,] shall not be wanting. Sometimes he makes attempts upon their
thoughts and affections, which are as their chariot wheels; and if
these can be knocked off any way, it retards them. Sometimes he casts
stumbling-blocks in their way. If any prejudice may divert them, if
threatenings or penalties can hinder; if the frownings of friends or
anything else can put a stop to their proceedings, he will have them
ready. Sometimes he endeavours to retard them by solicitations of
acquaintance, offers of former occasions and opportunities of sinning,
or whatever else may be as a _remora_ to their intentions.

[4.] Fourthly, But if none of these serve, then, as his last shift, he
_proclaims open war against them, pursues them as enemies and rebels_.
Now he begins to accuse them for that which they did by his advice and
temptation. Now sins that were called little are aggravated. Now that
day of repentance, which he was wont to say was long, he tells them it
is quite spent, that the sun of their hope is set. Nothing now doth he
suggest but hell, damnation, and wrath; he makes them, as it were, see
it, hear it, and feel it in everything. That interest in their hearts
which he dissembled before, now he stands upon and asserts, and will
not be beat off; designing in all this either to make them weary of
these new resolves by this unusual disquietment and hostility, or to
precipitate them upon some desperate undertaking, or at least to avenge
himself upon them, in venting his malice and rage against them; but of
this more afterward.




