CHAPTER V.

 _Satan’s attempts against the peace of God’s children
 evidenced—(1.) By his malice; (2.) From the concernment
 of peace to God’s children; what these concerns are, explained.
 (3.) From the advantages which he hath against them by
 disquieting their minds—1. Confusion of mind; 2.
 Unfitness for duty, and how; 3. Rejection of duty; 4.
 A stumbling-block to others; 5. Preparation of the mind to
 entertain venomous impressions, and what they are; 6. Bodily
 weakness; 7. Our miseries Satan’s contentment._


We have viewed the ways of Satan by which he tempts to sin, by which
he withdraws men from duty and service, by which he corrupts the mind
through error. It only now remains that something be spoken of his
attempts against the peace and comfort of the children of God.

That it is also one of Satan’s chief designs to cheat us of our
spiritual peace, may be fully evinced by a consideration of his malice,
the great concern of inward comfort to us, and the many advantages
which he hath against us by the disquiet of our minds.

1. First, Whosoever shall seriously consider the devil’s _implacable
malice, will easily believe that he so envies our happiness that he
will industriously rise up against all our comforts_. It is his inward
fret and indignation that man hath any interest in that happiness
from which he irrecoverably fell, and that the Spirit of God should
produce in the hearts of his people any spiritual joy or satisfaction
in the belief and expectation of that felicity; and therefore must
it be expected that his malice—heightened by the torment of his
own guilt, which, as some think, are those ‘chains of darkness’ in
which he is reserved at present ‘to the judgment of the great day,’
[2 Peter ii. 4,]—will not, cannot leave this part of our happiness
unattempted. He endeavours to supplant us of our birthright, of our
blessing, of our salvation, and the comfortable hopes thereof. From his
common employment in this matter, the Scripture hath given him names,
importing an opposition to Christ and his Spirit in the ways they take
for our comfort and satisfaction. Christ is our advocate that pleads
for us; Satan is διάβολος, a calumniator. The Spirit intercedes for
us; Satan is κατήγορος τῶν ἀδελφῶν, ‘the accuser of the brethren, who
accuseth them before God night and day,’ Rev. xii. 10. The Spirit is
our comforter; Satan is our disturber, a Beelzebub who is ever raking
in our wounds, as flies upon sores. The apostle Paul had his eye
upon this when he was advising the Corinthians to receive again the
penitent incestuous person; his caution was most serious: 2 Cor. ii.
11, ‘Lest Satan get advantage of us,’ lest he deceive and circumvent
us; for his expression relates to men cunningly deceitful in trade,
that do overreach and defraud the unskilful, πλεονεκτηθῶμεν; and the
reason of this caution was the known and commonly experienced subtlety
of Satan, ‘for we are not ignorant of his devices,’ implying that he
will, and frequently doth lie at catch to take all advantages against
us. Some indeed restrain these advantages to ver. 10,[317] as if
Paul only meant that Satan was designing to fix the Corinthians upon
an opinion, that backsliders into great sins were not to be received
again, or that he laid in wait to raise a schism in the church upon the
account of this Corinthian. Others[318] restrain this advantage which
he waited for to ver. 7, where the apostle expresseth his fear lest the
excommunicated person should ‘be swallowed up of too much sorrow;’ but
the caution being not expressly bound up to any one of these, seems to
point at them all, and to tell us that Satan drives on many designs
at once, and that in this man’s case Satan would endeavour to put the
Corinthians upon a pharisaical rigour, or to rend the church by a
division about him, and to oppress the penitent by bereaving him of his
due comfort; so that it appears still that it is one of his designs to
hinder the comfort and molest the hearts of God’s children.

2. Secondly, Of _such concern is inward spiritual peace to us_, that
it is but an easy conjecture to conclude from thence that so great an
adversary will make it his design to rob us of such a jewel; for,

[1.] Spiritual comfort is the _sweet fruit of holiness_, by which
God adorns and beautifies the ways of religious service, to render
them amiable and pleasant to the undertakers: ‘Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace,’ Prov. iii. 17; and this is
the present ‘rest and refreshment’ of God’s faithful servants under all
their toil, that when they have ‘tribulation from the world,’ yet they
have ‘peace in him,’ John xvi. 33; and that, being ‘justified by faith,
they have peace with God,’ and sometimes ‘joy unspeakable and full of
glory,’ 1 Peter i. 8; and this they may the more confidently expect,
because ‘the fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace,’ &c., Gal. v.
22.

[2.] Spiritual comfort is not only our satisfaction, but our _inward
strength and activity; for all holy services doth depend upon it_. By
this doth God strengthen our heart and gird up our loins ‘to run the
ways of his commandments.’ It doth also strengthen the soul to undergo
afflictions, to glory in tribulations, to triumph in persecutions. The
outward man is also corroborated by the inward peace of the mind: ‘A
merry heart doth good like a medicine, but a broken spirit drieth the
bones,’ Prov. xvii. 22; all which are intended by that expression, Neh.
viii. 10, ‘The joy of the Lord is your strength;’ it is strength to the
body, to the mind, and that both for service and suffering; the reason
whereof the apostle doth hint to us, Phil. iv. 7, ‘The peace of God,
which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds’—that
is, peace doth so guard us as with a garrison, φρουρήσει—for so much
the word imports—that our affections, our hearts, being entertained
with divine satisfactions, are not easily enticed by baser proffers
of worldly delights, and our reasonings, our minds, being kept steady
upon so noble an object, are not so easily perverted to a treacherous
recommendation of vanities.

[3.] Joy and peace are propounded to our careful endeavours, for
attainment and preservation, _as a necessary duty of great importance
to us_. Rejoicings are not only recommended as seemly for the upright,
but enjoined as service, and that in the constant practice: ‘Rejoice
evermore;’ ‘In everything give thanks,’ 1 Thes. v. 16, 18; ‘Rejoice
in the Lord alway; and again I say, rejoice,’ Phil. iv. 4. In the Old
Testament, God commanded the observation of several feasts to the
Jews. These, though they had their several respective grounds from
God’s appointment, yet the general design of all seems to have been
this, that ‘they might rejoice before the Lord their God,’ Lev. xxiii.
40; as if God did thereby tell them that it was the comely complexion
of religion, and that which was very acceptable to himself, that his
children might always serve him in cheerfulness of heart, seeing such
have more cause to rejoice than all the world besides. They are then
much mistaken that think mournful eyes and sad hearts be the greatest
ornaments of religion, or that none are serious in the profession of it
that have a cheerful countenance and a rejoicing frame of spirit. It is
true, there is a joy that is devilish, and a mirth which is madness, to
which Christ hath denounced a woe: ‘Woe be to them that laugh now, for
they shall mourn and weep,’ [Luke vi. 25]; but this is a joy of another
nature, a carnal delight in vanity and sin, by which men fatten their
hearts to ruin; and whatsoever is said against this can be no prejudice
to spiritual, holy joy in God, his favour and ways.

[4.] Spiritual comfort is also _a badge of our heavenly Father’s
kindness_. As Joseph, the son of his father’s affections, had a special
testimony thereof in his parti-coloured coat, so have God’s favourites
a peculiar token of his good-will to them when he gives them ‘the
garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness,’ [Isa. lxi. 7.] If
spiritual comfort be so advantageous to us, it will be no wonder to see
Satan so much rage against it. It would be a satisfaction to him to
tear these robes off us, to impede so needful a duty, to rob us of so
much strength, and to bereave us of the sweet fruits of our labours.

3. Thirdly, It further appears that Satan’s design is against the
comforts of God’s children, _by the many advantages he hath against
them, from the trouble and disquiet of their hearts_. I shall reckon up
the chief of them; as,

[1.] From the trouble of the spirit _he raiseth confusions and
distractions of mind_; for, (1.) It is as natural to trouble to raise
up a swarm of muddy thoughts as to ‘a troubled sea to cast up mire and
dirt;’ and hence is that comparison, Isa. lvii. 20; a thousand fearful
surmises, evil cogitations, resolves, and counsels immediately offer
themselves. This disorder of thoughts Christ took notice of in his
disciples when they were in danger, ‘Why do thoughts arise in your
hearts?’ Luke xxiv. 38. And David considered it as matter of great
anxiety, which called for speedy help: Ps. xciv. 19, ‘In the multitude
of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.’ Sometimes one
fear is suggested, then presently another; now this doubt perplexeth,
then another question is begot by the former; they think to take this
course, then by and by they are off that, and resolve upon another,
and as quickly change again to a third, and so onward, one thought
succeeding another, as vapours from a boiling pot. (2.) Such thoughts
are vexatious and distracting, the very thoughts themselves, being
the poisonous steams of their running sores, are sadly afflictive,
and not unfitly called _cogitationes onerosæ_, burdensome thoughts.
But as they wrap up a man in clouds and darkness, as they puzzle him
in his resolves, nonplus him in his undertakings, distract him in
his counsels, disturb and hinder him in his endeavours, &c., so do
they bring the mind into a labyrinth of confusion. What advantage the
devil hath against a child of God when his heart is thus divided and
broken into shivers, it is easy to imagine. And David seems to be very
sensible of it when he put up that request, Ps. lxxxvi. 11, ‘Unite my
heart to fear thy name.’

[2.] By disquiet of heart the devil _unfits men for duty or service_.
Fitness for duty lies in the orderly temper of body and mind, making a
man willing to undertake, and able to finish his work with comfortable
satisfaction. If either the body or mind be distempered, a man is
unfit for such an undertaking; both must be in a suitable frame, like
a well-tuned instrument, else there will be no melody. Hence, when
David prepared himself for praises and worship, he tells us his ‘heart
was ready and fixed,’ and then ‘his tongue was ready also,’ so was his
hand with psaltery and harp; all these were awakened into a suitable
posture, Ps. xlv. 1, 2, and cviii. 1, 2. That a man is or hath been
in a fit order for service may be concluded from—(1.) His alacrity
to undertake a duty. (2.) His activity in the prosecution. (3.) His
satisfaction afterward, right grounds and principles in these things
being still presupposed. This being laid as a foundation, we shall
easily perceive how the troubles of the spirit do unfit us for duty.
For,

_First_, These do take away all _alacrity and forwardness of the mind,
partly by diverting it from duty_. Sorrows when they prevail do so
fix the mind upon the present trouble, that it can think of nothing
but its burden; they confine the thoughts to the pain and smart, and
make a man forget all other things, as David in his trouble ‘forgot
to eat his bread,’ [Ps. cii. 4]; and sick persons willingly discourse
only of their diseases; partly by indisposing for action. Joy and
hope are active principles, but sorrow is sullen and sluggish. As the
mind in trouble is wholly employed in a contemplation of its misery,
rather than in finding out a way to avoid it, so if it be at leisure
at any time to entertain thoughts of using means for recovery, yet it
is so tired out with its burden, so disheartened by its own fears, so
discouraged with opposition and disappointment, that it hath no list
to undertake anything. By this means the devil brings the soul into
a spiritual catoche,[319] so congealing the spirits, that it is made
stiff and deprived of motion.

_Second_, Disquiets of heart unfit us for duty, _by hindering our
activity in prosecution of duty_. The whole heart, soul, and strength
should be engaged in all religious services, but these troubles are as
clogs and weights to hinder motion. Joy is the dilatation of the soul,
and widens it for anything which it undertakes; but grief contracts the
heart, and narrows all the faculties. Hence doth David beg an ‘enlarged
heart,’ as the principle of activity: Ps. cxix. 32, ‘I will run the way
of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart;’ for what can
else be expected when the mind is so distracted with fear and sorrow,
but that it should be uneven, tottering, weak, and confused? so that
if it do set itself to anything, it acts troublesomely, drives on
heavily, and doth very little with a great deal ado; and yet, were the
unfitness the less, if that little which it can do were well done, but
the mind is so interrupted in its endeavours that sometimes in prayer
the man begins, and then is presently at a stand, and dare not proceed,
his words are ‘swallowed up, he is so troubled that he cannot speak,’
Ps. lxxvii. 4. Sometimes the mind is kept so employed and fixed on
trouble, that it cannot attend in hearing or praying, but presently the
thoughts are called off, and become wandering.

_Third_, Troubles hinder _our satisfaction in duty, and by that means
unfit us to present duties, and indispose us to future services of that
kind_. Our satisfaction in duty ariseth, (1.) Sometimes from its own
lustre and sweetness, the conviction we have of its pleasantness, and
the spiritual advantages to be had thereby; these render it alluring
and attractive, and by such considerations are we invited to their
performance, as Isa. ii. 3, ‘Come ye, let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths.’ Hosea vi. 1, ‘Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he
hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us
up;’ but trouble of spirit draws a black curtain over the excellencies
of duty, and presents us with frightful thoughts about it, so that
we judge of it according to our fears, and make it frightful to
ourselves, as if it would be to no purpose—rather a mischief than an
advantage. (2.) Sometime our satisfaction ariseth from some special
token of favour which our indulgent Father lets fall upon us while we
are in his work, as when he gives us more than ordinary assistance, or
puts joy and comfort into our hearts. And this he often doth to make
us come again, and to engage afresh in the same or other services,
as having ‘tasted and seen that the Lord is gracious,’ [1 Pet. ii.
3,] and that there is a blessedness in waiting for him. As in our
bodies he so orders it that the concocted juices become a successive
ferment to those that succeed from our daily meat and drink: so from
duties performed doth he beget and continue spiritual appetite to new
undertakings. But oh how sadly is all this hindered by the disquiet of
the heart! The graces of faith and love are usually obstructed, if not
in their exercise, yet in their delightful fruits, and if God offer a
kindness, inward sorrow hinders the perception: as when Moses told the
Israelites of their deliverance, ‘they hearkened not for hard bondage,’
[Exod. vi. 9.] If a message of peace present itself in a promise, or
some consideration of God’s merciful disposition, yet usually this is
not credited. Job confesseth so much of himself: Job xix. 16, ‘If I
had called and he had answered me, yet would I not believe that he had
hearkened unto my voice.’ David also doth the like: Ps. lxxvii. 2, 3,
‘My soul refuseth to be comforted; I remembered God, and was troubled.’
Matter of greatest comfort is often so far from giving ease, that it
augments the trouble. However, the heart is so hurried with its fears,
and discomposed with grief, that it cannot hearken to, nor consider,
nor believe any kind offer made to it.

By all these ways doth the devil, through the disquiet of mind, unfit
the Lord’s people for duty; and what a sad advantage this is against us
cannot easily be told. By this means he may widen the distance betwixt
God and us, keep our wounds open, make us a reproach to religion;
and what not? But (3.) By these disquiets he pusheth us on to reject
all duties; for when he hath tired us out by wearisome endeavours,
under so great indispositions and unfitness, he hath a fair advantage
to tempt us to lay all aside. Our present posture doth furnish him
with arguments, he forgeth his javelins upon our anvil, and they are
commonly these three:—

[1.] That duties are _difficult_. And this is easily proved from our
own experience; while we are broken or bowed down with sorrows, we make
many attempts for duty, and are oft beat off with loss; our greatest
toil helps us but to very inconsiderable performances; hence, he
infers, it is foolishness to attempt that which is above our strength,
better sit still than toil for nothing.

[2.] That they are _unfruitful_; and this is our own complaint, for
troubled spirits have commonly great expectations from duties at first,
and they run to them, as the impotent and sick people to the pool of
Bethesda, with thoughts of immediate ease as soon as they shall step
into them; but when they have tried, and waited a while, stretching
themselves upon duty, as Elisha’s servant laid the staff upon the
face of the Shunammite’s son, and yet there is no voice nor hearing,
no answer from God, no peace, then are they presently dissatisfied,
reflecting on the promises of God and the counsels of good men, with
this, Where is all the pleasantness you speak of? what advantage is it
that we have thus run and laboured, when we have got nothing? And then
it is easy for the devil to add, And why do you wait on the Lord any
longer?

[3.] His last and most dangerous argument is, that they are _sinful_.
Unfitness for duty produceth many distractions, much deadness,
wandering thoughts, great interruptions, and pitiful performances.
Hence the troubled soul comes off from duty wounded and halting,
more distressed when he hath done than when he began; upon these
considerations, that all his service was sin, a mocking of God, a
taking his name in vain, nay, a very blasphemous affront to a divine
majesty. Upon this the devil starts the question to his heart, Whether
it be not better to forbear all duty, and to do nothing? Thus doth
Satan improve the trouble of the mind, and often with the designed
success. For a dejected spirit doth not only afford the materials of
these weapons which the devil frames against it, but is much prepared
to receive them into its own bowels. The grounds of these arguments
it grants, and the inferences are commonly consented to, so that
ordinarily duty is neglected, either, 1. Through sottishness of heart;
or, 2. Through frightful fears; or, 3. Through desperateness; bringing
a man to the very precipice of that atheistical determination, ‘I have
cleansed my hands in vain,’ [Ps. lxxiii. 13.]

_Fourth_, Satan makes use of the troubles of God’s children as a
_stumbling-block to others_. It is no small advantage to him, that he
hath hereby an occasion to render the ways of God unlovely to those
that are beginning to look heavenward; he sets before them the sighs,
groans, complaints, and restless outcries of the wounded in spirit, to
scare them off from all seriousness in religion, and whispers this to
them, ‘Will you choose a life of bitterness and sorrow? can you eat
ashes for bread, and mingle your drink with tears? will you exchange
the comforts and contents of life for a melancholy heart and a dejected
countenance? how like you to go mourning all the day, and at night to
be scared with dreams and terrified with visions? will you choose a
life that is worse than death, and a condition which will make you a
terror to yourselves and a burden to others? can you be in love with
a heart loaden with grief, and perpetual fears almost to distraction,
while you see others in the meantime enjoy themselves in a contented
peace? Thus he follows young beginners with his suggestions, making
them believe that they cannot be serious in religion, but at last they
will be brought to this, and that it is a very dangerous thing to be
religious overmuch, and the highway to despair; so that if they must
have a religion, he readily directs them to use no more of it than
may consist with the pleasures of sin and the world, and to make an
easy business of it, not to let sin lie over-near their heart, lest it
disquiet them; nor overmuch to concern themselves with study, reading,
prayer, or hearing of threatening, awakening sermons, lest it make them
mad; nor to affect the sublimities of communion with God, exercises of
faith and divine love, lest it discompose them and dash their worldly
jollities out of countenance. A counsel that is readily enough embraced
by those that are almost persuaded to be Christians; and the more to
confirm them in it, he sticks not sometime to asperse the poor troubled
soul with dissimulation—where that accusation is proper, for the devil
cares not how inconsistent he be with himself, so that he may but
gain his end—affirming all his seriousness to be nothing but whining
hypocrisy. So that whether they judge these troubles to be real or
feigned, his conclusion is the same, and he persuades men thereby to
hold off from all religious strictness, holy diligence, and careful
watchfulness.

_Fifth_, A further use which the devil makes of these troubles of
spirit is, _to prepare the hearts of men thereby to give entertainment
to his venomous impressions_. Distress of heart usually opens the door
to Satan, and lays a man naked, without armour or defence, as a fair
mark for all his poisoned arrows; and it is a hundred to one but some
of them do hit. I shall choose out some of the most remarkable, and
they are these:—

[1.] _After long acquaintance with grief he labours to fix them in it._
In some cases custom doth alleviate higher griefs, and men take an odd
kind of delight in them; _Est quædam etiam dolendi voluptas_. It is
some pleasure to complain, and men settle themselves in such a course,
their finger is ever upon their sore, and they go about telling their
sorrows to all they converse with—though to some this is a necessity,
for real sorrows, if they be not too great for vent, will constrain
them to speak—yet in some that have been formerly acquainted with
grief, it degenerates at last into a formality of complaining; and
because they formerly had cause so to do, they think they must always
do so. But besides this, Satan doth endeavour to chain men to their
mourning upon two higher accounts[320]: 1. By a delusive contentment
in sorrow, as if our tears paid some part of our debt to God, and made
amends for the injuries done to him. 2. By an obstinate sullenness and
desperate resolvedness they harden themselves in sorrow, and say as
Job, chap. vii. 11, ‘I will not refrain my mouth, I will speak in the
anguish of my spirit, I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. Am
I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me?’

[2.] Another impression that men’s hearts are apt to take, is,
_unthankfulness for the favours formerly bestowed upon them_. Their
present troubles blot out the memory of old kindnesses. They conclude
they have nothing at all, because they have not peace. Though God
heretofore hath sent down from on high, and taken them out of the
great waters, or out of the mire and clay where they were ready to
sink; though he hath sent them many tokens of love, conferred on them
many blessings; yet all these are no more to them, so long as their
sorrows continue, than Haman’s wealth and honour was to him, so long as
Mordecai the Jew sat at the king’s gate. Thus the devil oft prevails
with God’s children, to deal with God as some unthankful persons deal
with their benefactors; who, if they be not humoured in every request,
deny the reality of their love, and despise with great ingratitude all
that was done for them before.

[3.] By inward griefs, the heart of the afflicted are prepared to
entertain _the worst interpretation that the devil can put upon the
providences of God_. The various instances of Scripture, and the
gracious promises made to those that ‘walk in darkness and see no
light,’ do abundantly forewarn men from making bad conclusions of
God’s dealings, and do tell us that God in design, for our trial and
for our profit, doth often hide his face ‘for a moment,’ when yet his
purpose is to ‘bind us up with everlasting compassions.’ Now the devil
labours to improve the sorrows of the mind to give a quite contrary
construction. If they are afflicted, instead of saying, ‘Sorrow may
endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning,’ [Ps. xxx. 5,]
or that ‘for a little while God hath hidden himself,’ he puts them to
say, ‘this darkness shall never pass away.’ If the grief be little,
he drives them on to a fearful expectation of worse; as he did with
Hezekiah, Isa. xxxviii. 13, ‘I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion,
so will he break all my bones; from day even to night wilt thou make
an end of me.’ If God purpose to teach us by inward sorrows our pride
of heart, carelessness, neglect of dependence upon him, the bitterness
of sin, or the like, the devil will make us believe, and we are too
ready to subscribe to him, that God proclaims open war against us,
and resolves never to own us more. So did Job, chap. xix. 6, ‘Know
now that God hath overthrown me, and compassed me with his net;’ how
often complained he, ‘thou hast made me as thy mark, thou hast broken
me asunder, thou hast taken me by my neck and shaken me to pieces’! So
also Heman, Ps. lxxxviii. 14, ‘Why castest thou off my soul? why hidest
thou thy face from me?’

[4.] Upon this occasion the devil is ready to envenom the soul _with
sinful wishes and execrations against itself_. Eminent saints have
been tempted in their trouble to say too much this way. Job solemnly
cursed his day: Job iii. 3, ‘Let the day perish wherein I was born,
and the night in which it was said, There is a man-child conceived,’
&c. So also Jeremiah, chap. xx. 14, ‘Cursed be the day wherein I was
born: let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed. Cursed be
the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, A man-child is born
unto thee; and let that man be as the cities which God overthrew, and
repented not.’ Strange rashness! what had the day deserved? or wherein
was the messenger to be blamed? Violent passions hurried him beyond all
bounds of reason and moderation. When troubles within are violent, a
small push sets men forward; and when once they begin, they are carried
headlong beyond what they first intended.

[5.] On this advantage the devil sometimes emboldens them to _quarrel
God himself directly_. When Job and Jeremiah cursed their day, it was
a contumely against God indirectly; but they durst not make bold with
God at so high a rate as to quarrel him to his face. Yet even this are
men brought to often when their sorrows are long-lasting and deep. The
devil suggests, Can God be faithful, and never keep promise for help?
can he be merciful, when he turns away his ears from the cry of the
miserable? where is his pity, when he multiplies his wounds without
cause? Though at first these cursed intimations do a little startle
men, yet when by frequent inculcating they grow more familiar to the
heart, the distressed break out in their rage with those exclamations,
Where is the faithfulness of God? where are his promises? hath he not
forgotten to be gracious? are not his mercies clean gone? And at last
it may be Satan leads them a step higher, that is—

[6.] _To a despairing desperateness._ For when all passages of relief
are stopped up, and the burden becomes great, men are apt to be drawn
into rage and fury when they think their burden is greater than
they can bear, and see no hope of ease; in a kind of revenge they
express their anger against the hand that wounded them. The devil is
officiously ready with his advice of ‘Curse God and die,’ [Job. ii. 9,]
and they, being full of anguish, are quickly made to comply with it.

[7.] When it is at this height, the devil hath but one stage more, and
that is the suggesting of _irregular means for ease_. Rage against
God doth not quench the inward burning, blasphemies against heaven
easeth not the pain, the sore runs still and ceaseth not, the trouble
continues, the man cannot endure it longer, all patience and hope is
gone. What shall he do in this case? The devil offers his service; he
will be the physician, and commonly he prescribes one of these two
things: (1.) That it is best to endeavour to break through all this
trouble into a resolved profaneness; not to stand in awe of laws, not
to believe that there is a God that governs in the earth, but that this
is only the bitter fruit of melancholy and unnecessary seriousness, and
therefore it is best ‘to eat, drink, and be merry,’ If a man can thus
escape out of his trouble, the devil needs no more; but oft he cannot,
the wounds of conscience will not be thus healed. Then, (2.) He hath
another remedy, which will not fail, as he tells them, that is, to
‘destroy themselves,’ to end their troubles with their lives. How open
are the breasts of troubled creatures to all these darts! and were it
not that God secretly steps in and holds the afflicted with his right
hand, it is scarce imaginable but that wounded consciences should by
Satan’s subtle improvement of so fair an advantage be brought to all
this misery.

[8.] Satan can afflict the _body by the mind_. For these two are
so closely bound together that their good and bad estate is shared
betwixt them. If the heart be merry the countenance is cheerful, the
strength is renewed, the bones do flourish like an herb. If the heart
be troubled the health is impaired, the strength is dried up, the
marrow of the bones wasted, &c. Grief in the heart is like a moth in
the garment, it insensibly consumeth the body and disordereth it. This
advantage of weakening the body falls into Satan’s hands by necessary
consequence, as the prophet’s ripe figs, that fell into the mouth of
the eater. And surely he is well pleased with it, as he is an enemy
both to body and soul. But it is a greater satisfaction to him in
that as he can make the sorrows of the mind produce the weakness and
sickness of the body, so can he make the distemper of the body, by a
reciprocal requital, to augment the trouble of the mind. How little can
a sickly body do! It disables a man for all services; he cannot oft
pray, nor read, nor hear; sickness takes away the sweetness and comfort
of religious exercises. This gives occasion for them to think the worse
of themselves. They think the soul is weary of the ways of God, when
the body cannot hold out. All failures which weariness and faintness
produce are ascribed presently to the bad disposition of the mind, and
this is like oil cast upon the flame. Thus the devil makes a double
gain out of spiritual trouble.

[9.] Let it be also reckoned among the advantages which Satan hath
against men from trouble of spirit, that it is _a contentment to him to
see them in their miseries_. It is a sport to him to see them, as Job
speaks, take their flesh in their teeth, and cry out in the bitterness
of their souls, [Job. xiii. 14.] Their groanings are his music. When
they wallow in ashes, drown themselves in tears, roar till their throat
is dry, spread out their hands for help, then he gluts his heart in
looking upon their woes. When they fall upon God with their unjust
surmises, evil interpretations of providence, questioning his favour,
denying his grace, wishing they had never been born, then he claps his
hands and shouts a victory. The pleasantest sight to him is to see
God hiding himself from his child, and that child broken with fears,
torn in pieces with griefs, made a brother to dragons, a companion to
owls, under restless anxieties, perpetual lamentations, feeble and
sore broken, their strength dried like a potsherd, their throat dry,
their tongue cleaving to their jaws, their bowels boiling, their bones
burnt with heat, their skin black upon them, their flesh consumed,
their bones sticking out, chastened with strong pain upon their bed.
This is one of Satan’s delightful spectacles, and for these ends doth
he all he can to bereave them of their comfort, which we may the more
certainly persuade ourselves to be true, when we consider the grounds
forementioned, his malicious nature, the advantages of spiritual peace,
and the disadvantages of spiritual trouble.




