CHAPTER XIV.

 _Of Satan’s maintaining his possession.—His first engine for
 that purpose is his finishing of sin, in its reiteration and
 aggravation.—His policies herein._


Having explained the five ways by which Satan through the power of lust
causeth blindness of mind in tempting to sin, I shall next lay open
Satan’s devices for the _keeping and maintaining his possession_, which
are these:—

1. First, He endeavours, after he hath prevailed with any man to commit
an iniquity, _to finish sin_: James i. 15, ‘After if is conceived
and brought forth, then it is finished;’ which notes its growth and
increase. This compriseth these two things, its reiteration and its
aggravation.

(1.) First, Its _reiteration_ is, when by frequent acts it is
strengthened and confirmed into a habit. There are various steps,
by which men ascend into the seat of the scornful. _Nemo repentè
turpissimus_, It is not one act that doth denominate men ‘wise to do
evil.’ In Ps. i. 1 _seq._, David shews there are gradations and degrees
of sin: some walk in the counsel of the ungodly; some by progress and
continuance of sin ‘stand in the way of sinners;’ some, by a hardness
of heart and fixedness in wicked purposes, ‘sit in the seat of the
scornful.’ To this height doth he labour to bring his proselytes; yet
he further designs,

(2.) Secondly, That sin may have its utmost accomplishments in _all
the aggravations whereof it may be capable_. He strives to put men
upon such a course of sinning as may be most scandalous to the gospel,
most ensnaring and offensive to others, most hardening and desperate
to ourselves, most offensive and provoking to God. In this he imitates
the counsel of Ahithophel to Absalom, when he advised him to go in
unto his father’s concubines in the sight of all Israel, that so the
breach betwixt him and his father might be widened to an impossibility
of reconciliation. Thus he labours that sinners should act at such a
rate of open defiance against heaven, as if they resolved to lie down
in their iniquity, and were purposed never to think of returning and
making up their peace with God. That sin may be finished in both these
respects, he useth these policies:—

[1.] First, _After sin is once committed, he renews his motions and
solicitations to act it again, and then again, and so onward till they
be perfect and habituated to it_. In this case he acts over again
the former method by which he first ensnared them, only with such
alterations as the present case doth necessitate him unto. Before,
he urged for the committing of it but once. How little is he to be
trusted in these promises! Now, he urgeth them by the very act they
have already done, Is it not a pleasant or profitable sin, to thy
very experience? hast thou not tasted and seen? hast thou not already
consented? Taste and try again, and yet further; withdraw not thy
hand. A little temptation served before, but a less serves now; for
by yielding to the first temptation our hearts are secretly inclined
to the sin, and we carry a greater affection to it than before; for
this is the stain and defilement of sin, that when once committed it
leaves impressions of delight and love behind, which are still the more
augmented by a further progress and frequent commission, till at last
by a strong power of fascination it bewitches men that they cannot
forbear; all the entreaties of friends, all their own promises, all
their resolves and purposes, though never so strong and serious, except
God strike in to rescue by an omnipotent hand, can no more restrain
them than fetters of straw can hold a giant. God himself owns it as
a natural impossibility, ‘Can the Ethiopian change his skin? no more
can ye do good,’ [Jer. xiii. 23;] and the reason of that impossibility
is from hence, that they are ‘accustomed to do evil.’ Such strong and
powerful inclinations to the same sin again are begot in us by a sin
already committed, that sometime one act of sin fills some men with as
vehement and passionate desires for a further enjoyment, as custom and
continuance doth others. Austin reports that Alypius, when once he gave
way to the temptation of beholding the gladiators, was bewitched with
such a delight, that he not only desired to come again with others, but
also before others. Neither is it any great wonder it should be so,
when, besides the inclinations that are begot in us by any act of sin
to recommit it, sin puts us out of God’s protection, debilitates and
weakens our graces, strengthens Satan’s arm, and often procures him
further power and commission against us.

[2.] Secondly, Satan endeavours _to make one sin an engagement to
another, and to force men to draw iniquity with cords of vanity_.
Agur notes a concatenation in sins, ‘Lest I steal, and take the name
of God in vain,’ Prov. xxx. 9. Adam sinning in the forbidden fruit,
and proclaimed guilty by his conscience, runs into another sin for
the excuse of the former, ‘the woman that thou gavest me,’ &c. David
affords a sad instance of this, the sin with Bathsheba being committed,
and she with child upon it, David to hide the shame of his offence,
(1.) Hypocritically pretends great kindness to Uriah. (2.) When that
served not, next he makes him drunk, and, it may be, he involved many
others in that sin as accessories. (3.) When this course failed, his
heart conceives a purpose and resolution to murder him. (4.) He cruelly
makes him the messenger of his own destruction. (5.) He engageth Joab
in it. (6.) And the death of many of his soldiers. (7.) By this puts
the whole army upon a hazard. (8.) Excuseth the bloody contrivance by
providence. (9.) In all using still the height of dissimulation. Satan
knows how natural it is for men to hide the shame of their iniquity,
and accordingly provides occasions and provocations to drive them on to
a kind of necessity.

[3.] Thirdly, _By a perverse representation of the state of godly
and wicked men_, he draws on sin to a higher completement. How often
doth he set before us the misery, affliction, contempt, crosses,
and sadnesses of the one, and the jollity, delights, plenty, peace,
honours, and power of the other! It was a temptation that had almost
brought David to an atheistical resolve against all religious duty, and
that which he observed had prevailed altogether with many professors,
Ps. lxxiii. When they observed ‘they were not in trouble like other
men,’ and that their mouth and tongue had been insolent against God,
without any rebuke or check from him; when in the meantime the godly
were ‘plagued all the day, and chastened every morning:’ some that
were, in profession or estimation at least, God’s people, returned to
take up these thoughts, and to resolve upon such practices, ver. 10;
as if God, who sees all these with so much silence, must be supposed
knowingly to give some countenance to such actions. This, indeed, when
it is prosecuted upon our hearts in its full strength with those ugly
surmises, jealousies, and misapprehensions that are wont to accompany
it, is a sad step to a desperate neglect of duty and a carelessness in
sinning, in that it insensibly introduceth atheistical impressions upon
the hearts of men, and such are apt to catch hold even upon good men,
who are but too ready to say as David, ‘I have cleansed my hands in
vain,’ [ver. 13.]

[4.] Fourthly, Satan hath yet another piece of policy for the
multiplication and aggravation of sin, which is _the enmity and
opposition of the law_. Of this the apostle Paul sadly complains
from his own experience: Rom. vii. 8, ‘Sin taking occasion by the
commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence.’ What he
laments is this, that such is the perverseness of our natures, that
the law, instead of restraining us, doth the more enrage us, so that
accidentally the law doth multiply sin; for when the restraint of the
law is before us, lust burns not only more inwardly, but when it cannot
be kept in and smothered, then it breaks out with greater violence,
‘Let us break their bonds asunder,’ &c., [Ps. ii. 3.] When the law
condemns our lusts, they grow surly and desperate: ‘Let us eat and
drink, for to-morrow we die,’ &c., [Isa. xxii. 13.] If any wonder that
the law, which was given of purpose to repress sin, and which is of so
great use in its authority to kill it in us, and to hinder temptations,
should thus be used by Satan to increase and enrage it, they may
consider that it is but still an accidental occasion, and not a cause,
and sin takes this occasion without any fault of the law. Satan to
this end watcheth the time[195] when our hearts are most earnestly set
upon our lusts, when our desires are most highly engaged, and then by
a subtle art so opposeth the law, letting in its contradictions in way
and measure suitable, that our hearts conceive a grudge at restraint,
which together with its earnestness to satisfy the flesh, ariseth up
to a furious madness, and violent striving to maintain a liberty and
freedom to do according to the desires of their heart; whereas this
same law, if it be applied to the heart when it is more cooled and
not so highly engaged upon a design of lust, will break, terrify, and
restrain the heart, and put such a damp upon temptations that they
shall not be able to stand before it. So great a difference is there
in the various seasons of the application of this law; in which art
for the enflaming of the heart to iniquity, Satan shews a wonderful
dexterity.




