CHAPTER XIII.

 _Of Satan’s diverting our reason, being the third way of blinding
 men.—His policies for diverting our thoughts.—His attempts to
 that purpose in a more direct manner; with the degrees of that
 procedure.—Of disturbing or distracting our reason, which is Satan’s
 fourth way of blinding men.—His deceits therein.—Of precipitancy,
 Satan’s fifth way of blinding men.—Several deceits to bring men to
 that._


III. Thirdly, Satan blinds the sons of men by _diverting and
withdrawing their reason_, and taking it off from the pursuit of its
discovery or apprehensions. For sometime it cannot be induced to go
so contrary to its light as to call evil good, either directly or
indirectly. Then is Satan put to a new piece of policy, and if the
frame of the heart and the matter of the temptation suit his design,
he endeavours to turn the stream of our thoughts either wholly another
way, or to still them by turning them into a dead sea, or by some trick
to beguile the understanding with some new dress of the temptation. So
that we may observe in Satan a threefold policy in a subserviency to
this design. For,

1. First, _Satan sometimes ceaseth his pursuit and lets the matter
fall, and thinks it better to change the temptation than to continue
a solicitation at so great a disadvantage_. When he tempted Christ
and could not prevail, he ‘departed for a season,’ Luke iv. 13, with
a purpose to return at some fitter time, which Christ himself was
in expectation of, knowing it to be his manner to lie in wait for
advantages; and accordingly when his suffering drew nigh, which, as
he speaks to the Jews, was ‘their hour and power of darkness,’ Luke
xxii. 53, he foretold his return upon him, ‘Now the prince of this
world cometh.’ However this attempt of his against the Lord Jesus
prevailed not, yet he shewed his art and skill in the suspending of his
temptation to a more suitable time. And the success of this against us
is sadly remarkable, for however we resist and at present stand out,
yet his solicitations are often like leaven, which while it is hid in
our thoughts, doth not a little ferment and change them, so that at his
return he often finds our lusts prepared to raise greater clouds upon
our mind. Many there are that resist strongly at present that which
they easily slide into when Satan hath given them time to breathe; that
say, ‘I will not,’ and yet ‘do it afterwards,’ [Mat. xxi. 29.]

2. Secondly, He sometimes withdraws their considerations, by _huffing
them up with a confidence that they are above the temptation_; as a
conquest in a small skirmish, begetting an opinion of victory, makes
way for a total overthrow over a careless and secure army. We are
too apt to triumph over temptations because we give the first onset
with courage and resolution. Christ forewarned Peter of his denial;
he stoutly defies it, and not improving this advertisement to fear
and watchfulness, Satan, who then was upon a design to sift him, took
him at that advantage of security, and by a contemptible instrument
overthrew him. Thus while we grow strong in our apprehensions by a
denial of a sin, and undervalue it as below us, our confidence makes us
careless, and this lets in our ruin.

3. Thirdly, If these ways of policy fail him, he _seemingly complies
with us, and is content we judge the matter sinful, but then he
proffers his service to bring us off by distinctions_; and here the
sophister useth his skill to further our understanding in framing
excuses, coining evasions, and so doth out-shoot us in our own bow.
The Corinthians had learnt to distinguish betwixt eating of meat in an
idol’s temple in honour to the idol, and as a common feast in civility
and respect to their friends that invited them. This presently withdrew
their consideration, and so quieted them in that course, that the
apostle was forced to discover the fallacy of it. The Israelites cursed
him that gave a wife to any of the tribe of Benjamin; but when they
turned to them in compassion, they satisfied themselves with this poor
distinction, that they would not give them wives, but were willing to
suffer them to take them, Judges xxi. 18, 20. It is a common snare in
matters of promise or oath, where conscience is startled at a direct
violation thereof, by some pitiful salvo or silly evasion to blind the
eyes, and when they dare not break the hedge, to leap over it by the
help of a broken reed.

But I must here further observe, that Satan doth sometimes set
aside these deceits aforementioned, and tries his strength for the
withdrawing of our consideration from the danger of sin in a more plain
and direct manner—that is, by continuing the prospect of the sweets
and pleasures of sin under our eye, and withal urging us by repeated
solicitations to cast the thoughts of the danger behind our back:
in which he so far prevails sometimes, that men are charged with a
deep forgetfulness of God, his law, and of themselves; yet usually it
ariseth to this by degrees. As,

(1.) First, When a temptation is before us, and our conscience _relucts
it_. If there be any inclination to recede from a conviction, the
motion is resisted with a secret regret and sorrow. As the young man
was said to ‘go away sorrowful,’ [Mat. xix. 22,] when Christ propounded
such terms for eternal life as he was not willing to hear of: so do
we; our heart is divided betwixt judgment and affection, and we begin
to wish that it might be lawful to commit such a sin, or that there
were no danger in it; nay, often our wishes contradict our prayers, and
while we desire to be delivered from the temptation, our private wishes
beg a denial to those supplications.

(2.) Secondly, If we come thus far, we usually proceed to the next
step, which is, to _give a dismission to those thoughts that oppose the
sin_. We say to them, as Felix to Paul, ‘Go thy way for this time, and
when I have a convenient opportunity I will send for thee,’ [Acts xxiv.
25.]

(3.) Thirdly, If a plain dismission serve not to repel these thoughts,
we begin to _imprison the truth in unrighteousness_, Rom. i. 18; 2
Peter iii. 5, and by a more peremptory refusal to stifle it and to keep
it under, and become at last willingly ignorant.

(4.) Fourthly, By this means at last the heart grows _sottish and
forgetful_. The heart is ‘taken away,’ as the prophet speaks, and
then do these thoughts of conviction and warning at present perish
together. This withdrawing of our consideration is Satan’s third way
of blinding us. Follows next,

IV. The fourth way by which our lust prevails in Satan’s hand to blind
knowledge, and that is by _distracting and disturbing it in its work_.
This piece of subtlety Satan the rather useth, because it is attended
with a double advantage, and, like a two-edged sword, will cut either
way. For (1.) A confusion and distraction in the understanding will
hinder the even and clear apprehensions of things, so that those
principles of knowledge cannot reach so deep nor be so firm and full
in their application. For as the senses, if any way distracted or
hindered, though never so intent, must needs suffer prejudice in their
operations, a thick air or mist not only hinders the sight of the eye,
but also conduceth to a misrepresentation of objects. Thus is the
understanding hindered by confusion. But (2.) If this succeed not, yet
by this he hinders the peace and comfort of God’s children. It is a
trouble to be haunted with evil thoughts. To work this distraction,

1. First, Satan useth a _clamorous importunity_, and doth so follow us
with suggestions, that what way soever we turn they follow us. We can
think nothing else, or hear nothing else, they are ever before us.

2. Secondly, He worketh this disturbance in our thoughts by _levying a
legion of temptations against us_—many at once, and of several kinds,
from within, from without, on every side. He gathers all, from the Dan
to the Beersheba of his empire, to oppress us with a multitude; so that
while our thoughts are divided about many things, they are less fixed
and observant in any particular.

3. Thirdly, He sometimes endeavours _to weary us out with long
solicitations_: as those that besiege a city, when they cannot storm,
endeavour to waste their strength and provisions by a long siege. His
design in this is to come upon us, as Ahithophel counselled Absalom,
when we are ‘weary and weak-handed’ by watching and long resistance.

4. Fourthly, But his chief design is _to take the advantage of any
trouble, inward or outward_, and by the help of this he dangerously
discomposeth and distracts our counsels and resolves. If any have a
spirit distempered, or lie under the apprehensions of wrath, it is easy
for him to confound and amaze such, that they shall scarce know what
they do or what they think. The like advantage he hath from outward
afflictions, and these opportunities he the rather takes, for these
reasons:—

(1.) First, Usually inward or outward troubles leaves some _stamp of
murmuring and sullenness upon our hearts_, and of themselves distemper
our spirits with a sad inclination to speak ‘in our haste,’ or to
act unadvisedly. Job’s affliction imbittered his spirit, and Satan
misseth not the advantage. Then he comes upon him with temptations, and
prevailed so far that he spake many things in his anguish of which he
was ashamed afterward, and hides his face for it. ‘Once have I spoken,
but I will not answer: yea, twice, but I will proceed no further,’ Job
xl. 5.

(2.) Secondly, By reason of our burden we are _less wieldy and more
unapt to make any resistance_. God himself expresseth the condition of
such, under the similitude of those that are ‘great with young,’ who,
because they cannot be driven fast, he ‘gently leads’ them. But Satan
knows a small matter will discompose them, and herein he deals with us,
as Simeon and Levi dealt with the Shechemites, who set upon them when
they were sore by circumcision.

(3.) Thirdly, _Troubles of themselves occasion confusion, multitudes of
thought, distractions, and inadvertencies_. If men see a hazard before
them they are presently at their wits’ end, they are puzzled, they know
not what to do—thoughts are divided, now resolving this, then presently
changing to a contrary purpose. It is seldom but ‘as in a multitude
of words there is much folly,’ Prov. x. 19, so in a distraction of
thoughts there are many miscarriages, and Satan with a little labour
can improve them to more. Here he works unseen; in these troubled
waters he loves to angle, because his baits are not discerned.

V. Fifthly, Our considerations and reasonings against sin are hindered
by _a bold forward precipitancy_. When men are hasted and pressed to
the committing of sin, and like the ‘deaf adder stop their ears against
the voice of the charmer,’ [Ps. lviii. 4;] in this case, the rebellious
will is like a furious horse, that takes the bridle in his teeth, and
instead of submitting to the government of his rider, he carries him
violently whither he would not. Thus do men rush into sin, as the horse
into the battle. The devices by which Satan doth forward this, we may
observe to be these, among others:—

1. First, He endeavours _to affright men into a hopelessness of
prevailing against him_, and so intimidates men that they throw down
their weapons, and yield up themselves to the temptation; they conclude
there is no hope by all their resistance to stand it out against him,
and then they are easily persuaded to comply with him. To help this
forward, Satan useth the policy of soldiers, who usually boast high of
their strength and resolutions, that, the hearts and courage of their
adversaries failing, the victory may fall to them without stroke. The
devil expresseth a disdain and scorn of our weak opposition, as Goliath
did of David, ‘Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? Dost
thou think to stand it out against me? It is in vain to buckle on thine
armour, and therefore better were it to save the trouble of striving
than to fight to no purpose.’ With such like arguings as these are men
sometimes prevailed with to throw down their weapons, and to overrun
their reason through fear and hopelessness.

2. Secondly, Sometimes he is more subtle, and _by threaping[192] men
down, that they have consented already, he puts them upon desperate
adventures of going forward_. This is usually where Satan hath used
many solicitations before, after our hearts have been urged strongly
with a temptation. When he sees he cannot win us over to him, then he
triumphs and boasts we are conquered already, and that our thoughts
could not have dwelt so long upon such a subject but that we had a
liking to it, and thence would persuade us to go on and enjoy the
fulness of that delight which we have already stolen privately: over
shoes, over boots. Now though his arguings here be very weak—for though
it be granted that by the stay of the temptation on our thoughts he
hath a little entangled us, it cannot hence be inferred that it is our
wisdom to entangle ourselves further—yet are many overcome herewith,
and give up themselves as already conquered, and so give a stop to any
further consideration.

3. Thirdly, When men will not be trepanned into the snare by the former
delusions, he attempts to work them up _to a sudden and hasty resolve
of sinning_; he prepares all the materials of the sin, puts everything
in order, and then carries us, as he did Christ, into the mountain, to
give us a prospect of their beauty and glory: ‘All these,’ saith he,
‘will I give thee,’ [Mat. iv. 9;] do but consent, and all are thine.
Now albeit there are arguments at hand, and serious considerations to
deter us from practice, yet how are all laid aside by a quick resolve!
Satan urgeth us by violent hurry, as Christ said to Judas, ‘What thou
hast to do, do it quickly,’ [John xiii. 27.] The soul, persuaded with
this, puts on a sudden boldness and resolution, and when reason doth
offer to interpose, it holds fast the door, because the ‘sound of
its master’s feet is behind it,’ [2 Kings vi. 32.] Doth it not say
to itself, ‘Come, we will not consider, let us do it quickly, before
these lively considerations come in to hinder us’? It is loath to be
restrained, and conceiteth that if it can be done before conscience
awaken and make a noise, all is well; as if sin ceased to be sinful
because we by a violent haste endeavoured to prevent the admonition
of conscience. Thus they enjoy their sin, as the Israelites ate their
passover, ‘in haste, and with their staves in their hands,’ [Exod. xii.
11.]

4. Fourthly, _When opportunities and occasions will well suit it_. He
takes the advantage of a passionate and sullen humour, and by this
means he turns us clearly out of our bias; reason is trampled under
foot, and passion quite overruns it. At this disadvantage the devil
takes Jonah, and hardens him to a strange resolve of quarrelling God,
and justifying himself in that insolency. The humour that Satan wrought
upon was his fretful sullenness, raised up to a great height by the
disappointment of his expectation; and this makes him break out into
a choleric resolution, ‘I do well to be angry,’ [Jonah iv. 9.] Had
he been composed in his spirit, had his mind been calm and sedate,
the devil surely could not by any arguments have drawn him up to it;
but when the spirit is in a rage, a little matter will bind reason in
chains, and push a man upon a desperate carelessness of any danger that
may follow; suitable to that expression of Job, chap xiii. 13, ‘Let me
alone, that I may speak, and let come on me what will.’

5. Fifthly, All these are but small in comparison of those _deliberate
determinations which are to be found with most sinners_, who are
therefore said to sin with a high hand, presumptuously, wilfuly,
against conscience, against knowledge; and this ordinarily to be found
only among those whom a custom of sin hath hardened and confirmed into
a boldness of a wicked way and course. When the spirits of men are thus
harnessed and prepared, Satan can, at pleasure almost, form them into
a deliberate resolve to cast the commandment behind their back, and to
refuse to hearken. When any temptation is offered them, if God say,
‘Ask for the old paths, and walk therein,’ as Jer. vi. 16, they will
readily answer, ‘We will not walk therein.’ If God say, ‘Hearken to the
sound of the trumpet,’ they will reply, ‘We will not hearken.’ When
the people by a course of sinning had made themselves like the wild ass
used to the wilderness, then did they peremptorily set up their will
against all the reason and consideration that could come in to deter
them, though they were told the inconveniences, Jer. ii. 25; that this
did unshoe their foot, and afflicted them with thirst and want, yet
was the advice slighted. ‘There is no hope,’ said they; there is no
expectation that we will take any notice of these pleadings, for we
have fixed our resolve, ‘We have loved strangers, and after them will
we go.’ So Jer. xliv. 16, ‘As for the word that thou hast spoken unto
us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but we will
certainly do whatsoever thing goeth out of our own mouth.’ A plain and
full resolve of will dischargeth all the powers of reason, and commands
it silence. And that this is most ordinary among men, may appear by
these frequent expressions of Scripture, wherein God lays the blame
of all that madness which their lives bring forth upon their will,
‘Ye would not obey,’ ‘ye will not come to me’; ‘their heart is set to
do evil,’ &c. It may indeed seem strange that Satan should proceed
so far with the generality of men, and that they should do that that
should seem so inconsistent with those principles which they retain,
and the light which must result from thence; but we must remember that
these _wills_ and _shalls_ of wicked men are for the most part God’s
interpretation of their acts and carriage, which speaks as much, though
it may be their minds and hearts do not so formally mould up their
thoughts into such open and brazen-faced assertions. And yet we ought
also further to consider, that when the Spirit of God chargeth man with
wilfulness, there is surely more of a formal wilfulness in the heart of
man than lieth open to our view. And this will be less strange to us
when we call to mind,

6. Sixthly, That through the working of Satan _the minds of men
are darkened, and the light thereof put out by the prevalency of
atheistical principles_.[193] Something of atheism is by most divines
concluded to be in every sin, and according to the height of it in its
various degrees, is reason and consideration overturned. There are, it
may be, few that are professed atheists in opinion, and dogmatically
so, but all wicked men are so in practice. Though they profess God,
yet ‘the fool saith in his heart, There is no God,’ [Ps. liii. 1,] and
in ‘their works they deny him,’ [Titus i. 16.] This is a principle
that directly strikes at the root: for if there be no God, no hell or
punishment, who will be scared from taking his delight in sin by any
such consideration? The devil, therefore, strives to instil this poison
with his temptation. When he enticed Eve by secret insinuations, he
first questions the truth of the threatening, and then proceeds to an
open denial of it, ‘ye shall not surely die;’ and it is plain she was
induced to the sin upon a secret disbelief of the danger. She reckons
up the advantages, ‘good for food, pleasant to the eye, to be desired
to make one wise;’ wherein it is evident she believed what Satan had
affirmed, ‘that they should be as God,’ and then it was not to be
feared that they should die. This kind of atheism is common. Men may
not disbelieve a Godhead; nay, they may believe there is a God, and yet
question the truth of his threatenings. Those conceits that men have
of God, whereby they mould and frame him in their fancies, suitable to
their humours—which is a ‘thinking that he is such a one as ourselves,’
Ps. 1.—are streams[194] and vapours from this pit, and ‘the hearts of
the sons of men are desperately set within them to do evil,’ upon these
grounds; much more when they arise so high as in some who say, ‘Doth
God know? Is there knowledge in the Most High?’ [Ps. lxxiii. 11.] If
men give way to this, what reason can be imagined to stand before them?
All the comminations of Scripture are derided as so many theological
scarecrows, and undervalued as so many pitiful contrivances to keep men
in awe.




