
Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation, spelling accents and punctuation remain unchanged.

Footnotes are located at the end of the book.

Italics are represented thus _italic_ and superscripts thus y^e.




                 NICHOL’S SERIES OF STANDARD DIVINES.

                            PURITAN PERIOD.


                         With General Preface


                       BY JOHN C. MILLER, D.D.,
  LINCOLN COLLEGE; HONORARY CANON OF WORCESTER; RECTOR OF GREENWICH.


                          DÆMONOLOGIA SACRA;

                                  OR,

                  A TREATISE OF SATAN’S TEMPTATIONS.


                                  BY
                         RICHARD GILPIN, M.D.




COUNCIL OF PUBLICATION.


 W. LINDSAY ALEXANDER, D.D., Professor of Theology, Congregational
 Union, Edinburgh.

 JAMES BEGG, D.D., Minister of Newington Free Church, Edinburgh.

 THOMAS J. CRAWFORD, D.D., S.T.P., Professor of Divinity, University,
 Edinburgh.

 D. T. K. DRUMMOND, M.A., Minister of St Thomas’s Episcopal Church,
 Edinburgh.

 WILLIAM H. GOOLD, D.D., Professor of Biblical Literature and Church
 History, Reformed Presbyterian Church, Edinburgh.

 ANDREW THOMSON, D.D., Minister of Broughton Place United Presbyterian
 Church, Edinburgh.


                            General Editor.
                  REV. THOMAS SMITH, D.D., EDINBURGH.




[Illustration: Portrait of Richard Gilpin with handwritten note as
               follows.

 _it was only my design to endeavour a more full discovery, though
 every way short of the thing itself, of Satan’s Craft, because ye
 knowledge of this is so necessary, & withall others have done it more
 sparingly. Such as it is accept & improve for thy spiritual advantage
 for that was ye end of this undertaking, by him who desires that thy
 soul may prosper._

  _Rich: Gilpin._]




                          DÆMONOLOGIA SACRA;
                                  OR,
                  A TREATISE OF SATAN’S TEMPTATIONS.


                            IN THREE PARTS.


                                  BY
                         RICHARD GILPIN, M.D.,
      VICAR OF GREYSTOKE, CUMBERLAND; LATER OF NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE.


                         EDITED, WITH MEMOIR,
                BY THE REV. ALEXANDER BALLOCH GROSART,
                              LIVERPOOL.


                       EDINBURGH: JAMES NICHOL.
           LONDON: JAMES NISBET AND CO. DUBLIN: G. HERBERT.

                             M.DCCC.LXVII.




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE
  I. PREFATORY NOTE,                                                xiii

  II. MEMOIR OF DR GILPIN,                                            xv

  III. DÆMONOLOGIA SACRA.
  To the Reader,                                                     3-6

  CHAPTER I.—The introduction to the text, from a consideration
  of the desperate ruin of the souls of men—The text opened,
  expressing Satan’s malice, power, cruelty, and diligence,         8-10

  CHAPTER II.—Of the malice of Satan in particular—The grounds
  and causes of that malice—The greatness of it proved; and
  instances of that greatness given,                               10-14

  CHAPTER III.—Of Satan’s power—His power as an angel considered—That
  he lost not that power by his fall—His power
  as a devil—Of his commission—The extent of his authority—The
  efficacy of his power—The advantages which he hath for
  the management of it, from the number, order, place, and
  knowledge of devils,                                             14-20

  CHAPTER IV.—That Satan hath a great measure of knowledge proved, by
  comparing him with the knowledge of Adam in innocency, and by his
  titles—Of his knowledge, natural, experimental, and accessory—Of his
  knowledge of our thoughts—How far he doth not know them, and how
  far he doth, and by what means—Of his knowledge of things future,
  and by what ways he doth conjecture them—The advantages in point of
  temptation that he hath by his knowledge,                        21-26

  CHAPTER V.—Instances of Satan’s power—Of witchcraft, what it
  is—Satan’s power argued from thence—Of wonder—Whether
  Satan can do miracles—An account of what he can do that
  way—His power argued from apparitions and possessions,           27-35

  CHAPTER VI.—Of Satan’s cruelty—Instances thereof in his dealing
  with wounded spirits in ordinary temptations of the
  wicked and godly, in persecutions, cruelties in worship—His
  cruel handling of his slaves,                                    35-44

  CHAPTER VII.—Of Satan’s diligence in several instances—The
  question about the being of spirits and devils handled—The
  Sadducees’ opinion discovered—The reality of spirits proved,     45-52

  CHAPTER VIII.—Of Satan’s cunning and craft in the general—Several
  demonstrations proving Satan to be deceitful; and
  of the reasons why he makes use of his cunning,                  52-58

  CHAPTER IX.—Of Satan’s deceits in particular—What temptation
  is—Of tempting to sin—His first general rule—The consideration
  of our condition—His second rule—Of providing
  suitable temptations—In what cases he tempts us to things
  unsuitable to our inclinations—His third rule—The cautious
  proposal of the temptation, and the several ways thereof—His
  fourth rule is to entice—The way thereof in the general,
  by bringing a darkness upon the mind through lust,              58-63

  CHAPTER X.—That Satan enticeth by our lust—The several ways
  by which he doth it—Of the power and danger of the violence
  of affections,                                                  63-68

  CHAPTER XI.—That lust darkens the mind—Evidences thereof—The
  five ways by which it doth blind men: (1.) By preventing
  the exercise of reason—The ways of that prevention:
  (1.) Secrecy in tempting; Satan’s subtlety therein;
  (2.) Surprisal; (3.) Gradual entanglements,                     68-72

  CHAPTER XII.—Of Satan’s perverting our reason—His second
  way of blinding—The possibility of this, and the manner of
  accomplishing it directly, several ways; and indirectly, by
  the delights of sin, and by sophistical arguments; with an
  account of them,                                                72-76

  CHAPTER XIII.—Of Satan’s diverting our reason, being the third
  way of blinding men—His policies for diverting our thoughts—His
  attempts to that purpose in a more direct manner;
  with the degrees of that procedure—Of disturbing or distracting
  our reason, which is Satan’s fourth way of blinding
  men—His deceits therein—Of precipitancy, Satan’s fifth way
  of blinding men—Several deceits to bring men to that,           77-83

  CHAPTER XIV.—Of Satan’s maintaining his possession—His first
  engine for that purpose is his finishing of sin, in its reiteration
  and aggravation—His policies herein,                            83-86

  CHAPTER XV.—Of Satan’s keeping all in quiet, which is his second
  engine for keeping his possession, and for that purpose his
  keeping us from going to the light by several subtleties; also
  of making us rise up against the light, and by what ways he
  doth that,                                                      86-91

  CHAPTER XVI.—Of Satan’s third grand policy for maintaining his
  possession; which is his feigned departure: (1.) By ceasing
  the prosecution of his design; and the cases in which he doth
  it—(2.) By abating the eagerness of pursuit; and how he doth
  that—(3.) By exchanging temptations; and his policy therein—The
  advantage he seeks by seeming to fly—Of his fourth
  stratagem for keeping his possession, which is his stopping
  all ways of retreat; and how he doth that,                     91-100

  CHAPTER XVII.—Satan’s deceits against religious services and
  duties—The grounds of his displeasure against religious duties—His
  first design against duties is to prevent them—His
  several subtleties for that end, by external hindrances, by
  indispositions bodily and spiritual, by discouragements; the
  ways thereof, by dislike; the grounds thereof, by sophistical
  arguings—His various pleas therein,                           100-118

  CHAPTER XVIII.—Satan’s second grand design against duties is
  to spoil them—(1.) In the manner of undertaking, and how
  he effects this—(2.) In the act or performance, by distracting
  outwardly and inwardly—His various ways therein, by vitiating
  the duty itself—How he doth that—(3.) After performance,
  the manner thereof,                                           118-125


  PART II.

  CHAPTER I.—That it is Satan’s grand design to corrupt the minds
  of men with error—The evidences that it is so—and the
  reasons of his endeavours that way,                           127-140

  CHAPTER II.—Of the advantages which Satan hath, and useth, for
  the introduction of error—(1.) From his own power of
  spiritual fascination—That there is such a power, proved from
  Scripture, and from the effects of it—(2.) From our imperfection
  of knowledge; the particulars thereof explained—(3.)
  From the bias of the mind—What things do bias it, and the
  power of them to sway the understanding—(4.) From curiosity
  (5.) From atheistical debauchery of conscience,               140-158

  CHAPTER III.—Of Satan’s improving these advantages for error—1.
  By deluding the understanding directly: which he doth,
  (1.) By countenancing error from Scripture—Of his cunning
  therein—(2.) By specious pretences of mysteries; and what
  these are—Of personal flatteries—(3.) By affected expressions—Reason
  of their prevalency—(4.) By bold assertions—The
  reasons of that policy—(5.) By the excellency of the
  persons appearing for it, either for gifts or holiness—His
  method of managing that design—(6.) By pretended inspiration—(7.)
  By pretended miracles—His cunning herein—(8.)
  By peace and prosperity in ways of error—(9.) By lies against
  truth, and the professors of it,                              158-189

  CHAPTER IV.—Of Satan’s second way of improving his advantages,
  which is by working upon the understanding indirectly
  by the affections—This he doth, (1.) By a silent, insensible
  introduction of error—His method herein—(2.) By entangling
  the affections with the external garb of error, a gorgeous
  dress, or affected plainness—(3.) By fabulous imitations of
  truth—The design thereof—(4.) By accommodating truth to a
  compliance with parties that differ from it—Various instances
  hereof—(5.) By driving to a contrary extreme—(6.) By
  bribing the affections with rewards, or forcing them by fears—(7.)
  By engaging pride and anger—(8.) By adorning error
  with the ornaments of truth,                                  190-208

  CHAPTER V.—Satan’s attempts against the peace of God’s children
  evidenced—(1.) From his malice—(2.) From the concernment
  of peace to God’s children—What these concerns
  are, explained—(3.) From the advantages which he hath
  against them by disquieting their minds—1. Confusion of
  mind—2. Unfitness for duty, and how—3. Rejection of
  duty—4. A stumbling-block to others—5. Preparation of
  the mind to entertain venomous impressions, and what they
  are—6. Bodily weakness—7. Our miseries Satan’s contentment,   209-218

  CHAPTER VI.—Of the various ways by which he hinders peace—First
  way, By discomposures of spirit—These discomposures
  explained: by shewing, (1.) What advantage he takes from
  our natural temper, and what tempers give him this advantage—(2.)
  By what occasions he works upon our natural tempers—(3.)
  With what success—[1.] These occasions suited
  to natural inclinations, raise great disturbance—[2.] They
  have a tendency to spiritual trouble—The thing proved, and
  the manner how discovered—[3.] These disturbances much
  in his power—General and particular considerations about
  that power,                                                   219-237

  CHAPTER VII.—Of the second way to hinder peace—Affrightments,
  the general nature and burden of them, in several particulars—What
  are the ways by which he affrights—1. Atheistical
  injections—Observations of his proceeding in them—2.
  Blasphemous thoughts—3. Affrightful suggestions of
  reprobation—Observations of his proceedings in that course—4.
  Frightful motions to sin—5. Strong immediate impressions
  of fear—6. Affrightful scrupulosity of conscience,            238-254

  CHAPTER VIII.—Of his third way to hinder peace, by spiritual
  sadness—Wherein, 1. Of the degrees of spiritual sadness—2.
  Of the frequency of this trouble, evidenced several ways—Of
  the difference betwixt God and Satan in wounding the
  conscience—3. Of the solemn occasions of this trouble—4.
  The engines by which Satan works spiritual sadness:—(1.)
  His sophistry—His topics enumerated and explained—[1.]
  Scriptures perverted—[2.] False notions—[3.] Misrepresentations
  of God—[4.] Sins: how he aggravates them—[5.]
  Lessening their graces: how he doth that—(2.) His second
  engine, fear: how he forwards his design that way,            254-286

  CHAPTER IX.—Of his fourth way to hinder peace, by spiritual
  distresses—1. The nature of these distresses—The ingredients
  and degrees of them—Whether all distresses of soul
  arise from melancholy—2. Satan’s method in working
  them; the occasions he makes use of; the arguments he
  urgeth, the strengthening of them by fears—3. Their weight
  and burden explained in several particulars—Some concluding
  cautions,                                                     287-311


  PART III.

  CHAPTER I.—The first circumstance of the combat, the time
  when it happened—The two solemn seasons of temptation—The
  reasons thereof,                                              313-316

  CHAPTER II.—The second circumstance, Christ’s being led by
  the Spirit—What hand the Spirit of God hath in temptations—and
  of running into temptations when not led into it,             316-321

  CHAPTER III.—The third circumstance, the place of the combat—The
  advantage given to temptations by solitude,                   321-322

  CHAPTER IV.—The fourth circumstance, the end wherefore
  Christ was led to the wilderness—Holiness, employment,
  privileges, exempt not from temptation—Of temptations
  that leave not impressions of sin behind them—How Satan’s
  temptations are distinguished from the lusts of our own
  heart,                                                        322-328

  CHAPTER V.—Of Christ’s fast, with the design thereof—Of
  Satan’s tempting in an invisible way—Of his incessant
  importunities, and how he flies when resisted—Of inward
  temptations, with outward afflictions—Several advantages
  Satan hath by tempting in affliction,                         328-336

  CHAPTER VI.—That Christ’s temptations were real, and not in
  vision—That temptation is Satan’s employment, with the
  evidences and instances thereof—Of Satan’s tempting visibly,
  with the reasons thereof,                                     337-341

  CHAPTER VII.—The general view of these temptations—Of
  Satan’s gradual proceeding in temptations—Of reserving a
  great temptation last—What a great temptation is; in what
  cases to be expected—Of Satan’s using a common road, in
  comparing these temptations with the ordinary temptations
  of men—Of the advantage Satan takes of natural appetite,
  sense, and affections,                                        341-346

  CHAPTER VIII.—The rise of Christ’s first temptation—Of Satan’s
  suiting his temptations to the conditions of men—Of tempting
  men upon the plea of necessity—The reasons and cheats
  of that plea—His pretences of friendship in tempting, with
  the danger thereof,                                           346-350

  CHAPTER IX.—A particular consideration of the matter of the
  first temptation, what Satan aimed at in bidding him turn
  stones into bread—Of Satan’s moving us to things good or
  lawful—The end of such a motion—How to know whether
  such motions are from Satan or the Spirit—What to do in
  case they be from Satan—Of his various aims in one temptation—What
  they are, and of his policy therein—Of his artificial
  contrivement of motions to make one thing infer
  another,                                                      350-355

  CHAPTER X.—Of Satan’s chief end in this temptation—His skill
  in making the means to sin plausible—The reasons of that
  policy, with his art therein—Men’s ignorance his advantage—Of
  the differences of things propounded to our use,              355-359

  CHAPTER XI.—Of the temptation to distrust upon the failure of
  ordinary means—Of the power of that temptation, and the
  reasons of its prevalency—Of unwarrantable attempts for
  relief, with the causes thereof—Of waiting on God, and
  keeping his way—In what cases a particular mercy is to be
  expected,                                                     360-367

  CHAPTER XII.—Of Satan’s proceeding to infer distrust of sonship
  from distrust of providences—Instances of the probability
  of such a design—The reasons of this undertaking—Of
  Satan’s endeavour to weaken the assurance and hopes of
  God’s children—His general method to that purpose,            367-376

  CHAPTER XIII.—The preparation to the second temptation—Of
  his nimbleness to catch advantages from our answers to
  temptation—That Satan carried Christ in the air—Of his
  power to molest the bodies of God’s children—How little
  the supposed holiness of places privilegeth us from Satan—Of
  Satan’s policy in seeming to countenance imaginary
  defences—Of his pretended flight in such cases, with the
  reasons of that policy—Of his improving a temptation to
  serve several ends,                                           376-382

  CHAPTER XIV.—That presumption was the chief design of this
  temptation—Of tempting to extremes—What presumption is—The
  several ways of presuming—The frequency of this
  temptation, in the generality of professors, in hypocrites, in
  despairing persons, and in the children of God—The reasons
  of Satan’s industry in this design—His deceitful contrivance
  in bringing about this sin—Preservatives against it,          382-390

  CHAPTER XV.—Self-murder, another of his designs in this
  temptation—How he tempts to self-murder directly, and
  upon what advantage he urgeth it—How he tempts to it
  indirectly, and the ways thereof—Of necessary preservatives
  against this temptation,                                      390-396

  CHAPTER XVI.—Of pride, Satan’s chief engine to bring on
  presumption—What pride is, and how it prepares men for sinning
  presumptuously—Considerations against pride—The
  remedies for its cure—Pride kindled by a confidence of
  privileges and popular applause,                              397-401

  CHAPTER XVII.—Of Satan’s subtlety in urging that of Psalm xci.
  11, 12, to Christ—Of his imitating the Spirit of God in
  various ways of teaching—Of his pretending Scripture to
  further temptation—The reasons of such pretendings, and
  the ends to which he doth abuse it—Of Satan’s unfaithfulness
  in managing of Scripture—Cautions against that deceit—The
  ways by which it may be discovered,                           402-415

  CHAPTER XVIII.—The manner of Satan’s shewing the kingdoms
  of the world—Of Satan’s preparations before the motion of
  sin—Of his confronting the Almighty by presumptuous imitation,
  and in what cases he doth so—Of his beautifying the
  objects of a temptation, and how he doth it—His way of
  engaging the affections by the senses—Of his seeming shyness, 415-423

  CHAPTER XIX.—Satan’s end in tempting Christ to fall down and
  worship him—Of blasphemous injections—What blasphemy
  is—The ways of Satan in that temptation, with the advantages
  he takes therein, and the reason of urging blasphemies
  upon men—Consolations to such as are concerned in such
  temptations—Advice to such as are so afflicted,               424-430

  CHAPTER XX.—The nature of idolatry—Satan’s design to corrupt
  the worship of God—The evidences thereof, with the reasons
  of such endeavours—His general design of withdrawing the
  hearts of men from God to his service—The proof that this
  is his design—Upon whom he prevails—That professions and
  confidences are no evidences to the contrary—His deceit of
  propounding sin as a small matter—The evidences of that
  method, and the reason thereof,                               430-437

  CHAPTER XXI.—Of worldly pleasure—Proofs that this is Satan’s
  great engine—What there is in worldly delights that make
  them so—Counsels and cautions against that snare,             438-444

  CHAPTER XXII.—Of Christ’s answer in the general—That these
  temptations were upon design for our instruction—Of the
  agreement betwixt Eph. vi. and Mat. iv.—The first direction,
  of courageous resolves in resisting temptations—Its
  consistency with some kind of fear—The necessity of this
  courage—Wherein it consists; and that there is a courage in
  mourning spirits,                                             445-450

  CHAPTER XXIII.—The second direction, that temptations are not
  to be disputed—The several ways of disputing a temptation—In
  what cases it is convenient and necessary to dispute
  with Satan—In what cases inconvenient, and the reasons
  of it,                                                        451-458

  CHAPTER XXIV.—The third direction, of repelling a temptation
  without delay—The necessity of so doing—What a speedy
  denial doth contain,                                          459-462

  CHAPTER XXV.—The fourth direction, of repelling a temptation
  by Scripture arguments—Of several things implied in the
  direction—The necessity of answering by Scripture arguments—The
  excellency of the remedy—How Scripture arguments
  are to be managed,                                            462-469

  CHAPTER XXVI.—The fifth direction, of prayer, and of the seriousness
  required of those that expect the advantage of prayer—Of
  God’s hearing prayer while the temptation is continued—Of
  some that are troubled more, while they pray more,            470-471

  INDICES, &c.,                                                 472-480




PREFATORY NOTE.


Few who know the fine old quarto ‘_Dæmonologia Sacra_’ of Dr Gilpin
will dispute its right to a place of honour in the Series of later
Puritan Divines. To those who have not hitherto heard,—or only heard
of it,—we commend it with all confidence and urgency as in various
respects a remarkable book by a remarkable man. It will be found—as
an early writer says of another—‘_matter-full_,’ and nevertheless
suggestive rather than exhaustive—that is, you have many rich lodes
of the ore of thought opened, but many others indicated, not worked;
clear and keen of insight into the deepest places of the deepest
things discussed; wide in its out-look, yet concentrated in its
in-look; sagacious and wise in its general conclusions, and passionate
as compassionate in its warnings, remonstrances, and counsels; full
of faith in all ‘written’ in The Word, and pathetically credulous
in accepting testimony when a given fact (alleged) is fitted to
barb an appeal; curious and quaint in its lore; intense and anxious
in its trackings of sin without and within; pre-Raphaelite in the
vivid fidelity of its portrayals of satanic guiles, and guises
that are always disguises; and above all, tenderly _experimental_
in its consolation to the tried and troubled. The third part is an
exposition of the Temptation of our Lord, which may bear comparison for
thoroughness and power with any extant.

For our Memoir of Dr Gilpin we have had literally to do everything,
inasmuch as next to nothing has thus far been published concerning
him—not even his birthplace, or birth or death dates known. If still we
feel the result of our ‘labour of love’ in prosecuting the necessary
researches, to be very inadequate, it is gratifying that we have
secured so much as we have done.

As in the preparation of former Memoirs, our visits and investigations
have brought us much pleasant intercourse and correspondence with
descendants, representatives, and reverers of the old Worthy. Family
papers of the most private nature have been unreservedly confided to
us—as duly acknowledged in each place where referred to or used; and
altogether the most ungrudging help has been rendered. The various
friends mentioned in the foot-notes of the Memoir will be so good as
accept this further general acknowledgment.

It only remains to state that the present volume has been edited on
the same principle with Sibbes and Brooks. The text is given with
scrupulous integrity; references and quotations are traced, and less
known names and dates annotated; every reference or quotation of
Scripture verified and filled in; and copious indices are subjoined;
the two last the more important, that Dr Gilpin himself seems to have
quoted Scripture from memory, and furnished no ‘table’ or index beyond
the heading of the several chapters as ‘contents.’

May this revised treatise be used at this later day as in the past, to
help in the great warfare against the Adversary.

  ALEXANDER B. GROSART.

       *       *       *       *       *

 ⁂ It has not been deemed needful to give a list of such slight
 _errata_ as have come under our eye in preparing the indices; but
 mark, with reference to the ‘Note,’ page 2, that for ‘Dr’ there is a
 misprint of ‘Mr,’ and that ‘deficiency’ is spelled with an ‘i’ for an
 ‘e.’—G.




MEMOIR OF THE REV. RICHARD GILPIN, M.D.


In pursuing our investigations for our Memoir of RICHARD SIBBES, we
found and noted, that his name—in every one of its odd variations of
spelling, numerous as those of Shakespeare and Raleigh—had quite died
out at once of his native county and country, being traceable nowhere
for fully a century of years—the stream which rose at Cony-Weston,
Norfolk, in 1524, lapsing in a ‘Richard Sibbes, clerk, rector of
Gedding, aged 93, February 2, 1737;’ and the blood thenceforward
flowing in the female line.[1]

Very different is it with the name of GILPIN, now before us.
From family-muniments and genealogies intrusted to us by various
representatives, of nearer and remoter kin, it were easy to go back
many generations before the earliest-noticed SIBBES; while at the
present day, in nearly all gradations of circumstance, at home and
abroad—from the original Cumberland and Westmoreland, to ‘the gray
metropolis of the North:’ from the Castle of Scaleby, to ‘huts, where
poor men lie;’ and from Wyoming of Pennsylvania to Acadie of Evangeline
and ‘distant Ind’—GILPINS, descending from our Worthy, and proud of the
descent—sustain the ancient renown of goodness and brain-power. As I
sit down to put my collections into shape, I am called to place therein
the statesman-like Speech on a great public question of our age, of
CHARLES GILPIN, in the House of Commons—words destined to re-echo
again and again, and determine legislation—so grave, wise, patriotic,
Christian are they; and now the Libraries are being besieged for the
‘New America’ of William Hepworth Dixon, wherein I was gladdened with
a splendid, yet penetrative and measured, eulogy of the Founder of
Colorado, WILLIAM GILPIN;[2] both, as I am informed, as do nearly all
of the name—in this resembling the Rogerses of the United States, who
all claim descent from John Rogers, proto-martyr of England—counting
from Bernard Gilpin, the apostle of the North, the venerable and holy
St Bernard of Protestantism; and so, as we shall see, from our Richard.

I place in an Appendix[3] such genealogical-antiquarian details as some
readers may look for in a Memoir of a Gilpin; and summarise here that
the author of ‘_Dæmonologia Sacra_’ was sprung of a race such as old
Dan Chaucer would have cited in teaching ‘_who is worthy to be called
gentill_’ as we may judge by a few of his golden lines:—

    ‘The first stocke was full of rightwisnes,
    Trewe of his worde, sober, pitous, and free.
    Clene of his goste; and loved besinesse,
    Against the vice of slouth, in honeste:
    And but his heire love vertue as did he,
    He is not gentill, though he rich seme,
    All weare he miter, crowne, or diademe.’[4]

Turning now to DR RICHARD GILPIN—whose remarkable book is in the
present volume faithfully reprinted; he was grandson of Richard, a
younger brother of the illustrious Bernard, his father being an Isaac
Gilpin. We get a glimpse of both grandfather and father in the county
History as follows:—‘In a small manuscript by one Isaac Gilpin,—whose
father [Richard Gilpin, _as before_] had been steward of several manors
within the barony of Kendal, and died about the year 1630, at the age
of 92 years,—he says he had heard of his father, and observed the same
himself, that by general custom within the said barony, if a woman
hath an estate, and married, hereby the estate is so far vested in the
husband, that he may sell it in his life-time; but if in his life-time
he doth not alter the property, then it shall continue to her and her
heirs.’[5] This little record takes us to ‘the barony of Kendal,’
the ‘Land’ of Bernard Gilpin; and thither accordingly, we turned our
search. There was a vague traditionary understanding that our Richard
Gilpin was born, as of the same family, so in the same region of
‘Kentmere;’ but nothing definite had hitherto been known. The Kentmere
‘Registers’ do not commence until A.D. 1700; and thus we were baffled
there. But Kentmere being a chapelry in the old Parish of Kendal, a
hope was indulged that in the parent-parish the wished-for facts should
be discovered; nor were we disappointed, for in the Baptism-Register,
under date ‘October 23, 1625,’ there is this entry:—

  ‘Richard, son of Isaac Gilpin, of Strickland Kettle,’

which is our Worthy, as after-dates will shew.[6] He might be born a
week more or less previously, according to the then ‘use and wont’
of infant baptism. The same Register furnishes another earlier
entry, which—if we are correct in surmising that the Isaac Gilpin of
Strickland Kettle in 1625, was the same with the Isaac of it—informs us
Richard was a younger son:—

  ‘1623, May 3, Henry, y^e soun of Mr Isaacke Gilpin of Helsington.’

Elsewhere he is named ‘of Gilthroton, co. Westmoreland;’ and seems to
have been the same who was clerk to the Standing Committee of county
Durham in 1645.[7] That Isaac Gilpin was ‘steward of _several_ manors’
probably covers the different local designations. There are so many
Gilpins, and so many of the same Christian name, that it is hard to
decide on given personalities; but, after considerable comparison
and sifting, such appears to us to be the parentage paternally of Dr
Gilpin. Maternally I have come on nothing; for an Elizabeth Gilpin,
widow of Isaac Gilpin, merchant, Newcastle, though of the same
stock, was not his mother. This ‘widow’ was buried in All Saints,
7th November, 1694.[8] Archdeacon Cooper, of Kendal, in transmitting
these data, remarks: ‘The mode of writing, and the insertion of _Mr_,
indicates a person of some importance.’ But with reference to ‘Mr,’ I
suspect it is rather accidental, as it is inserted in the one, and left
out in the other; and moreover, is frequently omitted when, from other
sources, we know the family was of importance. Little Richard must have
been just beginning to toddle about when his venerable grandfather’s
snow-white head [‘aged 92’] was laid in the old Church-yard. One
delights to picture the aged Simeon, before his serene departure,
‘blessing’ by prayer his dear little grandchild, after the manner of
such ancient Puritans as were the Gilpins in every branch.

Strickland-Ketel, not Kettle, as in the Register and vulgarly,[9]—now
settled to have been the birth-place of Dr Gilpin,—was a most fitting
nest for one destined to serve the master-Shepherd so well. It is
an English Bethlehem—a rich, kine-fragrant, pleasant, breezy tract
of pasture-land, sloping from the west down to the river Kent, its
eastern boundary, which river, issuing out of a fair ‘mere,’ or lake,
gives its name to Kent_mere_ Hall, the seat of the elder house of the
Gilpins. The hamlet of Ketel itself is on the road from Kendal to the
Ferry on Windermere; and thus partakes of the glory of Wordsworth’s
poetry, as of Scott’s, who in Rokeby celebrates a local incident of the
Cromwellian time.[10] It is somewhat noticeable that within the space
of an ordinarily-sized farm should have been born BERNARD GILPIN and
HENRY AIRAY,[11] and later, Richard Gilpin.

Of the childhood of our Richard, we can tell nothing directly. But
with the famous ‘School’ founded by his honoured ancestor available,
we are safe in assuming that he entered it. It is of this School that
the later biographer of Bernard Gilpin,—himself a Gilpin,—thus writes:
‘The effects of his endowment were very quickly seen. His school was no
sooner opened than it began to flourish, and to afford the agreeable
prospect of a succeeding generation rising above the ignorance and
errors of their forefathers.’ ... ‘That such might be its effects,
no care on his part was wanting. He not only placed able masters in
his school, whom he procured from Oxford, but he likewise constantly
inspected it himself.’[12] The saintly Apostle was long gone to his
rest before the advent of Master Richard; but as bearing the name, and
being of the blood of the Founder, he could not fail to be welcomed
to all its privileges. The more’s the pity that no memorial seems to
have been kept of the scholars of this celebrated Institution. Before
proceeding to Houghton, he was probably initiated into learning at the
nearer Kendal, then all astir with the enterprise of the Flemings. So I
gather from family communications made to me; and thus we have to think
of the ‘little lad’ trotting down the quiet rural roads among the sunny
hills, much as another Richard earlier, from Packenham to Thurston,[13]

               ... ‘with his satchel
    And shining morning face,’

_not_, we may be sure,

               ... ‘creeping like snail
    Unwillingly to school.’[14]

There is a tradition,—reported by various descendants,—that our
Gilpin went from ‘School’ to Queen’s College, Oxford. This, it will
be remembered, was Bernard Gilpin’s own College, and whither he sent
his favourite scholars, as Airay, Carleton, Ironside, and others. So
that if Richard went to Oxford at all, Queen’s would most naturally
be selected. No mention of him, however, occurs in any of the College
Registers. Therefore he cannot at any rate have graduated.[15] I place
in Appendix incidental valuable _data_ concerning other related Gilpins
gleaned in Oxford.[16]

In lack of the facts of the case, it is impossible to explain why one
so well-born and well-introduced did not, apparently, follow out a
full University career. That the circumstances of his own Family and
kindred were adequate thereto—apart from the Gilpin ‘endowments,’ which
were open to him specially—and that they were of the right stamp to
appreciate a sound, liberal education, is certain from numerous notices
of the house that occur in old records.[17]

Another floating tradition,—also brought before me by descendants, is,
that our Gilpin studied at the University of Glasgow; which so far
receives confirmation from the statement of his bosom-friend Alderman
Barnes of Newcastle—of whose MS. ‘Memoirs’ I have already spoken—that
‘he was educated in Scotland;’ but neither there does his name
occur.[18]

Equally uncertain is it,—advancing further,—when or by whom Dr
Gilpin was ‘licensed’ or ‘ordained’ as a Preacher of the Gospel or
Clergyman. Barnes again says that he ‘administered the Lord’s Supper
to a small congregation in Durham;’[19] and Calamy, that ‘he had been
[_i.e._, before Greystoke] a Preacher in Lambeth, at the Savoy—where
he was assistant to Dr Wilkins—and at Durham.’[20] Of all of these,
the memorial has perished. Neither under ‘Lambeth,’ nor ‘Savoy’,
nor ‘Wilkins’—afterwards Bishop of Chester[21]—nor ‘Gilpin,’ does
Newcourt’s _Repertorium_[22] mention him; nor, after considerable
investigation in each place, has any trace of him been found beyond the
above statements. So that his presentation to the Living of Greystoke
in Cumberland is really the first definite fact we have, after his
now ascertained birth-place, baptism-date, and family connexion.
The Rector of Greystoke had been ‘sequestered’[23] by Sir Arthur
Haselrigge and the Parliamentary Commissioners for the Propagation of
the Gospel in the four northern counties; which sentence having been
appealed against, was confirmed by the Committee for (as they were
called) Plundered Ministers. The Rector was William Moreland, M.A.,
‘bred,’ according to Walker of the ‘Sufferings,’ folio, ‘at Jesus
College, Cambridge.’[24] This ‘ejection’ took place in 1649-50. He was
succeeded by ‘one West, who died in about two years’ time.’[25] Such
is all Walker says of West; but from another overlooked authority, we
learn a little more of him. In the ‘Postscript’ concerning ‘Mr John
Noble,’ added to Audland’s funeral sermon on that notable man, it is
said, after mentioning the ‘laying aside’ of Mr Moreland, ‘certain
Commissioners appointed others, in his room, to supply the Parish, when
John Noble was little turned of twenty years of age;’ and then, ‘In
the year 1650, Mr West was sent, a zealous Preacher, and one mighty in
prayer, but sickly; and he soon died of a consumption. His doctrine
being exemplified in his own life, was very effectual on many in that
Parish, and particularly on John Noble, who received lively convictions
of Divine truth and the world to come, and so began earnestly to
inquire about the life and power of godliness.’[26] Gilpin immediately
succeeded Mr West, and thus must have entered on his duties in 1652 or
1653, when he was in his twenty-eighth or twenty-ninth year.

What influence procured our Worthy the ‘presentation’ to this
(comparatively) rich benefice,—for it was then worth £300 per annum,
now nearly trebled, being from £700 to £800, we do not know; but among
the neighbouring gentry there were intermarriages with the Gilpins,
_e.g._, the Laytons and Whartons—the former the ancient owners of
Dalemain in Dacre, the next parish to Greystoke. The Living was
held by the family of Arundel—with a branch of whom it remains—but
was subject no doubt to the Commissioners of Parliament during the
Commonwealth.

We have Richard Gilpin, then in 1652-53 installed as the ‘parish
priest’ of Greystoke; and save him of Bemerton, none ever brought a
finer spirit, or a more entire consecration, or a more ‘ingenuous’
activity, to the service of the one great Master.

Visiting Greystoke recently, I found it a quaint-visaged, gray,
long, low-roofed church, venerable and time-stained still, though
‘restored’—tenderly—in 1848. It is dedicated to St Andrew. It nestles
in a ‘bit’ of woodland such as—flushed with autumnal tints of green
and gold equal to the glories of a New England Indian summer among
the maples and elms—would have burdened and kindled the eyes of a
Ruysdael or Gainsborough, aye and until the ‘studies’ were transferred
to imperishable canvas; and the whole surrounding district, sweet,
soft, and tranquil enough for the Valley of Rip Van Winkle’s long
dreamless sleep—much more so indeed than Irving’s own, behind the
shaggy bluffs of the Hudson. It is a genuinely English ‘parish.’ When
Gilpin came to it, the ‘_common people_’ were intelligent and godly
after the antique type of the mid-Reformation period, having a spice
of sturdy originality of character and speech that is not altogether
gone even now. For ‘leisure hours,’ if the cultured Rector wished it,
there were in the country Seats—embracing ducal Castle and historic
family mansion—men and ‘faire ladyes’ of rare force and worth. There
are ‘Sunny Memories’ still—treasured in dim old manuscripts—of the
full ‘gatherings’ from far and near, from hall and hut, from plain
and fell, of the ‘gentle and simple’ over a wide area—to hang on the
lips of the ‘good Parson,’—as everywhere he came to be named. We have
a fine ‘testimony’ to the integrity and devotedness of the Rector in
the ‘Postscript’ of John Noble’s Funeral Sermon, previously quoted:
‘Graistock parish was large, had a fair glebe and liberal revenue. It
had four chapels: the nearest three miles distant from the Church. Mr
Gilpin provided worthy, preaching ministers for those, and allowed
generously for their support; himself residing at Graistock, where he
had a society of communicants prepared by the foregoing efficacy of the
word on their minds and hearts, and manifested in a new life,’ (page
41.)

Altogether Greystoke could not be other than a most congenial portion
of the great ‘Vineyard’ for one like RICHARD GILPIN, who breathed the
very spirit of saintly GEORGE HERBERT, and had little taste for the
controversies in which some of his contemporaries were engaged.

Not very long after his settlement at Greystoke, viz., in 1654-5, a
sad disaster befell the parent or ‘Kentmere’ house of the Gilpins,
springing out of the ‘confusions’ of the Commonwealth. I shall let
the good Prebendary tell it,—preliminary remarks and all, from the
manuscript already quoted,—reserving comment: ‘In the year 1655, says
he, ‘Cromwell dissolved his refractory parliament, and the members of
the House retiring to their several counties, spread everywhere such
new matter of discontent that measures were no longer observed. Men
were levied in many places against the usurper, and a general rising
was expected. But Cromwell, who had his eyes in all places, soon
dispersed every insurrection as it made its appearance. It was at that
time he sent his major-generals throughout the kingdom to punish with
fines and proscriptions all delinquents. Among the families ruined by
the severity of these military magistrates was Mr Gilpin of Kentmere
Hall, near Kendal, in Westmoreland. He was the head of the family,
and lived respectably on an estate which had been in the hands of
his ancestors from the days of King John. _It seems probable he had
taken an active part against Cromwell in the kings life-time_; but his
affairs being composed, _he lived quietly_ till these new disturbances
broke out on Cromwell’s violent measures with the parliament. _Having
joined an unsuccessful insurrection_, he became a marked man, and was
obliged to provide for his safety as he could. To avoid a sequestration
he gave up his estate in a kind of trust-mortgage to a friend, and went
abroad. There he died; but in a time of quiet, his heir not being able
to get hold of the proper deeds to recover the estate, it was totally
lost to the family. _In the meantime_ Dr Gilpin _lived quietly at
Greystoke_, concerning himself only with his own parish, and lamenting
those public evils, which he could not remove.’[27] One can smile at
this time of day at the name ‘Usurper’ applied to England’s mighty
Protector; can understand the inevitable royalism of a dignitary of
the Church, that holds for ‘the king’ as against ‘the kingdom,’ can
leave the admissions of former freedom to ‘live quietly,’ and of an
active part ‘against Cromwell,’ to justify any enforced flight, without
either refuting allegations or exposing prejudices. But as matter
of fact, while Dr Gilpin, in common with many of his Presbyterian
brethren, condemned the execution of Charles, and while the shadow
that fell on Kentmere doubtless darkened the rectory of Greystoke, he
yet unreservedly accepted the government of Cromwell, and in every way
sought to carry out the measures devised by the Parliament. Moreover,
far from ‘_living quietly at Greystoke_,’ and ‘_concerning himself only
with his own parish_,’ it is the very opposite of the facts. Instead of
retiring in the timid, nerveless fashion suggested, he took a foremost
part in organising that modification of Church government which the
abolition of Episcopacy demanded. The evidence of this, spite of the
wreck and loss of contemporary ‘records,’ is abundant; and it is the
next landmark in the Life we are telling.

It needeth not that in a necessarily brief Memoir such as this we
should enter on the _merits_ of the national change of Church ‘Polity’
which gave supremacy for the time to Presbytery over Prelacy. The
materials for judgment lie in fulness in every worthy Ecclesiastical
History of England; and the whole story has just been re-written with
fine candour and attractiveness by Mr Stoughton.[28] Presbyterianism
in England during the Commonwealth can hold its own,—lustrous as it is
with the names of Edmund Calamy and Bates and Manton, Richard Baxter
and William Jenkyn and Thomas Watson, Samuel Clark and Thomas Wilson of
Maidstone, and Thomas Hall of King’s Norton,—selecting a few, urban and
rural, almost at random.

Suffice it to recall that, outside of the more ambitious organisation
of London,—whose unpublished ‘Memorial’ lies all but unknown in Sion
College Library,[29]—there were various voluntary Associations which
took a semi-Presbyterian mould, in the counties of Chester, Cumberland,
Westmoreland, Dorset, Wilts, Worcestershire, and others. These
Associations embraced the ‘clergymen,’ and ‘ministers’ or ‘pastors,’
and laymen belonging to the Episcopalians, the Presbyterians, and
the Independents, and sought to combine the presidency of the first
with the union and co-operation of the second, and the freedom
of the third; in short, a federated rather than organic oneness.
Subordinating everything else, was an intense yearning after nearness
to all who loved the one Lord Jesus, and heroic as devout endeavours
for ‘discipline,’ so as to vitalise and Christianise ‘the _masses_.’
It is pathetic to read of the days and nights of these good men’s
Fasting and Prayer ‘unto the breaking of the light,’ for one another’s
Parishes and Charges. Their ideal was lofty, their own practice
beautiful, their success marked in changing the face of erewhile
godless and heathen-dark communities. What RICHARD BAXTER was in
Worcestershire, RICHARD GILPIN was in Cumberland and Westmoreland; and
as the author of ‘The Saint’s Everlasting Rest’ was chosen to draw
up the ‘Agreement’ for his county, so the author of ‘_Dæmonologia
Sacra_’ was selected to execute the same office for Cumberland and
Westmoreland. The ‘Agreement,’—of which the title-page will be found in
the list at the close of our Memoir, must be studied by all who would
master the problems of the period. It is comprehensive, without being
general or vague; decisive in dogma, but not uncharitable; high in
aim, but most practical; earnest, but not fanatic; stern to offences,
but hopeful and tender toward offenders; richly scriptural, but also,
and because of it, most human, all a-glow with wide sympathies, and
unutterably wistful in its appeals for oblivion on all lesser matters,
so as to set a firm front to the evils and passions, the divisions and
heart-burnings, the rivalries and recriminations, of the time. The
whole is perfumed, so to speak, with prayer. If it was a Utopia, it was
a grander and more celestial one than ever More or Bacon imagined; nor
while it lasted was it a mere paper Agreement. For years through all
the Counties enumerated the ‘good men and true’ made their ‘gatherings’
so many centres of light and love; and their Parishes were as spiritual
Goshens amid the national formalism and barrenness.

Seeing that the extent to which ‘_Dæmonologia Sacra_’ has gone prevents
our reprinting the minor writings of Gilpin, as we had desired,
we shall here give a few brief extracts from the ‘Agreement,’ to
illustrate its aims, tone, and style. Thus he struck the key-note:
‘When we compare the present miseries and distempers with our former
confident expectations of unity and reformation, our hearts bleed
and melt within us. We are become a byword to our adversaries; they
clap their hands at us, saying, “Is this the city that men call the
perfection of beauty?” Piety is generally decayed, most men placing
their religion in “doting about questions” which they understand not;
profaneness thrives through want of discipline; error, blasphemy
domineers; jealousies, divisions, unmerciful revilings and censurings,
are fomented among brethren of the same household of faith; the weak
ones are discouraged and distracted by the multitude of opinions and
fierce opposition of each party, and that which is worst of all, God’s
honour suffers deeply, and the credit of religion is brought very low.
“Is this nothing to you, all ye that pass by?”’ But having lamented,
as with Jeremiah, he assumes a more hopeful and encouraging attitude,
thus: ‘Though these things can never be sufficiently lamented, yet
seeing it is not sufficient barely to lament them, without endeavouring
to heal them, and considering that it is a duty incumbent upon all
Christians, according to their several places and abilities, to promote
the welfare of Zion, especially when we have tasted so much of the
bitterness of our divisions, and because a brotherly Union hath so
much of God in it, and consequently gives so much hope that God will
take that course in establishing his Church when he shall arise to
build Jerusalem, and seeing it is an unjustifiable pettishness and
peevishness of spirit to be averse from joining together in anything
because we cannot join in all things, therefore we resolve, [“the
associated ministers,”] setting aside all carnal interests, and casting
ourselves, with all our concernments, at the Lord’s feet, to walk
together as far as we can for the present, not resting here, nor tying
ourselves from further progress in union, as the Lord shall give light
and satisfaction, much less binding ourselves from a submission to and
compliance with a more general accommodation, if any such thing should
hereafter be agreed on, which might be more suitable and fitted for
the composure of the different principles of brethren throughout the
nation.’—(Pp. 1-3.) Hereupon follows the ‘Basis’ of the ‘Agreement,’
which was very much the same with Baxter’s in Worcestershire, and that
of Essex, &c., &c. ‘In order,’ he proceeds, ‘to the carrying on of
this great work, we lay down and assent unto these general rules as
the Basis and Foundation which must support and bear up our following
Agreement:—

‘1. That in the exercise of discipline it is not only the most
safe course, but also the most conducing to brotherly union and
satisfaction, that particular churches carry on as much of their work
with joint and mutual assistance as they can with conveniency and
edification, and as little as may be, in their actings, to stand,
distinctly by themselves and apart from each other.

‘2. That in matters of church discipline those things which belong
only _ad melius esse_, ought to be laid aside, both in respect of
publication and practice, rather than that the Church’s peace should be
hindered.

‘3. That where different principles lead to the same practice, we
may join together in that practice, reserving to each of us our own
principles.

‘4. That where we can neither agree in principle nor in practice, we
are to bear with one another’s differences that are of a less and
disputable nature, without making them a ground of division amongst
us. Yet notwithstanding we do not hereby bind up ourselves from
endeavouring to inform one another in those things wherein we differ,
so that it be done with a spirit of love and meekness, and with
resolutions to continue our brotherly amity and association, though in
those particulars our differences should remain uncomposed,’ (pp. 3, 4.)

Further, all pledge themselves to be true and faithful ambassadors,
stewards, workmen, and overseers, and ‘to this end we resolve in
the course of our ministry to observe the temper, disposition, and
capacity of the generality of the people, and to suit ourselves
not only in our matter to the people’s condition, but also in our
expressions to the people’s apprehension, that so our sermons may be
plain, piercing, seasonable, and profitable,’ (p. 4.) Speaking next
of ‘catechising’ from the Assembly’s ‘Larger and Shorter’ Catechisms,
and of ‘inspection,’ there are these wise counsels, that there be
tender dealing in consideration of ‘first, unacquaintedness with
the terms and words of the question; or, secondly, from bashfulness
or shamefacedness,’ (p. 11.) And in regard to ‘supervision,’ to be
cautious ‘lest brotherly inspection degenerate into an unbrotherly
prying,’ (p. 15.) And there is this pronouncement on a _questio vexata_
of the period: ‘We agree not to press a declaration of the time and
manner of the work of grace upon the people as a necessary proof of
their actual present right to the Lord’s Supper, nor to exclude persons
merely for want of that; yet will we accept it if any will be pleased
to offer it freely,’ (p. 16); and onwards there is encouraged a ‘holy
modesty and bashfulness’ in speaking of the ‘passage and transaction
‘twixt God and our soul,’ (p. 39.) Finally, the Confession of Faith
consists of the Creed paraphrased, and confirmed by texts, (pp. 23-25.)

Another incident proved with equal unmistakableness that RICHARD
GILPIN regarded Oliver as no ‘usurper,’ but the rightful governor
of the nation. I must leave the reader to consult the authorities
on the history of the establishment of the University of Durham.
Every one who knows anything of ‘the times’ knows that the efforts
to found a University there—which the death of Cromwell delayed, and
the Restoration quashed—is one of the ‘boasts’ of the Protector’s
reign.[30] In honoured association with Sir Thomas Widdrington, Lords
Fairfax, Grey, Wharton, and Falconbridge, Sir Henry Vane, and Sir
Arthur Haselrigge, and other well-known names, Gilpin was appointed
one of the ‘Visitors.’[31] He had entered into the scheme with
enthusiasm and hope. It is difficult to estimate what was lost herein
by the death of Cromwell. If we may conjecture from the ‘Model’ of the
learned and pious Matthew Pool—issued in 1657-58, while the grand jury
were addressing Richard to complete what his father had begun—it is
all but certain that a more strictly theological training would have
been inaugurated than any of the great Universities even to this day
supplies.[32]

To shew that Dr Gilpin still adhered to his former action in Church
matters, it must here be stated that in 1658 he preached a ‘Sermon’
before the ‘associated ministers of Cumberland’ at Keswick. By the
request of the ‘General Meeting’ he published it. The title-page will
be found in our list of his writings at close of this Memoir. It was
with reluctance the good man consented to give his sermon ‘to print,’
as he intimated in the ‘Epistle Dedicatory.’ ‘What your commands,’
says he, ‘have wrested from me—for of that force and prevalency with
me are your desires—I now lay at your feet. If I could have prevailed
with you to have altered your vote, or after you had passed it, durst
have resisted—this had gone no further than your own hearing. But when
you would not be persuaded, I endeavoured to conform myself to those
Christians in Acts xxi. 14, and took up with that which put a stop to
their entreaties. “The will of the Lord be done,”’ (pp. 1, 2.) The
Text of this sermon—which is no common one—is Zech. vi. 13, ‘Even He
shall build the Temple of the Lord,’ &c., and hence its title, ‘The
Temple Rebuilt.’ I select a few of the more easily detached sentences.
First of all, concerning ‘Controversy,’ he says admirably: ‘Disputings,
though they have their fruits, yet are they like trees growing upon a
rocky precipice, where the fruit cannot be gathered by all, and not
by any without difficulty and hazard,’ (p. 3.) Again, on the office
of the ministry, he exclaims: ‘Dream not of ease in an employment of
this nature. God, angels, and men have their eyes upon you to see
how you will bestir yourselves: it is your duty, and not a matter of
unnecessary courtesy which you may give or hold back at your pleasure.
He that hath commanded you ἐν τόυτοις εἰναι, (1 Tim. iv. 15,) to
“give yourselves up wholly to these things,” will not take himself to
be beholden to you when you have done your best: neither is it any
disparagement to you to become even servants to any: so that you may
but gain them and forward Christ’s work. They that think it below them
to trouble themselves so much with catechising, reproof, admonition,
and are of Ptolemæus his mind, who changed the title of Heraclides
his book, from πονου ἐγκωμιον to ὄνου ἐγκωμιον: as if laboriousness
were nothing but an ass-like dulness, making a man crouch under every
burden; but God having made the ox which treadeth out the corn to be
the hieroglyphic of your employment, he doth thereby teach you that
labour and patience are so far from being a disgrace to you, that
they are necessary qualifications for the calling of the ministry,’
(pp. 3, 4.) Lastly—for we may not linger—take a burning and fearless
reproof of the lukewarm: ‘How cowardly and sinfully shamefaced,’ he
observes, kindling as he advances, ‘are many when they should plead
for God and truth, as if their own hearts did secretly question the
reality of religion! How strangely do many of the gentry spend their
time! What irreligious, prayerless families do some of them keep,
when they should shew better example to the meaner sort; and yet how
confidently can they censure others for hypocrites—sometime unjustly
concluding against the strictness of God’s ways from the liberty of
some professors—not considering what their own carriage and vanity
do testify against themselves! How do we needlessly multiply our
controversies and disputes! and with what bitterness do we manage them,
even when the strife is merely about words and method! and, generally,
how is the name of God and religion abused to serve the designs of men!
What strange religious people have we! Some must needs be religious
by taking up a singular conceit and opinion, though a man may easily
see their hearts through their lives: others have all their religion
on their tongue’s-end: they can have good discourses, and yet be
unconscionable in their callings, shops, and trading,’ (pp. 33, 34.)

Thus taking a conspicuous part in all that belonged to the interests of
the Church of Christ, our Worthy behind these went out and in before
his flock a ‘master-builder,’ from Sabbath to Sabbath preaching the
very gospel of Jesus Christ, with unequalled power, pungency, and
pathos combined, while he drew all hearts to himself; for he acted on
the maxim—

                  ‘All worldly joys go less
    To the one joy of doing kindnesses.’[33]

He was a large-hearted and open-handed man, as well as a faithful
‘preacher’—his life an exemplification of his teaching. He was, says
the ‘Noble’ memorial, ‘a gentleman and a Christian indeed; one of
singular gravity, temper, learning, and all valuable qualifications for
a minister; of a good family too, and an eligible estate; a witness and
an honour to the good cause of a further Reformation,’ (p. 38.) And so
he pursued the ‘even tenor of his way’ in his tranquil sphere. He had
married shortly after coming to Greystoke; but, curiously enough, the
lady’s name has not been preserved in any of the numerous family papers
put into my hands. The Greystoke ‘Registers’ record the baptism of two
of his children, William and Susannah. The ‘entries’ may be given here:—

 ‘1657. September. Borne the 5th Day in ye afternoune, and ye 23d day
 Baptized, William, the Soune of Mr Richard Gilpin, p’son, [= parson],
 of Graistock.

 ‘1659. Susanna, ye Daughter of Mr Gilpin, p’son, of Graistocke,
 was borne ye 17th day of October, And Baptized ye 7th of December,
 1659.’[34]

I have described the parish of Greystoke as tranquil; but even into
it there swept—as the sea-swell sweeps into the smallest nook of
shore—the ruffle of that agitation which pervaded the nation in
religious matters; and, inasmuch as it gives colour and tone to not
a few passages of the ‘_Dæmonologia Sacra_,’—his difficulty with the
Quakers—to which I have made reference—falls now to be chronicled.
We shall have an after-occasion to notice subsequent interviews with
the pre-eminently good, though provoking, Quaker missionary-preacher,
Thomas Story. Here I glean my information from the ‘Memoir’ of a
‘Greystoke’ celebrity, HENRY WINDER, D.D.[35] The following, then, is
the narrative, omitting irrelevant portions:—

‘The Reverend Richard Gilpin, M.D., was the parish minister of
Graystock before the Restoration.... Some time before the Restoration
Quakerism began to spread in Cumberland and Westmoreland. Among other
things remarkable in their behaviour, the Quakers would go into the
parish church of Graystock, and disturb Dr Gilpin in the pulpit during
divine worship. And such were their novel phrases and cross questions
and answers, that the Doctor seemed sometimes at a loss what to say
to them. Upon that, some of his parishioners were stumbled, withdrew
from their former communion, and defended the cause of the Quakers.
Among others Henry Winder was seduced, to the no small grief of good Dr
Gilpin and his friends. A day of humiliation and prayer was appointed,
in which Dr Gilpin, and some of the neighbouring ministers, as well
as some of the laity of that parish, took such proper methods as to
recover some that had fallen, and to confirm and establish those that
were wavering, though, before that, the infection had spread far and
wide. Then was Henry Winder secretly resolved to comply with the
desire of Dr Gilpin and his church, and make some public recantation.
But these convictions did not last long. For notwithstanding several
conferences with him, Henry Winder openly joined with the Quakers, and
continued among them some years.... Henry Winder and his [second] wife
[finally] left the Quakers, returning to Dr Gilpin’s church, in which
they afterwards continued.’[36]

All this goes far to explain the unusual severity of the ‘_Dæmonologia
Sacra_’ against Quakers and Quakerism—as also the ‘Agreement’—and
the grave classification of ‘double meanings,’ and ‘light within,’
&c., &c., among evident ‘devices’ of the Devil. At this later day we
willingly forget the eccentricities and vulgarities and blunders of
the early followers of GEORGE FOX, and in the spirit of the ‘Quakers’
Meeting’ of winsome Elia, reverence the service of this once powerful
and still honoured and altogether inoffensive section of God’s people.

With these minor ‘troubles’ now and again annoying him,—for they ended
in the setting up of Quaker ‘tabernacles’ in the district, remains of
which survive until now,—the Rector of Greystoke fulfilled his ‘labour
of love,’ as a good servant of Jesus Christ, until the Restoration.
That event found him with a mind made up and ‘ready’ for all loss
and sacrifice. Unable to accept the notorious ‘Act’ of Uniformity,
he anticipated the memorable ‘Ejection’ of 1662 by withdrawing from
Greystoke; whereupon the former ‘sequestered Rector Morland re-entered
on possession.’

We turn to the Family-Manuscript,[37] formerly quoted, for the
circumstances of the resignation. ‘After the Restoration,’ observes
Prebendary Gilpin, ‘when Episcopacy again took the lead, the
Presbyterian party made what stand they were able. But the Act
of Uniformity passed, and was executed with rigour. Dr Gilpin,
notwithstanding his moderation, could not subscribe it in all its
parts, and therefore resigned his benefice, trusting God for the
maintenance of himself and family, which consisted of a wife and five
children.’[38]

The good Rector was not without a home when he thus left his beloved
Greystoke—which was turned into a Bochim when his ‘parishioners’
looked their last upon him. During his incumbency he had invested what
‘monies’ he had at his disposal in the purchase from the Musgraves,
of the Castle and small estate of Scaleby near Carlisle—filling up
the amount of the purchase-money by a mortgage. Thither accordingly
he retired into privacy; but holding with the old Nonconformists
the indefeasibility of his office as a preacher of the gospel by an
ordination more sure than that from quasi-apostolic hands, he was
wont to assemble his employés and neighbours in a ‘great room’ of
the old Castle—originally a Border-fortalice erected against the
Scots—and there ‘preach’ to them on the Sabbaths.[39] Moreover,
he resumed his previous medical studies and practice, to the great
advantage more especially of the poor. ‘How acceptable,’ says our
Manuscript, ‘his services were among the poor people of those parts,
and how much they revered him for wisdom and sanctity, appears from
the superstitious respect they paid him. During many years after his
death, it was believed among them that he had “_laid the devil_,” as
they phrased it, in a morass not far from his house.’[40] Besides
these semi-professional duties, he set about improving the somewhat
dilapidated castle, and the lands, more particularly planted trees
extensively; the result of which was an entire change of the appearance
of the estate, and now the fine woodland within which venerable Scaleby
lifts its gray towers, still worthily held by a descendant through the
female line.[41]

RICHARD GILPIN was too eminent and potential a man to be allowed to
withdraw thus from the stage of public events. He had not been long in
his retreat when a ‘tempting’ offer was made him of a Bishopric, as
Bernard Gilpin had been ‘tempted’ before him. I recur here again to
our Manuscript. Following on the passage already given we read, ‘The
king and council however seemed to have been apprehensive lest this
rigorous step against the Presbyterians [‘Act of Uniformity’] might
have ill consequences. They were much inclined therefore to compound
the matter, at least, with some of the leaders of the party; and, in
this view, three or four bishoprics and many superior dignities in the
Church were offered to them. Among others, Dr Gilpin was represented to
the king as a person highly esteemed in the Northern parts of England,
and as a man of great moderation. Accordingly, in filling up the vacant
bishoprics, his name was inserted for the see of Carlisle: and it was
not doubted by his friends but he would get over the few scruples he
had to the Act of Uniformity, and accept the preferment: for he had
always spoken favourably of the Church of England, and considered the
line between the two parties with regard to their religious sentiments
as almost an invisible one. But, to the surprise of his nearest
friends, he declined the offer.’[42] The ‘friends,’ who so lightly
estimated the ‘scruples’ of the ‘retired’ Rector, little knew the stamp
of man he was. Everything before and subsequent goes to shew that DR
GILPIN remained a Nonconformist, with, no doubt, the same reluctance as
Baxter and Calamy and the rest,—to whom bishoprics had similarly been
offered, and by whom they had similarly been promptly declined,—but
also from the same deep conviction of necessity so long as that ‘Act’
outraged the truth, and ignored conscience. And so, as his ancestor,
Bernard Gilpin to Elizabeth,[43] did Richard Gilpin to Charles II.
refuse that mitre which he could not have worn unless at the sacrifice
of principles which were dearer to him then all civil or ecclesiastical
dignities, and life itself.[44] We have an incidental allusion—as I
read it—in ‘_Dæmonologia Sacra_’ to the ‘temptation,’ and the casuistic
pleas of the ‘friends’ alluded to. Speaking of the ‘wiles’ of the
Tempter, and his many snares to induce to sin, he specially notices
this, that ‘he extenuates the offence by propounding some smaller good
or convenience that may follow that evil,’ and he continues, evidently
speaking from his own experience of the ‘fiery dart:’ ‘This, though it
be a way of arguing directly contrary to that rule, “Do not evil that
good may come,” yet it oft proves too successful; and it is like that
common stratagem of war when, by the proposal of a small booty in view,
the enemies are drawn out of their hold into a fore-contrived danger.
Thus Satan pleads, This one act of sin may put you into a capacity of
honouring God the more. _Some have admitted advancements and dignities
against conscience, upon no better ground, but they might keep out
knaves, and that they might be in a condition to be helpful to good
men._ ... Thus a pretended good to come becomes a pander to a present
certain iniquity.’ There are other like intimations in the book, which
give new significance and a strange passion to the words; but this one
must suffice.

Recurring to our Family-Manuscript—which though somewhat stilted in
its style, is generally accurate in its facts—we reach the next point
in our Worthy’s ‘Life.’ ‘The Dissenters,’ remarks the Prebendary,
‘having now found they could get nothing from government beyond a
Toleration, began to separate everywhere into assemblies, and choose
pastors of their own;’ and so eyes and hearts turned toward the Doctor,
secluded at Scaleby. ‘Among other places,’ the Narrative proceeds, ‘a
large congregation united at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, where they built a
handsome meeting-house, and sent an invitation to Dr Gilpin to be their
minister; and though he had now taken his measures, and laid his plan
for a life of quiet and repose, he accepted their invitation, and as
soon as he could settle his affairs at Scaleby, removed with his family
to Newcastle.’ ‘Here,’ continues the Manuscript, ‘a new scene of life
opened before him. Hitherto he had lived in a country retirement, both
at Greystock and at Scaleby, where party prevailed little. But here he
was in the midst of a large town, divided by various opinions, where
his candour and moderation had an ample field for exercise. In fact, I
have heard it said that his meeting-house was a kind of centre of unity
among them all. It was frequented as much by Churchmen as Dissenters,
and they all found here, what was seldom found in the pulpits of those
times, their common Christianity preached, unsullied by the religious
contests which everywhere prevailed. His preaching was extremely
pleasing and popular. His subject-matter, his language, his voice, his
manner, were all engaging, and made such an impression on the people as
was never worn out, but with the lives of his contemporaries.’[45]

Gilpin arrived in Newcastle, as the successor of the admirable
SAMUEL HAMMOND, one of the ejected,[46] and the spiritual father
of Oliver Heywood,—about 1668-69, that is, in the crisis of the
‘troubles’ to all who bore the ‘mark’ of Nonconformity. High-Churchmen
were ‘building-up,’ as they deemed it, the Church, by persecuting
relentlessly those who dared not acquiesce in the ‘Act of Uniformity;’
and accordingly ‘Dissenters’ had to preach furtively, even as ‘of
old,’—and all was clamour and confusion. One of themselves, who, if not
of kin, was, in wit and wiseness, of kind, in more than name to Thomas
Fuller,—thus vividly describes the period during which the recluse
of Scaleby went to his new charge in Newcastle: ‘I am ashamed,’ says
Ignatius Fuller, ‘that whilst the Jews’ temple was building, there was
neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the house,—now
when we are raising an house to Him that dwells not in temples made
with hands, we should make so much use of iron and steel, and should
reckon guns and swords, flames and fagots amongst our means of grace.
I am sorry we should seem to have more of Nimrod than Solomon in our
building; that we should partake of the curse poured upon the workmen
at Babel—

                      “Let’s make the brother,
    The sire and son, not understand each other.”’[47]

Thus plunged into the midst of all manner of ‘oppositions’ and
intolerance, RICHARD GILPIN, for a goodly number of years—as William
Durant before him—confined his ‘preaching’ to his own private house in
Newcastle. Very sad is it to come on ‘records’ such as these from the
‘Depositions from the Castle of York, relating to offences committed in
the northern counties in the seventeenth century.’[48] They may be well
left to speak for themselves, without a word of comment:—

 ‘clxxvi. Richard Gilpin, Clerk, and others. For holding a
 _Conventicle_.

‘Aug. 4, 1669.—Before Ralph Jenison, Mayor of Newcastle, Cuthbert
Nicholson, cordyner, [= cordwainer,] saith, that upon Sunday last,
about five or six of the clock in the morneng, he did see a great
nomber of people goe inn to the house of Mr Richard Gilpyn, minister,
in the White Freers, and afterward, he went to parson Jo^{n.} Shaw, and
acquainted him with the premisses. Whereupon the said Mr Shaw togeither
with the church-wardens, constables, and serjeants-at-mace, by the
comaund of Mr Maor, did repaire to the said Richard Gilpin’s howse. And
when they came there all the dores were shutt and made fast. And after
the dores were broken open, he did see these severall persons come
out, viz., Robert Johnson, merchant, Dr Tunstall, Wm. Cutter, James
Hargraves, merchant, Wm. Hutchinson, George Headlyn, fitter, Charles
Newton, gent, Humphrey Gill, gent, Jno. Bittleston, tanner, Matthew
Soulsbey, roper, Michaell Jobling, pully-maker, Robert Finley, chapman,
and diverse other persons to the nomber of fortie.’

Again:—

 ‘The information of Cuthbert Nicholas, cordwainer, against the persons
 hereinafter named, for being att meetings and conventicles:—Mr
 Richard Gilping, Mr William Deurant, Mr John Pringle, Mr Henry Lever,
 preachers,’ &c. &c. &c. &c.

So early as 1663—which would intimate that Gilpin had previously
resided and ‘preached’ in Newcastle—Bishop Cosin wrote to the Mayor
of Newcastle, telling him to look sharply after ‘_the caterpillars_,’
naming as the ringleaders, ‘William Durant, Henry Leaver, _Richard
Gilpin_, and John Pringle.’[49] When we consider who these men
were—every one a ‘pattern’ of godliness and consuming consecration to
the Master, and more especially that one of them, viz., Gilpin, had
lately refused to elevate himself to a level with Cosin, it is hard
to repress indignation; while the word of scorn, ‘_caterpillars_,’
reminds one of the Popish parallel of Pope Alexander, wondering how the
Signory of Florence could so far have forgotten what was due to him
and to themselves as to aid and abet that ‘contemptible _reptile_,’
[vermicciattolo] in offending the majesty of the Holy See—the
‘reptile’ being SAVONAROLA; or the ‘_heretici et imperiti homines_’
of SALMERON, as applied to Augustine and Chrysostom, Jerome, _et hoc
genus omne_.[50] Very different was the ‘letter’ of Cosin, Bishop of
Durham to the Mayor, from that of another ‘in authority,’ who had
also addressed to his Worship of Newcastle ‘a letter,’ wherein he
had counselled amity and forbearance; so much so, that Mr Durant and
others of the preachers in Newcastle, returned him an answer of thanks
for his ‘inculcated exhortations to love the whole flock of Christ,
_though not walking in the same order of the gospel_.’ The writer was
OLIVER CROMWELL.[51]

       *       *       *       *       *

Until the ‘Indulgence’ of 1672, Gilpin carried on his ‘ministry’ in
the half-public, half-hidden, manner which these deplorable acts
indicate. At one time he had to leave his own house; for in the Barnes’
‘Memoirs,’ we read, ‘When the Five Mile Act came out, Dr Gilpin
lodged at Mr Barnes his house, for more security. When his goods
were destrained upon, Mr Barnes—to prevent their being squandered
away—replevyed them.’ ... ‘And when there was a design to banish the
Doctor from Newcastle, Mr Barnes, by persuading the magistrates of his
great usefulness in the town, by his skill in physic, procured him
quietness to the end of King Charles his reign.’[52] Not however until
1672 was there anything approaching ‘religious liberty’ in England, and
that only by connivance. Until that year, practically, Nonconformity
and Dissent from the Church of England was politically treason, and
ecclesiastically ‘illegal.’

The Reader will have noticed that by Barnes and others, our Worthy is
designated ‘Doctor,’ and that this stood him in stead on one occasion.
But the title was not due technically until 1676. In that year he
proceeded to Leyden—like Sir Thomas Browne earlier—and there ‘took’
the ‘degree’ of M.D. By the kindness of Professor J. Van Hoeden of
Leyden, I am enabled—for the first time—to give the ‘record’ of it from
the ‘Inscriptions of the Students.’[53] It is as follows:—‘Richard
Gilpin, [misspelled “Gulpin,”] Cumbridus,’ obtained his degrees July
6, 1676—_post disputationem privatam de Historia Hystericæ Passionis
medicinæ doctor renunciatus est a clarissimo Kraame_—and again, Richard
Gilpin—_Med. Candid., anno 50, apud Prof. Spinæus, die_ xxix. _Junii
1676_. This second inscription is only a week before ‘the promotion,
_die_ vi. _Julii 1676_.’ Gilpin ‘lodged’ with Professor Spinæus during
his brief visit. In the list at close of the Memoir, along with his
other Writings, is given the title-page of the medical Dissertation or
‘Disputation,’ which he read on the occasion and published. In passing,
I may remark that the ‘Disputation’ is entirely technical, so that
there is nothing to interest an unscientific reader.[54]

Returned from Holland as Dr RICHARD GILPIN,—and by this time married to
his second wife, a daughter of a Cumberland squire, Brisco or Briscoe
of Crofton Hall,—he gave himself to his work with unflagging zeal,
with ever-deepening power and influence, and with most gratifying
tokens that he was not labouring in vain, nor spending his strength
for nought. He was now in ‘easy’ circumstances. ‘The purchase,’
says Barnes, ‘of the Lordship of Scaleby had put him into debt, but
he now cleared it off,’ and Mr Barnes went with him to Sir Richard
Musgrave, and got the conveyances finished, and this because ‘by the
encouragement his ministry met with from the liberality of the people,
and his emoluments by the practice of physic, he [had] raised a
considerable estate.’[55] He was vigilant as a ‘watchman’ on the walls
of Zion; and as he mellowed into a beautiful old age, surrounded by a
gifted and affectionate family, and having ‘troops of friends,’ he came
to be _the_ representative man of Nonconformity, so that the ‘care’ of
all their churches, in large measure, came upon him. Very pleasant must
have been those holiday ‘escapes’ from smoky Newcastle to the sylvan
solitudes and brightness of Scaleby, which he interposed between his
toils.

His Congregation enormously increased—at a bound probably, for, on
the death of William Durant in 1681, his ‘flock’ was received by
Gilpin.[56] Accordingly, in the course of years, he received several
‘helpers.’ One was the excellent William Pell, M.A., who, ‘ejected’
from Great Stainton in 1662, after being ‘seven years minister of a
congregation at Boston,’ removed to Newcastle, where, says Calamy, ‘he
became assistant to Dr Gilpin, and died there, aged 63.’ This was in
1698.[57] Another was Timothy Manlove, M.D., who settled at Pontefract
in 1688, removed to Leeds in 1694, and became assistant to Dr Gilpin in
1698. He died August 3, 1699, and Gilpin preached two ‘Sermons’ before
his funeral, informed by a fine spirit. They were published; and the
title-page will be found in our list of his Writings at close.

As before with the ‘Temple Rebuilt,’ it was only by constraint that
Gilpin issued these Sermons—two in one. ‘The following Discourse,’
he says, ‘was preached without the least thought of offering it to
public view; and yet I was persuaded to yield to the publication of
it to prevent the printing of more imperfect notes.’ The melancholy
duty interrupted a series of Sermons on ‘Striving to enter in at
the strait gate,’ and from Galatians v. 16, ‘This I say then, Walk
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh;’ but,
he continues, ‘having received an intimation that my dear brother
and fellow-labourer, now deceased, had found such comfort in his
meditations of this scripture in his prospect of death, that he
expressed his desires that his funeral sermon might be upon this text,’
[Romans viii. 35-39,] he had chosen it. I have space for only a very
few sentences from these ‘Sermons’ as follow:—“In all these things we
are more than conquerors.” It is a glorious victory to stand in an
evil day when Satan hath drawn up all his forces against us. It is
a glorious victory not only to escape without loss, but to gain by
his opposition. Thus we outshoot him in his own bow; and all this,
_sine labore et sudore_, easily through Divine assistance, (page 17.)
Again: “We are led by the Spirit” ver. 14. Whether we read the sense
backward or forward it holds true, “as many as are led by the Spirit
are the sons of God,” and “as many as are the sons of God have been and
shall be led by the Spirit,” (page 30.) He pays affectionate tribute
to his departed ‘assistants.’ ‘It hath pleased God Almighty and the
all-wise Disposer of all things to make another breach upon us. It is
not long since he took Mr Pell from us, and now he hath called home Mr
Manlove, both of them excellent men, worthy ministers of the Gospel,
singularly both of them fitted with abilities for their work. They
were successively my dear brethren and fellow-labourers in this part
of God’s vineyard. It must be acknowledged that it is a stroke to be
lamented: and if we look upon the present Providence we may have some
cause to fear that when God is discharging His servants from His work,
and paying them their wages, that He may shortly break up His house
with us,’ (page 21.)

From what must have been a large correspondence, only two letters
of Dr GILPIN have come down to us, in so far as known. The one is
an unimportant ‘note’ given in Horsley’s ‘Life of Dr Harle,’ (8vo,
1730,)—not worth reprinting; the other hitherto unpublished, and of
much interest and value, as shewing how staunch and true he was to the
last in his Nonconformity, and how his one fear in his ‘old age’ was
lest the Church of England should absorb his large congregation on his
death.

This Letter is among the Ayscough MSS. 4275 in the British Museum
(Birchiana.) We have transcribed it _verbatim_.


 ‘NEWCASTLE, _Decemb. 13 ‘98_.

 ‘DEARE SR,—Since I writ last to you concerning ye proposed
 correspondence, I received a lr from you, wherein you give answer to
 yr two obiections wch I had mentioned to you. Your lr I communicated
 to ye brethren; but then there arose new mutterings about ye designe
 of yr late reflections on the circular lre, [and they] have taken hold
 of ye same advantages against it: so yt at present little is to be
 expected of any procedure in yt matter till men see what will become
 of ye publick outcry against it.

 ‘It hath pleased God to take from me my deare assistant, Mr Pell, by a
 feaver; we buryed him last weeke. It is a sad stroke upon us all, but
 it falls at present most heavy upon me. Ever since his sickness, it
 became necessary for me (such are our circumstances) to preach twice
 every Lord’s day, and I must continue to do so at least every other
 Lord’s day for some time, because there are a small party (and but
 a very small one) who have formed a designe, and are now encouraged
 upon this sad occasion to open it. This party were ye few remainders
 of Mr Durant’s congregation, who have kept communion wth ours in all
 ordinances, wthout making any exceptions, about 15 years; but when old
 Mr Barnes (their politick engineer) brought home his young son Thomas,
 from London, they presently shewed their intentions to choose him for
 their pastor; but as introductory to that they (in my absence) thrust
 him into ye pulpit, without so much as asking leave. I was silent,
 and suffered him to preach in ye evenings; but they being weary of
 that—few people staying to heare him—they thought it more conduceable
 to their designe to separate from us, and set up at ye Anabaptists’
 meeting-house; but no great party would follow them, and now they have
 chosen him to be their pastor, though before this he had in our pulpit
 vented some unsound Crispian notions, and at last had ye confidence
 to contradict what I had preached about preparation to conversion.
 For this, I thought it necessary to give him a publick rebuke, and
 to answer his exceptions. That theire designe is to worme us out of
 or meeting-house, and to breake or congregation, is visible to all:
 they now openly claime ye meeting-house for their pastor’s use, (when
 he pleaseth,) and pretend old Mr Hutchinson (upon whose ground ye
 house is built) promised them so much when they contributed towards
 ye charge of building; but Mr Jonathan Hutchinson, his son, denyes
 any such promise, and stands firmly to us, though Mr Barnes (his
 father-in-law) surprised him wth solicitations; but we offer to repay
 them all ye money they contributed towards ye building.

 ‘You see, Sr, how much I need your prayers, and (if it could be)
 ye nomination of a man of parts, prudence, piety, and authority
 to assist me at present, and to succeed me when I am gone. _Much
 of ye dissenters’ interest in ye North depends upon ye welfare of
 or congregation. The Episcopall party have long since made their
 prognostik, yt token I die, ye congregation will be broken, and then
 there will be an end of ye dissenters’ interest in Newcastle._ I pray
 give my deare love and respects to all ye brethren wth you, and
 pardon the trouble given by, Revd. sr, your affectionate brother and
 servant,

 RICH. GILPIN.’

 On the 4th page, folio—For the Reverend Mr Richard Stratton, minister
 of ye gospel, at the house, Hatton Garden, in London.

We have little more to tell of the author of _Dæmonologia Sacra_.
He survived his estimable ‘assistant’ Manlove but a short time.
But to the last he was ‘in harness.’ Looking over old Papers he
came upon a Sermon which he had preached so far back as ‘1660,’ at
the ‘Assize’ in Carlisle, revised and published it; and it bears
the same date of ‘1700’ as his own death: so that, like Sibbes, he
must have had proof-sheets passing through his hands very near ‘the
end.’ The ‘Epistle’ or ‘Preface’ prefixed is as terse and effective
as ever; and the ‘Sermon’ itself manly, outspoken, faithful, and
truly characteristic of the man. The title-page will be found in our
list.[58] This ‘Sermon’ having been preached before Judge Twisselton
and Serjeant Bernard and the ‘gentry’ present at the Assize, is
specially searching on ‘sins’ in ‘high places,’ for Gilpin acted on
the sentiment of Edward Boteler, who, in his own quaint way, says of
Earl Mulgrave, ‘He knew what great evils evil great ones are; that they
have many followers, go they whither they will, and seldom go to hell
alone.’ [As after, p. 48.] I detach a single ‘particular’ from this
weighty Sermon:—‘If magistrates advance not the throne of Christ, they
commonly prove furious against it, and plagues of God’s people. If this
proceed from a careless blockish temper, then judgment of itself will
degenerate into gall, and the “fruit of righteousness into hemlock.”
Justice, like water, purifies itself by motion, when it “runs down
like a stream:” if it be a standing water, it corrupts, and _corruptio
optimorum pessima_. If this neglect proceed from enmity to Christ,
then, seeing they have the greatest advantages in their hands to do
evil, they may “establish wickedness by a law:” they can “push with
the horn, and tread down the pasture with their feet.” [Ezek. xxxiv.
18.] “When the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.” [Prov. xxix. 2.]
Or if it proceed from apostasy, then “the revolters are profound to
make slaughter.” [Hosea v. 27.] And this happens not so much from the
churlish and cruel dispositions of men, as from God’s giving them up
judicially to rage against His ways, either as a scourge to his people,
or in order to their own ruin. Hence it is noted that the cruellest
persecutions were set on foot by emperors, sometimes of the best parts,
and most civil dispositions, as Antoninus Philosophus, Trajan, Severus,
Decius, &c. Magistrates are for the most part like the prophet’s figs,
either very good or very bad: they are the heads of the people, and
all diseases in the head are dangerous; so when the leprosy appeared
in the head deeper than the skin, the party was pronounced utterly
unclean,’ (pp. 13, 14.)

Calamy and Mr Thompson of Stockton thus record the ‘good man’s
end:’—‘He went,’ says the former, ‘into the pulpit the last time he was
in it under a feverish indisposition, and preached from 2 Cor. v. 2,
“For in this we groan, earnestly,” &c.; and to the surprise of all, he
rather ‘groaned’ than spake this sermon. The lungs being at that time
too tender for work, his disease seized that part, and he was brought
home in a _peripneumonia_, which in ten days put a period to his
life.’[59] Mr Thompson, in his ‘Diary,’[60] thus writes:—‘Dr Gilpin,
y^t eminent servant of God, died much lamented by all, on (Tuesday)
Feb. 13, 1699/1700, about eight o’clock in y^e morning.’[61] He was
interred in the churchyard of All Saints, Newcastle. And the following
is the ‘entry’ in its Register of Burials:—‘1699 [= 1699-1700] Feb. 16.
Rich. Gilpin, doctor of physick.’[62] The ‘scutcheon of the ‘Kentmere’
Gilpins was placed on his coffin. He left a widow, who retired, as her
husband had asked, with her family, to Scaleby Castle.

From point to point of our Memoir, it has been our endeavour to bring
out the character of Dr Gilpin under his varying circumstances; so
that, unless I have failed more than I can suppose, my Readers must
by this time—even out of the scanty material which has been left to
us—have formed an idea of him, such as will bear me out, I anticipate,
in characterising him summarily as a man of no ordinary type, large of
soul,—with the spaciousness of genius that has been hallowed,—strong
and inevitable in his convictions, quick and sensitive in conscience,
intense and full of _momentum_ in whatever he undertook; and, as his
‘_Dæmonologia Sacra_’ proves, profound, sagacious, keen in his scrutiny
of human and celestial-demoniac problems, and one who must have carried
sunshine with him wherever he went. His portrait—preserved in Nova
Scotia by a descendant, Dr Gilpin of Halifax—as engraved in the earlier
edition of Palmer, shews the liquid eye of genius, the mobile lip,
the brow compact and packed of brain, a nose somewhat audacious, and
a touch of sauciness in the chin, while the long cavalier-like curled
‘locks’ of his wig seem to proclaim the lord of the manor of Scaleby
as much as the Preacher; for as Edward Boteler puts it of another,
with Fullerian alliteration, ‘Though he was very humble, yet he knew
how to be a man and no worm, as well as when to be “a worm and no man.”
He knew when to lay his honour in the dust, and when to let no dust be
upon his honour.’[63]

I would now bring together several ‘estimates’ of our Worthy by those
who knew him well, and thus could form an accurate judgment concerning
him. First of all, I am fortunate enough to be able to give, from
an old, worn, and weather-stained holograph preserved by Prebendary
Gilpin, a quaint ‘Poem,’ which probably represents in portions of it
the inscription placed on his ‘monument’—long since mouldered away.
Here it is, rude and halting in rhyme and rhythm, but biographically
interesting:—


               TO THE MEMORY OF YE EXCELLENT DR GILPIN.

    In mournfull numbers I did weep of late,
    Criton the wise,[64] and sweet Philander’s fate,[65]
    And Calvus,[66] to ye learned world well known.
    Oppress’d and wth repeated grief borne down,
    Palæmon’s[67] death succeeding struck me dumb,
    My tears were all I offer’d at his tomb.
      Thus th’ Eastern sage[68] wth wondrous patience bore
    Thrice dismal news, but he could bear no more,
    Did weep, fall down, and silently adore.
    My trouble now swells o’er, and artless strays,
    Where nature yields, and passion leads ye ways.
      Thou man of peace! born in our publick rage,
    Designed to correct ye giddy age:
    Thy solid judgment did resist ye flame,
    In midst of civil fury still ye same.
    When the grave world run madly uniform,
    Serene within thou weather’d out ye storm.
    The miter thou refused with a brow
    Wch calmness shew’d, and resolution too.
    Esteemed by ye good, by ill men fear’d,
    By ye wise admired, and followed by ye herd.
    Ev’n Satan did trembling on thy lectures wait,
    When thou display’d his mysteries of state.
    Begg’d leave to plague thee, but he begg’d in vain,
    Vowing revenge upon ye list’ning train.
      Great prophet! who could’st prudently dispense,
    With a becoming warmth, substantial sense;
    In such a manner thou thy God addrest
    As both thy rev’rence and thy wants exprest.
    Thy zeal was not confined to th’ sacred chair,
    But bright through all thy actions did appear.
    Thy spotless life thy doctrine best apply’d,
    Truth recommending wch thou first had try’d.

    Our honour and defence[69] with thee depart,
    The gift of preaching and ye healing art.
                                        J. H.

    Artes infernas Divinà Gilpinus arte
      Detexit, vicit, jam requiescit ovans.
                                     _Id._

    Presbyterûm præses, præco optimus, et medicinæ
      Doctor Gilpinus, conditur hoc tumulo.
                                        T. P.

Fitly accompanying this ‘elegy’ and—as verse little superior
but—similarly valuable as a ‘testimony,’ come the lines of Dr Harle,
which Horsley thus prefaces:—‘I have oft heard him mention the severe
shock the death of Dr Gilpin gave him.’ His tribute to Gilpin occurs
in a ‘copy of verses upon the death of the Rev. John Turnbull of North
Shields.’ It is as follows:—

    ‘How oft have we with admiration hung
    On the angelic Gilpin’s pow’rful tongue,
    Who in perfection had the mighty art,
    To form the soul and captivate the heart;
    Pour Gospel balm into the wounded soul,
    And vengeance on the harden’d conscience rowl.
    When he hell’s gloomy stratagems did clear[70]
    Man ceased, and Satan then began to fear
    His empire’s utter ruin drawing near.
    Great man! whom goodness did to greatness raise,
    Nor forced applause, nor warmly courted praise.
    The tempting dignity he did despise
    Made him more glorious still in good men’s eyes.’[71]
                             (As before, pp. 20, 21.)

I have next to set forth the famous ‘story’ of THOMAS STORY the
Quaker missionary-preacher—of his interviews with Dr Gilpin; wherein
it will be seen he shews the deepest respect for him, albeit in
his self-opinionativeness unconvinced of the erroneous tendency of
his ‘views’ and practice. These ‘notes’ are found in a folio that
has now gone out of sight, and become among the rarest of rare
Quaker books.[72] The narrative is too tedious for reproduction in
full; but a specimen will interest. Having told of his conversion
to the principles of Quakerism, and more especially of the result
of the reading of ‘three small books,’ he goes on: ‘Some time
after this, [1691,] Dr Gilpin, before mentioned, sent his son, a
counsellor-[at-law], under whom I had been initiated into the study
of the law, and who was one of those at the tavern aforesaid, and
still retained a great affection for me—to invite me to his house
at Scaleby Castle, and desired to see some of the Quakers’ books,
supposing I had been imposed upon by reading them; and I sent him,
as I remember, all that I had. Soon after I had parted with these
books, I observed a cloud come over my mind and an unusual concern;
and therein the two sacraments—commonly so termed—came afresh into my
remembrance, and divers scriptures and arguments _pro_ and _con_: and
then I was apprehensive the Doctor was preparing something of that
sort to discourse me upon; and I began to search out some scriptures
in defence of my own sentiments on those subjects: but as I proceeded
a little in that work I became more uneasy and clouded: upon which
I laid aside the Scripture and sat still, looking towards the Lord
for counsel. For I considered the Doctor as a man of great learning,
religious in his way, an ancient preacher and writer too, famous in
Oliver’s time, and a “throne” among his brethren: and that he might
advance such subtilties as I could not readily confute nor would
concede to, as knowing them erroneous, though I might not be suddenly
furnished with arguments to demonstrate their fallacy; and so might
receive hurt. And then it was clear in my understanding that as he was
in his own will and strength, though with a good intent, in his own
sense, searching the letter [of the Scripture,] and depending upon
that and his own wisdom, acquirements, and subtilty, leaning to his
own spirit and understanding, I must decline that way and trust in the
Spirit of Christ, the divine Author of the Holy Scriptures. And as
this caution was presented in the life and virtue of truth, I rested
satisfied therein, and searched no further on that occasion. When I
went to his house, he entered into a discourse on those subjects; and
had such passages of Scripture folded down as he purposed to use. And
when I observed it, I was confirmed that my sight of him in my own
chamber at Carlisle, and of his work some days before, was right, [as
if, to intercalate a remark, it needed prescience to foretell that the
Doctor’s appeal would be ‘to the Law and to the Testimony’!!] and
my mind was strengthened thereby. But before he began to move upon
the subject, he dismissed every other person out of the room, so that
himself and I remained alone. The first thing he said was, in a calm
manner, to admonish me to be very cautious how I espoused the errors
of the Quakers; for he had heard of late and with concern that I had
been among them, or seemed to incline that way. I answered that I had
not been much among them, nor seen any of their books but those I had
sent him, and knew not of any errors they held. Yes, said he, they
deny the ordinances of Christ, the two sacraments—Baptism and the Lord
s Supper; and then opened his book [his!] at one of his down-folded
leaves, where he read thus, 1 Cor. i. 2, xi. 23, 26....’ Now follows
the usual delusive appeals beyond the ‘letter,’ as ‘carnal,’ and all
the unconsciously-blaspheming, ‘_setting-aside_,’ of plain words that
reveal ‘the mind of the Spirit,’ commingled with a simple-minded
self-superiority which need not be illustrated. Very patient and
wonderingly-silent must have been the Doctor with his undoubtedly pious
and acute, but most perverse, visitor. He thus closes, ‘The Doctor
did not oppose this, [about prayer,] but only said I had given him
better satisfaction on that point than he had found in the book; and
afterwards he was much more free and familiar with me than before, or
than I expected: and so we parted in friendship, and I returned in
peace and gladness,’[73] (pp. 41-45.)

But by far the most important, as it is the most elaborate, ‘estimate’
of our Worthy, is that of Calamy, who, usually marked by judicial calm,
and chary of praise, glows and burns in the fulness of his admiration.
The fervour of his eulogy of Gilpin contrasts with his usual
matter-of-fact statements, and surprises by its suddenness and passion.
With this I shall close those personal tributes by contemporaries. Thus
the ‘Account’ under ‘Grastoke’ runs:—

‘Richard Gilpin, M.D. He was designed by God for great work in his
church, and was singularly qualified for it. He had a large share of
natural abilities, which he had wonderfully improved by an unwearied
industry and long and hard study, so that there was scarce anything
that accomplished a man, a scholar, a physician, or divine, but he
possessed it in great perfection.

‘His stature was of the middle sort, rather inclining to the lesser
size; but his presence was far from being mean. There was a pleasing
mixture of majesty and sweetness, affableness and gravity in his
aspect. He could readily set his countenance to a severity or mildness
as the business or persons he had to do with required; and he did it
not by any artificial affectation, but naturally and with ease, in such
a way as kept up the dignity of his profession, and to such an end as
made religion both more awful and more alluring.

‘He had a delicate, fine, and polite fancy, expressing itself in a
plenty of words, which gave clear and lively images of things, and kept
up the life, strength, and elegancy of the English tongue.

‘His memory was strong and faithful, and gave back with great exactness
what he committed to it, though it was a treasury of very great
reading, and filled with variety of matter in several sciences.

‘To these was added a most penetrating, discerning judgment. This
enabled him in reading to choose well, and to form a just opinion of
the sentiments of others, which was always with that candour as made
another considerable addition to his many excellences.

‘He had so well digested all necessary parts of learning that he had
them in readiness when he needed them. He used such things in their
proper place, and adorned his discourses with them as there was
occasion; and was able to make that which was little else but pageantry
appear with a due gracefulness and beautiful in its season.

‘As he had a rich fund of sense, learning, experience, and reading to
fit him for a divine, so he had all the qualifications necessary for a
preacher in the highest degree that can well be thought attainable. The
several endowments that make a man a true, divine, orator did jointly
meet in him.

‘He had a voice strong enough to command the most usual public places
of divine worship. It was piercing and sweet, and naturally well
modelled. He had the true skill of fixing an accent upon particular
words where the matter needed it. There was a force attended his way
of speaking without an undue transport. He was vigorous and vehement,
but under great conduct. His expressions were conceived and his sermons
delivered without the use of notes: and he was qualified for that way
of preaching. His pregnant memory, his ready invention, his great
presence of mind, his natural fluency, that made him able to speak well
and gracefully, with ease and assurance, entitled him to it. He could
clothe any matter in apt words, with all the ornaments of a regular
elocution. He fell neither into too swift an utterance, nor was forced
upon any unbecoming, unguarded expressions. There was no restraint
upon his delivery by being thus managed. It made him only capable of
speaking what he did with much greater warmth and life and decency of
gesture. It had all the smoothness of style and propriety of words to
make it acceptable. It had all the graces of natural oratory, all the
decencies of behaviour to recommend it. And that which completed all,
it came from a serious mind, the concern of which was visibly to be
read both in his countenance and expressions. He spoke from his very
heart, as appeared sometimes in the force of his words, sometimes
in his tears, and usually in both. He spake with solemnity and
seriousness, with gravity and majesty, and yet with so much meekness
mixed with all, as declared him to be a man of God and ambassador of
Christ. There was a lively air of delivery, a sacred vehemence of
affection in what he spake, that were very much his peculiar talent.
He knew how to temper his discourses with due motion. His gestures
were admirably taking and graceful, and further expressive of what he
was delivering. In prayer he was likewise most solemn and fervent, and
usually expressed himself much in Scripture language, and with a flood
of affection. The very fountains of it seemed in the performance of
that duty to be broken up and the great deep of it opened. It often
forced him to silence for a little till it had flowed out at his eyes.
In his pulpit discourses he was a very great example, both as to
the design and method of them. His design was vast and noble in the
ordinary course of his preachings. He usually proposed some subject,
and pursued it on various texts. Every head with its enlargements was
closely studied, and his particulars under each general were admirably
chosen. If he had ever so many, none could be wanting; if never so few,
there seemed to need no more. In the handling of any subject, after
he had explained and proved what he had undertaken, with a great deal
of clearness and affection, he was most plain, familiar, and moving
in his applications. His way in these was another particular talent
that he had. In all his uses he was excellent, but mostly so in his
exhortations. He made them as so many set discourses of persuasion.
They were delivered with most address and greatest warmth and vigour.
He entered upon them usually with some rousing, lively preface to
gain attention, and then offered his motives, which were prosecuted
with the most pungent expressions. Here his earnestness increased,
together with his voice, and the vehemency of it. He had a feeling
apprehension of the importance of what he was then urging upon his
hearers, and every word was big with concern of mind. He affected an
elaborate eloquence at no time, but least of all then. In easy but
moving expressions, and with a distinguishing πάθος he would plead with
sinners sometimes for a whole sermon together, without flagging in his
affections or suffering his attentive hearers to do it in theirs. He
was a man of a distinguishing knowledge and experience in the mysteries
of Christianity; and of a discerning spirit in understanding a work
of grace upon the hearts of others. With a clear head and searching
skill in divine things, he had a sincere and warm heart. The fire of
zeal and the light of knowledge accompanied one another. He kept up a
serious temper at all times and in all places and company, without much
discernible alteration or abatement; but this did not in the least sour
his disposition, which was cheerful, though thinking and solid. His
skill in government appeared in the managing a numerous congregation
of very different opinions and tempers. His integrity, modesty,
and contempt of the world, in refusing the bishopric of Carlisle,
as another of the family (Mr Bernard Gilpin) had done before him,
consonant to their motto, _dictis factisque simplex_. The care of the
churches lay upon him. His unblamable character had obtained amongst
all but those whose ill-nature would suffer them to speak well of none
who differed from them. He was much respected by many for the good he
had done them as a physician. Among persons of rank and quality in the
parts where he lived, all necessary means were scarce thought to have
been used if he had not been consulted. He went about doing good to
the souls and bodies of men. This world was not in his eye, none could
charge him with anything like covetousness.’

Be it remembered that these are the ‘words’ in every case, of men who
knew not to flatter, and spake out of ‘perfect knowledge.’ Above all,
be it specially remembered that I have been quoting from no ‘Funeral
Sermon,’ with its almost inevitable exaggerations.

       *       *       *       *       *

It only remains that I give a complete annotated list of the extant
writings of Dr Gilpin, arranged chronologically as published, also an
account of the manuscript of _Dæmonologia Sacra_, and the destruction
of other MSS.

I. The Agreement of the Associated Ministers and Churches of the
Counties of Cumberland and Westmerland [_sic._]. With something for
Explication and Exhortation annexed. London: Printed by T. L., for
Simon Waterson, and are sold at the sign of the Globe, in Paul’s
Churchyard, and by Richard Scot, Bookseller in Carlisle. 1656. Pp. 59.
4to.

 ⁂ In the copy of above in St Patrick’s (Cathedral) Library, (Marsh’s,)
 at p. 52, there is a careful correction in Gilpin’s autograph of
 Carolostadius for Oecolompadius, which itself confirms the authorship.
 There is no name on title-page or elsewhere; but Calamy gives it in
 his enumeration. Account, vol. ii. p. 157.

II. The Temple Rebuilt: a Discourse on Zachery vi. 13. Preached at
a Generall Meeting of the Associated Ministers of the County of
Cumberland, at Keswick, May 19. By Richard Gilpin, Pastor of the Church
at Graistock, in Cumberland. London: Printed by E. T., for Luke Fawne,
at the Parrot, in Paul’s Churchyard, and are to be sold by Richard
Scott, Bookseller in Carlisle. 1658. 4to. Ep. Dedy., pp. 6, and 40. On
reverse of title-page is this note: ‘We, the Associate Ministers of
the County of Cumberland, do earnestly desire our reverend brother, Mr
Richard Gilpin, to print his acceptable Sermon preached this day at our
Generall Meeting.

  TIMOTHY TULLIE, _Modr. pro Temp._
  JOHN JACKSON, _Scribe_.’

 ⁂ My own copy has inscribed in Gilpin’s autograph, ‘_Ex dono
 Authoris_,’ and again misprints are carefully corrected.

III. Disputatio Medica Inauguralis de Hysterica Passione, quam Præside
Deo Opt. Max. ex autoritate magnifici D. Rectoris D. Johannis Coccii,
in Inclytâ Lugd. Batav. Academia Eloquentiæ et Historiarum Professoris
celeberrimi nec non amplissimi Senatûs Academici, Consensu et Almæ
Facultatis Medicæ Decreto, Pro Gradu Doctoratus, Summisque in Medicina
Honoribus ac Privilegiis legitime obtinendis, Eruditorum examini
subjicit Richardus Gilpin, Anglus Cumbriens. Die 6 Julii, loco horisque
solitis, ante merid. Lugduni Batavorum, Apud Viduam et Haeredes
Johannis Elsevirii Academiæ Typograph. 1676. 4to. Pp. 8.

 ⁂ The following is the dedication to his (second) father-in-law:
 ‘Celeberrimo et virtute maxime conspicuo viro Gulielmo Brisco de
 Crofton, in Comitatu Cumbriæ Armigero, Socero suo venerando. Hanc
 Disputationem Inauguralem observantiæ signum offert et inscribit
 Richardus Gilpin.’

IV. _Dæmonologia Sacra._ 1677. 4to. See our reprint, pp. 2, 7, 126,
312, for general and special title-pages.

 ⁂ In our ‘Prefatory Note,’ I have characterised this the most
 important of Gilpin’s works, and add here a little from the Barnes’
 ‘Memoirs,’ (as before,) and from one well capable of pronouncing an
 opinion. 1. Barnes: ‘What had greatly raised Dr Gilpin’s fame was
 his treatise of “Satan’s Temptations,” which, in imitation of a book
 of King James I., he entitled “Dæmonologia Sacra,” the largest and
 completest of any extant upon that subject. Being out of print, both
 it and an account of its author, and others of his writings, may be
 given the world when his posterity think it convenient, (pp. 145,
 146.) 2. John Ryland, M.A.: ‘If ever there was a man that was clearly
 acquainted with the cabinet-councils of hell, this author is the man,’
 [in his ‘Cotton Mather.’]

V. The Comforts of Divine Love: Preached upon the Occasion of the much
Lamented Death of the Reverend Mr Timothy Manlove. With his Character,
done by another Hand. London. 1700. 12mo. Epistle, pp. 2. Character,
pp. 4. Sermons, pp. 46.

 ⁂ The Williams’ copy is marked contemporaneously ‘16th January 1699.’
 Prefixed is a portrait of Dr Manlove—for, like Gilpin and Pringle, he
 too was an M.D.—by Vander Gucht.

VI. An Assize Sermon, Preached before Judge Twisselton and Serg.
Bernard at Carlisle, September the 10th, Anno 1660. And Now Publish’d
and Recommended to the Magistrates of the Nation, as a Means, by God’s
Blessing, to quicken them to a serious Pursuit of the Honourable and
truly Religious Design, for the Reformation of Manners, which is now
on foot, and Countenanced by the Nobility, Bishops, and Judges, in
the late Account of the Societies for the Reformation of Manners, and
applauded by the Serious and Religious Men of all Persuasions. By R.
Gilpin, now Minister of the Gospel in Newcastle-upon-Tyne. London:
Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, near Mercers
Chapple; and Sarah Burton, Bookseller at Newcastle. 1700. 4to.

I have now to notice the MANUSCRIPTS of Gilpin. By the courtesy of
the Rev. Bernard Gilpin, Bengeo, Hertford, I have had confided to me
the original holograph of ‘_Dæmonologia Sacra_,’ and in our reprint
I have found it clearing up occasional misprints and mis-pointings.
The MS. is not complete; the collation is as follows: General title
and three special titles, pp. 3. To the Reader, pp. 6, signed ‘Rich.
Gilpin.’ Treatise on to Part II., page 255, (in our edition,) ending
in line 21st from top, 4 disqui[eting].’ The penmanship is clear and
legible, with few erasures, and having a margin on either side. On the
top of the page whereon Part I. begins, there is the date, ‘Newcastle,
July 9, 1671.’[74] Further: Calamy, in his ‘Account,’ thus mentions a
_manuscript_ treatise of which he had heard: ‘Among other things he
hath left behind him in manuscript, a valuable Treatise concerning
The Pleasantness of the Ways of Religion; and in whatsoever hands it
lies, it is pity but it should see the light,’ (vol. ii. p. 157.) It
is to be lamented that this appeal was not responded to, as Prebendary
Gilpin records sorrowfully its loss as follows: ‘Among his other papers
was found a treatise of considerable length, prepared, as it seemed,
for the press, “On the Pleasures of Religion.” This MS., and several
other MSS. of Dr Gilpin’s, consisting chiefly of heads and divisions
of sermons, from which he used commonly to preach, fell into the hands
of the author of this memoir; and being deposited in a box with
other papers, and placed in the corner of a closet, were attacked by
what is commonly called dry damp, and were almost entirely spoiled.
If anything had been interposed between the bottom of the box and
the floor so as to have suffered the air to circulate, the mischief
had been prevented;’ and what levity in the custodier of so precious
a legacy that this little care was neglected. Mr Gilpin of Juniper
Green writes me concerning these spoiled MSS.: ‘Nevertheless [_i.e._,
notwithstanding their utter destruction by the dry-rot] my mother kept
the fragments all the days of her life with great veneration. But now
these relics—they were little better than ashes—of our ancestor have
perished.’

I have thus done my best to revivify the story of RICHARD GILPIN, His
highest ‘record’ is ‘on high;’ but those who love the memory of our
Worthy, will, it is hoped, accept kindly our endeavours to keep his
grave green, and to import, so to speak, personality to the name in an
old title-page—of one who did valiant service for The Master:

    ‘Sword and spear he might not wield,
    But with faith his heart to shield,
    Marched he to the battle-field.’—[‘_Paradisus Animæ._’]

And so I close with like verses by leal-hearted Sir Egerton Brydges:

    ‘His tongue, the Spirit’s two-edged sword,
      Had magic in its blade;
    For while it smote with every word,
      It healed the wounds it made.
    Yet, who so humbly walked as he,
      A conqueror in the field;
    Wreathing the rose of victory
      Around his radiant shield!’
                       ALEXANDER B. GROSART.

 LIVERPOOL.


APPENDIX TO MEMOIR.

A.—Page xvi.—ANCESTRY AND DESCENDANTS OF THE GILPINS.

The different ‘County’ Historians, and Works on the old families of
England, give more or less full details concerning the Gilpins in all
their many branches. The ‘Arms’ are _Or_, a boar passant sable, armed
and tusked Gules. A fine book-plate of this adorns Prebendary Gilpin’s
Family Manuscript. These ‘Arms’ are hereditarily understood to have
been derived from the fact that a Richard de Gylpyn or Gilpin—who is
regarded as the founder of the house—killed a wild boar which had
infested the neighbourhood of Kentmere, in the reign of King John. [See
Nicholson and Burns’ ‘Antiquities of Westmoreland and Cumberland,’
(as before,) vol. i. pp. 135-137.] This is confirmed by Sir Daniel
Fleming’s Collection of Pedigrees, in the possession of Sir W. Fleming
of Rydal, Co. Westm. Bart. A.D. 1713; and is given by Bishop Carleton
in his Life of Bernard Gilpin. From these authorities, and various
other Family documents, I construct this genealogy of the elder House:—

1. Richard ... founder. He a son, 2. William, who married a daughter of
Thomas Ayray, bailiff of Kentmere. He a son, 3. Richard, who married
daughter of Fleming of Coningston, from whom many descendants are found
in and around Kendal. He a son, 4. William. He a son, 5. Richard. He a
son, 6. William, a captain at Bosworth field, and there killed. He a
brother, 7. Edwin, two of whose sons were distinguished—viz., (1.) The
ambassador of Queen Elizabeth to the States of Holland. (2.) Bernard,
the ‘Apostle of the North,’ was the fourth son. He, [_i.e._, Edwin,] a
son, 8. William. He a son, 9. George. He a son, 10. William. He a son,
11. George. He succeeded by, 12. Christopher Gilpin, a half brother of
George, in whom the direct _male_ line ended. The ‘Kentmere’ estate
sold to Sir Charles Philipson.—[_N._ and _B._—_as before_.]—William,
son of Richard, [= the 4th of our list,] married a daughter of Thomas
Lancaster of Sockbred, who descended of the baron of Kendal. His son
Richard, again [= 5th in our list,] married a daughter of Sir Rowland
Thornborroux, knight of Rampsell. This Richard married as his second
wife Margaret Layton = Enwine, second daughter of Thomas Layton of
Dalemaine, who had several sons—Anthony, Thomas, Sir William, Sir
Bryan, Sir Cuthbert, Sir Richard, all famous men, mostly soldiers, and
some knights of Rhodes. His daughters also intermarried with Redman,
Carelton, Clyborne, and Vaux. We may now tabulate the descent. From
Richard, and his second wife, Margaret Layton, comes—

     Randall = Sykes.
             │
             ├————————┬——————-┬—————————┬————————┬—————————-┐
             │        │       │         │        │          │
          Richard.  John.  Francis.  George.  Bernard.  2 daughters.
             │
     ┌———-——-┼——-—-—-——┬———-—-——-┬————-—-—-┬————-—-┬———-—--┬———-—-—┐
     │       │         │         │         │       │       │       │
  William  George.  Randall.  Bernard   Richard.  Caly.  Mary.  Margaret.
  = Eliz.                    of Houghton   │
  Washington.                 le Spring.    │father of Isaac, father
     │                                                of our Dr Gilpin.
     │
   ┌—┼————————-┬———————┬———————┬————————┬————————-┬———————-┬——————-┐
   │           │       │       │        │         │        │       │
   George.  2d son. 3d son. 4th son. 5th son. 6th son. 7th son.    3.
      │                                                         daughters
      William = * * * * Sandforth.
         │
         George.

[See Hutchinson’s ‘History of Durham,’ vol. ii. 703, account of the
Gilpins, from a paper in the hands of Mr Rob. Sober of Sherburn, near
Durham, without date.—Randall MSS. The last George, at the time of
making out Sober’s pedigree, is said to be living, and owner of the
ancient house of the Gilpins, Kentmere Hall.]

Turning to _Dr Richard Gilpin_, I have had two elaborate pedigrees
(of descent) entrusted to me, by the former of which, it appears our
Worthy had a very large family by, (as I understand,) his two wives.
By this also I find that his second wife was born ‘Oct. 15th, 1625,’
eldest daughter of William Brisco of Crofton—her name Susannah. I have
a suspicion that the first Mrs Gilpin died at Greystoke, and that the
Doctor re-married before leaving it; but owing to the time-worn state
of the Greystoke ‘Registers,’ all the entries that remain concerning
Dr Gilpin’s family are the two children given in our Memoir. Following
William and Susannah were, 1. Isaac, born July 12, 1658; married
Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Clagget. Then, 2. Susanna, born Nov.
27th, 1659; married Matthew Parlis, minister. [The former Susannah must
have died as a child.] Then, 3. Anne, who married Sawrey of Broughton
Tower, Esq. [On this marriage, see Barnes’ ‘Memoir,’ as before, pp.
142, 143.] She was born December 5th, 1660. Then, 4. Elizabeth, born
Aug. 3, 1662; died unmarried. Then, 5. Richard: died of a blow of his
schoolmaster. Then, 6. Mary, born Dec. 28th, 1666; died unmarried.
Then, 7. Dorothy, born Aug. 13, 1668; married, (1.) Jabez Cay, M.D.;
(2.) Eli Fenton. Then, 8. John, born Feb. 13, 1669. [More of him
immediately.] Then, 9. Francis, born July 27, 1671; ob. infant.
Then, 10. Bernard, born Oct. 6, 1672, died in his youth at Jamaica,
unmarried. Then, 11. Francis, born Jan. 27, 1675, died in infancy.
Then, 12. Thomas, born July 27, 1677, died unmarried, June 20, 1700.
Returning upon John, [eighth of this list,] he married Hannah, daughter
of Robert Cay, Esq. of Newcastle, and left large issue, as follows: 1.
Richard, born April 9, 1700, (soon after his grandfather died,) died
unmarried, 1723. 2. Robert, born 17th Aug. 1702, married Ruth, daughter
of Reynold Hall of Newbiggen, Esq. [More of this pair immediately.]
3. William, born Jan. 1, 1700 (?), married Mary, daughter of Thomas
Dickenson, clerk. 4. John, born 1st Sept. 1705. 5. Thomas, born Jan. 8,
1711, ob. 12 March 1713. 6. Susanna. 7. A daughter. 8. Barbara, born
16th May 1710, wife of Braithwaite of Stockton. 9. Susanna, born 28th
April 1712, wife of Isaac Cookson of Newcastle. 10. Hannah, born 22d
May 1715, wife of.... Goldsmith. Returning again upon Robert, [second
of the list from John,] he had issue—1. John, who married daughter of
John Cookson of London. He took the name of Sawrey on succeeding to the
Broughton Tower estate. 2. Richard, died in East Indies. 3. Ruth. 4.
5. Jer. (?). William, [third of list from John,] had issue—1. Thomas,
ob. an infant. 2. John, dead 1809. 3. Robert, _ib._ 4. Hannah, married.
5. William, died 18th September æt. 67. So much for the first paper.
Now for the second, which gives the descendants of the eldest son of
Dr Gilpin, viz., William, born, as stated in Memoir, at Greystoke, 5th
Sept. 1657. He became a barrister-at-law, justice of the peace, and
deputy vice-admiral for county Cumberland, and recorder of the city
of Carlisle; bought Highfield Moor and the tithes of Crosby; died at
Scaleby Castle, Aug. 14, 1724, æt. 67. He married Mary, eldest daughter
and one of the co-heiresses of Henry Fletcher of Talantyre. The issue
were—1. Susan Maria, born at Scaleby Castle, 10th Nov. 1689, wife of
Joshua Dacre Appleby of Kirklevington, by whom she had issue—[will be
enumerated immediately]. 2. Anne, born April 14, 1691. 3. Richard, born
6th Feb. 1692, married Mary, daughter of Enoch Hudson. 4. Dorothy,
ob. an infant. 5. Henry, _ibid._ 6. William, born at Whitehaven,
married Margaret, daughter of G. Langstaff. 7. Henry, born Oct. 1692,
ob. at Jamaica. 8. John Bernard, born at Scaleby, Jan. 24, 1701, ob.
circa 1776, buried at Carlisle Cathedral. He married Matilda, eldest
daughter of George Langstaff, ob. circa 1773, buried at Carlisle. 9.
Dorothy, born at Scaleby, wife of Eaglivfield Griffith, born 4th Nov.
1703. 10. George, born at Scaleby, 29th Aug. 1706, married Elizabeth,
third daughter of George Langstaff. Returning on Susan Maria, [eldest
daughter,] she had a daughter, Elizabeth, born at Whitehaven, Feb.
12, 1708, ob. an infant, and a son, William, born June 1724, ob. at
Whitehaven, 4th Dec. 1779. He married Elizabeth Hodgson, daughter of
Robert Hodgson of Whitehaven, died at Denbigh Castle, 25th April 1792,
æt. 60. They had issue—1. William Gilpin, born at Whitehaven, 12th Nov.
1758, ob. 15th Oct. 1822, at East Sheen, Surrey, having married Sarah,
daughter of George Holland, Esq. of London, in 1793. Finally returning
on John Bernard, [eighth, _supra_,] he was father of the Rev. William
Gilpin, vicar of Boldre, prebendary of Salisbury, died April 5, 1804 at
Boldre, æt 80. He will not soon be forgotten, as his delightful books,
with their carefully finished ‘Illustrations’ on ‘Picturesque Beauty,’
are gathering increasing value as they become older. He had issue by
his first cousin. John Bernard Gilpin, Esq., who went to Philadelphia,
and afterwards became British Consul at Rhode Island. His descendants
are now partly in Nova Scotia, [J. Bernard Gilpin, Esq., M.D.,
Halifax,] and in England and Scotland; and Rev. William Gilpin, born
April 8, 1757, rector—an excellent and venerable man, and clergyman—in
county Salop; and Sawrey Gilpin, born Oct. 30, 1733, ob. 1808. For the
two Papers whence most of the preceding details have been collected,
I owe thanks to my friend Joshua Wilson, Esq., Nevil Park, Tunbridge
Wells. I may add that in Prebendary Gilpin’s Family-Manuscript there
are ‘Memoirs’ of William Gilpin, Esq., the recorder of Carlisle,
containing valuable and interesting letters to and from the Lowther
family. The ‘Recorder’ was a man of mark. His portrait is at Scaleby
Castle. Next, severally William ‘merchant at Whitehaven,’ [See Story,
as before.] Henry, of ‘the Navy,’ Thomas, John Bernard, Anne, Dorothy,
Susannah Maria, the eldest daughter, who must have been a lady of
uncommon originality and force of character, and largeness of heart.
[As _above_. She was married to Dacre Appleby, Esq. of Kirklinton,
contiguous to Scaleby Castle. Curiously enough, their eldest son
married a daughter of the Bishop of Carlisle. Mrs Appleby ‘was
followed by all the country, in tears, to her grave.’] John Bernard,—a
very capital ‘Memoir’ of a gallant soldier. Somerville, in ‘The
Chase,’ refers to the Windsor ‘roads’ constructed under his military
supervision. He was a familiar friend of the good Colonel Gardiner.
There are glimpses of the Rebellion of 1745 in this Memoir, throwing
light on events at Carlisle. At ‘leisure hours’ he cultivated painting,
and when he lived at Carlisle, he had sometimes half a dozen young
people, or more, who used occasionally to attend him for instruction.’
Of these some became famous, _e.g._, John Smith, whom Lord Warwick sent
to Rome, Robert Smirke, Esq., R.A., Mrs Head, &c. The Prebendary, in
his MS., here gives also an account of literary society of the period,
including Warburton, Dr Brown, and others. There are Letters of this
many-gifted man, revealing a very beautiful and tender veneration
for his departed wife, whose loss he ‘mourned unto the grave.’ The
correspondence between Mr and Mrs Bernard Gilpin is striking and
brilliant. Sawrey Gilpin, R.A., of Knightsbridge, their son, became
celebrated as an animal painter. Sir J. D. A. Gilpin, another son,
was knighted for his long services in America, West Indies, and
Gibraltar. He was a friend of Washington’s. Catherine, sister of the
two last, born at Scaleby Castle, 1738, was a woman of rare intellect,
and a friend of Miss Blamire, the sweet Poetess of Cumberland. In a
new edition of Miss Blamire’s ‘Poems and Songs,’ recently published,
there are given some by Miss Gilpin, equal to the others. She died
at Carlisle in 1811. Even these bare names and dates will suffice to
reveal a Family distinguished in well-nigh every department of human
achievement, to be placed in their hereditary talent with the Hunters,
Gregorys, and Browns, and equally remarkable in their hereditary piety
and worth, as well where they belonged to the Church of England as
where they held true to Nonconformity, and their descent from the great
and good Dr RICHARD GILPIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

B.—Page xix.—GILPINS AT OXFORD.

The following memoranda are taken from the three Lists of Queen’s
College, as detailed:—

 I. From the List of Fellows:

 1555. Gilpin. [In another and later hand this note is appended:

 ‘Bernardus (_ni fallor_) R^r de Houghton le Spring in Com. Dunelm.
 V. Batesii Vitas clar. virorum, p. 284.’ The apostle.]

  1569. Richard Gilpin.
  1572. Joshua Gilpin,

II. From the List of Entries:

  1594. Term. Mic. Gilpin.
  1602.   ”   Pasch.  ”
  1610.   ”     ”     ”
  1614.   ”     ”     ”   _b_, [= ‘bateller,’ or exhibitioner.]
  1631.   ”     ”  Samuel Gilpin, _b_, [_ibid._]

III. From the List of Matriculations:

     1602. } Franciscus Gilpin, Lancastrensis filius ministri verbi Dei.
  Oct. 15. }   Nat. An. 17.


C.—Page xix.—NOTICES OF GILPINS.

The following extract from N. and B. ‘History,’ (as before,) vol. i.
p. 130, shews the Gilpins were freeholders in Strickland as early as
the days of Queen Bess: ‘And in the 14 Eliz. William Parr, marquis of
Northampton, died seised thereof [_i.e._, of the manor of Strykeland
Rogers] and the same was assigned to his widow for dower, and the
particulars in the rental made thereof was as follows: manor of
Strickland Roger: freeholders there, Edward Lancaster, Esquire, 26s.
8d.: John Master, Esquire, 11s. 9d.: _William Gilpin_, 9s. 9d. Total
of the (customary) rent of this manor £15, 14s. 5d.: ten shillings
paid yearly by Mr Lancaster’s tenants, to be free of their gift from
the lord’s will, being part of the said sum.’ Further, this notice
occurs under Chapel of Crosthwaite in parish of Heversham, ‘The chancel
and steeple of this chapel were built by one William Gilpin, who also
contributed largely towards the three bells, in 1626: on which bells
are the following inscriptions: on the first bell: “Jesus, be our
speed:” the second bell: “_Soli Deo gloria_:” the third bell:

    “A young man grave in godliness
      William Gilpin by name
    Gave forty pounds to make these sounds
      To God’s eternal fame.”
                            [Vol. I. p. 215.]




                          DÆMONOLOGIA SACRA.


                                 NOTE.

 For account of the holograph MS. of ‘Dæmonologia Sacra’—still in
 the larger portion preserved—see our Memoir _in loco_. The original
 edition of the book forms a handsome quarto. The general title-page
 will be found below: the special ones of Parts I., II., and III. in
 their respective places. There have been at least two reprints, but
 none comparable with the first. Our text is a careful reprint of the
 Author’s own edition, collated in all doubtful places with the MS. as
 above. Mr Gilpin very largely quotes Scripture, without giving the
 book, chapter, and verse; we have made up the deficiency by filling
 all in, within brackets.—G.

                         _DÆMONOLOGIA SACRA._

                                 OR, A

                               TREATISE

                                  OF

                          Satans Temptations:

                            In Three Parts.

                          By RICHARD GILPIN.

          2 Cor. 2. 11. _We are not ignorant of his Devices._

                               _LONDON_,
    Printed by _J. D._ for _Richard Randel_, and _Peter Maplisden_,
            Booksellers in _New Castle_ upon _Tine_. 1677.




TO THE READER.


The accurate searches into the secrets of nature which this age
hath produced, though they are in themselves sufficient evidences
of a commendable industry, yet, seeing they fall so exceedingly
short of that discovery which men aim at—giving us at best but
probable conjectures and uncertain guesses—they are become as little
satisfactory to men that look after the true causes of things, as those
‘ships of desire’ whose great undertaking for gold had raised high
expectations in their attempts, but in the return brought nothing home
for their ventures but ‘apes and peacocks,’[1 Kings x. 22, and 2 Chron.
ix. 21.] While men reflect upon themselves under such disappointments,
they cannot but check themselves, for over-promising themselves in
their adventures, with that of Zophar, ‘Vain man would be wise,’ [Job
xi. 12.]

But how happy would it be for men if such failures of expectation
might better inform them! If our attainments in these pursuits will
not bear our charges, nor recompense our pains and loss of time
with an answerable profit, though we may see cause sometimes, as a
divertisement or recreation, to use them, yet how shall we satisfy
ourselves to make them our chief and sole business?

If we knew of nothing of higher concern to us than these, our neglect
of greater matters were more excusable; but seeing we are sufficiently
instructed that we have more weighty things to look after, such as
relate to a certain future estate of happiness or misery, the very
discovery of this to a rational being must needs entitle such things
to the first and greatest part of his care. He that knows that there
is ‘one thing necessary,’ and yet suffers himself to be diverted from
the pursuit of that, by ‘troubling himself about many things,’ [Luke x.
41,] is more justly chargeable with folly, than he that neglects his
estate, and finds himself no other employment but to pursue feathers in
the wind.

Among those things that religion offers to our study, God and our
own hearts are the chief. God is the first and last and whole of our
happiness; the beginning, progress, and completement of it is from him
and in him—for in that centre do all the lines meet; but our heart is
the stage upon which this felicity, as to the application of it, is
transacted: upon this little spot of earth doth God and Satan draw
up their several armies; here doth each of them shew their power and
wisdom; this is treated by both; each of them challenge an interest in
it; it is attacked on the one side and defended on the other. So that
here are skirmishes, battles, and stratagems managed. That man, then,
that will not concern himself in his inquiries, how the matter goes
in his own heart, what ground is got or lost, what forts are taken
or defended, what mines are sprung, what ambuscados laid, or how the
battle proceeds, must needs lie under a just imputation of the greatest
folly; neither can he be excused in his neglect by the most pressing
solicitations of other things that seem to require his attendance
upon the highest imaginable pretences of necessity: ‘For what is he
profited, that gains the whole world, if he loses his soul?’ [Mark
viii. 36.]

But the exact and faithful management of such spiritual inquiries,
with their necessary improvement to diligent watchfulness and careful
endeavours of resistance, is another manner of work than most men dream
of. To discover the intrigues of Satan’s policy, to espy his haunts and
lurking-places in our hearts, to note his subtle contrivances in taking
advantages against us, and to observe how the pulse of the soul beats
under his provocations and deceitful allurements, how far we comply
or dissent, requires so much attendance and laborious skilfulness,
that it cannot be expected that such men who design no more than to be
Christians at the easiest rate, and content themselves with a formal
superficiality of religion; or such who, having given up themselves to
the deceitful sweets of worldly carnal delights, are not at leisure to
engage themselves in so serious a work; or such whose secret guilt of
rebellious combination with the devil against God, makes them fearful
to consider fully the hazards of that wickedness, which they had rather
practise with forgetfulness, lest the review of their ways and sight of
their danger should awaken their consciences to give them an unwelcome
disquiet; it cannot, I say, be expected that any of these sorts of men,
whilst they are thus set, should give themselves the trouble of so much
pains and toil as this business doth require.

Upon this consideration I might rationally fix my prognostic of the
entertainment of the following treatise. What acceptance soever it
may find with such as are cordially concerned for their souls and
the realities of religion—and of such I may say as the apostle Paul
concerning brotherly love, 1 Thes. iv. 9, as touching this matter,
‘They need not that I write unto them, for they themselves are taught
of God’ to be suspicious of Satan’s devices; and by experience they
find his deceits so secret, and withal so dangerous, that any help
for further discovery and caution must needs be welcome to them;
yet—to be sure the prince of darkness, who is always jealous of the
least attempts that may be made against his empire, will arm his
forementioned subjects against it, and whomsoever else he can prevail
upon, by the power of prejudice, to reject it, as urging us to a study
more severe or harsh than is consistent either with the lower degrees
of knowledge of many, or with that ease which most men desire to
indulge to themselves; or as offering such things which they, to save
themselves from further trouble, will be willing to call chimeras or
idle speculations: and this last I may rather expect, because in this
latter age Satan hath advanced so far in his general design against
all Christianity, and for the introduction of paganism and atheism,
that none now can express a serious conscientious care for holiness
and the avoidance of sin, but upon pain of the imputation of silliness
or whining preciseness; and none can speak or write of conversion,
faith, or grace, but he shall be hazarded by the scoffs of those that
are unwilling to judge the private workings of the heart to God-ward,
or spiritual exercises of grace, to be any better than conceited whims
and unintelligible nonsense: but seeing such men make bold to jeer,
not only that language and those forms of speech which the Holy Ghost
thought fit to make use of in the Scriptures, but also the very things
of ‘Faith,’ ‘Grace,’ and ‘Spirit,’ which are everywhere in the sacred
oracles recommended to us with the most weighty seriousness—which with
them pass for no better than cheats and fancies—we can easily sit under
their contempt; and shall, as we hope, be so far from being jeered out
of our religion, that their scorns shall have no more impression upon
us than the ravings of a frenzical person that knows not what he speaks.

Notwithstanding these, who are no way considerable for weight, there
are, I hope, a great many who seriously employ themselves in the
inwards as well as the outwards of religion—and who will not suffer
themselves to be persuaded that the apostle obtruded an empty notion
upon believers, when he recommended that observable truth to them,
Rom. ii. 28, ‘He is not a Jew which is one outwardly,’ &c.; for their
sakes have I undertaken this labour of collecting and methodising the
grand stratagems and chief ways of delusion of the great deceiver. To
these I must particularly account for some few things relating to this
discourse. As,

1. That I have satisfied myself in the reasons of the publication of
these papers, and do not judge it requisite to trouble any so far as to
tell what these reasons are. They who desire to resist such an enemy,
and whose experience doth convince them that all helps are necessary,
will not need them; and those that are men of scorn or of avowed
carelessness will not regard them, though I should declare them.

2. To prevent the misapprehensions, which possibly some may otherwise
labour withal, of a monstrous product from one text, because they may
observe one text in the front, and no other mentioned throughout the
first and second parts; they may know that I made use of several in the
preaching of these discourses, as suitable foundations for the several
particulars herein mentioned; but in the moulding up of the whole
into the method of a treatise, for the ease of the reader, I thought
fit to lay aside those introductions—as also many other occasional
applications which were proper for sermons, and a great many things
which were necessary to be spoken for explication and illustration
of these points to a popular auditory—and have only presented the
substance in a more close connexion; because if there be any little
obscurity that may at first appear to any for want of variety of words,
the treatise being under their eye, will be at leisure to attend their
review in a second or third reading; which, however, I would recommend
earnestly to those that in these concerns do really design to be ‘wise
for themselves.’

3. Neither should it seem strange that I have frequently made use
of instances from history or other later relations. Whosoever shall
consider the nature of the matter treated on will not complain of this
as a needless trouble put upon them; yet withal I have been so careful
of doing any persons an unkindness, by making too bold with them, that
I mentioned no names but such as upon such occasions have been made
public by others before. The rest I have only mentioned in the general,
discovering their case where it was useful, but concealing the persons.

4. It may perhaps seem a defect, that the several directions, remedies,
or counsels which are requisite to be observed in making resistance
against Satan are not added, except some few hints in the latter end of
the third part, and some other things in that part, in the applications
of the several doctrines therein, which I thought fit, upon good
grounds, to leave in the order of a preaching method; but such may be
pleased to consider that several have performed that part very fully,
to whose labours I had rather refer the reader than trouble him with a
repetition. It was only my design to endeavour a more full discovery,
though every way short of the thing itself, of Satan’s craft, because
the knowledge of this is so necessary, and withal others have done it
more sparingly. Such as it is, accept and improve for thy spiritual
advantage; for that was the end of this undertaking, by him who desires
that thy soul may prosper,

  RICH. GILPIN.




                         _DÆMONOLOGIA SACRA_:

                                 OR, A

                               TREATISE

                                  OF

                          Satans Temptations

                            The First Part.

                              CONTAINING

 A Discourse of the Malice, Power, Cruelty and Diligence of Satan. Of
his cunning in Temptation in the general. Of his Method of tempting to
  Sin. Of his Policies for maintaining his Possession. Of his Deceits
    for the preventing and spoiling Religious Services and Duties.

                              By _R. G._

          2 Cor. 2. 11. _We are not ignorant of his Devices._

                              _London_,
    Printed by _J. D._ for _Richard Randel_, and _Peter Maplisden_,
            Booksellers in _New-Castle_ upon _Tine_, 1677.




                  A TREATISE OF SATAN’S TEMPTATIONS.


PART I.

 _Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring
 lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour._—1 PETER V. 8.


CHAPTER I.

 _The introduction to the text, from a consideration of the desperate
 ruin of the souls of men.—The text opened, expressing Satan’s malice,
 power, cruelty, and diligence._


The souls of men are ‘precious.’ The whole world cannot repair their
loss. Hence by God are all men in particular charged with care and
watchfulness about them. He hath also set up watchmen and overseers,
whose business it is to watch over souls, and in the most strict and
careful manner, as those that must ‘give an account,’ [Heb. xiii. 17.]

What can more stir up men to the discharge of this duty than the
frequent alarms which we have of the assaults of such an adversary,
whose business it is to destroy the soul? ‘The Philistines are upon
thee, Samson!’ [Judges xvi. 9;] he fights continually, and useth all
the policy and skill he hath for the management of his strength.

Besides, it is a consideration very affecting, when we view the
‘desolations that are made in the earth,’ [Ps. xlvi. 8,] what wounds,
what overthrows, what cruelties, slaveries, and captivities these
conquered vassals are put to. It was, as some think, an inexcusable
cruelty in David against the Ammonites, when he ‘put them under saws,
and harrows of iron, and made them pass through the brick-kiln,’ 2
Sam. xii. 31; but this spiritual Pharaoh hath a more grievous ‘house
of bondage,’ and iron furnace. Neither is this miserable destruction
ended, but will keep pace with time, and shall not cease till Christ
shall at his appearance finally conquer him and tread him down. If
Xerxes wept to look upon his army through the prospective of devouring
time, which, upon an easy foresight, shewed him the death of so great
a company of gallant men, we may well weep, as David at Ziklag, till
we can weep no more; or as Rachel for her children, ‘refusing to be
comforted,’ [Jer. xxxi. 15;] while we consider what a great number of
succeeding generations, ‘heaps upon heaps,’ [Judges xv. 16,] will be
drawn with him to a consuming Tophet. And could we follow him thither,
to hear the cries of his prisoners, the roarings of his wounded, where
they ‘curse the day’ that brought them forth, and themselves for
their folly and madness in hearkening to his delusions, the dreadful
outcries of eternity, and then their ‘rage against heaven’ in cursings
and blasphemings, while they have no mitigations or ease, nor the
refreshment of ‘a drop of water to cool their tongues,’ [Luke xvi.
24,] we would surely think we could never spend our time better than
in opposing such an enemy, and warning men to ‘flee from the wrath to
come,’ [Mat. iii. 7,] to take heed they come not into his snare. With
what earnestness would we endeavour to persuade men! What diligence
would we use to cast water upon these devouring flames, and to pluck
men as brands out of the fire! It is true, if Satan had dealt plainly
with men, and told them what wages they were to expect, and set a
visible mark upon his slaves, or had managed a visibly destructive
hostility, men have such natural principles of self-preservation, and
of hatred of what appears to be evil, that we might expect they would
have fled from him, and still have been upon their guard; but he useth
such artifices, such sleights and cozenage, that men are cast into a
sleep or a golden dream; while he binds them in chains of darkness they
see not their end, the snare, nor the pit; nay, he intoxicates them
with a love of their misery, and a delight in helping forward their
ruin, so that they are volunteers in his service, and possessed with a
madness and rage against all that will not be as willing as themselves
to go to hell; but especially if they put forth a compassionate hand to
help any out of that gulf of misery, they hate them, they ‘gnash upon
them with their teeth,’ and run upon them with utmost violence, as if
they had no enemies but these compassionate Samaritans, [Luke x. 33.]

How great is this mystery of darkness! Who shall be able to open
the depths of it? Who shall declare it fully to the sons of men, to
bring these ‘hidden things to light’? Especially seeing these hellish
secrets which are yet undiscovered, are double to those that have
been observed, by any that have escaped from his power. He only whose
prerogative it is ‘to search the hearts of men’ [Rev. ii. 23] can know,
and make known, what is in the heart of Satan; he views all his goings,
even those paths which the ‘vulture’s eye hath not seen,’ [Job xxviii.
7,] and can trace those footsteps of his, which leave no more print or
track behind them than ‘a ship in the sea, or a bird in the air, or a
serpent on a stone,’ [Prov. xxx. 19.]

Yet notwithstanding, we may observe much of his policies; and more
would God discover if we did but humbly and faithfully improve what we
know already. It is my design to make some discovery of those haunts I
have observed, if by that means I may be useful to you, to quicken and
awaken you. And first I shall set before you the strength and power of
your enemy, before I open his cunning and craft.

There are found in him whatsoever may render an adversary dreadful.

1. As, first, _Malice and enmity_: ὁ Αντίδικος is a law term, and
signifies an adversary ‘at law,’ one that is against our cause; and
the text, as some think, heightens this malice, (1.) By the article
ὁ, which denotes an arch enemy.[75] (2.) The name Διάβολος, which
signifies a slanderer or calumniator—for the word is twice in the New
Testament used for a slanderer—shewing his hatred to be so great that
it will not stick at lying and falsehood, either in accusing God to us
or us to God. Nay, it particularly hints that when he hath in malice
tempted a poor wretch to sin, he spares not to accuse him for it, and
to load him with all things that may aggravate his guilt or misery,
accusing him for more than he hath really done, and for a worse estate
than he is really in.[76]

2. Secondly, _His power_. Under the metaphor of a ‘lion,’ a beast of
prey, whose innate property is to destroy, and is accordingly fitted
with strength, with tearing paws, and a devouring mouth; that as a lion
would rend a kid with ease and without resistance, so are men swallowed
up by him as with open mouth, so the word καταπιῄ signifies, he can sup
them up at a draught, à καταπίνω.

3. Thirdly, _His cruelty_: a ‘roaring lion’ implying not only his
innate property to destroy, which must be a strange fierceness, but
also that this innate principle is heightened and whetted on, as hunger
in a lion sharpens and enrages that disposition till he get his prey,
so that he becomes raving and roaring, putting an awful majesty upon
cruelty, and frighting them out of endeavours or hopes of resistance,
and increasing their misery with affrightments and tremblings. Thus
Satan shews a fierce and truculent temper, whose power being put forth
from such an implacable malice, must needs become rage and fierceness.

4. Fourthly, _His diligence_: which, together with his cruelty, are
consequences of his malice and power; he ‘goes about and seeks.’ He is
restless in his pursuit, and diligent, as one that promiseth himself a
satisfaction or joyful contentment in his conquests.




