CHAPTER VIII.

 _Of Satan’s cunning and craft in the general.—Several demonstrations
 proving Satan to be deceitful; and of the reasons why he makes use of
 his cunning._


We have taken a survey of our adversary’s strength, and this will
open the way to a clearer discovery of his subtlety and craft, which
is his great engine by which he works all his tyranny and cruelty in
the world, to the ruin or prejudice of the souls of men; of which
the apostle in 2 Cor. ii. 11 speaks, as a thing known by the common
experience of all discerning persons. His way is to overreach and take
advantages, and for this end he useth devices and stratagems, which is
a thing so ordinary with him, that none can be ignorant of the truth of
it: ‘We are not ignorant of his devices.’

This, before I come to the particulars, I shall prove and illustrate
in the general, by the gradual procedure of these few following
considerations:—

First, _All the malice, power, cruelty, and diligence of which we have
spoken, with all the advantages of multitude, order, and knowledge,
by which these cruel qualifications are heightened—these are but his
furniture and accomplishment which fit him for his subtle contrivances
of delusion, and make him able to deceive; neither hath he any rise
of his power and knowledge but in reference to deceit_. In Eph. vi.
11, 12, which is a place wherein the apostle doth of purpose present
Satan in his way of dealing with men, his whole practice is set forth
under the term and notion of arts and wiles: ‘that you may be able to
stand against the wiles of the devil.’ This is the whole work of Satan,
against which the furniture of that spiritual armour is requisite; and
lest any should think that his power or wickedness are other distinct
things in him, which are to be provided against by other means of
help, he presently adds, that these are no otherwise used by him but
in order to his wiles and cunning, and therefore not to be looked
upon as distinct, though indeed to be considered in conjunction with
his subtlety and cunning, as things that make his wiles the more
dangerous and hazardous: ‘For we wrestle not against flesh and blood,
but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places;’
which words do but strengthen the apostle’s warning and caution about
the forementioned wiles, which are therefore the more carefully to be
observed and watched against, because his power is so great that he can
contrive snares with the greatest skill and art imaginable; and his
wickedness is so great, that we cannot expect either honesty or modesty
should restrain him from making the vilest and most disingenuous
proposals, nor from attesting a conveniency or goodness in his motions,
with the highest confidence of most notorious lying.

2. Secondly, _The subtlety that the Scriptures do attribute to sin, or
to the heart, is mostly and chiefly intended to reflect upon Satan,
as the author and contriver of these deceits_. In Heb. iii. 13 there
is mention of the ‘deceitfulness of sin,’ but it is evident that
something else besides sin is intended, to which deceitfulness must
be properly ascribed; for sin being, as most conclude, formally a
privation, or if we should grant it a positive being, as some contend,
yet seeing the highest notion we can arrive at this way, excluding
but the figment of Flacius Illyricus, who seems to make original sin
indistinct from the very essence of the soul, is but to call it an
act.[165] Deceitfulness cannot be properly attributed to it, but with
reference to him who orders that act in a way of deceitfulness and
delusion; which ultimately will bring it to Satan’s door. If here
the deceitfulness of sin be devolved upon the subject, then it runs
into the same sense with Jer. xvii. 9, ‘The heart is deceitful above
all things.’ But why is the deceitfulness fixed upon the heart? The
ground of that we have in the next words; it is deceitful, because it
is wicked, ‘desperately wicked.’ But who then inflames and stirs up
the heart to this wickedness? Is it not Satan? Who then is the proper
author of deceit but he? It is true, indeed, that our hearts are proper
fountains of sin, and so may be accused possibly in some cases where
Satan cannot be justly blamed; yet if we consider deceitfulness as a
companion of every sin, though our hearts be to be blamed for the sin,
Satan will be found guilty of the deceitfulness. It may be said a man
complies with those things which are intended for his delusion, and so
improperly by his negligence may fall under blame of self-deception;
but it is unimaginable that he can properly and formally intend to
deceive himself. Deceit then, not being from sin nor ourselves
properly, can find out no other parent for itself than Satan. Besides
this, that these texts upon a rational inquiry do charge Satan with
the deceitfulness of sin; they do over and above point at the known
and constant way of Satan, working so commonly by delusion, that
deceitfulness is a close companion of every sin. The deceitfulness of
one sin is as much as the deceitfulness of every sin. Nay, further,
that text of Jer. xvii. 9, shews this deceitfulness not to be an
ordinary sleight, but the greatest of all deceits above measure, and of
an unsearchable depth or mystery; ‘who can know it?’

3. Thirdly, _All acts of sin, some way or other, come through Satan’s
fingers_. I do not say that all sin is Satan’s proper offspring, for we
have a cursed stock of our own; and it may be said of us, as elsewhere
of Satan, sometime we sin out of our own inclination and disposition;
yet in every sin, whether it arise from us or the world, Satan blows
the sparks and manageth all. As David said to the woman of Tekoah,
‘Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this?’ [2 Sam. xiv. 19;]
so may we say, Is not the hand of Satan with thee in every sin thou
committest? This is so eminently true, that the Scripture indifferently
ascribes the sin sometimes to us, sometimes to the devil. It was
Peter’s sin to tempt Christ to decline suffering, yet Christ repelling
it with this rebuke, ‘Get thee behind me, Satan,’ Mat. xvi. 23, doth
plainly accuse both Peter and Satan. It is the personal sin of a man
to be angry, yet in such acts he ‘gives place to the devil;’ both man
and Satan concur in it, Eph. iv. 26. Paul’s ‘thorn in the flesh,’ 2
Cor. xii. 7, whatever sin it was, he calls ‘Satan’s messenger.’ He
that submits not to God, doth in that comply with Satan; as, on the
contrary, he that doth submit himself to God, doth resist the devil,
James iv. 7.

Neither doth that expression of the apostle, James i. 14, ‘Every man
is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust,’ &c., give any
contradiction to this. It is not the apostle’s design to exclude
Satan, but to include man as justly culpable, notwithstanding Satan’s
temptations; and that which he asserts is this, that there is sin and
a temptation truly prevalent when there is the least consent of our
lust or desire, and that it is that brings the blame upon us; so that
his purpose is not to excuse Satan, or to deny him to have a hand in
drawing or tempting us on to sin, but to shew that it is our own act
that makes the sin to become ours.

4. Fourthly, _Such is the constitution of the soul of man, that its
sinning cannot be conceived without some deception or delusion_;[166]
for, granting that the soul of man is made up of desires, and that the
soul were nothing else but, as it were, one willing or lusting power
diversified by several objects; and that this power or these faculties
are depraved by the fall, and corrupted; and that man in every action
doth consult with his desires; and that they have so great an influence
upon him, that they are the law of the members, and give out their
commands accordingly for obedience; yet still these three things are
firm and unshaken principles:—

[1.] First, That desires cannot be set upon any object but as it is
apprehended truly or apparently good. It is incompatible to a rational
soul to desire evil as evil: _Omne appetit bonum_.

[2.] Secondly, The will doth not resolvedly embrace any object till
the light of the understanding hath made out, some way or other, the
goodness or conveniency of the object.[167]

[3.] Thirdly, There is no man that hath not a competent light for
discovery of the goodness or evil of an object presented. Unregenerate
men have, (1.) The light of nature. (2.) Some have an additional
light from Scripture discovery. (3.) Some have yet more from common
convictions, which beget sensible stirrings and awful impressions upon
them. (4.) To those God sometime adds corrections and punishments,
which are of force to make that light burn more clear, and to stir up
care and caution in men for the due entertainment of these notices that
God affords them. Regenerate men have all this light, and besides that,
they have, (1.) The light of their own experience, of the vileness and
odiousness of sin; they know what an evil and bitter thing it is. (2.)
They have a more full discovery of God, which will make them abhor
themselves in dust and ashes, Job xlii. 6; Isa. vi. 5. (3.) They have
the advantage of a new heart, the law of the spirit of life, making
them free from the law of sin and death. (4.) They have also the
help and assistance of the Spirit, in its motions, suggestions, and
teachings. (5.) They fortify themselves with the strongest resolutions
not to give way to sin.

Notwithstanding all these, it is too true that both regenerate and
unregenerate men do sin; the reason whereof cannot be given from any
other account than what we have asserted—to wit, they are some way or
other deluded or deceived; some curtain is drawn betwixt them and the
light; some fallacy or other is put upon the understanding some way or
other; the will is bribed or biassed; there is treachery in the case,
for it is unimaginable that a man in any act of sin should offer a
plain, open, and direct violence to his own nature and faculties; so
that the whole business is here, evil is presented under the notion of
good; and to make this out, some considerations of pleasure or profit
do bribe the will, and give false light to the understanding. Hence is
it, that in every act of sin, men, by compliance with Satan, are said
to deceive, or to put tricks and fallacies upon themselves.[168]

5. Fifthly, _All kinds of subtlety are in Scripture directly charged
upon Satan, and in the highest degrees_. Sometime under the notion
of logical fallacies; those sleights which disputants, in arguing,
put upon their antagonists. Of this import is that expression, 2
Cor. ii. 11, ‘We are not ignorant of his devices,’ where the word
in the original is borrowed from the sophistical reasonings of
disputants.[169] Sometime it is expressed in the similitude of
political deceits; as the Scripture gives him the title of a prince, so
doth it mark out his policies in the management of his kingdom, Rev.
xii. 7, expressly calling them deceits, and comparing him to a dragon
or serpent for his subtlety. Sometime he is represented as a warrior:
Rev. xii. 17, ‘The dragon was wroth, and went to make war,’ &c.; and
here are his warlike stratagems pointed at. Mention is made, 2 Tim. ii.
26, of his snares, and the taking of men alive, or captive, directly
alluding to warlike proceedings, [ἐζωγρήμενοι.] The subtle proceedings
of arts and craft are charged on him and his instruments. Men are said
to be enticed, James i., as fish or fowl, by a bait; others deluded,
as by cheaters in false gaming: Eph. iv. 14, ‘By the sleight of men,
and the cunning craft of those that lie in wait to deceive.’[170] The
overreaching of merchants or crafty tradesmen is alluded to in 2 Cor.
ii. 11. All these sleights are in Satan, in their highest perfection
and accomplishment. He can ‘transform himself into an angel of light,’
2 Cor. xi. 14, where he hath an occasion for it; in a word, all
‘deceiveableness of unrighteousness is in him,’ 2 Thes. ii. 10. So that
a general πανουργία, a dexterity and ability for all kind of subtle
contrivances, is ascribed to him, 2 Cor. xi. 3, and that in his very
first essay upon Eve, when the serpent deceived her ‘through subtlety;’
so that whatsoever malice can suggest, or wit and art contrive for
delusion, or whatsoever diligence can practise, or cruelty execute, all
that must be imagined to be in Satan.

6. Sixthly, All this might be further proved _by instances_. What
temptation can be named wherein Satan hath not acted as a serpent? Who
can imagine the cunning that Satan used with David in the matter of
Uriah? How easily he got him to the roof of the house in order to the
object to be presented to him! How he directs his eye, wrought upon his
passions, suggested the thought, contrived the conveniences! What art
must there be to bring a darkness into David’s mind, a forgetfulness
of God’s law, a fearlessness of his displeasure, and a neglect of his
own danger! Surely it was no small matter that could blind David’s
eye, or besot his heart to so great a wickedness. But, above all
instances, let us take into consideration that of Eve, in the first
transgression, wherein many things may be observed; as (1.) That he
chose the serpent for his instrument, wherein, though we are ignorant
of the depth of his design, yet that he had a design in it of subtlety,
in reference to what he was about to suggest, is plain from the text,
‘Now the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field.’ It had
been needless and impertinent to have noted the serpent’s subtlety as
Satan’s agent, if he had not chosen it upon that score, as advantageous
for his purpose. (2.) He set upon the weaker vessel, the woman; and
yet such, as once gained, he knew was likely enough to prevail with
the man, which fell out accordingly. (3.) Some think he took the
advantage of her husband’s absence, which is probable, if we consider
that it is unlikely that Adam should not interpose in the discourse
if he had been present. (4.) He took the advantage of the object. It
appears she was within sight of the tree, ‘She saw that it was good
for food, and pleasant to the eyes;’ thus he made the object plead
for him. (5.) He falls not directly upon what he intended, lest that
should have scared her off, but fetcheth a compass and enters upon the
business by an inquiry of the affair, as if he intended not hurt. (6.)
He so inquires of the matter— ‘Hath God said, Ye shall not eat of
every tree of the garden?’—as if he made a question of the reality of
the command; and his words were so ordered that they might cast some
doubt hereof into her mind. (7.) He, under a pretence of asserting
God’s liberality, secretly undermines the threatening, as if he had
said, ‘Is it possible that so bountiful a creator should deny the
liberty of eating of any tree? To what purpose was it made, if it might
not be tasted?’ (8.) When he finds that by these arts he had gained
a little ground, and brought her to some land of questioning of the
reality of the threatening, for she seems to extenuate it in saying,
‘lest we die,’ he grows more bold to speak out his mind, and plainly
to annihilate the threatening, ‘Ye shall not die.’ This he durst not
do, till he had gained in her mind a wavering suspicion, that possibly
God was not in good earnest in that prohibition. (9.) Then he begins
to urge the conveniency and excellency of the fruit, by equivocating
upon the name of the tree, which he tells her could make them knowing
as gods. (10.) He reflects upon God as prohibiting this out of envy and
ill-will to them. (11.) In all this there is not a word of the danger,
but impunity and advantage promised. (12.) This deadly advice he covers
with a pretence of greater kindness and care than God had for them. See
in this, as in a clear glass, Satan’s way of policy; after this rate he
proceeds in all his temptations.

If any inquire why so mighty and potent a prince useth rather the fox’s
skin than the lion’s paw, these reasons may satisfy:—

[1.] First, _There is a necessity upon him so to do_.[171] He must use
his craft, because he cannot compel; he must have God’s leave before he
can overcome; he cannot winnow Peter before he sue out a commission,
nor deceive Ahab till he get a licence; neither can he prevail against
us without our own consent. The Scripture indeed useth some words that
signify a force in tempting, as that he ‘put it into the heart of
Judas,’ ‘filled the heart of Ananias,’ ‘provoked David,’ ‘rules in the
hearts of the children of disobedience,’ and ‘leads them captive at his
will,’ &c.; yet all these and the like expressions intend no more than
this, that he useth forcible importunities, frames strong delusions,
and joins sometime his power to his temptations; as sometime fowlers
shew themselves to the birds they intend to ensnare, that so they may
be affrighted into an awe and amazement, to give a better opportunity
to spread their nets over them.

[2.] Secondly, _If he could compel, yet his way of craft and subtlety
is generally the most prevalent and successful_. Force stirs up an
opposition; it usually alarms to caution and avoidance, and frights to
an utter averseness in any design; so that where force should gain its
thousands, subtlety will gain its ten thousands.

[3.] Thirdly, _His strength is not useless to him_. For besides that
it enables him to deceive with higher advantage than otherwise he
could do, as hath been said, he hath times and occasions to shew his
strength and cruelty, when his cunning hath prevailed so far as to give
him possession. What was said of Pope Boniface, that he entered like
a fox, and ruled like a lion, may be applied to him; he insinuates
himself by subtlety as a fox or serpent, and then rules with rigour as
a lion.




