CHAPTER XV.

 _Of Satan’s keeping all in quiet, which is his second engine for
 keeping his possession, and for that purpose his keeping us from going
 to the light by several subtleties; also of making us rise up against
 the light, and by what ways he doth that._


Satan’s next engine for the maintaining his possession, is to _keep
all in quiet_; which our Saviour notes: Luke xi. 21, ‘When a strong
man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace.’ He urgeth
this against those that objected to him, that he cast out devils by
Beelzebub, which calumny he confuteth, by shewing the inconsistency of
that with Satan’s principles and design—it being a thing sufficiently
known and universally practised, that no man will disturb or dispute
against his own peaceable possession; neither can it be supposed Satan
will do it, because he acts by this common rule of keeping down and
hindering anything that may disquiet. Breach of peace is hazardous to
a possession. An uneasy government occasions mutinies and revolts of
subjects; yet we might think that, the wages of sin, the light and
power of conscience considered, it were no easy task for the devil
to rule his slaves with so much quiet as it is observed he doth. His
skill in this particular, and the way of managing his interest for
such an end, we may clearly see in John iii. 20, ‘Every one that doth
evil, hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved.’ From which place we may observe—(1.) The great
thing that doth disquiet Satan’s possession is light. (2.) The reason
of that disquietment is the discovery that light makes, and the shame
that follows that discovery. (3.) The way to prevent that light, and
the reproof of it, is to avoid coming to it; and where it cannot be
avoided, to hate it. It is Satan’s business then for keeping all in
peace—(1.) To keep us from the light; or if that cannot be, then (2.)
To make us rise up against it. I shall make inquiry after both these
projects of the devil.

To keep us from coming to the light, he useth a great many subtleties.
As,

1. First, _For his own part he forbears to do anything that might
discompose or affright entangled souls_. At other times, and in other
cases, he loves to torment and affright them, to cause their wounds
to stink and corrupt; but in this case he takes a contrary course,
he keeps off, as much as may be, all reflections of conscience; he
conceals the evil and danger of sin, he sings them asleep in their
folly, ‘till a dart strike through their liver,’ and hastens them
to the snare, ‘as a bird that knoweth not that it is for his life,’
Prov. vii. 23. They that shall consider that the heart of a sinner
is hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and that the greatest
part of the affrightment that molests the consciences of such is from
Satan’s fury and malice, they will easily conceive how much his single
forbearance to molest may contribute to the peace and ease of those
that are ‘settled upon their lees;’ but besides his forbearance, we
may expect that whatever clouds or darkness he can raise to exclude
the light, or to muffle the eyes, he will not be negligent in the use
of that power. Whatever he can positively do, in the raising up the
confidence of presumption or security in the minds of men, whatever he
can do to make them sottish or careless, that shall not be wanting.

2. Secondly, He shews no less skill and diligence _by secret
contrivances to hinder occasions of reproof and discovery_. How much he
can practise upon others, that out of pity and compassion to the souls
of men, are ready to draw a sinner ‘from the error of his way, and to
save a soul from death!’ [James v. 20.] We can scarce imagine what ways
he hath to divert and hinder them. By what private discouragements he
doth defer them, who can tell? He that could dispute with the angel
about the body of Moses to prevent the secret interment of it, Jude
9; he that could give a stop of one and twenty days to the angel
that was to bring the comfortable message to Daniel, chap. x. 13,
of the hearing of his prayers, may more easily obstruct and oppose
the designs of a faithful reprover. Sometime he doth this by visible
means and instruments, stirring up the spirits of wicked men to give
opposition to such as seek to deliver their souls from the blood of
men, by faithful warnings or exhortations. The devil was so careful to
keep Jeroboam quiet in his sinful course of idolatry, that he stirs up
Amaziah to banish Amos from the court, lest his plain dealing should
startle or awaken the conscience of the king: Amos vii. 12, 13, ‘Go,
flee thee away into the land of Judah, &c.; but prophesy not any more
at Bethel, for it is the king’s chapel, it is the king’s court.’

3. Thirdly, In order to the keeping out the light from the consciences
of men, he insinuates himself _as a lying spirit into the mouths of
some of his mercenaries_; and they speak ‘smooth things’ and deceit
to Satan’s captives, telling them that they are in a good condition,
Christians good enough, and may go to heaven as well as the precisest.
It is a fault in unfaithful ministers, they do the devil this service.
God highly complains of it: Jer. vi. 14, ‘They have healed also the
hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when
there is no peace;’ Ezek. xiii. 10, ‘They have seduced my people,
saying, Peace; and there was no peace; and one built up a wall, and
others daubed it with untempered mortar.’ Besides, this stratagem is
the more likely to prevail, because it takes the advantage of the
humours and inclinations of men, who naturally think the best of
themselves, and delight that others should speak what they would have
them; so that when men by the devil’s instigation prophesy deceit to
sinful men, it is most likely they should be heard, seeing they desire
such prophets, ‘and love to have it so.’

4. Fourthly, Satan keeps off the light, by _catching away the word
after it is sown_. This policy of his, Christ expressly discovers:
Mat. xiii. 19, ‘When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and
understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away
that which was sown in his heart.’ Such opportunities the devil doth
narrowly watch. To be sure, he will be present at a sermon or good
discourse, and if he perceive anything spoken that may endanger his
peaceable possession, how busy is he to withdraw the heart, sometime
by the sight of the eyes, sometimes by vain thoughts of business,
occasions, delights, and what not; and if this come not up to his
end, then he endeavours, after men have heard, to justle all out by
impertinent discourses, urgencies of employment, and a thousand such
divertisements, that so men may not lay the warning to heart, nor by
serious meditation to apply it to their consciences.

5. Fifthly, He sometimes _snuffs out the light by persecution_.
Those hearers, Mat. xiii. 20, 21, that had received the word with
some workings of affections and joy, are ‘presently offended when
persecution, because of the word, ariseth.’ By this he threatens men
into an acquiescency in their present condition, that if they ‘depart
from iniquity, they shall make themselves a prey,’ [Isa. lix. 15.]
Bonds, imprisonments, and hatreds, he suggests, shall abide them, and
by this means he scares men from the light.

6. Sixthly, He sometimes _smothers and chokes it with the cares of
the world_, as those that received seed among thorns. By earnest
engagements in business, all that time, strength, and affection which
should have been laid out in the prosecution of heavenly things, are
wholly taken up and spent on outward things. By this means that light
that shines into the hearts of men is neglected and put by.

7. Seventhly, He staves off men from coming to the light, by putting
them upon _misapprehensions of their estate in judging themselves by
the common opinion_. Satan hath so far prevailed with men, that they
are become confident of this conceit, that men may take a moderate
liberty in sinning, and yet nevertheless be in a good condition; that
sin is not so great a matter in God’s esteem, as in the judgment of
some rigorous precisian; that he will not be so extreme to mark what
we do amiss, as some strict professors are. What can be of greater
hindrance to that ingenuous search, strict examination, and impartial
judging or shaming ourselves for our iniquities, which the light of
Scripture would engage us unto, than such a conceit as this! And yet
that this opinion is not only common, but ancient, is manifest by
those warnings and cautions given by the apostle to the contrary: Gal.
vi. 7, ‘Be not deceived; God is not mocked: whatsoever a man soweth,
that shall he also reap;’ Eph. v. 6, ‘Let no man deceive you with vain
words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience.’ If it had not been usual for men to live
in uncleanness, covetousness, and such like offences, which he calls
‘sowing to the flesh,’ and yet in the midst of these to think they
were not under the hazard of wrath, or if men had not professedly and
avowedly maintained such an opinion, it had been superfluous for the
apostle to have warned us with so much earnestness, ‘Be not deceived;
let no man deceive you with such vain words,’ [1 Cor. vi. 9.]

8. Eighthly, It is usual for Satan to still and quiet the stirring
thoughts of sinners _with hopes and assurances of secrecy_. As children
are quieted and pleased with toys and rattles, so are sinners put off
and diverted from prosecuting the discoveries that the light would make
in them, by this confidence, that though they have done amiss, yet
their miscarriages shall not be laid open or manifested before men.
It is incredible how much the hopes of concealment doth satisfy and
delight those that have some sense of guilt. Sometime men are impudent,
that ‘they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not,’ Isa. iii. 9.
But before they arrive at so great an impudency, they usually ‘seek
deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the
dark; and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?’ Isa. xxix.
15. Like those foolish creatures that think themselves sufficiently
concealed by hiding their heads in a bush, though all their bodies be
exposed to open view, Isa. xxviii. 15, those that made ‘lies their
refuge, and under falsehood hid themselves,’ became as confident of
their security as if they had ‘made a covenant with death, and were at
an agreement with hell;’ and when they have continued in this course
for some time with impunity, the light is so banished that they carry
it so as if God observed their actions done in the dark as little as
men do. ‘How doth God know?’ say they; ‘can he judge through the dark
clouds? thick clouds are a covering to him, that he seeth not,’ Job
xxii. 13. And hence proceed they to promise themselves a safety from
judgments: ‘When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall
not come nigh unto us, for we have made lies our refuge,’ &c.

9. Ninthly, Satan keeps them from going to the light by _demurs and
delays_. If the light begin to break in upon their consciences, then
he tells them that there is time enough afterward. Oh, saith he,
thou art young, and hast many days before thee; it is time enough to
repent when you begin to be old. Or thou art a servant, an apprentice
under command, thou wantest fit opportunities and conveniences for
serious consideration, defer till thou becomest free, and at thine own
disposal. That this is one of Satan’s deceits to hinder us from making
use of the light, besides what common experience may teach every man,
may be clearly gathered from the exhortations of Scripture, which do
not only shew us ‘the way wherein we ought to walk,’ but also press us
to a present embracement of that counsel: ‘To-day, to-day, while it
is called to-day, harden not your hearts;’ ‘Now is the accepted time,
now is the day of salvation;’ ‘Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, before the evil day comes;’ ‘If ye will enquire, enquire: yea,
return, come,’ Heb. iii. 7; 2 Cor. vi. 2; Eccles. xii. 1; Isa. xxi. 12.
This hasty urgency to close with the offered occasions, plainly accuse
us of delays, and that it is usual with us to adjourn those thoughts to
a fitter opportunity, which we are not willing to comply with for the
present.

By these nine devices he keeps the light from ensnared sinners, or them
from coming to the light. But if all this cannot draw a curtain before
the sun, if its bright beams breaks through all, so that it cannot be
avoided, but there will be a manifestation and discovery of ‘the hidden
things of darkness,’ then Satan useth all his art and cunning to stir
up in the hearts of men their hatred against the light.

This is his second grand piece of policy to keep all in quiet under his
command, to which purpose,

1. First, He endeavours to draw on a hatred against the light, by
raising in the minds of men _a prejudice against the person that
brings or offers it_. If he that warns or reproves express himself
anything warmly or cuttingly against his brother’s sins, this the devil
presently makes use of; and those that are concerned think they have a
just cause to ‘stop their ears and harden their necks,’ because they
conceive that anger, or ill-will, or some such base thing did dictate
those, though just, rebukes. The devil turned the heart of Ahab against
the faithful warnings of Micaiah upon a deep prejudice that he had
taken up against him; for so he expresseth himself to Jehoshaphat, ‘I
hate him, for he never prophesieth good unto me,’ 1 Kings xxii. 8.
In this case men consider not how justly, how truly, how profitably
anything is spoken; but, as some insects that feed upon sores, they
pass by what is sound and good, and fix upon that which is corrupt and
putrid, either through the weakness and inobservancy of the reprover,
or pretended to be such, by the prejudice of the party which doth
altogether disable him to put a right construction upon anything.

2. Secondly, If this help not, then he seeks to get the advantage _of a
provoked, passionate, or otherwise distempered fit_; and then hatred is
easily procured against anything that comes in its way.

3. Thirdly, Satan endeavours to engage our hatred against the light, by
presenting our _interest as shaken or endangered by it_. If interest
can be drawn in and made a party, it is not difficult to put all the
passions of a man in arms, to give open defiance to any discovery it
can make. That great rage and tumult of kings and people mentioned in
Psalm ii., combining and taking counsel against the Lord and his laws,
is upon the quarrel of interest. Their suspicions and jealousies that
the setting up of Christ upon his throne would eclipse their power and
greatness, makes them, out of a desperate hatred against the light,
fall into resolves of open rebellion against his laws: ‘Let us break
his bands asunder, and cast away his cords from us.’ This pretence of
interest strengthened the accusation of Amaziah against Amos: chap.
vii. 10, ‘Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of
Israel: the land is not able to bear all his words.’ No wonder, then,
if Jeroboam, instead of hearkening to the threatening, banish him out
of the land. We find the like in Asa, a good man; the devil stirs up
his hatred against the seer: ‘He was wroth with him, and put him in the
prison-house; for he was in a rage against him,’ 2 Chron. xvi. 10. The
ground of that rage was this: the king’s interest, in his apprehension,
was wrapped up in that league with the king of Syria, ver. 2, 3, so
that he could not bear so plain a reproof, which directly laid the
axe to the root of so great an interest as the safety of the king and
kingdom, which seemed to depend so much upon that league.

4. Fourthly, Satan stirs up hatred against the light from the
_unavoidable effects of light, which are discovery and manifestation_:
Eph. v. 13, ‘All things that are reproved are made manifest; for
whatsoever doth make manifest is light.’ Now the issue of this
manifestation is shame, which however it be the daughter of sin and
light, yet would it naturally destroy the sin that bred it; and
therefore repentance is usually expressed by being ‘ashamed and
confounded:’ but that Satan might avoid this, he turns the edge of
shame against the light, which should have been employed against sin.
When men therefore have sinned, and are as ‘a thief when he is taken,’
Jer. ii. 26, ready to fall into the hands of shame; for the avoiding of
that, they ‘rebel against the light,’ Job xxiv. 13. The ground of this
hatred, Christ, in John iii. 20, tells us, is ‘lest their deeds should
be reproved,’ and they forced to bear their shame. To this end they are
put upon it to hide themselves from shame by lies, pretences, excuses,
extenuations, or by any fig-leaf that comes first to hand. And as those
that live in hotter regions curse the sun because it scorcheth them, so
do these curse the light: and instead of taking its help, raise up an
irreconcilable enmity against it; and so run from it.




