CHAPTER III.

 _Of Satan’s improving these advantages for error: 1. By deluding the
 understanding directly: which he doth—_(1.) By countenancing
 error from Scripture. Of his cunning therein. (2.) By specious
 pretences of mysteries; and what these are. Of personal flatteries._
 (3.) By affected expressions. Reason of their prevalency._
 (4.) By bold assertions. The reasons of that policy._
 (5.) By the excellency of the persons appearing for it, either
 for gifts or holiness. His method of managing that design. (6.)
 _By pretended inspiration. (7.) By pretended miracles. His
 cunning herein. (8.) By peace and prosperity in ways of error.
 (9.) By lies against truth, and the professors of it._


What are the general advantages which Satan hath to forward his design
of error we have seen. It now remains that we take an account of the
various ways by which he improves those advantages, and those may be
referred to two heads: (1.) They are such stratagems as more directly
work upon the understanding to delude and blind it. Or, (2.) They are
such as indirectly by the power of the will and affections do influence
it.

1. First, Those stratagems that more immediately concern the
understanding are the use of such _arguments, which carry in them a
probability to confirm an error_, though indeed they are but fallacies,
sophisms, or paralogisms, of which the apostle speaks, Col. ii. 4,
‘Lest any beguile you,’—that is, lest they impose upon you by ‘false
reasonings.’ His usual way of proceeding in this case is:

(1.) First, When he hath to do with men that are brought up with
profession and belief of Scripture, he is then careful _to give an
error some countenance or pretence from Scripture_. It is not his
course to decry the Scriptures with such men, but to suppose their
truth and authority, as the most plausible way to his design; for by
this means he doth not only prevent a great many startling objections
which would otherwise rise up against him—seeing men brought up
with Scripture cannot easily be brought to call them false—but with
considerable advantage lie doth thereby authorise and justify his
error, for nothing can give more boldness or confidence to a mistake
than a belief that it is backed with Scripture.

That this is one of his grand stratagems may be sufficiently evinced
from the infinite number of errors that pretend to Scripture warrant.
Those that are above or beyond Scripture, which acknowledge no
dependence upon it, are but few and rare, and indeed among Christians
error cannot well thrive without a pretence of Scripture. Men would
have enough to do to persuade themselves to such errors, but it would
be impossible to make a party or persuade others. Such errors would
presently be hissed out of the world. Upon this account is it that
atheism skulks and conceals itself, except where generally tolerated
profaneness gives it more than ordinary encouragement, which is not to
be ascribed to any shame-faced modesty that atheisms can be supposed
to nourish, but to the general dislike of others, who so stick to the
authority of the Bible that they reject all direct contradictions to
it with great abhorrency. Hence also it is that some erroneous persons
are forced to contradictions in their practice against their professed
principles, because they find it impossible to propagate their errors
without some pretence or other to Scripture. They that would undermine
those sacred records are forced to make use of their authority for
proof of what they would say. The papists have a quarrel at them, and
envy them the title of perfection and perspicuity, upon design to
introduce traditions, and to set up the pope’s judicial authority in
matters of faith; and when they have said all they can to subject the
Scriptures to the pope’s determination, they are forced at last to be
beholden to the Scriptures to prove the pope’s determination. They
would prove the Scriptures by the church, and then the church by the
Scriptures, which is a circle they have been often told of, and of
which some of the wiser sort among themselves are ashamed. Others also
that will not allow the Scriptures to be a general standing rule are
yet forced to make it, in some cases, a rule to themselves, and eagerly
plead it to be so to others. They that pretend to be above ordinances,
and decry outward teachings as unnecessary or hurtful, yet they teach
outwardly, because they see they are not able to enlarge the empire
of error without such teaching. Those very errors that make it their
chief business to render the Scriptures no better than an old almanack,
they yet seek to Scripture to countenance their blasphemous assertions;
and if they get any scrap or shred of it that may by their unjust
torture be wrested to speak any such thing, or anything toward it, they
think all their follies are thereby patronised, 2 Pet. iii. 16; and
commonly such men either fix upon such places as give warning of the
necessary concomitances of the spirit and heart with the outward act
of service; and from hence, separating what God hath joined together,
they set up spiritual sabbaths, spiritual baptism, spiritual worship,
to cry down and cashier the external acts of such ordinances, or they
pretend kindred to Scripture, as prophesying or foretelling those new
administrations which they are about to set up. Let H. Nicholas be an
instance of this, who, though he decried the service of the law under
God the Father, and the service of the belief under Christ, and in
the room of both these would set up another administration under the
Spirit; yet, that he might be the better believed, he applied several
scriptures to his purpose, as prophetically foretelling H. Nicholas and
his services, and would have men imagine that he was that ‘angel flying
in the midst of heaven with the everlasting gospel,’ Rev. xiv. 6; and
that prophet inquired after by the Jews: John i. 21, ‘Art thou that
prophet?’ and that ‘man ordained to judge the world,’ Acts xvii. 31;
and that the times of his dispensation were the times of perfection and
glory spoken of in 1 Cor. xiii. 9, and Heb. vi. 1. The like pretences
for new administrations had Saltmarsh and several others.

Satan, fixing his foot upon this design, and taking advantage of men’s
ignorance, curiosity, and pride, &c., it is impossible to tell what
he may do. He hath introduced many heresies already, and none knows
what may be behind. Many passages of Scripture are dark to the wisest
of men, a great many more are so to the common sort of Christians. A
great many wits are employed by him as adventurers for new discoveries,
and a small pretence is ground enough for a bold undertaker to
erect a new notion upon; and a new notion in religion is like a new
fashion in apparel, which bewitcheth the unsteady with an itch to be
in it before they well understand what it is; so that it is alike
impossible to stint the just number of errors, as to adjust the various
pretences from Scripture upon which they may be countenanced. Leaving,
therefore, this task to those that can undertake it, I shall only
note a particular or two of Satan’s cunning in affixing an error upon
Scripture.

[1.] First, In any grand design of error, he endeavours _to lay the
foundation of it as near to truth as he can_; but yet so that, in the
tendency of it, it may go as far from it as may be, as some rivers,
whose first fountains are contiguous, have notwithstanding a direct
contrary course in their streams. For instance, in those errors that
tend to overthrow the doctrine of the gospel concerning Christ and
ordinances—and these are things which the devil hath a great spite
at—he begins his work with plausible pretences of love and admiration
of Christ and grace; he proceeds from thence to the pretence of purer
enjoyments; from thence to a dislike of such preachers and preaching as
threaten sin and speak out the wrath of God against iniquity, and these
are presently called legal preachers, and the doctrine of duty a legal
covenant. Having them once at this point, they easily come to immediate
assistances and special gifts, which they pretend to have above
others. Being thus set up, they are for free grace and the enjoyment
of God in spirit. From thence they come to Christian liberty, and by
degrees duties are unnecessary. There is no Christ but within them;
and being freed from the law, whatever they do is no transgression.
This is a path that Satan hath trodden of old, though now and then he
may vary in some circumstances, and be forced to stop before he come
to the utmost of his journey. You may observe this method in the late
errors of New England,[236] in the Familists of Germany, and in those
of Old England; in all which at the long-run men are led as far from
Scripture as darkness is from light. Now this is not only to be seen
in a progressive multiplication of errors, but often may we perceive
the same subtlety of Satan in a simple error, as when he takes up part
of a truth which should stand in conjunction with another, and sets it
up alone against its own companion, where we shall have the name and
pretence kept up, but the thing quite destroyed. God requires services
of men, and prescribes to their use prayer, hearing, sacraments; but
because in these God is dishonoured when men only draw near with their
lips, he further tell us, ‘that he is not a Jew which is one outwardly,
neither is that circumcision which is of the flesh,’ &c., [Rom. ii.
28.] This part are some men so fixed upon, that they think they are
discharged of the other, and in practice go quite from these duties;
and yet still they profess they are for ordinances and the worship of
God. Just so are some men for Christ, but then it is but the name,
not the thing; they own Christ, they say, but then it is Christ in
them, and Christ come in their flesh, but not that Christ that died at
Jerusalem as a sacrifice for the sins of men.

[2.] Secondly, Satan takes great care that an error be, in all the ways
of its propagation, _clothed with Scripture phrases_; and the less
the error can pretend to any plausible ground of Scripture, the more
doth he endeavour to adorn it with Scripture language: I understand
this chiefly of such errors as are designed for the multitude: so that
though Scripture be not used to prove the error, yet are deceivers
taught to express their conceptions by it, and to accommodate the
words and sentences of it to their purposes; for besides pride and
confidence, scriptural eloquence is a necessary ingredient to make a
powerful deluder. Observe the ringleaders of errors, and you shall find
that ordinarily such have at first been studious of the Scriptures;
and though never able to digest them, yet when they turned their ears
from truth, they have carried their Scripture language, which they had
before brought themselves unto by long custom, away with them, and
still retain it, and express their opinions by it.

Now this is a great advantage to Satan. For, _first_, By this means
_the ignorant multitude are often caught without any more ado_. If
they hear Scripture expressions, they are apt to think that all is
truth which is spoken by them; and they the rather believe it, because
they will imagine such teachers to be well versed in Scripture, and
consequently either so honest or so knowing that they neither can
nor will delude them. _Secondly_, There is a majesty in Scripture
which, in some sense, _doth stick to the very expressions of it_. Men
may perceive that generally hearers are more affected with Scripture
eloquence than with play-book language. It hath, as it were, a charm
in the words, which makes the ear attentive more than a quaint
discourse, starched up in the dress of common rhetoric. One gives us
an observation to that purpose of his own preaching,[237] and so may
many others. While, then, men hear such language, they have a reverence
to it. And as physicians cover their pills with gold that the patient
might more willingly take them, so do men often swallow down error
without due consideration, because conveyed to them in a language which
they respect.

(2.) Secondly, Satan’s second care for the advancement of error, after
he hath given it all the countenance he can from Scripture, is to gild
it over with _specious pretences_. He sets it off with all the bravery
he can, and then urgeth that as an argument of its truth. Men are apt
to judge that what doth better their spiritual condition cannot be a
lie or delusion; and the argument were the more considerable, if the
advantages were such as he pretends them to be; but the very noise
and boast of advantages please the unwary, without a due inquiry into
their reality. The apostle, in Rom. xvi. 18, reduceth all this policy
of the deceiver to two heads: (1.) Good words, χρηστολογίας—words that
set out the profit and advantage of the thing; (2.) And fair speeches,
εὐλογίας—speeches that flatter the condition of the party. His art,
as to the first of these, is to tell them that the notions offered to
them are special discoveries, rare mysteries, which have been hidden
from others; and thence infers, that it must of necessity conduce much
to their happiness and spiritual perfection to know and embrace them.
Those that troubled the church in Paul’s days with false doctrines,
used this sleight of boasting, as appears by that expression in 1 Tim.
vi. 20, ‘oppositions of science.’ It seems they called their opinions,
though they were but profane and vain babblings, by the name of
‘science’ or ‘knowledge,’ implying that all others, even the apostles
themselves, were in the dark, and came short of their illumination.
The like we have in Rev. ii. 24 of that abominable prophetess Jezebel,
who recommended her blasphemous, filthy doctrines under the name of
‘depths,’ profundities or hidden knowledge, though the Spirit of
God told that church they were not such; but if depths, they were
‘depths of Satan’—as it is added there by way of correction—and not
of the Spirit of God. We may trace these footsteps of Satan in all
considerably prevailing errors; for what hath been more common than
to hear men speak of the designs they have been carrying on under the
specious titles of Christ’s coming to set up a righteous kingdom, the
church’s coming out of Babylon and out of the wilderness, the dawning
of the day of the Lord, the day of reformation, ‘the time of the
restitution of all things,’ with abundance of brags of the same kind? I
shall add no particular instance of this nature, but a few strains of
H. Nicholas, with whom such high promising vaunts were ordinary. His
service of love he compares to the ‘most holy;’ whereas John’s doctrine
of repentance was but a preparation to the holy, and the service
of Christ he allowed to be no more than as the holy of the temple.
This his service he calls ‘the perfection of life, the completion of
prophecies, the perfect conclusion of the works of God, the throne of
Christ, the true rest of the chosen of God, the last day, the sure word
of prophecy, the new Jerusalem,’ and what not.

If we make further inquiry into the nature of these fair promising
mysteries, we shall find that Satan most frequently pitcheth upon these
three:—

[1.] _First_, He befools men into a belief that the Scriptures do,
under the veil of their words and sentences, contain _some hidden
notions_ that are of purpose so disguised that they may be locked up
from the generality of men, at least from learned and wise men; and
that these rarities cannot be discerned from the usual significations
of the words and phrases, as we understand other books of the same
language, but they fancy these sacred writings to be like the writings
of the Egyptians,[238] by which they absconded[239] their mysteries,
especially like that kind of writing, whereby under words of common
known sense they intended things which the words themselves could
not signify; and that which occasions this imagination is this, that
we read frequently of ‘mysteries’ in [the] Scriptures, and ‘hidden
wisdom,’ and the ‘special revelation’ of them to God’s children, which
are very great truths, but yet not to be so understood as this delusion
supposeth; for these expressions in Scripture intend no more than this,
that the design of God to save man by Christ is in itself a ‘mystery,’
which never would have been found out without a special revelation; and
that though this ‘mystery’ is now revealed by the gospel, yet as to the
application of it to the hearts of men in conversion by the operation
of the Spirit, it is yet a ‘mystery.’ But none of these intend any
such suggestion, that there are private notions of truth or doctrine
that are lying under ground, as it were, in Scripture words, which the
words in the common language will not acquaint us withal; nay, the
contrary is expressly affirmed when we are told that all is plainly
laid open to the very simple, so that from the Scriptures they may as
well understand the fundamental principles of religion, as they may
understand any other thing which their language doth express to them.
However, in this Satan takes advantage of men’s pride and curiosity to
make them forward in the acceptation of such offers, especially when
such things are represented as the only saving discoveries, which a man
cannot be ignorant of but with hazard of damnation.

[2.] _Secondly_, In this boast of mystery, Satan sometimes takes
another course somewhat differing from the former, and that is to
put men upon _allegorical reflections and allusions_, by which the
historical passages of Scripture are made, besides the import of
the history, resemblances of spiritual truths, which supposeth the
letter of Scripture to be true, but still as no better than the first
rudiments to train up beginners withal, yet withal that the spiritual
meaning of it raiseth the skilful to a higher form in Christ’s school.
At this rate all are turned into allegories. If they fall upon the
first of Genesis, they think they then truly understand it when they
apply the light and darkness, and God’s separating of them, with such
other passages, to the regeneration of the soul. The like work make
they with the sufferings of Christ. But then the crafty adversary at
last enticeth them on to let go the history, as if it were nothing
but a parable, not really acted, but only fitted to represent notions
to us. Allegories were a trap which the devil had for the Jews, and
wherein they wonderfully pleased themselves. How much Origen abused
himself and the Scriptures by this humour is known to many; and how the
devil hath prevailed generally by it upon giddy people in later times I
need not tell you.

The pretence that Satan hath for this dealing is raised from some
passages of the New Testament, wherein many things of the Old Testament
are said to have had a mystical signification of things expressed or
transacted then, and some things are expressly called allegories. Hence
papists determine the Scripture to have, besides the grammatical sense,
which all of us do own, and besides the tropological sense, which is
not diverse or distinct from the grammatical, as when from histories
we deduce instructions of holy and sober carriage, an allegorical and
analogical sense; in which dealing men consider not that the Spirit of
God his interpreting a passage or two allegorically, will never justify
any man’s boldness in presuming to do the like to any other passage of
Scripture; and beside, when any hath tried his skill that way, another
may with equal probability carry the same scripture to a different
interpretation, and by this means the Scripture shall not only become
obscure, but altogether uncertain and doubtful, and unable to prove
anything; so that this doth extremely dishonour Scripture, by making it
little less than ridiculous. Porphyry and Julian made themselves sport
with it upon the occasion of Origen’s allegorizing; and no wonder,
seeing that humour, as one calls it,[240] is no better than a learned
foolery. Notwithstanding this, men are sometime transported with a
strange delight in turning all into allegories, and picking mysteries
out of some by-passages and circumstances of Scripture where one would
least expect them; which I can ascribe to no second cause more than to
the working and power of fancy, which, as it can frame ideas and images
of things out of that that affords no real likeness or proportion, as
men that create to themselves similitudes and pictures in the clouds or
in the fire, so doth it please itself in its own work; and with a kind
of natural affection it doth kiss and hug its own baby. It hath been my
wonder sometimes to see how fond men have been of their own fancies,
and how extremely they have doted upon a very bauble. I might note you
examples of this, even to nauseousness, in all studies, as well as
in this of religion. Those that affect the sublimities of chemistry
do usually by a strange boldness stretch all the sacred mysteries of
Scripture, as of the Trinity, of regeneration, &c., to represent their
secrets and processes, as may be seen sufficiently in their writings.
One of them I cannot forbear to name, and that is Glauber, who doth so
please himself with some idle whims about _sal_ and _sol_, that at last
he falls in with Bernardinus Gomesius, whom he cites and approves, who
in this one word, ἃλς, which signifies _salt_, finds the Trinity, the
generation of the Son, the two natures of Christ, the calling of the
Jews and Gentiles, the procession of the Spirit, and the communications
of the Spirit in the law and gospel; and all this he gathers from the
shapes, strokes, and positions of these three letters—a very subtle
invention.[241] Not unlike to this were some of the dotages of the
Jewish Cabala, which they gathered from the different writing of
some letters in the sacred text, from the transposing of them, and
from their mystical arithmetic. R. Ellis from the letter _aleph_,
mentioned six times in Gen. i. 1, collected his notion of the world’s
continuance for six thousand years, because that letter א stands for a
thousand in the Hebrew computation. Another Rabbi, mentioned by Lud.
Cappellus,[242] hath a profound speculation concerning the first letter
of Genesis, which, as he saith, doth therefore begin with _beth_, and
not with _aleph_, to shew the unexceptionable verity of God’s word,
against which no mouth can justly open itself; and this he gathers from
the manner of the pronunciation of that letter ב, which is performed by
the closure of the lips. It were not possible to imagine that wise men
should be thus carried away with childish follies, if there were not
some kind of enchantment in fancy, which makes the hit of a conceit,
though never so silly, intoxicate them into an apprehension of a rare
discovery. And doubtless this is the very thing that doth so transport
the allegorizers and inventors of mysteries, that they are ravished
either with the discovery of a new nothing or with the rare invention
of an enigmatical interpretation.

[3.] Thirdly, The devil hath yet another way of coining mysteries, and
that is a pretence of _a more full discovery of notions and ways_;
which, as he tells those that are willing to believe him, are but
glanced at in the Scripture; and this doth not only contain his boast
of unfolding prophecies, and the dangerous applications of them to
times and places that are no way concerned—which hath more than once
put men upon dangerous undertakings,—but also his large promise of
teaching the way of the Lord more perfectly, and of leading men into a
full comprehension of those tremendous mysteries, wherein the Scripture
hath as industriously concealed the reasons, way, and manner of their
being, as it hath fully asserted that they are: such are the decrees of
God, the Trinity, &c.; as also of unfolding and teaching at large those
things that the Scripture seems only to hint at. In all which points
we have instances enough at hand which will shew us how the devil hath
played his game, either by making men bold in things not revealed,
or by drawing men to dislike solid truths, and by puffing them up
with notions, till at last they were prepared for the impression of
some grand delusion. All this while I have only explained the first
head of Satan’s specious pretences, which consists in the promise of
discoveries and mysteries—χρηστολογίαι, good words.

The next head of pretences are those that relate to the _persons_
enamoured with these supposed mysteries—εὐλογίαι, fair speeches. With
these he strokes their heads, and causeth them to hug themselves in
a dream of an imaginary happiness. For if they have the knowledge of
mysteries which are locked up from other men, they cannot avoid this
conclusion, that they are the only favourites of heaven, that they
only have the Spirit, are only taught of God, &c. Such swelling words
of vanity have ever accompanied delusion. And indeed we shall find
the confidence of such men more strong, and their false embracements
more rapturous, than ordinarily the ways of truth do afford, upon
this account, that in such cases fancy is elevated, and the delights
of a raised fancy are excessive and enthusiastical. It is a kind of
spiritual frenzy, which extends all the faculties to an extraordinary
activity, the devil doing all he can to further it by his utmost
contributions. Joy, delight, hope, love, are all raised to make a
hubbub in the heart; whereas, on the contrary, truth is modest,
humble, sober, and affords a more silent joy, though more even and
lasting.

Here might I set error before you in its rant, and give you a taste
of the high-flown strains of it. Montanus, as vile as he was, had
the confidence to call himself ‘the comforter.’ Novatus and his
brother would be no less than Moses and Aaron. The Gnostics called
themselves the _Illuminati_. The Swinkfieldians assumed the title of
the Confessors of the glory of Christ. The Family of Love had their
_Evangelium regni_, the gospel of the kingdom. The _Fratricelli_
distinguished themselves from others by the term spiritual. Muntser
asserted, that all of his opinion were God’s elect, and that all the
children of their religion were to be called the children of God, and
that all others were ungodly and designed to damnation. H. Nicholas
affirms, that there was no knowledge of Christ nor Scripture, but in
his family. To this purpose most of them speak that forsake the ways of
truth; and though these swellings are but wind and vapour, yet those
heights are very serviceable to the devil’s purposes: who by this means
confirms those whom he hath already conquered, and then fits them out
with the greater confidence to allure others; and men are apt enough to
be drawn by fair shows and confident boastings. But I proceed.

(3.) The third stratagem of Satan for promoting error, is to
_astonish men with strange language and affected expressions_. It
was an old device of Satan to coin an unintelligible gibberish as
the proper vehicle of strange enthusiastics’ doctrine, and this he
artificially suits to his pretended mysteries. Without this, his
rare discoveries would be too flat and dull to gain upon any man of
competent understanding. For if these dotages were clothed in plain
words, they would either appear to be direct nonsense, or ridiculous
folly. It concerns him when he hath any feats of delusion in hand, to
set them off with a canting speech, as jugglers use their hard words
of _Ailif_, _casyl_, _zaze_, _presto_, _millat_, &c., to put their
ignorant admirers into a belief of some unknown power by which they
do their wonders. And this is in some sort necessary. Extraordinary
matters are above expression, and such wild expressions put men into
an expectation of things sublime. This knack Satan hath constantly
used. Montanus had his strange speeches; and all along, downward to
our times, we may observe that error hath had this gaudy dress. The
Familists especially abound with it. You may read whole books full of
such a kind of speaking, as the book called _Theologia Germanica_, or
German divinity,[243] the books of Jacob Behmen, ‘The Bright Morning
Star,’ &c. Neither are the papists free; one of late hath taken the
pains to shew them this and other follies.[244] Among them you may
find such talk as this: of being ‘beclosed in the midhead of God,
and in his meek-head; of being substantially united to God, of being
one’d to God; as also of the abstractedness of life, of passive
unions, of the deiform fund of the soul; of a state of introversion;
of a super-essential life, a state of nothingness,’ &c. Just like the
ravings of H. Nicholas, David George, and others, who confidently
discourse of being ‘godded with God,’ of being ‘consubstantiated with
the Deity,’ and of God’s ‘being manned with them.’

I have oft considered what reason might be given for the takingness of
such expressions, and have been forced to satisfy myself with these:
_First_, Many mistake the knowledge of words for the knowledge of
things. And well may poor ignorant men believe they have attained, no
man knows what, by this device; when among learned men the knowledge
of words is esteemed so great a pitch of learning, and they nourish a
great many controversies that are only verbal. _Secondly_, Some are
pleased to be accounted understanders by others, and rest in such high
words as a badge of knowledge. _Thirdly_, Some are delighted with such
a hard language upon a hope that it will lead them to the knowledge of
the things at last; they think strange expressions are a sign of deep
mysteries. I knew one that set himself to the reading of Jacob Behmen’s
books, though at present he confessed he was scarce able to make
common sense of three lines together, upon a secret enticement that
he had from the language, to come to some excellent discovery by much
pains and reading. _Fourthly_, Some that have their fancies heated,
have by this means broken, confused impressions of strange things in
their imaginations, and conceive themselves to know things beyond what
common language can express: as if with Paul, rapt up into the third
heaven, ‘they hear and see wonders unutterable.’ But what reason soever
prevails with men to take up such a way of speaking, Satan makes them
believe that it contains a rich mine or treasury, not of common truths,
but of extraordinary profundities.[245]

(4.) Fourthly, Instead of argument to confirm an error, sometimes we
have only _bold assertions that it is truth, and a confident condemning
the contrary as an error_, urging the danger of men’s rejecting it,
backed with threatening of hell and damnation; and all this in the
Words of Scripture. To be sure, they are right, and all other men
are wrong. This kind of confidence and fierceness hath been still
the complexion of any remarkable way of delusion; for that commonly
confines their charity to their own party, which is a great token of an
error. Not only may you observe in such extraordinary proclamations of
wrath against those that will not believe them: a practice used by the
mad fanatics of Munster, who, as our Quakers were wont to do, go up and
down the streets, crying, ‘Wo, wo; repent, repent; come out of Babylon;
the heavy wrath of God; the axe is laid to the root of the tree;’ but
in their more settled teaching they pronounce all to be antichrist, and
of the carnal church, that do oppose them. Take for this H. Nicholas
his words: ‘all knowledge’ besides his, ‘is but witchery and blindness,
and all other teachers and learners are a false Christianity, and
the devil’s synagogue; a nest of devils and wicked spirits; a false
being, the antichrist, the kingdom of hell, the majesty of the devil,’
&c. This piece of art, not only our Quakers, to whom nothing is more
familiar than to say to any opposer, ‘Thou art damned, thou art in
the gall of bitterness, the lake of fire and brimstone is prepared for
thee,’ &c., but also the papists commonly practise, who shut all out
of heaven that are not of their church; and when they would affright
any from protestantism, they make not nice to tell him that there is no
possibility of salvation but in their way.

The reasons of this policy are these: (1.) The heart is apt to be
startled with threatenings, and moved by commands; especially those
that are of a more tender and frightful spirit; and though they know
nothing by themselves, yet these beget fears which may secretly betray
reason, and make men leave the right way because of affrightment.
(2.) The confidence of the assertors of such things hath also its
prevalency; for men are apt to think that they would not speak so if
they were not very certain, and had not real experience of what they
said, and thus are men threaped[246] out of their own persuasions. (3.)
The native majesty of Scripture, in a business of so great hazard,
adds an unexpressible force to such threatenings; and though, being
misapplied, they are no more Scripture threatenings, yet, because God
hath spoken his displeasure in those words, men are apt to revere
them—as men cannot avoid to fear a serpent or toad, though they know
the sting and poison were taken out, because nature did furnish them
with a sting or venom.

(5.) Fifthly, It is a usual trick of Satan to _derive a credit and
honour to error, from the excellencies, supposed or real, of the
persons that more eminently appear for it_. So that it fetcheth no
small strength from the qualities of those that propagate it. The
vulgar, that do not usually dive deep into the natures of things,
content themselves with the most superficial arguments, and are sooner
won to a good conceit of any opinion by the respects they carry to the
author, than by the strongest demonstration.

The excellencies that usually move them are either their gifts or
their holiness. If the seedsman of an error be learned, or eloquent
and affectionate in his speaking, men are apt to subscribe to anything
he shall say, from a blind devotional[247] admiration of the parts
wherewith he is endowed. And often, where there is no learning, or
where learning is decried, as savouring too much of man, if there be
natural fluency of speech, with a sufficient measure of confidence,
it raiseth them so much the higher in the esteem of the common sort,
who therefore judge him to be immediately taught of God, and divinely
furnished with gifts. At this point began the divisions of the church
of Corinth. They had several officers severally gifted; some were
taken with one man’s gift, others with another man’s; some are for
Paul, as being profound and nervous in his discourses; others for
Apollos, as eloquent; a third sort were for Cephas, as, suppose,
an affectionate preacher. Thus upon personal respects were they
divided into parties: and if these several teachers were of different
opinions, their adherents embraced them upon an affectionate conceit
of their excellencies. And generally Satan hath wrought much by such
considerations as these. This he urgeth against Christ himself, when
he set up the wisdom and learning of the rulers and pharisees, as an
argument of truth in their way of rejecting such a Messias: John vii.
48, ‘Have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him?’
There is no insinuation more frequent than this: these are learned,
excellent, able men, and therefore what they say or teach is not to be
disbelieved; and though this be but _argumentum stultum_, a foolish
argument, yet some that would be accounted wise do make very great use
of it. The crack[248] ‘of learned doctors among the papists’ is one
topic of persuasion to popery, and so to other errors, as appears by
this, that all errors abound with large declamations of the praises of
their founders and teachers: and the most illiterate errors usually
magnify the excellent inspirements and gifts of utterance of their
leaders.

But the other excellency of holiness in the teachers of error is more
generally and more advantageously improved by Satan, to persuade men
that all is true doctrine which such men profess. Of this delusion
Christ forewarned us, ‘They shall come in sheep’s clothing—that is,
under the mask of seeming holiness, at least at first; notwithstanding,
‘beware of them,’ Mat. vii. 15. Those complained of by Paul, 2 Cor.
xi. 15, though they were Satan’s ministers, yet that they and their
doctrine might be more plausibly entertained, they were ‘transformed as
the ministers of righteousness.’ This cunning we may espy in heretics
of all ages. The Scribes and Pharisees used a pretence of sanctity as
a main piece of art to draw others to their way. Their alms, fastings,
long prayers, strict observations, &c., were all designed as a net to
catch the multitude withal. The lying doctrines of Antichrist were
foretold by Paul, to have their success from this stratagem; all that
idolatry and heathenism which he is to introduce must be, and hath
been, through the hypocrisy of a painted holiness, 1 Tim. iv. 2; and
where he intends most to play the dragon, Rev. xiii. 11, he there
most artificially counterfeits the innocency and simplicity of the
lamb. Arch-heretics have been arch-pretenders to sanctity, and such
pretences have great influence upon men; for holiness and truth are
so near of kin, that they will not readily believe that it can be a
false doctrine which a holy man teacheth. They think that God that hath
given a teacher holiness will not deny him truth. Nay, this is an easy
and plausible measure which they have for truth and error. To inquire
into the intricacies and depths of a disputation is too burdensome
and difficult for ordinary men, and therefore they satisfy themselves
with this consideration, which hath little toil in it, and as little
certainty: that surely God will not leave holy men to a delusion. It
would be endless to give all the instances that are at hand in this
matter. I shall only add a few things of Satan’s method in managing
this argument, as,

[1.] First, When he hath a design of common or prevailing delusion, he
mainly endeavours _to corrupt some person of a more strict, serious,
and religious carriage, to be the captain and ringleader_; such men
were Pelagius, Arius, Socinus, &c. He mainly endeavours to have fit
instruments. If he be upon that design of blemishing religion, and to
bring truth into a disesteem, then, as one observes,[249] he persuades
such into the ministry as he foresees are likely to be idle, careless,
profane, and scandalous; or doth endeavour to promote such ministers
into more conspicuous places, and provokes them to miscarriage, that so
their example may be an objection against truth, while in the meantime
he is willing that the opposers of truth should continue their smooth
carriage; and then he puts a two-edged sword into the hands of the
unstable: Can that be truth where there is so much wickedness? and can
this be error where there is so much holiness?

[2.] Secondly, In prosecution of this design he usually puts men upon
some more than _ordinary strictness, that the pretence of holiness
may be the more augmented_. In this case a course of ordinary
sanctity is not enough, they must be above the common practice; some
singular additions of severity and exactness above what is written,
are commonly affected to make them the more remarkable. Christ notes
this in the Pharisees, concerning all their devotions, and the ways
of expressing them; their phylacteries spoken of, Mat. xxiii. 5, as
some think,[250] were not intended by that text of Deut. vi. 8, but
only that they should remember the law, and endeavour not to forget
it, as they do that tie a thread or such like thing about their finger
for a remembrancer; according to Prov. iii. 3, ‘Bind them about thy
neck, write them upon the table of thine heart.’ However, if they were
literally enjoined, they would have them, as Christ tells them, broader
than others, as an evidence of their greater care. The _Cathari_
boasted of sanctity and good works, and rejected second marriages; the
_Apostolici_ were so called from a pretended stricter imitation of the
singular holiness of the apostles. The _Valesians_ made themselves
eunuchs, according to the letter, ‘for the kingdom of God.’ The
_Donatists_ accounted that no true church where any spot or infirmity
was found. The _Messalians_, or _Euchytæ_, were for constant praying,
the _Nudipedales_ for going barefoot, &c. The papists urge canonical
hours, whippings, penances, pilgrimages, voluntary poverty, abstinence
from meats and marriage in their priests and votaries. In a word, all
noted sects have something of special singularity, whereby they would
difference themselves from others, as a peculiar character of their
greater strictness; and for want of better stuff they sometimes take up
affected gestures, devotional looks, and outward garbs; all which have
this note, that what they most stand upon, God hath least, or not at
all, required at their hands—their voluntary humility, or neglecting of
the body being but will-worship, and a self-devised piece of religion.

[3.] Thirdly, When once men are set in the way of exercising
severities, Satan endeavours, by working upon their fancies, to _press
them on further to a delight and satisfaction in these_[251] ways of
strictness, so that the practisers themselves are not only confirmed
in these usages, and the opinions that are concomitant with them, but
others are the more easily drawn to like and profess the same things.
Any serious temper, under any profession of religion, easily comes to
be devout, and readily complies with opportunities of evincing its
devotion by strictness. And therefore we shall find among heathens a
great devotional severity, and such as far exceeds all of that kind
which the papists do usually brag of. The Magi abstained from wine, ate
not the flesh of living creatures, and professed virginity. The Indian
Brachmans did the like, and besides used themselves to incredible
hardship; they laid upon skins, sustained the violence of the sun and
storms, and exercised themselves therewith; some spending thirty-seven
years in this course, others more. We read strange things of this
nature concerning the Egyptian priests, and others. The Mohammedans
are not without their religious orders, which pretend a more holy and
austere life than others; and though of some, as of the _torlachs_
and _dervizes_, several private villainies are reported, yet of
others, as of the order of _calender_, we are assured from history
that they profess virginity, and expose themselves to hardship, and
a stricter devotion in their way; and generally it is said of all
of them, that they go meanly clad, or half naked; some abstinent in
eating and drinking, professing poverty, renouncing the world. Some can
endure cutting and slashing, as if they were insensible; some profess
perpetual silence, though urged with injuries and tortures; others have
chains about their necks and arms, to shew that they are bound up from
the world, &c. If such things may be found among heathens, no wonder
that error boasts of them, for in both there is the same reason of
men’s pleasing themselves in such hardships, which is from a natural
devotion, assisted by Satan’s cunning, and the same design driven on by
it; for the devil doth confirm heathens and Mohammedans in their false
worship by the reverence and respect they carry to such practices.

[4.] Fourthly, Because religious holiness hath a beauty in it, and
is very lovely, he doth all he can _to affect men with the highest
reverence for these pretences of religious strictness_; so that they
that will not be at pains to practise them, can bestow an excessive
respect and admiration upon those that are grown famous in the use of
such things; and by that means being almost adored, they are without
doubt persuaded that all they teach or do is right, and in a doting
fondness they multiply superstitious errors. Idolatry is supposed to
have a great part of its rise from this. While men endeavoured to
express their thankful and admiring remembrances of some excellent
persons by setting up their pictures, their posterity began to worship
them as gods. Pilgrimages were first set on foot by the respects that
men gave to places that were made famous by persons and actions of
more than ordinary holiness;[252] and because the devil found men so
very apt to please themselves in paying such devotional reverences, he
wrought upon their superstitious humour to multiply to themselves the
occasions thereof, and by fabulous traditions sent them to places no
otherwise made memorable than by dreams and impostures. Much of this
you might see if you would accompany a caravan from Cairo to Mecca and
Medina, where you would see the zealous pilgrims, with a great many
orisons and prayers, compassing Abraham’s house, kissing a stone which,
they are told, fell from heaven; blessing themselves with a relic of
the old vesture of Abraham’s house, washing themselves in the pond,
which, as their tradition goes, the angel shewed to Hagar; saluting
the mountain of pardon, throwing stones in defiance of the devil, as
their legend tells them Ishmael did; their prayers on the mountain of
health, their visit to the prophet’s tomb at Medina, &c.[253] The like
might you observe among the papists, in their pilgrimages to Jerusalem
and the sepulchre, to the Lady of Loretto’s chapel, and other places.
By such devices as these the unobservant people are transported with
a pleasure, insomuch that they not only persuade themselves they are
very devout in these reverences, but they also become unalterably fixed
to these errors that do support these delightful practices, or as
consequences do issue from them.

(6.) Sixthly, A more plausible argument for error than the learning
and holiness of the persons that profess it, is that of _inspiration_,
in which the devil soars aloft and pretends the highest divine warrant
for his falsehoods; for ‘God is truth,’ and ‘we know that no lie is of
the truth.’ Now to make men believe that God by his Holy Spirit doth
in any manner dictate such opinions, or certainly reveal such things
for truths, is one of the highest artifices that he can pretend to, and
such a confirmation must it be to those that are so persuaded, that all
disputes and doubtings must necessarily be silenced.

That the devil can thus ‘transform himself into an angel of light,’
we are assured from Scripture, which hath particularly cautioned us
against this cheat. The apostasy of the later times, 1 Tim. iv. 1,
the apostle foretells should be carried on by the prevalency of this
pretence: ‘Some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits.’ That by ‘spirits’ there, doctrines are intended rather than
doctors, is Mr Mede’s interpretation;[254] but it will come all to
one if we consider that the word ‘spirit’ carries more in it than
either doctrine or doctor; for to call either the one or the other
‘a spirit’ would be intolerably harsh, if it were not for this, that
that ‘doctor’ is hereby supposed to pretend an infallibility from the
Spirit of God, or, which is all one, that he received his doctrine by
some immediate revelation of the Spirit; so that by ‘seducing spirits’
must be men or doctrines that seduce others to believe them, by the
pretence of the Spirit or inspiration; and that text of 1 John iv. 1
doth thus explain it: ‘Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they are of God,’ which is as much as if he had said, Believe
not every man or doctrine that shall pretend he is sent of God and
hath his Spirit; and the reason there given makes it yet more plain,
because many ‘false prophets are gone out into the world;’ so that
these ‘spirits’ are ‘false prophets,’ men that pretend inspiration. And
the warning, ‘Believe not every spirit,’ tells us that Satan doth with
such a dexterity counterfeit the Spirit’s inspirations, that holy and
good men are in no small hazard to be deceived thereby. Most full to
this purpose is that of 2 Thes. ii. 2, ‘That ye be not soon shaken in
mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as
from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand;’ where the several means
of seduction are particularly reckoned as distinct from the doctrine
and doctors, and by ‘spirit’ can be meant no other than a pretence of
inspiration or revelation.[255]

It is evident then that Satan by this artifice useth to put a stamp
of divine warrant upon his adulterate coin; and if we look into his
practice, we shall in all ages find him at this work. Among heathens he
frequently gained a repute to his superstitious idolatrous worship by
this device. The men of greatest note among them feigned a spiritual
commerce with the gods. Empedocles endeavoured to make the people
believe that there was a kind of divinity in him, and affecting to be
esteemed more than a man, cast himself into the burnings of Mongebel,
that they might suppose him to have been taken up to the gods.[256]
Pythagoras his fiction of a journey to hell was upon the same account.
Philostratus and Cedrenus report no less of Apollonius, than that he
had familiar converses with their supposed deities; and the like did
they believe of their magi and priests; insomuch that some cunning
politicians, observing how the vulgar were under a deep reverence to
such pretences, gave it out that they had received their laws by divine
inspirations. Numa Pompilius feigned he received his institutions from
the nymph Ægeria, Lycurgus from Apollo; Minos the lawgiver of Candia
boasted that Jupiter was his familiar. Mohammed also speaks as high
this way as any; his Alcoran must be no less than a law received from
God, and to that end he pretends a strange journey to heaven, and
frequent converse with the angel Gabriel.

If we trace Satan in the errors which he hath raised up under the
profession of the Scriptures, we may observe the same method. The
Valentinians, Gnostics, Montanists talked as confidently of the Spirit
as Moses or the prophets could do, and a great deal more; for some
of them blasphemously called themselves the Paraclete or Comforter.
Among the monsters which later ages produced, we still find the same
strain: one saith he is Enoch, another styles himself the ‘great
prophet,’ another hath raptures, and all immediately inspired. The
papists have as much of this cheat among them as any other; and some
of their learned defenders avouch their _lumen propheticum_, and
_miraculorum gloria_, prophesies and miracles, to be the two eyes, or
the sun and moon of their church; nay, by a strange transportment of
folly, to the forfeiture of the reputation of learning and reason, they
have so multiplied revelations that we have whole volumes of them,
as the revelations of their St Bridget and others; and by wonderful
credulity they have not only advanced apparent dreams and dotages to
the honour of inspirations or visions, but upon this sandy foundation
they have built a great many of their doctrines, as purgatory,
transubstantiation, auricular confession, &c. By such warrants have
they instituted festivals and founded several orders. The particulars
of these things you may see more at large in Dr Stillingfleet and
others. And that there might be nothing wanting that might make them
shamelessly impudent, they are not content to equal their fooleries
with the Scriptures of God, as that the rule of their St. Francis—for
I shall only instance in him, omitting others for brevity sake—was not
composed by the wisdom of man, but by God himself, and inspired by the
Holy Ghost, but they advance their prophets above the apostles, and
above Christ himself. Their St Benedict, if you will believe them, was
rapt up to the third heavens, where he saw God face to face, and heard
the choir of angels; and their St. Francis was a nonsuch for miracles
and revelations. Neither may we wonder that Satan should be forward in
urging this cheat, when we consider,

[1.] First, _What a reverence men naturally carry to revelations,
and how apt they are to be surprised with a hasty credulity_. An old
prophecy, pretended to be found in a wall, or taken out of an old
manuscript, of I know not what uncertain author, is usually more doted
on than the plain and infallible rules of Scripture. This we may
observe daily; and foreigners do much blame the English for a facile
belief of such things; but it is a general fault of mankind, and we
find even wise men forward in their persuasions upon meaner grounds
than those that gain credit to old prophecies. For their antiquity and
strangeness of discovery, especially at such times wherein the present
posture of affairs seem to favour such predictions with a probability
of such events, are more likely to get credit than these artificial
imitations of the ways and garbs of the old prophets, and the cunning
legerdemain of those that pretend to inspirations by seeming ecstasies,
raptures, and confident declarations, &c.; nevertheless arrant cheats
have by these ways deceived no mean men. Alvarus acknowledgeth that he
honoured a woman as a saint that had visions and raptures as if really
inspired—and the same apprehensions had the bishop and friars—who was
afterward discovered to be a naughty woman.[257] Who shall then think
it strange that the unobservant multitude should be deluded by such an
art?

[2.] Secondly, Especially if we consider that _God himself took
this course to signify his mind to men_. His prophets were divinely
inspired, and the Scriptures were not of ‘any private interpretation,’
ἰδίας ἐπιλύσεως. The words that the penmen of Scriptures wrote were not
the interpretations of their own private thoughts, ‘for the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost,’ 2 Pet. i. 20, 21. Now though the
prophecies of Scripture are sealed, and no more is to be added to them
upon any pretence whatsoever, yet seeing there are promises left us of
the ‘giving of the Spirit,’ of ‘being taught and led by the Spirit,’
it is an easy matter for Satan to beguile men into an expectation of
prophetic inspirations, and a belief of what is pretended so to be; for
all men do not or will not understand that these promises of the Spirit
have no intendment of new and extraordinary immediate revelations,
but only of the efficacious applications of what is already revealed
in Scripture. This kind of revelation we acknowledge and teach, which
is far enough from enthusiasm, that is, a pretended revelation of new
truths, and we have reason to assert that internal persuasions without
the external word are to be avoided as Satan’s cozenages.[258] But
for all this, when men’s minds are set agadding, if they meet with
such as magnify their own dreams, and call their fancies visions,
the suitableness of this to their humour makes them to reject our
interpretations of these promises as false, and to persuade themselves
that they are to be understood of such inspirations as the prophets of
old had; and then they presently conclude they are to believe them,
lest otherwise they should resist the Holy Ghost.

[3.] Thirdly, But _the advantage which the devil hath to work delusion
upon by this pretence is a high motive to him to practise upon it_. For
inspirations, visions, voices, impulses, dreams, and revelations are
things wherein wicked impostors may by many ways and artifices play
the counterfeits undiscovered. It is easy to prophesy false dreams,
and to say, thus saith the Lord, when yet they do but lie, and the
Lord never sent them nor commanded them, Jer. xxiii. 31; nay, it is
easy, by tricks and illusions, to put that honour and credit upon their
designs which they could not by their bare assertions, backed with
all their art of seeming seriousness. The inventions of men that have
been formerly successful in this deceit being now laid open to our
knowledge, may make us more wary in our trust. Among the heathens you
may find notable ways of deceits of this nature. The story of Hanno
and Psappho is commonly known; they tamed birds and learned them to
speak, ‘Hanno and Psappho are gods,’ and then set them at liberty, that
men hearing such strange voices in the woods from birds, might imagine
that these men were declared gods by special discovery. Mohammed’s
device of making a dove to come frequently to his ear, which he did by
training her up to a use of picking corn out of it, served him for an
evidence among the vulgar beholders, who knew not the true cause of
it, of his immediate inspiration by the angel Gabriel, who, as he told
them, whispered in his ear in the shape of a dove. The like knavery he
practised for the confirmation of the truth of his Alcoran, by making
a bull, taught before to come at a call or sign, to come to him with a
chapiter upon his horns. Hector Boetius tells us of a like stratagem
of a king of Scots, who, to animate his fainting subjects against
the Picts that had beaten them, caused a man clothed in the shining
skins of fishes, and with rotten wood, which, as a glow-worm in the
night, represents a faint light, to come among them in the dark, and
through a reed or hollow trunk, that the voice might not appear to be
human, to incite them to a vigorous onset: this they took to be an
angel bringing them this command from heaven, and accordingly fought
and prevailed. Crafty Benedict, who was afterward pope under the name
of Boniface VIII., made simple Celestine V. give over the popedom by
conveying to him a voice through a reed to this purpose: Celestine,
Celestine, renounce the papacy, give it over, if thou wouldst be
saved, the burden is beyond thy strength, &c. The silly man, taking
this for a revelation from heaven, quitted his chair and left it for
that crafty fox Benedict. Not very many years since the same trick
was played in this country to a man of revelations—Paul Hobson—who
called himself David in spirit. When he had wearied his entertainer
with a long stay, he quitted himself of his company, as I was credibly
informed, by a policy which he perceived would well suit with the
man’s conceitedness, for through a reed in the night-time he tells him
that he must go into Wales, or some such country, and there preach the
gospel; the next morning the man avouches a revelation from God to go
elsewhere, and so departs. These instances shew you how cunningly a
cheating knave may carry on a pretence of revelation or vision. And
yet this is not all the advantage which the devil hath in this matter,
though it is an advantage which he sometime makes use of when he is
fitted with suitable instruments. But he works most dangerously when
he so acts upon men that they themselves believe they have visions,
raptures, and revelations, for some are really persuaded that it is
so with them. Neither is it strange that men should be deluded into
an apprehension that they hear and see what they do not; in fevers,
frenzies, and madness we clearly see it to be so; and who can convince
such persons of their mistakes, when with as high a confidence as may
be they contend that they are not deceived? Shall we think it strange
that Satan hath ways of conveying false apprehensions upon men’s minds?
No, surely. Do we not see that the senses may be cheated, and that
the fancies of men may be corrupted? Is it not easy for him to convey
voices to the ear, or shapes and representations to the eye? and in
such cases, what can ordinarily hinder a belief that they hear or see
such things? But he needs not always work upon the fancy by the senses.
If he hath the advantage of a crazy distempered fancy, as commonly he
hath in melancholy persons, he can so strongly fix his suggestions upon
them, and so effectually set the fancy on work to embrace them, that
without any appearance of madness they will persuade themselves that
they have discoveries from God, impulses by his Spirit, scriptures set
upon their hearts, and what not; and because they feel the workings
of these things within them, it is impossible to make them so much as
suspect that they are deceived. Do but consider the power of any fancy
in a melancholic person, and you may easily apprehend how Satan works
in such delusions. Melancholy doth strangely pervert the imagination,
and will beget in men wonderful misapprehensions, and that sometimes
doth bewitch them into peremptory, uncontrollable belief of their
fancy. It is a vehement, confident humour, what way soever it takes;
the imagination thus corrupted hath an enormous strength, so that if it
fix upon things never so absurd or irrational, it is not reducible by
the strongest reasons. If such a man conceits himself dead, or that he
is transformed to a wolf or cat, or that he is made of glass, as many
in this distemper have done, there is no persuasion to the contrary
that can take place with him. Now if this humour be taken up with
divine matters, as usually it doth, for it hath a natural inclination
to religious things, it still acts with fierceness and confidence,
and there are many things often concomitant to such actings, that if
it misconceit inspiration or prophecy, the parties themselves are not
only bound up under that persuasion, but even unwary spectators are
deluded. For sometime a melancholy imagination is not wholly corrupt,
but only in respect of some one or two particulars, whilst in other
things it acts regularly, and then neither they nor others, that are
unacquainted with such cases, are so apt to suspect that they are
mistaken in these things, while they act rationally and soberly in
other matters. Sometime they have vehement fits of surprisal—for the
humour hath its ebbings and flowings—and this gives them occasion to
apprehend that something doth supernaturally act or raise them, and
then when the things they speak are for the matter of them of religious
concern and odd notions—for the humour flies high and bounds not itself
with ordinary things—and withal uttered in Scripture rhetoric and with
fervency and urgency of spirit—when these things concur, there is such
an appearance of inspiration that the parties themselves and others
rest fully persuaded that it is so.

(7.) Seventhly, _Pretended and counterfeit miracles the devil makes
much use of to countenance error, and this is also one of his
strongholds_; for he suggests that God himself bears witness by these
signs, wonders, and miracles to such erroneous doctrine as seems to be
concerned[259] by them.

That the devil cannot work a true miracle hath been discoursed before,
but that he can perform many strange things, and such as may beget
admiration, none denies; and that by such unwonted actions he usually
endeavours to justify false doctrines, and to set them off with the
appearance of divine approbation, we are sufficiently forewarned
in the Scriptures.[260] Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses by false
miracles. In Deut. xiii. 1, God speaks of the signs and wonders of
false prophets, who would by that means seek to seduce the people to
follow after other gods. Christ also, in Mat. xxiv. 24, foretells that
‘false Christs and false prophets shall arise, and shew great signs
and wonders, insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive
the very elect,’ and puts a special note of caution upon it: ‘Behold,
I have told you before.’ And to the same purpose is that of Paul
concerning Antichrist, 2 Thes. ii. 9, where he tells us of powerful
‘signs and wonders by the working of Satan,’ who doth all the while
only lie and cheat that he may draw men to error.

If we make inquiry how Satan hath managed this engine, we shall observe
not only his diligence in using it on all occasions to countenance all
kind of errors both in paganism and Christianity, but also his subtle
dexterity by cheating men with forgeries and falsehood.

Heathenish idolatry, among other helps for its advancement, wanted not
this. The oracles and responses, which were common before the coming
of Christ, were esteemed as miraculous confirmations of the truth
of the deities which they worshipped; the movings and speakings of
their statues[261] were arguments that the operative presence of some
celestial _Numen_ was affixed to such an image. In some places the
solemn sacrifices are never performed without a seeming miracle. As in
Nova Zembla, where the priest’s trances, his running a sword into his
belly, his making his head and shoulder fall off his body into a kettle
of hot water by the drawing of a line, and then his reviving again
perfect and entire, without maim or hurt, are all strange, astonishing
things to the beholders.[262] But besides such things as these, which
are standing constant wonders, we read of some that have had, as it
were, a gift of miracles, that they might be eminently instrumental
to promote and honour paganism. All histories agree that Simon Magus
did so many strange things at Rome—as the causing an image to walk,
turning stones into bread, transforming himself into several shapes,
flying in the air, &c.—that he was esteemed a god. Philostratus and
Cedrenus[263] report great things of Apollonius [of Tyana,] as that
he could deliver cities from scorpions, serpents, earthquakes, &c.,
and that many miracles were wrought by him. This man Satan raised up
in an extraordinary manner to revive the honour of paganism, that it
might at least vie with Christianity. And though few ever attained to
that height which Apollonius and Simon Magus reached unto, yet have we
several instances of great things done now and then by some singular
persons upon a special occasion, which Satan improved to his advantage.
Vespasian cured a lame and blind man.[264] Adrianus cured a blind
woman; and which is more, after he was dead, by the touch of his body,
a man of Pannonia who was born blind received his sight.[265] Valerius
Maximus tells of many strange things, and particularly of a vestal
virgin that drew water into a sieve. As Livy tells of another, Claudia
by name, who with her girdle drew the ship to the shore which carried
the mother of their gods, when neither strength of men nor oxen could
do it.[266]

Errors under profession of Christianity have been supported and
propagated by the boast of miracles. A clear instance for this we
have in popery, that religion being a perpetual boast of wonders. To
let pass their great miracle of transubstantiation, which, as one
hath lately demonstrated, is a bundle of miracles, or contradictions
rather,[267] because it appears not to the senses of any man, and
consequently is not capable of being an argument to prove any of
their opinions. We have abundance of strange things related by them,
as proofs of some doctrines of theirs in particular, as purgatory,
invocation of saints, transubstantiation, &c., and of their profession
in the general, devils cast out, blind and lame cured, dead raised, and
what not; it would be endless to recite particulars. It would take a
long time to tell what their St Francis hath done—how he fetched water
out of a rock, how he was homaged by fowls and fishes, how he made a
fountain in Marchia run wine, and how far he exceeded Christ himself in
wonderful feats. Christ did nothing which St Francis did not do, nay,
he did many more things than Christ did: Christ turned water into wine
but once, but St Francis did it thrice; Christ was once transfigured,
but St Francis twenty times; he and his brethren raised above a
thousand to life, cast out more than a thousand devils, &c.[268] Their
Dominicus raised three dead men to life. Their Zeverius,[269] while
he was alive, did many miracles, and after he was dead his body lay
fifteen months sweetly smelling, without any taint of corruption. It
is irksome to repeat their stories; abundance of such stuff might be
added out of their own writings, the design of all which is to prove,
to those that are so prodigal of their faith as to believe them, that
they only are the true church, and that by this note among others they
may be known to be so.

But let us turn aside a little to observe Satan’s cunning in this
pretence of miracles; let things be soberly weighed, and we may see
enough of the cheat. This great boast is, as Austin hath it, resolved
into one of these two—either the figments of lying men, or the craft
of deceitful spirits: _Vel figmenta hominum mendacium, vel portenta
fallacium spirituum_.

As to the first of these, it is evident that a great many things that
have been taken by the vulgar for mighty wonders, were nothing but
the knaveries of impostors, who in this matter have used a threefold
cunning.

[1.] First, _By mere juggling and forgery in confederacies and private
contrivances they have set upon the stage persons before instructed to
act their parts, or things aforehand prepared, to pretend to be what
they were not, that others might seem to do what they did not, and all
to amaze those that know not the bottom of the matter_. Of this nature
was Mohammed’s dove and bull, who were privately trained up to that
obedience and familiarity which they used to him. The pagan priests
were not altogether to seek in this piece of art. Lucian tells us of
one Alexander, who nourished and tamed a serpent, and made the people
of Pontus believe that it was the god Æsculapius, and doubtless the
idol priests improved their private artificial contrivances: as of the
movings of their images, as that of Venus made by Dædalus, which by
the means of quicksilver enclosed could stir itself;[270] their eating
and drinking, as in the story of Bel in the Apochryphal adjections to
the Book of Daniel; their responses, and several other appearances; as
of the paper head of Adonis or Osiris, which, as Lucian reports, comes
swimming down the river every year from Egypt to Byblos, &c.; these
and such like they improved as evidences of the power, knowledge, and
reality of their gods. And though in the prevalency of idolatry, where
there was no considerable party to oppose, their cheats were not always
discovered, yet we have no reason to imagine that the priests of those
days were so honest that they were only deceived by the devil’s craft,
and did not in a villainous design purposely endeavour the delusion of
others. If we had no other grounds for a just suspicion in these cases,
the famous instances of the abuse of Paulina at the temple of Isis
in Rome, in the reign of the emperor Tiberius, by the procurement of
Mondus, who corrupted the priest of Anubis to signify to her the love
of their god, and under that coverture gratified the lust of Mondus,
mentioned by Josephus.[271] And that of Tyrannus, priest of Saturn in
Alexandria, who by the like pretence of the love of Saturn, adulterated
most of the fairest dames of the city, mentioned by Ruffinus.[272]
These would sufficiently witness that the priests of those times were
apt enough to abuse the people at the rate we have been speaking of.
In popery nothing hath been more ordinary. Who knows not the story of
the holy maid of Kent and the boy of Bilson? How common is it with them
to play tricks with women troubled with hysterical distempers; and to
pretend the casting out of devils, when they have only to deal with
a natural disease. Not very many years since they practised upon a
poor young woman at Durham, and made great boasts of their exorcisms,
relics, and holy water against the devil, with whom they would have all
believe she was possessed, when the event discovered that her fits were
only the fits of the mother. I myself, and some others in this place,
have seen those fits allayed by the fume of tobacco blown into her
mouth, to the shame and apparent detection of that artifice. I might
mention the legerdemain of Antonius of Padua, who made his horse adore
the host, for the conversion of a heretic; the finding of the images of
St Paul and St Dominic in a church at Venice, with this inscription for
Paul, ‘By this man you may come to Christ;’ and this for Dominic, ‘But
by this man you may do it easilier;’ and the honour put upon Garnet, by
his image on straw,[273] found at his execution, in all probability by
him that made it and threw it down, or by his confederate: but these
are enough to shew the honesty of these kind of men.

[2.] Secondly, _They have also a cunning of ascribing effects to
wrong causes, and by that means they make those things wonders that
are none_. Mohammed called his fits of falling-sickness ecstasies
or trances. Austin tells us the heathens were notable at this: the
burning lamp in the temple of Venus, though only the work of art, was
interpreted to be a constant miracle of that deity.[274] The image
which, in another temple, hung in the air, by ignorant gazers was
accounted a wonder, when indeed the loadstone in the roof and pavement,
though unseen, was the cause of it. The Sidonians were confirmed in
their constant annual lamentations of Adonis, by a mock miracle of
the redness of the river Adonis at one time of the year constantly;
they take it to be blood, when it is nothing else but the colouring
of the water by the dust of red earth or _minium_, which the winds
constantly at that time of the year from mount Libanus do drive into
the water.[275] Neither are the papists out in this point. I will only
instance in that observation of Dr Jenison, to confirm the doctrine and
practice of invocation:[276] they take the advantage of sovereign baths
and waters, and where they espy any fountain good against the stone, or
other diseases, presently there is the statue or image of some saint
or other erected by it, by whose virtue the cure and miracle must seem
to be done; or some chapel is erected to this or that saint, to whom
prayers before and thanks after washing must be offered.

[3.] Thirdly, where the two former fail, men that devote themselves
to this kind of service _imitate their father the devil, and fall to
plain lying and devised fables_. Idolatry was mainly underpropped by
fabulous stories; and no wonder, when they esteemed it a pious fraud
to nourish piety towards the gods, in which case, as Polybius saith,
though their writers speak monsters, and write childish, absurd,
and impossible things, yet are they to be pardoned for their good
intent.[277] Among the papists what less can be expected, when the
same principle is entertained among them? Canus, and Lodovicus Vives
mentioned by him,[278] as also some few others, do exceedingly blame
that blind piety of coining lies for religion, and feigning histories
for the credit of their opinions; but while they with great freedom
and ingenuity do tax the fables of their own party, they do plainly
acknowledge that they are too much guilty of feigning, insomuch that
not only the author of the Golden Legend is branded with the characters
of a brazen face and a leaden heart, but also Gregory’s Dialogues and
Bede’s History are blamed by him, as containing narrations of miracles
taken upon trust from the reports of the vulgar.[279] And indeed the
wonders they talk of are so strange, so unlikely, so ridiculous and
absurd some of them, that except a man offer violence to his reason,
and wilfully shut his eyes against the clear evidences of suspicion, he
cannot think they are anything else than dreams and fables, no better
than Æsop’s. You may meet with several catalogues of them in protestant
writers:[280] as their St Swithins making whole a basket of broken eggs
by the sign of the cross; Patricius his making the stolen sheep to
bleat in the thief’s belly after he had eaten it; their St Bridget’s
bacon, which in great charity she gave to a hungry dog, was found again
in her kettle; Dionysius after he was beheaded carried his head in his
hand three French miles; St Dunstan took the devil by the nose with his
tongs till he made him roar; Dominicus made him hold the candle till he
burnt his fingers; St Lupus imprisoned the devil in a pot all night;
a chapel of the Virgin Mary was translated from Palestine to Loretto;
a consecrated host, being put into a hive of bees to cure them of the
murrain, was so devoutly entertained that the bees built a chapel in
the hive, with doors, windows, steeple, and bells, erected an altar
and laid the host upon it, sung their canonical hours, and kept their
watches by night, as monks used to do in their cloisters, &c. Who would
ever imagine that men of any seriousness could satisfy themselves with
such childish fopperies? These are the usual ways by which men of
design have raised the noise of miracles.

The other part of Satan’s coming[281] relates to himself and his
own actions. When his agents can go no further in the trade of
miracle-making, he as a spirit doth often make use of his power,
knowledge, and agility, by which he can indeed do things incredible
and to be wondered at: _Portenta fallacium spirituum_. It is nothing
for him, by his knowledge of affairs at a distance, of the private
endeavours or expressed resolves of princes, to prognosticate future
events. By his power over the bodies of men, he can, with the help of
inclinations and advantages, do much to bring a man into a trance, or
take the opportunity of a fit of an apoplexy, and then, like a cunning
juggler, pretend, by I know not what nor whom, to raise a man from
death. He knows the secret powers and virtues of things, and by private
applications of them may easily supply spirits, remove obstructions,
and so cure lameness, blindness, and many other distempers, and then
give the honour of the cure to what person or occasion may best fit
his design; so that either by the officious lies of his vassals, or
the exerting of his own power on suitable objects at fit times, he
hath made a great noise of signs and wonders in the world. And this
stratagem of his hath ever been at hand to gain a repute to false
doctrine. And the rather doth he insist upon this,

_First_, Because true miracles are a divine testimony to truth. As
Nicodemus argued, John iii. 2, ‘No man could do these miracles that
thou doest except God be with him.’ And there were solemn occasions
wherein they were necessary; as when God gave public discoveries of
his mind before the Scriptures were written; and also when he altered
the economy of the Old Testament and settled that of the New. In these
cases it was necessary that God should confirm his word by miracles.
But now, though these ends of miracles are ceased, though God hath so
settled and fixed the rule of our obedience and worship that no other
gospel or rule is to be expected, and consequently no need of new
miracles, where the certain account of the old miracles are sufficient
attestations of old and unalterable truths; nay, though God have
expressly told us, Deut. xiii. 1, that no miracle—though it should
come to pass, and could not be discovered to be a lie—should prevail
with us to forsake the established truths and ways of Scripture, or to
entertain anything contrary to it; yet doth Satan exercise herein a
proud imitation of the supreme majesty, and withal doth so dazzle the
minds of the weaker sort of men—who are more apt to consider the wonder
than to suspect the design—that, without due heed given to the cautions
which God hath laid before us in that particular, they are ready to
interpret them to be God’s witness to this or that doctrine, to which
they seem to be appendant.

_Secondly_, Because Satan hath a more than ordinary advantage to
feign miracles; he doth more industriously set himself to pretend
them and to urge them for the accomplishment of his ends. It is an
easy work to prevail with men that are wholly devoted to their own
interest, under the mask of religion to say and do anything that may
further their design; and the business of miracles is so imitable by
art, through the ignorance and heedlessness of men, that with a small
labour Satan can do it at pleasure. The secret powers of nature—such
as that of the loadstone—by a dexterous application brought into act
in a fitly-contrived subject, will seem miraculous to those that see
not the secret springs of those actions. There have been artificial
contrivances of motions which, had they been disguised under a
religious form, and directed to such an end, might have passed for
greater miracles than many which we have mentioned. Such was the
dove of Archyas, which did fly in the air as if it had been a living
creature.[282] Such was the fly of Regiomontanus, and the eagle
presented to the Emperor Maximilian, which, in the compass of their
little bodies, contained so many springs and wheels as were sufficient
to give them motion, and to direct their courses as if they had been
animated. Albertus Magnus his artificial man, and the silver galley
and tritons made by a goldsmith at Paris,[283] were rare pieces of
art—their motions so certain and steady, that they seemed to have life
and understanding. If art can do all this, how much more may we suppose
can Satan do! how easily can he make apparitions, present strange
sights to the eye and voices to the ear, and, by putting out his power,
do a thousand things astonishing and wonderful!

(8.) Eighthly, _Sometimes Satan pleads for error, from the ease,
peace, or other advantages which men pretend they have received since
they engaged in such a way or received such a persuasion_. This is an
argument from the effect, and frequently used to confirm the minds
of men in their opinions. Hence they satisfy themselves with these
reasonings: ‘I was before always under fears and uncertainties; I never
was at peace or rest in my mind. I tried several courses, followed
several parties, but I never had satisfaction or comfort till now,
and by this I know that I am in a right way.’ Others argue after the
same manner from their abundance and outward prosperity: ‘I met with
nothing but crosses and losses before, but now God hath blessed me with
an increase of substance, prospered my trade and undertakings,’ &c.
These, though apparently weak and deceitful grounds, are reputed strong
and conclusive to those that are first resolved upon an error. For men
are so willing to justify themselves in what they have undertaken,
that they greedily catch at anything that hath the least appearance of
probability to answer their ends.

This plea of satisfaction is commonly from one of these two things:

1. First, _From inward peace and contentment of mind_. Satan knows
that peace is the thing to which a man sacrificeth all his labours
and travail. This he seeks, though often in a wrong way, and by wrong
means. He knows also that true peace is only the daughter of truth,
‘the ways whereof are pleasantness, and the paths whereof are peace;’
neither is he ignorant of the delights which a man hath, by enjoying
himself in the sweet repose of a contented mind, that he may charm the
hearts of the erroneous into a confidence and assurance that they have
taken a right course; he doth all he can to further a false peace in
them, and to this purpose he commonly useth this method:—

[1.] First, He doth all he can to _unsettle them from the foundation
of truth upon which they were bottomed_. He labours to render things
suspicious, doubtful, or uncertain. This some have noted from 2 Thes.
ii. 2, where Satan’s first attempts are to shake their minds, not only
by disquiet, of which we are next to speak, but by alteration of their
judgment; for mind is sometimes taken for sentence, opinion, judgment,
as 1 Cor. ii. 16, ‘We have the mind of Christ;’ and 1 Cor. i. 10, ‘In
the same mind, and in the same judgment.’[284]

[2.] Secondly, His second approach is to _raise a storm of restless
disquiet upon that uncertainty_; and in order to his intended design,
he usually fills them with the utmost anxiety of mind, and makes their
thoughts, like a tempestuous sea, dash one against another. This
piece of his art is noted in the fore-cited place, that ‘ye be not
shaken in mind, or troubled:’ the word signifies a great perplexity,
θροεῖσθαι. And this is a usual method which the false teachers among
the Galatians practised; they first troubled them, and then endeavoured
by the advantage of that trouble to pervert the gospel of Christ, Gal.
i. 7, and v. 12. To effect both these, he doth amuse them with all the
objections that can be raised. If he can say anything of the antiquity
of the error, the number, wisdom, learning, or authority of those
that embrace it, they are sure to hear of these things to the full.
The danger of continuing as they were, and the happiness of the new
doctrine, are represented with all aggravating circumstances; and these
so often, that their thoughts have no rest: and if this restlessness
does wound or weaken them, he pursues with a high hand. These ways
of disturbing the unsettled mind are hinted to us in the aforesaid
place—spirit, word, letter, anything that carries a seeming authority
to unsettle, or power to amaze and distress. And we may here further
note, that where the minds of men are discomposed with other fears or
disquiets, Satan is ready to improve them to this use, so that commonly
when the word of God begins to work at first upon the consciences of
men, to awaken them to the consideration of their sin and danger, the
adversary is then very busy with them to inveigle them into some error
or other.

[3.] Thirdly, Having thoroughly prepared the mind with restless fears,
he then advanceth forward with the _proffers of peace and comfort in
the way of error which he proposeth_; and in this case error will
boast much, ‘Come to me, and ye shall find rest for your souls.’ How
grateful and welcome the confident proffers of ease and satisfaction
are to a tossed and disquieted mind, any man will easily imagine. It is
usually thus: men that are tired out will easily embrace anything for
ease. A man in this case may be wrought upon like wax, to receive any
impression; he will fasten on anything, true or false, that doth but
promise comfort.

[4.] Fourthly, The completement of his method is _to please the man in
the fruition of the peace promised_; and this he labours to do, not
only to fix the man in his delusion, but to make that man brag of ease,
to be a snare to others. And it is easy for the devil to do this: for,
_first_, The novelty of a new opinion doth naturally please, especially
if it give any seeming commendation for discovery or singularity. We
see men are fond of their own inventions, and delighted to be lifted
up above others. _Secondly_, Satan can easily allay the storm which
he himself raised: he gives over to molest with anxious thoughts—on
the contrary, he suggests thoughts of satisfaction. _Thirdly_, And
whatever he can do in a natural way to raise up our passions of joy and
delight, he will be sure to do it now, to ravishment and excess if he
can; and then he not only makes these men sure—for what argument can
stand before such a confidence?—but hath an active instrument for the
allurement of such as cannot discover these methods.

2. Secondly, _Outward prosperity_ is the other common plea for error.
Though successes, plenty, and abundance of worldly comforts argue of
themselves neither love nor hatred, truth nor falsehood—because the
wise providence of God, for holy ends and reasons often undiscerned by
us, permits often the tabernacles of robbers to prosper, and permits
those that ‘deal treacherously’ with the truths of God ‘to be planted,
to take root, to grow, yea, to bring forth fruit’—nevertheless if in a
way of error they meet with outward blessings, they are apt to ascribe
all to their errors, and to say as Israel, Hosea ii. 5, ‘I will go
after my lovers that gave me my bread and my water, my wool and my
flax, mine oil and my drink,’ without any serious consideration of
God’s common bounty, which upon far other accounts, ‘gives them corn,
and wine, and oil, and multiplies their silver and gold,’ which they
prepared for Baal, ver. 8. I shall not need to add anything further for
the proof and explanation of this than what we have in Jer. xliv. 17,
18, where the Jews expressly advance their idolatrous worship as the
right way, and confirm themselves even to obstinacy in the pursuit of
it, upon this reason: ‘We will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth out
of our own mouth, to burn incense to the queen of heaven ... for then
had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil: but since
we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out
our drink-offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been
consumed by the sword and by the famine.’

(9.) Ninthly, Instead of better arguments, Satan usually makes _lies
his refuge_: and these respect either the truth which he would cry
down, or the errors which he would set up.

Those lies that are managed against truth are of two sorts: mistakes
and misrepresentations of its doctrines, or calumnies against the
persons and actions of those that take part with it.

Those lies that are proper to bespatter a truth withal are such as tend
to render it unlovely, inconvenient, or dangerous. Satan hath never
been a-wanting to raise up mists and fogs to eclipse the shining beauty
of truth. Sometime he persuades men that it is a novelty, and contrary
to the tradition of the fathers; and then, if an error had been once
upon the stage before, and had again been hissed out of the world, when
it peeps out again into the world, its former impudency is made an
argument for its antiquity, and truth is decried as novel. Or if it be
but an error of yesterday, and hath only obtained an age or two, then
the ghosts of our forefathers are conjured up as witnesses, and the
plea runs current, What has become of your fathers? or, are you wiser
than your fathers? are they all damned? These were insisted on by the
heathens: the gods of the country and the worship of their fathers,
they thought, should not be forsaken for Christianity, which they
judged was but a novelty in comparison of paganism. Of the same extract
is that old song of the papists, ‘Where was your religion before
Luther?’ and to this purpose they talk of the succession of their
bishops and popes. And other errors grow a little pert and confident,
if they can but find a pattern or sample for themselves among the old
heresies. Sometime he endeavours to bring truth into suspicion, by
rendering it a dangerous encroachment upon the rights and privileges
of men, as if it would turn all upside down, and introduce factions
and confusions. This clamour was raised against the gospel, that it
would subvert the doctrine of Moses and the law. Sometimes he clothes
the opinions of truth with an ugly dress, and misrepresents it to the
world as guilty of strange inferences and absurdities, which only arise
from a wrong stating of the questions; and where it doth really differ
from error, he endeavours to widen the differences to an inconvenient
distance, so that if it go a mile from error, Satan will have it to
go two: if truth teach justification by faith, error represents it as
denying all care of holiness and good works; if truth say bare moral
virtues are not sufficient without grace, error presently accuseth
it as denying any necessary use of morality, or affirming that moral
virtues are obstructions and hindrances to salvation. It were easy to
note abundance of such instances.

As for calumnies against the persons and actions of those that are
assertors of truth, it is well known for an old threadbare design, by
which Satan hath gained not a little. Machiavel borrowed the policy
from him, and formed it into a maxim; for he found by experience that
where strong slanders had set in their teeth, though never so unjustly,
the wounds were never thoroughly healed; for some that heard the report
of the slander never heard the vindication, and those that did were not
always so unprejudiced as to free themselves from all suspicion, but
still something remained usually upon their spirits for ever after; and
that, like a secret venom, poisons all that could be said or done by
the persons that wrongfully fell under their prejudice, and did not a
little derogate from the authority and power of the truths which they
delivered.

The friends of truth have always to their cost found it so. Christ
himself escaped not the lies and censures of men when he did the
greatest miracles; they raised this calumny against him, that ‘he cast
out devils by Beelzebub, the prince of devils,’ John viii. 48. When he
shewed the most compassionate condescensions, they called him ‘a man
gluttonous, a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners;’ and at
last, upon a misinterpretation of his speeches, ‘I will destroy this
temple, and in three days I will build it up,’ Mat. xxvi. 61, they
arraigned and condemned him for blasphemy; and his servants have,
according to what he foretold, drunk of the same cup: the more eminent
in service the greater draught. Paul, a chosen vessel, met with much
of this unjust dealing: he was accused, Acts xxi. 28, as speaking
against the people, the law, and the temple, and, chap. xxiv. 5, called
‘a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, a profaner of the temple.’
Neither can we wonder at this, that the greatest innocency or highest
degree of holiness is no armour or proof against the sharp arrows of
a lying tongue; when we read this as one of Satan’s great characters,
that he is ‘the accuser of the brethren,’ and that his agents are
so perfectly instructed in this art that they are also branded with
the same mark of ‘false accusers,’ Jude 10. It is well known how the
primitive Christians were used: they were accounted ‘the filth and
offscouring of all things;’ there could be nothing that could render
them odious or ridiculous but they were aspersed with it; as that
they ‘sacrificed infants, worshipped the sun, and used promiscuous
uncleanness;’ nay, whatever plague or disaster befell their neighbours,
they were sure to carry the blame. And we might trace this stratagem
down to our own days. Luther in his time was the common butt for all
the poisoned arrows of the papists’ calumny; which so exceeded all
bounds of sobriety and prudence that they devised a romance of his
death, how he was choked of the devil; that before he died he desired
his corpse might be carried into the church and adored with divine
worship; and that after his death the excessive stench of his carcase
forced all his friends to forsake him. All this and more to this
purpose they published while he was alive; whose slanders, worthy only
of laughter, he refuted by his own pen. The like fury they expressed
against Calvin by their Bolsecus, whom they set on work to fill a book
with impudent lies against him. Neither did Beza, Junius, or any other
of note escape without some slander or other. How unjustly the Arians
of old accused Athanasius of uncleanness, and of bereaving Arsenius of
his arm, is sufficiently known in history.[285]

But the devil’s malice doth not always run in the dirty channel of
odious calumnies. He hath sometimes a more cleanly conveyance for his
lies against holy men. In prosecution of the same design, it is a
fair colour for error if he can abuse the name and credit of renowned
champions of truth, by fathering an error upon them which they never
owned. By this means he doth not only grace a false doctrine with the
authority of an eminent person, whose estimation might be a snare
to some well-meaning persons, but weakens the truth, by bringing
a faithful assertor of it into suspicion of holding, at least in
some points, dangerous opinions; by which many are affrighted from
entertaining anything that they write or preach. For though they may
be confessedly sound in the most weighty doctrines, yet if it be once
buzzed abroad that they are in anything unsound, this dead fly spoils
all the precious ointment. And the matter were yet the less if there
were any just cause for such a prejudice; but such is Satan’s art, that
if a man explains the same truth, but in different words and forms
of speech than those that others have been used unto; or if he casts
it into a more convenient mould, that, by laying aside doubtful or
flexible expressions, it may be more safely guarded from the exceptions
of the adversaries; especially if he carefully choose his path betwixt
the extremes on either hand,—this is enough for Satan to catch at,
and presently he bestows upon him the names of the very errors which
he most strenuously opposeth; nay, sometimes if he mention anything
above the reach or acquaintance of those that hear him, it is well if
he escapes the charge of heresy, and that he meets not with the lot of
Virgilius, bishop of Salzburg, who was judged no less than heretical
for venting his opinion concerning the antipodes.[286] I know men do
such things in their zeal; but while they do so they are concerned to
consider how Satan doth abuse their good meaning to the disservice of
truth.

As Satan’s design in bespattering the actions and doctrines of good
men is to bring the truth they profess into a suspicion of falsehood,
and to advance the contrary errors to the place and credit of truth,
so doth he use a skill proportionable to his design. And though he
be so impudent that he will not blush at the contrivance of the most
gross and malicious lie, yet withal he is so cunning that he studiously
endeavours some probable rise for his slanders, and commonly he takes
this course:—

[1.] First, He doth all he can _to corrupt the professors of truth_.
If riches or honours will tempt them to be proud, high-minded,
contentious, or extravagant, he plies them with these weapons; if the
pleasures of the flesh and world be more likely to besot them, or
to make them sensual, earthly, or loose, he incessantly lays those
baits before them; if fears and persecutions can affright them out of
duty, if injuries and provocations may prejudice them into a froward
or wayward temper, he will certainly urge them by such occasions;
and when he hath prevailed in any measure, he is sure to aggravate
every circumstance to its utmost height, and upon that advantage to
make additions of a great many things beyond what they can be justly
accused of. This old device Paul, in Rom. ii. 24, takes notice of
concerning the Jews, whose breach of the law so dishonoured God that
‘the name of God was blasphemed among the Gentiles through them.’ The
Jews lived wickedly, and their wicked lives was a current argument
among the Gentiles to confirm them in paganism; for they judged the
law of God could not approve itself to be better than their own, when
the professors of it were so naught. To prevent this mischief, we are
seriously warned to be carefully strict in all our stations, ‘that the
name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed,’ 1 Tim. vi. 1; Titus
ii. 5.

[2.] Secondly, _Whatever miscarriages any professor of truth is
guilty of, Satan takes care that it be presently charged upon all the
profession_. If any one offend, it is matter of public blame; much more
if any company or party shall run into extravagances, or do actions
strange and unjustifiable; those that agree with them in the general
name of their profession, though they differ as far from their wild
opinions and practices as their enemies do, shall still be upbraided
with their follies. We see this practised daily by differing parties;
according to what was foretold in 2 Pet. ii. 2, ‘false prophets’ seduce
a great number of Christians to follow their pernicious ways, and by
reason of their wild, ungodly behaviour, ‘the whole way of truth was
evil spoken of.’

[3.] Thirdly, _The least slip or infirmity of the children of truth the
devil is ready to bring upon the stage_; and they that will not charge
themselves as offenders for very great evils, will yet object, to the
disparagement of truth, the smallest mistakes of others: a mote in the
eye of the lovers of truth shall be espied when a beam in the eye of
falsehood shall pass for nothing.

[4.] Fourthly, _Slanderous aspersions are sometimes raised from a
simple mistake of actions, and their grounds or manner of performance,
and sometimes from a malicious misrepresentation_. The devil seldom
acts from a simple mistake; but he will either suborn the passionate
opposers to a wilful perverting of the true management of things,
or will by a false account of things take the advantage of their
prejudice, to make men believe that such things have been said or done,
which indeed never were. The Christians in the primitive times were
reported to be bloody men, and that they did kill men in sacrifice, and
did eat their flesh and drink their blood; and this was only occasioned
by their doctrine and use of the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ. They were accused for promiscuous uncleanness with one another,
and this only because they taught that there was no distinction of male
and female in respect of justification, and that they were all brethren
and sisters in Christ. This account Tertullian gives of the calumnies
of those times, and others have noted the like occasions of other
abuses of them.[287] They were reported to worship the sun, because
they in times of persecution were forced to meet early in the fields,
and were often seen undispersed at sunrising. They were reported to
worship Bacchus and Ceres, because of the elements of bread and wine in
the Lord’s supper. If they met in private places, and in the night, it
was enough to occasion surmises of conspiracy and rebellion: so ready
is Satan to take occasion where none is given.

[5.] Fifthly, But if none of these are at hand, then _a downright lie
must do the turn, according to that of Jer._ xviii. 18, ‘Come and let
us devise devices against Jeremiah;’ and when once the lie is coined,
Satan hath officious instruments to spread it: Jer. xx. 10, ‘Report,
say they, and we will report it.’

These were the lies raised against truth; but besides this endeavour,
he useth the same art of lying to enhance the credit of error. Lying
inspirations, lying signs and wonders we have spoken of; I shall only
mention another sort of lying, which is that of forgery, an art which
error hath commonly made use of. Sometimes books and writings erroneous
have been made to carry the names of men that never knew or saw them.
The apostles themselves escaped not these abuses: you read of the
counterfeit Gospels of Thomas and Bartholomew, the Acts of Peter and
Andrew, the Apostolical Constitutions, and a great many more. Later
writers have by the like hard usage been forced to father the brats of
other men’s brains. I might be large in these, but they that please may
see more of this in authors that have of purpose discovered the frauds
of spurious, supposititious books.[288] The design is obvious: error
would by this means adorn itself with the excellent names of men of
renown, that so it might pass for good doctrine with the unwary.




