CHAPTER VII.

 _Of Satan’s diligence in several instances.—The question about
 the being of spirits and devils handled.—The Sadducees’ opinion
 discovered.—The reality of spirits proved._


The last particular observed in the text is his _diligence_. This adds
force and strength to his malice, power, and cruelty, and shews they
are not idle, dead, or inactive principles in him, which, if they could
be so supposed, would render him less hurtful and formidable. This I
shall despatch in a few instances, noting to this purpose,

1. First, _His pains he takes in hunting his prey, and pursuing his
designs_. It is nothing for him to ‘compass sea and land,’ to labour
to the utmost in his employment; it is all his business to tempt and
destroy, and his whole heart is in it. Hence intermission or cessation
cannot be expected. He faints not by his labour; and his labour, with
the success of it, is all the delight we can suppose him to have. So
that, being pushed and hurried by the hellish satisfactions of deadly
revenge, and having a strength answerable to those violent impulses, we
must suppose him to undergo, with a kind of pleasing willingness, all
imaginable toil and labour. If we look into ourselves, we find it true,
to our no small trouble and hazard. Doth he at any time easily desist
when we give him a repulse? Doth he not come again and again, with
often and impudently-repeated importunities? Doth he not carry a design
in his mind for months and years against us? And when the motion is not
feasible, yet he forgets it not, but after a long interruption begins
again where he left; which shews that he is big with his projects, and
his mind hath no rest. He stretcheth out his nets all the day long. We
may say of him, that he riseth up early, and sitteth up late at his
work, and is content to labour in the very fire, so that he might but
either disturb a child of God or gain a proselyte.

2. Secondly, Diligence is not only discovered in laboriousness,
but also in _a peculiar readiness to espy and to close in with fit
occasions, which may in probability answer the end we drive at_. In
this is Satan admirably diligent; no occasion shall slip, or through
inadvertency escape him. No sooner are opportunities before us, but we
may perceive him suggesting to us, ‘Do this, satisfy that lust, take
that gain, please yourselves with that revenge.’ No sooner obtains he a
commission against a child of God, but presently he is upon his back,
as he dealt with Job; he lost no time, but goes out immediately from
the presence of the Lord and falls upon him. Besides what he doth upon
solemn and extraordinary occasions, these that are common and ordinary
are so carefully improved by him, that everything we hear or see is
ready to become our snare, and Satan will assay to tempt us by them,
though they lie something out of the way of our inclination, and be not
so likely to prevail with us.

3. Thirdly, It is also a discovery of his diligence, that he never
_fails to pursue every advantage which he gets against us to the
utmost_. If the occasion and motion thereupon incline us, so that if
we are persuaded by them, he follows it on, and is not satisfied with
either a lower degree of acting sinfully, or with one or two acts;
but then he presseth upon us to sin to the height, with the greater
contempt of God and grievance of his Spirit, the greater scandal and
offence to our brethren; and having once caused us to begin, he would
never have us to make an end. His temptations roll themselves upon
us like the breaking in of waters, which, by the fierceness of their
current, make a large way for more to follow. He knows how to improve
his victories, and will not, through slothfulness or pity, neglect to
complete them. Hence it is that sometimes he reaps a large harvest
where he had sown little, and from one temptation not only wounds the
soul of him that committed it, but endeavours to diffuse the venom and
poisonous steam of it to the infection of others, to the disgrace of
religion, the hardening the hearts of wicked men, and the turning the
ignorant out of the way of truth. In like manner, if he perceive the
spirits of men grow distempered and wounded, he then plies them with
threatenings, fills them with all manner of discouragements, dresseth
every truth with the worst appearance, that it may be apprehended
otherwise than it is, and puts such interpretations on all providences,
that everything may augment the smart of the wound, till they be
overwhelmed with terrors.

4. Fourthly, _The various ways which he takes_, shews also his
diligence. If one plot take not, he is immediately upon another. He
confines not himself to one design nor to one method; but if he find
one temptation doth not relish, he prepares another more suitable. If
covetousness doth not please us, then he urgeth to profuseness; if
terrors do not affright us to despair, then he abuseth mercies to make
us careless and presuming. If we are not content to be openly wicked,
then he endeavours to make us secretly hypocritical or formal. Sometime
he urgeth men to be profane; if that hit not, then to be erroneous.
If he cannot work by one tool, then he takes another; and if anything
in his way disgust, he will not urge it over-hard, but straight takes
another course. Such is his diligence, that we may say of him, as it
was said of Paul upon a better ground, he will ‘become all things to
all men, that he may gain some,’ [1 Cor. ix. 19.]

5. Fifthly, Diligence will most shew itself _when things are at the
greatest hazard, or when the hopes of success are ready to bring
forth_. In this point of diligence our adversary is not wanting. If men
are upon the point of error or sin, how industriously doth he labour to
bring them wholly over, and to settle them in evil! One would think at
such times he laid aside all other business, and only attended this.
How frequent, incessant, and earnest are his persuasions and arguings
with such! The like diligence he sheweth in obstructing, disturbing,
and discouraging us when we are upon our greatest services or near
our greatest mercies. What part of the day are we more wandering and
vain in our thoughts, if we take not great care, than when we set
about prayer? At other times we find some more ease and freedom in our
imaginations, as if we could better rule or command them; but then, as
if our thoughts were only confusion and disorder, we are not able to
master them, and to keep the door of the heart so close but that these
troublesome, unwelcome guests will be crowding in, is impossible. Let
us observe it seriously, and we shall find that our thoughts are not
the same, and after the same manner impetuous at other times as they
are when we set about holy things; which ariseth not only from the
quickness of our spiritual sense in our readier observation of them
at that time, but also from the devil’s busy molestation and special
diligence against us on such occasions. Besides, when he foresees
our advantages or mercies, he bestirs himself to prevent or hinder
us of them. If ministers set themselves to study and preach truths
that are more piercing, weighty, or necessary, they may observe more
molestations, interruptions, or discouragements of all sorts, than when
they less concern themselves with the business of the souls of men.
He foresees what sermons are provided, and often doth he upon such
foresight endeavour to turn off those from hearing that have most need
and are most likely to receive benefit by them. Many have noted it,
that those sermons and occasions that have done them most good, when
they came to them, they have been some way or other most dissuaded
from and resolved against before they came; and then when they have
broken through their strongest hindrances, they have found that all
their obstruction was Satan’s diligent foresight to hinder them of such
a blessing as they have, beyond hope, met withal. The like might be
observed of the constant returns of the Lord’s day. If men watch not
against it, they may meet with more than ordinary, either avocations
to prevent and hinder them, or disturbances to annoy and trouble, or
bodily indispositions to incapacitate and unfit them. And it is not
to be contemned, that some have observed themselves more apt to be
drowsy, dull, or sleepy on that day. Others have noted greater bodily
indispositions than ordinarily, than at other times; all which make no
unlikely conjecture of the devil’s special diligence against us on such
occasions.

Let us cast in another instance to these, and that is, of those that
are upon the point of conversion, ready to forsake sin for Christ. Oh,
what pains then doth the devil take to keep them back! He visits them
every moment with one hindrance or other. Sometimes they are tempted
to former pleasures, sometime affrighted with present fears and future
disappointments; sometime discouraged with reproaches, scorns, and
afflictions that may attend their alteration; otherwhile obstructed by
the persuasion or threatening of friends and old acquaintances; but
this they are sure of, that they have never more temptations, and those
more sensibly troubling, than at that time—a clear evidence that Satan
is as diligent as malicious.

I should now go on to display the subtlety of this powerful, malicious,
cruel, and diligent adversary. There is but one thing in the way,
which hitherto I have taken for granted, and that is, Whether indeed
there be any such things as devils and wicked spirits, or that these
are but theological engines contrived by persons that carry a goodwill
to morality and the public peace, to keep men under an awful fear of
such miscarriages as may render them otherwise a shame to themselves
and a trouble to others. It must be acknowledged a transgression of
the rules of method to offer a proof of that now, which, if at all,
ought to have been proved in the beginning of the discourse: and
indeed the question at this length, whether there be a devil, hath such
affinity with that other, though for the matter they are as different
as heaven and hell, whether there be a God, that as it well deserves
a confirmation,—for the use that may be made of it to evidence that
there is a God, because we feel there is a devil,—so would it require
a serious endeavour to perform it substantially. But it would be not
only a needless labour to levy an army against professed atheists, who
with high scorn and derision roundly deny both God and devils—seeing
others have frequently done that—but also it would occasion too large a
digression from our present design. I shall therefore only speak a few
things to those that own a God, and yet deny such a devil as we have
described: and yet not to all of these neither, for there were many
heathens who were confident assertors of a deity, that nevertheless
denied the being of spirits as severed from corporeity; and others were
so far from the acknowledgment of devils, that they confounded them in
the number of their gods. Others there were who gave such credit to
the frequent relations of apparitions and disturbances of that kind,
that many had attested and complained of, that they expressed more
ingenuity[154] than Lucian, who pertinaciously refused to believe,
because he never saw them; and yet though they believed something of
reality in that that was the affrightment and trouble of others, they
nevertheless ascribed such extraordinary things to natural causes,
some to the powers of the heavens and stars in their influences upon
natural bodies, or by the mediation of certain herbs, stones, minerals,
creatures, voices, and characters, under a special observation of the
motion of the planets.[155] Some refer such things to the subtlety
and quickness of the senses of hearing and seeing, which might create
forms and images of things, or discover I know not what reflections
from the sun and moon. Some [Pomponatius, Epicureans] fancy the shapes
and visions to be exuviæ, thin scales or skins of natural things,
giving representations of the bodies that cast them off, or exhalations
from sepulchres, representing the shape of the body. Others [Cardan,
Academics] make them the effects of our untrusty and deceitful
senses, the debility and corruption whereof they conclude to be such,
and so general, that most men are in hazard to be imposed upon by
delusive appearances. But with far greater show of likelihood do some
[Averrhoes] make all such things to be nothing else but the issues of
melancholy and corrupt humours, which makes men believe they hear, see,
and suffer strange things, when there is nothing near them; or really
to undergo strange fits, as in lunacy and epilepsy.[156] Leaving these
men as not capable of information from Scripture evidence, because
disowning it, let us inquire what mistaken apprehensions there have
been in this matter among those that have pretended a reverence to and
belief of Scripture. The Sadducees deserve the first place, because
they are by name noted in Scripture to have ‘denied the resurrection,’
and to have ‘affirmed that there is neither angel nor spirit,’ Acts
xxiii. 8, and Mat. xxii. 23.

This opinion of theirs, could we certainly find it out, would make much
for the confirmation of the truth in question, seeing, whatever it was,
it is positively condemned in Scripture, and the contrary asserted to
be true. Many, and that upon considerable grounds, do think that they
do not deny absolutely that there were any angels at all, but that,
acknowledging that something there was which was called an angel, yet
they imagining it to be far otherwise than what it is indeed, were
accused justly for denying such a kind of angels as the Scripture had
everywhere asserted and described. For considering that they owned
a God, and, at least, the five books of Moses, if not all the other
books of the Old Testament—as Scaliger and others judge, not without
great probability, for neither doth the Scripture—nor Josephus mention
any such thing of the prophets—it is unimaginable that they would
altogether deny that there was angel or spirit at all.[157] They read
of angels appearing to Lot, to Abraham, and met with it so frequently,
that, believing Scriptures to be true, they could not believe angels to
be an absolute fiction; for one fable or falsity in Scripture, which so
highly asserts itself to be an unerring oracle of the true God, must of
necessity have destroyed the credit of all, and rendered them as justly
suspected to be true in nothing, when apparently false or fabulous in
anything.

Again, If we call to mind what apprehensions they had of God, which
all consent they did acknowledge, we might more easily imagine what
apprehensions they had of angels, for in regard that Moses made mention
of God’s face and back-parts, Exod. xxxiii., and that frequently hands
and other parts of man’s body were attributed to him, they concluded
God to be corporeal; and seeing the best of creatures which God created
cannot be supposed to have a more noble being than was that of their
Creator, and, at the utmost, to be made according to the pattern of
his own image and likeness, they might upon this bottom easily fix a
denial of incorporeal spirits, and by consequence that the soul of
man was mortal, and therefore that there could be no resurrection;
so that the nature of angels being described under the notion of
spiritual substances, they are judged to deny any such thing, supposing
that to be incorporeal was as much as not to be at all; and yet it
were unreasonable to deny that they had not some interpretation for
those passages of Scripture that mentioned angels, which in their
apprehensions might be some salvo to the truth of those historical
writings, which they acknowledged; but what that was we are next to
conjecture. And indeed Josephus, by a little hint of their opinion,
seems to tell us that they did not so much deny the being of the soul,
as the permanency of it; and so, by consequence, they might not so much
deny absolutely the existence of spirits, as their natural being and
continuance.[158] Something there was that was called by the name of
angel—that they could not but own—and that this must be a real and not
an imaginary thing, is evident from the real effect, and things done by
them; yet observing their appearances to have been upon some special
occasion, and their disappearing to have been on a sudden, they might
conjecture them to be created by God for the present service, and then
reduced to nothing when that service was done.

Their opinion, then, of angels seems to be one of these two: either
that they were corporeal substances created upon a special emergency,
but not permanent beings; or that they were but images and impressions
supernaturally formed in the fancy by the special operation of God,
to signify his mind and commands to men, upon which they might fitly
be called God’s messengers and ministers. I put in this last into the
conjecture, because I find it mentioned by Calvin,[159] as the opinion
of the Sadducees; but both are noted by Diodate,[160] on Acts xxiii. 8,
as with equal probability belonging to them. His words are, ‘They did
not believe they were subsisting and immortal creatures, but transitory
apparitions, or some divine actions and motions to produce some special
and notable effect.’

Others also have been lately hammering out the same apprehension
concerning angels, and profess themselves delivered from it with great
difficulty, differing only in this from some of the heathens before
mentioned, that what those ascribed to the puissance of the stars,
natural powers, or to weakness of senses and corrupt humours, they,
by the advantage of the general notions of Scripture, have ascribed
to God, putting forth his power upon the minds and fancies of men, or
working by the humours of the body.[161] Upon this foundation they
will easilier make bold with devils, to deny, if not their being, yet
their temptations, imagining that we may possibly do him wrong in
fathering upon him these solicitations and provocations to sin, which
we by experience find to be working and acting upon our minds, thinking
that our own fancies or imaginations may be the only devils that vex
us; and this they more readily hearken to, from the nature of dreams
and visions which happen to men in an ordinary natural way, where our
fancies play with us as if they were distinct from us; as also from
this consideration, that the lunatic, epileptic, and frenzical persons
are in Scripture called demoniacs, as Mat. xvii. 15, with Luke ix.,
where the person is called lunatic, and yet said to be taken and vexed
by a spirit. So also John x. 20, he hath a devil, and is mad. But these
reasonings can do little with an intelligent, considering man, to
make him deny what he so really feels, and is so often forewarned of
in Scripture; for suppose these were called demoniacs by the vulgar,
it doth not compel us to believe they were so. Men are apt to ascribe
natural diseases to Satan, and Christ did not concern himself to cure
their misapprehensions, while he cured their diseases.[162] This some
suggest as a reason that may answer many cases, though indeed it cannot
answer that of Mat. xvii., because, ver. 18, it is said expressly that
‘Jesus rebuked the devil, and he departed out of him,’ which would not
have been proper to have been spoken on the account of Christ by the
evangelist, to express the cure of a natural disease, for so would
he unavoidably have been rendered guilty of the same mistake with the
vulgar. But if we should grant that divers mentioned under the name of
demoniacs were men disturbed with melancholy, or the falling-sickness,
all were not so; for those in Mat. viii. 31, ‘besought Christ, after
their ejection,’ to have liberty ‘to go into the herd of swine:’ that
if Mr Mede intended to assert that all demoniacs were no other than
madmen and lunatics, I question not but he was mistaken, and by his
reason, not only must madmen and lunatic persons pass for demoniacs,
but all diseases whatsover; for the blind and dumb were called also
demoniacs, Mat. ix. 32, and xii. 22.[163] But the matter seems to
be this, that where men were afflicted with such distempers, Satan
took the advantage of them, and acted the possessed accordingly; as
he frequently takes the advantage of a melancholy indisposition, and
works great terrors and affrightments by it, as in Saul; or at least
that, where he possessed, he counterfeited the fits and furies of those
natural distempers, and acted some like madmen, and others he made dumb
and deaf—which seems to have been the case of those in Mat. ix. and
xii., where the deafness and dumbness did depend upon the possession,
and was cured with it—others were made to ‘fall on a sudden into fire
or water,’ as those that are epileptic, and therefore might such be
called both lunatic or epileptic, and also possessed with a devil.

As to that reason which some fetch from dreams, it is rather a dream
than a reason against the being of devils, seeing the effects of these
infernal spirits are far otherwise than the utmost of what can be
imagined to be acted upon the stage of imaginations; so that the real
and permanent being of devils may be easily proved:—

[1.] First, _From those real acts noted to be done by angels and
devils_. The angels that appeared to Lot were seen and entertained in
the family—seen and observed by the Sodomites. Those that appeared
to Abraham were more than fancied appearances, in that they ‘ate and
drank’ with him. The devil conveyed Christ from place to place. This
could not be a fancy or imagination. Their begging leave to go ‘into
the swine’ shews them real existences.

[2.] Secondly, _From the real effects done by them_. We have undoubted
testimonies of men really hurt and tormented by Satan. Of some really
snatched away, and carried a great distance from their dwellings. Of
others possessed, in whom the devil really speaks audible voices and
strange languages, gives notice of things past, and sometime of things
to come. The oracles of the heathen, which however they were for the
most part false or delusory, yet, in that they were responses from
images and idols, were more than phantasms.

[3.] Thirdly, _From what the Scripture speaks everywhere of them_. Of
their malice and cruelty; that devils are murderers from the beginning;
their daily waiting how they may devour; their arts, wiles, and
stratagems; their names and appellations, when styled principalities,
powers, spiritual wickednesses, the prince of the power of the air,
and a great many more to that purpose, shew that, without apparent
folly and dotage, we cannot interpret these of motions only upon the
minds and fancies of men. Besides, the Scripture speaks of the offices
of good angels, as their standing continually before the throne, their
beholding the face of God, their accompanying Christ at his second
coming, their gathering the elect from the four winds, &c., Dan. vii.
10, which cannot be understood of anything else but real and permanent
beings; and this is also an evidence that devils are, seeing the
Scripture mentions their fall and their punishment.

[4.] Fourthly, _Seeing also the Scripture condemned the opinion of the
Sadducees, the contrary of that opinion must be true_. And expressly in
Acts xii. 9, that which was done by an angel is opposed to what might
be visional or imaginary.

[5.] Fifthly, The reality of devils and their malignity hath been
the opinion of heathens. For there is nothing more common among them
than the belief of inferior deities, which they called δάιμονες or
δαιμόνια, that is, devils; and notwithstanding that they supposed these
to be mediators to the supreme gods, yet they learned to distinguish
them into good and evil.[164] The Platonists thought that the souls
of tyrants after death became _lemures_ and _larvæ_, that is, hurtful
devils; and at last the name _devil_ became of so bad a signification,
that to say, ‘thou hast a devil,’ was reproach and not praise; but what
these groped at in the dark, the Scripture doth fully determine, using
the word _devil_ only for a malignant spirit.




