CHAPTER VI.

 _Of the various ways by which he hinders peace—1. Way by
 discomposures of spirit. These discomposures explained, by shewing,
 (1.) What advantage he takes from our natural temper, and
 what tempers give him this advantage. (2.) By what occasions
 he works upon our natural tempers. (3.) With what success.
 [1.] These occasions suited to natural inclinations, raise
 great disturbance. [2.] They have a tendency to spiritual
 trouble. The thing proved, and the manner how discovered. [3.]
 These disturbances much in his power. General and particular
 considerations about that power._


Having evidenced that one of Satan’s principal designs is against the
peace and comfort of God’s children, I shall next endeavour a discovery
of the various ways by which he doth undermine them herein. All inward
troubles are not of the same kind in themselves, neither doth Satan
always produce the same effects out of all; some being in their own
nature disquiets, that do not so directly and immediately overthrow the
peace and joy of believing, and the comforts of assurance of divine
favour, as others do. Yet seeing that by all he hath no small advantage
against us as to sin and trouble, and that any of them at the long run
may lead us to question our interest in grace and the love of God, and
may accordingly afflict us, I shall speak of them all; which that I
may do the more distinctly, I shall rank these troubles into several
heads, under peculiar names—it may be not altogether so proper but
that the curious may find matter of exception to them—that by them and
their explanation the differences may the better appear. I distinguish
therefore of a fourfold trouble that the devil doth endeavour to
work up upon the hearts of men. They are, 1. Discomposures. 2.
Affrightments. 3. Dejections of sadness. 4. Distresses of horror. Of
all which I shall speak in their order. And,

1. _Of discomposures of soul._ These are molestations and disturbances
by which the mind is put out of order and made unquiet. The calm in
which it should enjoy itself, and by which it should be composed to a
regular and steady acting, being disturbed by a storm of commotion,
and in which the conscience or the peace of it is not presently
concerned. This distinction of the trouble of soul from the trouble
of conscience is not new. Others have observed it before,[321] and do
thus explain it: Trouble of soul is larger than trouble of conscience;
every troubled conscience is a troubled soul, but every troubled soul
is not a troubled conscience; for the soul may be troubled from causes
natural, civil, and spiritual, according to variety of occasions and
provocations, when yet a man’s inward peace with God is firm; and in
some cases, as in infants and in men distracted with fevers, &c.,
there may be passions and disturbances of soul when the conscience
is not capable of exercising its office: nay, the soul of Christ was
troubled—John xii. 27, ‘Now is my soul troubled’—when it was not
possible that sin or despair should have the least footing in him.

For the opening of these discomposures of soul I shall—1. Shew upon
what advantage of natural temper the devil is encouraged to molest men.
2. By what occasions he doth work upon our natural inclinations. 3. And
with what success of disturbance to the soul.

(1.) As to our natural dispositions, Satan, as hath formerly been
noted, _takes his usual indications of working from thence_. These
guide him in his enterprises; his temptations being suited to men’s
tempers, proceed more smoothly and successfully. Some are of so
serene and calm a disposition, that he doth not much design their
discomposure; but others there are whose passions are more stirring—fit
matter for him to work upon: and these are,

[1.] _The angry disposition._ How great an advantage this gives to
Satan to disturb the heart, may be easily conceived by considering the
various workings of it in several men, according to their different
humours. It is a passion that acts not alike in all; and for the
differences, so far as we need to be concerned, I shall not trouble
the schools of philosophers, but content myself with what we have in
Eph. iv. 31, where the apostle expresseth it by three words, not that
they differ essentially, declaring thereby the various ways of anger’s
working. The first is πικρία, which we translate _bitterness_. This is
a displeasure smothered; for some when they are angry cover it, and
give it no vent, partly for that they are sometimes ashamed to mention
the ground as trivial or unjust, partly from sullenness of disposition,
and oft from a natural reservedness; while the flame is thus kept
down, it burns inwardly, and men resolve[322] in their minds many
troublesome, vexatious thoughts. The second word is θυμὸς, _wrath_;
this is a fierce, impetuous anger. Some are soon moved, but so violent
that they are presently transported into rage and frenzy, or are so
peevishly waspish that they cannot be spoken to. The third is ὀργὴ,
translated here _anger_, but signifies such a displeasure as is deep,
entertaining thoughts of revenge and pursuit, settling itself at last
into hatred. Any of these is enough to bereave the heart of its rest,
and to alarm it with disturbances.[323]

[2.] Others have an _envious nature, always maligning and repining at
other men’s felicity_; an evil eye that cannot look on another’s better
condition without vexation. This turns a man into a devil. It is the
devil’s proper sin, and the fury that doth unquiet him, and he the
better knows of what avail it would be to help on our trouble.

[3.] Some are _of proud tempers_, always overvaluing themselves, with
the scorn and contempt of others. This humour is troublesome to all
about them, but all this trouble doth at last redound to themselves.
These think all others should observe them, and take notice of their
supposed excellencies, which if men do not, then it pines them or stirs
up their choler to indignation. Solomon, Prov. xxx. 21, mentioning
those things that are greatly disquieting in the earth, instanceth
in ‘a servant when he reigneth; and the handmaid that is heir to her
mistress,’ intending thereby the proud, imperious insolency of those
that are unexpectedly raised from a low estate to wealth or honour. He
that is of ‘a proud heart stirreth up strife,’ Prov. xxviii. 25; and as
he is troublesome to others, so doth he create trouble to himself; for
he not only molests himself by the working of his disdainful thoughts,
while he exerciseth his scorn towards others: Prov. xxi. 24, ‘The
haughty scorner deals in proud wrath;’ but this occasions the affronts
and contempt of others again, which beget new griefs to his restless
mind.

[4.] Some have a natural _exorbitancy of desire, an evil coveting_;
they are passionately carried forth toward what they have not, and have
no contentment or satisfaction in what they do enjoy. Such humours are
seldom at ease, their desires are painfully violent; and when they
obtain what they longed for, they soon grow weary of it, and then
another object takes up their wishes, so that these ‘daughters of the
horse-leech are ever crying, Give, give,’ Prov. xxx. 15.

[5.] Others have _a soft effeminate temper, a weakness of soul that
makes them unfit to bear any burden, or endure any hardness_. These,
if they meet with pains or troubles—and who can challenge an exemption
from them?—they are presently impatient, vexing themselves by a vain
reluctancy to what they cannot avoid; not but that extraordinary
burdens will make the strongest spirit to stoop, but these cry out for
the smallest matters, which a stout mind would bear with some competent
cheerfulness.

[6.] And there are other dispositions that _are tender to an excess of
sympathy_, so that they immoderately affect and afflict themselves with
other men’s sorrows. Though this be a temper more commendable than any
of the former, yet Satan can take advantage of this, as also of the
fore-named dispositions, to discompose us, especially by suiting them
with fit occasions, which readily work upon these tempers. And this was,

(2.) The second thing to be explained, which shall be performed by a
brief enumeration of them, the chief whereof are these:

[1.] _Contempt or disestimation._ When a man’s person, parts, or
opinion are slighted, his anger, envy, pride, and impatience are
awakened, and these make him swell and restless within. Even good men
have been sadly disturbed this way. Job, as holy a man as he was, and
who had enough of greater matters to trouble his mind, yet among other
griefs complains of this more than once: Job xii. 4, ‘I am as one
mocked of his neighbour: the just upright man is laughed to scorn;’
chap. xix. 15, ‘They that dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me
for a stranger. I called my servant, and he gave me no answer. Yea,
young children despised me; I rose up and they spake against me.’ Thus
he bemoans himself, and, which is more, speaks of it again with some
smartness of indignation: Job xxx. 1, ‘Now they that are younger than I
have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set
with the dogs of my flock.’ David also, who had a stout heart under
troubles, complains that he could not bear reproaches: Ps. lxix.,
‘Reproach hath broken mine heart; I am full of heaviness.’ What these
reproaches were, and how he was staggered with them, he tells us: ver.
10, ‘I chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach. I made
sackcloth my garment; and I became a proverb to them. They that sit in
the gate speak against me; and I was the song of the drunkards.’ With
these he was so stounded that if he had not catched hold on God by
prayer, as he speaks, ver. 13, he had fallen, ‘But as for me, my prayer
is unto thee, O Lord,’ &c.; and he afterward speaks of his support
under reproaches as a wonder of divine assistance: Ps. cxix. 51, ‘The
proud have had me in derision: yet have I not declined from thy law.’

[2.] _Injury_ is another occasion by which the devil works upon our
tempers to disquiet us. Wrongs of injustice and oppression are hard
to bear. This is a common ground of trouble. Good men cannot always
acquit themselves in this case as they ought. Jeremiah, when smitten by
Pashur, and put in the stocks, Jer. xx. 2, 8, falls into a sad passion:
‘I am a derision daily, every one mocketh me. I cried out, I cried
violence and spoil,’ imitating the passionate affrightments of those
that cry, Murder, murder, &c. No wonder, seeing Solomon gives it as an
axiom built upon manifold experience, Eccles. vii. 7. Oppression doth
not only make a man unquiet, but mad in his unquietness; and not only
those that are foolish and hasty, but the most considerate and sedate
persons: ‘Oppression makes a wise man mad.’

[3.] Another occasion of men’s discomposure is, _the prosperity of the
wicked_. Their abundance, their advancements to honours and dignity,
hath always been a grudge to those whose condition is below them, and
yet suppose themselves to have better grounds to expect preferment
than they. This astonished Job even to trembling: Job xxi. 7, ‘When I
remember, I am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my flesh;’ and the
matter was but this, ‘Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea,
and mighty in power?’ &c. The trouble that seizeth on men’s hearts
on this occasion is called fretting, a vexation that wears out the
strength of the soul, as two hard bodies waste by mutual attrition or
rubbing. And it takes its advantage from our envy chiefly, though other
distempers come in to help it forward: Ps. xxxvii. 1, ‘Fret not thyself
because of evil-doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of
iniquity.’ David confesseth that he was apt to fall into this trouble,
Ps. lxxiii. 3, ‘I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity
of the wicked.’ Against this disquiet we have frequent cautions, Prov.
xxiv. 1, 19, and Ps. xlix. 16, ‘Be not afraid when one is made rich,
when the glory of his house is increased.’ All which shew our proneness
to this disease.

[4.] _Crosses and afflictions give Satan an opportunity to work upon
our passions_; as disappointments of expectations, loss of friends, of
estate, persecutions and sufferings for conscience sake, &c. None of
these in their own nature are ‘joyous, but grievous;’ and what use they
have been of to the devil to discompose the minds of the sufferers,
is evidenced by common experience. The tears, sad countenances, and
doleful lamentations of men are true witnesses of the disquiet of
their hearts. Every one being pressed with the sense of his own smart
is ready to cry out, ‘Is there any sorrow like my sorrow? I am poor
and comfortless; my lovers and my friends have forsaken me, and there
is none to help.’ Some grow faint under their burden, while their
eyes fail in looking for redress, especially when new unexpected
troubles overwhelm their hopes: ‘When I looked for good, then evil
came; and when I waited for light, there came darkness,’ Job xxx. 26.
‘Why hast thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? We looked
for peace, and there is no good; and for the time of healing, and
behold trouble,’ Jer. xiv. 19; and here they sink, concluding there
is no hope. Others that bear up better in a blessed expectation of
spiritual profit, having that of David in their eye, ‘Blessed is the
man whom thou afflictest, and teachest in thy law;’ yet they cannot
forbear their complaints even to God; Ps. xxv. 17, ‘The troubles of
mine heart are enlarged; oh bring thou me out of my distresses; look
upon mine affliction and my pain.’ Nay,[324] those that have had the
highest advantages of heavenly support, whose hearts have been kept in
peace, counting it all joy that they have fallen into these trials—and
God doth more this way for those that suffer for the gospel’s sake
than ordinarily for others; yet have not these been under a stoical
senselessness of their trouble. Though they were not ‘distressed,’ they
were ‘troubled on every side;’ though ‘not in despair,’ yet they were
‘perplexed,’ 2 Cor. iv. 8; though their afflictions were light, yet
were they afflictions still.

[5.] To these may be added, _the pain or anguish of sickness and bodily
distemper_. Though there are various degrees of pain, and that some
sicknesses are less afflictive than others, yet none of them forbear
to pierce the mind. The whole man is discomposed. He that is exercised
with ‘strong pains upon his bed,’ cries out in the bitterness of his
soul; and he that by insensible degrees languisheth, grows ordinarily
peevish, and his mind bleeds by an inward wound, so that he ‘spends
his days in sighing,’ and his years in mourning. And others there are
who, being before acquainted with bodily pains, grow very impatient in
sickness, and are able to bear nothing. And besides the present sense
of pain, the expectation of death puts some into great commotion; the
fears of it, for it is naturally dreadful, fills them with disquiet
thoughts; and those that approach to the grave by slow steps, under
consumption or languishing sicknesses, they are habituated to sadness,
and can think of nothing cheerfully—except they have great assurance of
salvation, and have well learned to die—because the coffin, grave, and
winding-sheet are still presented to them. These, though they be very
suitable objects for meditation, and, well improved, of great advantage
for preparation to death, yet doth Satan thereby, when it is for his
purpose, endeavour to keep men under grief, and to bereave them of
their peace.

[6.] Satan takes an advantage of trouble from _the miseries of others_.
Sympathy is a Christian grace; and to bear one another’s burdens, to
mourn with those that mourn, shews us to be fellow-feeling members
of the same body; for ‘if one member suffer, all the members suffer
with it,’ [1 Cor. xii. 26.] Yet are some men naturally of so tender a
constitution, that Satan overdrives them herein. Every common occasion
will wound them. The usual effects of God’s ordinary providence on the
poor, lame, or sick, are deeply laid to heart by them; and instead of
being not unsensible of other men’s miseries, they are not sensible of
anything else, neither do they enjoy their own mercies. And here, as
Satan can every moment present them with objects of pity, ordinary or
extraordinary, so upon a religious pretence of merciful consideration,
they are made cruel to themselves, refusing their own peace, because
other men are not at ease.

(3.) The third particular promised to be explained for the discovery
of these discomposures of soul was this, that by _a concurrence of
these and such like occasions to such tempers, the hearts of men are
disturbed, and their inward peace broken_. This I shall evidence
of these three things: 1. That these occasions meeting with such
dispositions, do naturally raise great disturbances in their present
working; 2. That they have a tendency to further trouble; 3. That Satan
doth design, and hath it ordinarily in his power, to discompose the
hearts of men hereby.

[1.] That these occasions meeting with such dispositions, do naturally
raise _great disturbances_. This is evident from what hath been said
already; for (1.) _All these dispositions carry as much fire in their
own bosoms, as is sufficient to burn up the standing corn of any man’s
peace._ What is anger, but an inward burning, a restless confusion of
the spirits? sometime a frenzy, a distraction, a troubled sea full of
rage, a wild beast let loose. Envy, that is a fretful peevishness, a
vexatious repining, needing no other tormentors but its own furies,
recoiling upon him that bred it, because it cannot wreak its spite upon
its objects. An envious person is a self-murderer, by the verdict of
Eliphaz: Job v. 2, ‘Wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy slayeth
the foolish one.’ This is not barely to be understood of its provoking
the judge of all the earth to send down its deserved destruction;
but also, if not chiefly, of its own corroding temper, which by
long continuance wastes the strength and consumes the body. Pride
is a perpetual vexation, creating its troubles from its own fancy.
Irregular covetings keep a man still upon the rack; they make a man
like the Tantalus of the poets; they give a man a _caninus appetitus_,
a strong appetite with excessive greediness, and restless pursuit,
and constant dissatisfactions; he is ever gaping, and never enjoying.
Impatience is a wearisome conflict with a burden which it can neither
bear nor yet shake off; where all the fruit of the vain labour amounts
to no better account than this, that the impatient makes his burden
the greater, the bands that tie it on the stronger, and the strength
that should bear it the weaker. Lastly, An excess of pity multiplies
‘wounds without cause.’ It hinders a man to be happy so long as
there are any that are miserable. He is always, in reference to his
quiet, at the mercy of other men. The afflicted can torment him at a
distance; and, by a kind of magic, make him feel the torments that are
inflicted upon his image. Who can deny but that men that are ridden
by such vexatious dispositions must lead an unquiet life, and always
be tossed with inward tempests? Especially, (2.) When we consider
_how fit the fore-mentioned occasions are to draw out these humours
to their tumultuary extravagances_. A lighted match and gunpowder are
not more exactly suited to raise a shaking blast, than those occasions
and tempers are to breed an inward annoyance. Some of these humours
are so troublesome, that rather than they will want work, they will
fight with their own shadows, and, by a perverseness of prejudicated
fancy, will create their own troubles; and the best of them, which seem
sometime to take truce and compose themselves to rest, while occasions
are out of the way; yet they are quickly awakened, like sleeping
dogs that are roused with the least noise. What work, then, may we
expect they will make when they are summoned to give their appearance
upon a solemn occasion? But (3.) If we should deal by instances, and
bring upon the stage the effects that have been brought forth by these
concurring causes, it will appear that they make disturbances in good
earnest. Let us either view _the furious fits that have been, like
sudden flashes, soonest gone_, or their more lasting impressions, and
we shall find it true. As to violent fits raised by such occasions and
dispositions, examples are infinite. What rages, outrages, madnesses,
and extravagances have men run into! Some, upon provocations, have
furiously acted savage cruelties, and for small matters have been
carried to the most desperate revenges. Others have been brought to
such violent commotions within themselves, that the frame of nature
hath been thereby weakened and overthrown. As Sylla, who in a strong
passion vomited choler till he died. Some in their fury have acted that
which hath been matter of sorrow to them all their days. But, omitting
the examples of heathens and wicked men, let us consider the wonderful
transports of holy men. Moses, a man eminent beyond comparison in
meekness, was so astonished with a sudden surprise of trouble at the
sight of the golden calf, that he threw down the tables of the law, and
brake them. Some indeed observe from thence a significancy of Israel’s
breaking the law and forfeiting God’s protection as his peculiar
people; but this is more to be ascribed to the designment of divine
providence, that so ordered it, than to the intendment of Moses, who no
doubt did not this from a sedate and calm deliberation, as purposing
by this act to tell Israel so much; but was hurried by his grief, as
not considering well what he did, to break them. Asa, a good man, when
he was reproved by the prophet, instead of thankful acceptance of the
reproof, grows angry, falls into a rage, and throws the prophet into
prison. Elias, discomposed with Jezebel’s persecution, desires that God
would take away his life. Jonah, in his anger, falls out with God, and
justifies it when he hath done. Surely such fits as these proceeded
from great inward combustion. Would wise, sober, holy men have said or
done such things if they had not been transported beyond themselves?
and though in such cases the fits are soon over, yet we observe that
some are apt to fall into such fits often, and are so easily irritated,
that, like the epileptic person possessed by the devil, upon every
occasion, they are by him ‘cast into the fire or into the water,’ [Mat.
xvii. 15,] and by the frequent return of their distemper are never at
rest.

As to others, whose tempers are more apt to retain a troublesome
impression, it is very obvious that their discomposures have as much
in length and breadth as the other had in height. You may view Haman
tormented under his secret discontent, which his pride and envy formed
in him, for the want of Mordecai’s obeisance. The king’s favour, a
great estate, high honour, and what else a man could wish to make him
content, are all swallowed up in this gulf, and become nothing to him.
You see Amnon, vexed and sick for his sister Tamar, waxing lean from
day to day. You see Ahab, though a king, who had enough to satisfy
his mind, in the same condition for Naboth’s vineyard. If you say
these were wicked men, who rid their lusts without a bridle, and used
the spur; look then upon better men and you will see too much. Rachel
so grieves and mourns for want of children, that she professeth her
life inconsistent with her disappointment: ‘Give me children, else
I die,’ [Gen. xxx. 1.] Hannah upon the same occasion weeps and eats
not, and prays in the bitterness of her soul, and the abundance of
her complaint and grief. Jeremiah, being pressed with discouragements
from the contradiction of evil men, calls himself ‘a man of strife
and contention to the whole earth,’ Jer. xv. 10; his sorrows thence
arising, had so imbittered his life, that he puts ‘a woe’ upon his
birth: ‘Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast born me a man of strife.’
Paul had a noble courage under manifold afflictions; he could glory
in the cross and rejoice in persecutions; nevertheless the greatness
of his work, the froward perverseness and unsteadiness of professors,
which put him under fears, jealousies, and new travail, the miseries
of Christians, and the care he had for the concerns of the gospel—2
Cor. xi. 2; Gal. vi. 19—which was a constant load upon his mind, his
heart,—like old Eli’s, trembling still for the ark of God, made him
complain as one worn out by the troubles of his heart: 2 Cor. xi.
27, ‘In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides those things
that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the
churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak?’ &c. For the Jews he had
great heaviness and continual sorrow in his heart; and for the Gentiles
he had perpetual fears, Rom. ix. 2. Now though he had a great share
of divine comforts intermixed, and a more than ordinary assistance of
the Spirit to keep him from sinful discomposure of spirit, at least to
such a height as it ordinarily prevails upon others, yet was he very
sensible of his burden, and doubtless the devil laboured to improve
these occasions to weary out his strength. For by these and such
like things he frequently vexeth the righteous souls of the faithful
ministers of the gospel from day to day; so that their hearts have
no rest, and their hands grow often feeble, and they cry out, Oh the
burden! oh the care! being ready to say, as Jeremiah, chap. xx. 7,
‘O Lord, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived: I am a derision
daily, every one mocketh me.’ Thus say they, Did we ever think to meet
with such disappointments, such griefs, from the wilfulness, pride,
weakness, ignorance, pettishness, inconstancy, negligence, and scandals
of friends? and such hatred, contradictions, scorns, and injuries from
enemies? Were we free, what calling would we not rather choose? what
place would we not rather go to, where we might spend the remainder of
our days in some rest and ease? Were it not better to work with our
hands for a morsel of bread? for so might our sleep be sweet to us at
night, and we should not see these sorrows. At this rate are good men
sometime disturbed, and the anguish of their spirit makes their life a
burden.

[2.] Yet is not this all the disturbance that the devil works upon our
hearts by these things, though these are bad enough, but they have
a tendency _to further trouble_. Discomposures of spirit, if they
continue long, turn at last into troubles of conscience. Though there
is no affinity betwixt simple discomposure of soul and troubles of
conscience in their own nature—the objects of the former being things
external, no way relating to the soul’s interest in God and salvation,
which are the objects of the latter—yet the effects produced by the
prevalency of these disturbances are a fit stock for the engrafting
of doubts and questionings about our spiritual condition. As Saul’s
father first troubled himself for the loss of his asses, and sent his
son to seek them; but when he stayed long, he forgot his trouble, and
took up a new grief for his son, whom he feared he had lost in pursuit
of the asses; so is it sometime with men, who, after they have long
vexed themselves for injuries or afflictions, &c., upon a serious
consideration of the working and power of these passions, leave their
former pursuit, and begin to bethink themselves in what a condition
their souls are, that abound with so much murmuring, rage, pride, or
impatience, and then the scene is altered, and they begin to fear they
have lost their souls, and are now perplexed about their spiritual
estate. To make this plain I will give some instances, and then add
some reasons, which will evidence that it is so, and also how it comes
to be so.

For instances, though I might produce a sufficient number to this
purpose from those that have written of melancholy, yet I shall only
insist upon two or three from Scripture.

Hezekiah, when God smote him with sickness, at first was discomposed
upon the apprehension of death, that he should so soon be deprived of
the ‘residue of his years, and behold man no more with the inhabitants
of the world,’ as he himself expresseth it, Isa. xxxviii. 10; afterward
his trouble grew greater, ‘He chattered as a crane or swallow, and
mourned as a dove;’ he was in ‘great bitterness,’ ver. 17; and sadly
oppressed therewith, ver. 14. That which thus distressed him was not
simply the fear of death. We cannot imagine so pious a person would
so very much disquiet himself upon that single account; but by the
expressions which he let fall in his complainings, we may understand
that some such thoughts as these did shake him: that he apprehended
God was angry with him, that the present stroke signified so much to
him, all circumstances considered—for he was yet in his strength,
and Jerusalem in great distress, being at that time besieged by
Sennacherib’s army,[325] and for him to be doomed to death by a sudden
message at such a time, seemed to carry much in it—and that surely
there was great provocation on his part; and it seems, upon search, he
charged himself so deeply with his sinfulness, that his apprehensions
were no less than that, if God should restore him, yet in the sense of
his vileness he should never be able to look up; ‘I shall go softly
all my years in the bitterness of my soul,’ ver. 15; which expression
implies a supposition of his recovery, and a deep sense of iniquity,
and accordingly when he was recovered, he takes notice chiefly of God’s
love to his soul and the pardon of his sin, which evidently discover
where the trouble pinched him: ‘Thou hast in love to my soul delivered
it from the pit of corruption, for thou hast cast all my sins behind
thy back,’ ver. 17.

Job’s troubles were very great, and his case extraordinary. Satan
had maliciously stripped him of all outward comforts; this he bore
with admirable patience: Job i. 21, ‘Naked came I out of my mother’s
womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord
hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.’ The devil, seeing
now himself defeated, obtains a new commission, wherein Job is wholly
put into his hand—life only excepted, chap. ii. 9. He sets upon him
again, and in his new encounter labours to bring upon him spiritual
distresses, and accordingly improves his losses and sufferings to
that end, as appears by his endeavours and the success; for as he
tempted him by his wife to a desperate disregard of God that had so
afflicted him, ‘Curse God and die,’ so he tempted him also by his
friends to question the state of his soul and his integrity, and all
from the consideration of his outward miseries. To that purpose are
all their discourses. Eliphaz, chap. iv. 5-7, from his sufferings and
his carriage under them, takes occasion to jeer his former piety, as
being no other than feigned, ‘It is come upon thee, and thou faintest:
is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of
thy ways?—that is, Is all thy religion come to this? and also concludes
him to be wicked, ‘Who ever perished, being innocent? and where were
the righteous cut off?’ Bildad, chap. viii. 6, 13, chargeth him with
hypocrisy upon the same ground, and while he makes his defence, Zophar
plainly gives him the lie, chap. xi. 3; and at this rate they go their
round; and all this while Satan, whose design it was to afflict his
conscience with the sense of divine wrath, secretly strikes in with
these accusations, insomuch that though Job stoutly defended his
integrity, yet he was wounded with inward distresses, and concluded
that these dealings of God against him were no less than God’s severe
observance of his iniquity; as is plain from his bemoaning himself in
chap. x. 2, ‘I will say unto God, Do not condemn me: shew me wherefore
thou contendest with me;’ ver. 16, 17, ‘Thou huntest me as a fierce
lion, thou renewest thy witnesses against me,’ &c.

David was a man that was often exercised with sickness and troubles
from enemies, and in all the instances almost that we meet with in the
psalms of these his afflictions, we may observe the outward occasions
of trouble brought him under the suspicion of God’s wrath and his
iniquity; so that he was seldom sick, or persecuted, but this called
on the disquiet of conscience, and brought his sin to remembrance; as
Ps. vi., which was made on the occasion of his sickness, as appears
from ver. 5, wherein he expresseth the vexation of his soul under the
apprehension of God’s anger; all his other griefs running into this
channel, as little brooks, losing themselves in a great river, change
their name and nature. He that was at first only concerned for his
sickness, is now wholly concerned with sorrow and smart under the fear
and hazard of his soul’s condition; the like we may see in Ps. xxxviii.
and many places more.

Having made good the assertion that discomposures of soul upon outward
occasions, by long continuance and Satan’s management, do often run
up to spiritual distress of conscience, I shall next, for further
confirmation and illustration, shew how it comes to be so.

(1.) Discomposures of spirit _do obstruct, and at last extinguish the
inward comforts of the soul_; so that if we suppose the discomposed
person at first, before he be thus disordered, to have had a good
measure of spiritual joy in God’s favour, and delight in his ways, yet
the disturbances,

[1.] _Divert his thoughts from feeding upon these comforts, or from
the enjoyment of himself in them._ The soul cannot naturally be highly
intent upon two different things at once, but whatsoever doth strongly
engage the thoughts and affections, that carries the whole stream with
it, be it good or bad, and other things give way at present. When the
heart is vehemently moved on outward considerations, it lays by the
thoughts of its sweetness which it hath had in the enjoyment of God;
they are so contrary and inconsistent, that either our comforts will
chase out of our thoughts our discomposures, or our discomposures will
chase away our comforts. I believe the comforts of Elias, when he lay
down under his grief, and desired to die; and of Jeremiah, when he
cried out of violence, run very low in those fits of discontent, and
their spirits were far from an actual rejoicing in God. But this is not
the worst; we may not so easily imagine that upon the going away of the
fit, the wonted comforts return to their former course. For,

[2.] The mind being distracted with its burden, is _left impotent and
unable to return to its former exercise_. The warmth which the heart
had, being smothered and suspended in its exercise, is not so quickly
revived, and the thoughts which were busied with disturbance, like
the distempered humours of the body, are not reduced suddenly to that
evenness of composure as may make them fit for their old employment.
And,

[3.] If God should _offer the influences of joyful support, a
discomposed spirit is not in a capacity to receive them_, no more
than it can receive those counsels that by any careful hand are
interposed for its relief and settlement. Comforts are not heard in
the midst of noise and clamour. The calmness of the soul’s faculties
are presupposed as a necessary qualification towards its reception of
a message of peace. Phinehas his wife being overcome of grief for the
ark’s captivity and her husband’s death, could not be affected with the
joyful news of a son, [1 Sam. iv. 19, _seq._] But,

[4.] Sinful discomposures _hinder these gracious and comfortable
offers; if we could possibly, which we cannot ordinarily, receive
them, yet we cannot expect that God will give them_. The Spirit of
consolation loves to take up his lodging in a ‘meek and quiet spirit,’
and nothing more grieves him than bitterness, wrath, anger, clamour,
and malice, which made the apostle, Eph. iv. 30, 31, subjoin his
direction of ‘putting these away’ from us, with his advice of ‘not
grieving the Spirit by which we are sealed unto the day of redemption.’
And then,

[5.] _The former stock of comfort, which persons distempered with
discomposures might be supposed to have, will soon be wasted_, for our
comforts are not like the oil in the cruse, or meal in the barrel,
which had, as it were, their spring in themselves. We are comforted
and supported by daily communication of divine aid, so that if the
spring-head be stopped, the stream will quickly grow dry. It is
evident then that inward consolations in God will not ripen under
these shadows, nor grow under these continual droppings, seeing a
discomposed spirit is not capable to receive more, nor able to keep
what comfort it had at first. We may easily see how it comes to pass
that these disturbances may in time bring on spiritual troubles; for
if our comforts be once lost, trouble of conscience easily follows.
Where there is nothing to fortify the heart, the poison of malicious
suggestions will unavoidably prevail.

(2.) Discomposures of soul afford the devil _fit matter to work upon_.
They furnish him with strong objections against sincerity of holiness,
by which the peace of conscience, being strongly assaulted, is at
last overthrown. The usual weapons by which Satan fights against the
assurance of God’s children, are the guilt of sins committed and the
neglect of duty; and the disturbed soul affords enough of both these to
make a charge against itself: for,

[1.] _Where there is much discomposure there is much sin._ If in the
multitude of words there wants not iniquity, then much more in the
multitude of unruly thoughts. A disturbed spirit is like troubled
water; all the mud that lay at the bottom is raised up and mixeth
itself with the thoughts. If any injury or loss do trouble the
mind, all the thoughts are tinctured with anger, pride, impatience,
or whatsoever root of bitterness was in the heart before. We view
them not singly as the issues of wise providence, but ordinarily we
consider them as done by such instruments, and against ourselves, as
malicious, spiteful, causeless, ungrateful wrongs; and then we give
too great a liberty to ourselves to rage, to meditate revenge, to
threaten, to reproach, and what not. And if our disposition have not
so strong a natural inclination to these distempers, yet the thoughts
by discomposure are quickly leavened. It is the comparison used by
the apostle, 1 Cor. v. 8, to express the power of malice, which is a
usual attendant in this service, to infect all the imaginations with a
sharpness, which makes them swell into exorbitancy and excess; hence
proceed revilings, quarrellings, &c. When the tongue is thus fermented,
it is ‘a fire, a world of iniquity,’ producing more sins than can be
reckoned, ‘it defileth the whole body,’ engaging all the faculties in
heady pursuit, James iii. 6.

[2.] _Discomposures obstruct duties._ This is the inconvenience which
the apostle, 1 Pet. iii. 7, tells us doth arise from disturbances
among relations. If the wife or husband do not carry well, so that
discontents or differences arise, their prayers are hindered. Duties
then are obstructed, 1. _In the act_. When the heart is out of frame,
prayer is out of season, and there is an averseness to it; partly
because all good things are, in such confusions, burdensome to the
humour that then prevails, which eats out all desire and delight to
spiritual things; and partly because they dare not come into God’s
presence, conscious of their own guilt, and awe of God hindering
such approaches. 2. They obstruct the _right manner of performance_,
straitening the heart and contracting the spirit, that if anything be
attempted it is poorly and weakly performed, 3. And also _the success
of duty_ is obstructed by discomposure. God will not accept such
services, and therefore Christ adviseth to ‘leave the gift before the
altar,’ though ready for offering, where the spirit is overcharged
with offences or angry thoughts, and ‘first to go and be reconciled to
our brother,’ and then to ‘come and offer the gift,’ it being lost
labour to do it before, [Mat. v. 24.] From these sins of omission and
commission Satan can, and often doth, frame a dreadful charge against
those that are thus concerned, endeavouring to prove by these evidences
that they are yet, notwithstanding pretence of conversion, in ‘the gall
of bitterness and bond of iniquity,’ [Acts viii. 23,] whereby the peace
of conscience is much shaken; and the more because also,

[3.] These discomposures of soul give Satan _a fit season for the
management of his accusation_. Strong accusations do often effect
nothing when the season is unsuitable. Many a time he hath as much
to say against the comforts of men, when yet they shake all off, as
Paul did the viper off his hand, and feel no harm, [Acts xxviii. 3.]
But that which prepares the conscience to receive the indictment is a
particular disposition which it is wrought into by suspicious credulity
and fearfulness. These make the heart, as wax to the seal, ready
to take any impression that Satan will stamp upon it. Now, by long
disturbances, he works the heart into this mould very often, and upon
a double account he gains himself a fit opportunity to charge home his
exceptions. 1. In that he sets upon the conscience with his accusations
after the heart hath been long molested and confused with its other
troubles; for then the heart is weakened, and unable to make resistance
as at other times. An assault with a fresh party after a long conflict
disorders its forces, and puts all to flight. 2. In that long and
great discomposures of mind bring on a distemper of melancholy; for
it is notoriously known by common experience that those acid humours
producing this distemper, which have their rise from the blood, may
be occasioned by their violent passions of mind, the animal spirits
becoming inordinate by long discomposures of sadness, envy, terror,
and fretful cares, and the motion of the blood being retarded, it by
degrees departs from its temperament, and is infected with an acidity,
so that persons no way inclined naturally to melancholy may yet become
so by the disquiets of their troubled mind.

Both these ways, but chiefly melancholy, the devil hath his advantage
for disturbing the conscience. Melancholy most naturally inclines men
to be solicitous for their souls’ welfare; but withal disposeth them
so strongly to suspect the worst—for it is a credulous, suspicious
humour in things hurtful—and afflicts so heavily with sadness for what
it doth respect, that when Satan lays before men of that humour their
miscarriages under their discontents, their impatience, unthankfulness,
anger, rash thoughts, and speeches against God or men, &c., withal
suggesting that such a heart cannot be right with God, after serious
thoughts upon Satan’s frequently repeated charge, they cry out, Guilty,
guilty; and then begins a new trouble for their unregenerate estate,
and their supposed lost souls.

[4.] In this case usually Satan hath greater _liberty to accuse, and by
his accusations to molest the conscience_, in that men of discomposed
spirits, by the manifold evils arising thence, provoke God to desert
them, and to leave them in Satan’s hand to be brought into an hour of
temptation. Satan’s commission is occasioned by our provocations, and
the temptations arising from such a commission are usually dreadful.
They are solemn temptations, and called so after a singular manner; for
of these I take those scriptures to be meant, ‘Watch and pray, that
ye enter not into temptation, Mat. xxvi. 41; ‘And lead us not into
temptation,’ Mat. vi. 13. Such temptations are not common temptations,
and are of unknown force and hazard to the soul, which way soever they
are designed, either for sin or terror. For several things do concur in
a solemn temptation. As, 1. Satan doth in a special manner challenge
a man to the combat, or rather he challenges God to give him such a
man to fight with him, as he did concerning Job. This Christ tells us
of, Luke xxii. 31, ‘Simon, Satan hath desired to have you.’ The word
signifies a challenging or daring—ἐξαιτεῖσθαι; and it seems the devil
is oft daring God to give us into his hand, when we little know of it.
2. There is also a special suitableness of occasion and snare to the
temper and state of men. Thus he took Peter at an advantage in the
high priest’s hall; and in the case we now speak of he takes advantage
of men’s provocations and melancholy. 3. There is always a violent
prosecution, which our Saviour expresseth under the comparison of
sifting, which is a restless agitation of the corn, bringing that which
was at the bottom to the top, and shuffling the top to the bottom, so
that the chaff or dirt is always uppermost. 4. And to all this there
is divine permission, Satan let loose, and we left to our ordinary
strength, as is implied in that expression, ‘He hath desired to have
you that he might sift you.’ Now then, if the devil have such ground to
give God a challenge concerning such men, and if God do, as he justly
may, leave such men, whose bitterness of spirit hath been as ‘a smoke
in his nostrils all the day,’ [Isa. lxv. 5,] in Satan’s hand, he will
so shake them that their consciences shall have no rest. And this he
can yet the more easily effect, because,

[5.] Discomposures of spirit have a particular tendency _to incline our
thoughts to severity and harshness_, so that those who have had long
and great disturbances upon any outward occasions—of loss, affliction,
or disappointment, &c.—do naturally think, after a solemn review of
such troubles, harshly of God and of themselves. They are ready to
conclude that God is surely angry with them in that he doth afflict
them, or that they have unsanctified hearts in that their thoughts
are so fretful and unruly upon every inconsiderable petty occasion.
It is so ordinary for men under the weight of their trouble, or under
the sense of their sin, to be sadly apprehensive of God’s wrath
and their soul’s hazard, that it were needless to offer instances:
let David’s case be instead of all. That his troubles begot such
imaginations frequently, may be seen throughout the book of the Psalms.
We never read his complaints against persecuting enemies, or for other
afflictions, but still his heart is afraid that God is calling sin to
remembrance. In Ps. xxxviii. he is under great distress, and tells how
low his thoughts were: he was ‘troubled,’ greatly ‘bowed down;’ he
‘went mourning all the day long;’ he expresseth his thoughts to have
been that ‘God had forsaken him,’ ver. 21: and his hopes, though they
afterward revived, were almost gone; he cries out of his sins as having
‘gone over his head,’ and become ‘a burden too heavy for him,’ ver. 4,
and therefore sets himself to confess them, ver. 18. He trembles at
God’s anger, and feels the ‘arrows of God sticking fast in him,’ ver.
2. But what occasioned all this? The psalm informs us, God had visited
him with sickness, ver. 7. Besides that—for one trouble seldom comes
alone—his friends were perfidious, ver. 11; his enemies also were busy
laying snares for his life, ver. 12. Now his thoughts were to this
purpose, that surely he had some way or other greatly provoked God by
his sins, and therefore he fears wrath in every rebuke, and displeasure
in every chastisement, ver. 1. The like you may see in Ps. cii., where
the prophet upon the occasion of sickness, ver. 3, 23, and the reproach
of enemies, ver. 8, is under great trouble, and ready to fail except
speedy relief prevent, ver. 2: the reason whereof was this, that he
concluded these troubles were evident tokens of God’s indignation and
wrath; ‘because of thine indignation and thy wrath,’ ver. 10. From
these five particulars we may be satisfied that it cannot be otherwise,
and also how it comes to be so, that sometime trouble of conscience is
brought on by other discomposing troubles of the mind. For if these
take away the comforts which supported the soul, and afford also
arguments to the devil to prove a wicked heart, and withal ‘a fit
season’ to urge them to a deep impression, God in the meantime standing
‘at a distance,’ and the thoughts naturally inclined to conclude God’s
wrath from these troubles, how impossible is it that Satan should miss
of disquieting the conscience by his strong, vehement suggestions of
wickedness and desertion!

In our inquiries after Satan’s success in working these discomposures
of mind, we have discovered, 1. That the disturbances thence arising
are great; 2. That they have a tendency to trouble of conscience. There
is but one particular more to be spoken of, relating to his success in
this design, and that is,

(3.) These disturbances are _much in Satan’s power_. Ordinarily he can
do it at pleasure, except when God restrains him from applying fit
occasions, or when, notwithstanding these occasions, he extraordinarily
suspends the effect, which he frequently doth when men are enraged
under suffering upon the account of the gospel and conscience; for
then, though they be bound up under affliction and iron, yet the ‘iron
enters not into the soul;’ though they are troubled, they are not
distressed. These extraordinaries excepted, he can as easily discompose
the spirits of men as he can by temptation draw them into other sins;
which may be evidenced by these considerations:

[1.] We may observe that those _whose passionate tempers do usually
transport them into greater vehemencies, are never out of trouble_.
Their fits frequently return, they are never out of the fire, and this
is because Satan is still provided of occasions suitable to their
inclinations.

[2.] Though God, out of his common bounty to mankind, hath allowed him
a comfortable being in the world, yet we find that generally the sons
of men, under their various occupations and studies, are wearied out
_with vexations of spirit_. This Solomon, in Ecclesiastes, discovers
at large in various employments of men, not exempting the pursuit of
wisdom and knowledge: chap. i. 18, ‘In much wisdom is much grief;
and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow:’ nor pleasures
nor riches, for by all these he shews that a man is obnoxious to
disquiets; so that the general account of man’s life is but this:
chap. ii. 23, ‘All his days are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea,
his heart taketh not rest in the night.’ That it is so, is testified
by common experience past denial; but how it comes to be so, is the
inquiry. It is either from God, or from Satan working by occasions upon
our tempers. That it is not from God, is evident; for though sorrow
be a part of that curse which man was justly doomed unto, yet hath
he appointed ways and means by which it might be so mitigated that
it might be tolerable without discomposure of spirit; and therefore
Solomon, designing in his Ecclesiastes to set forth the chief good,
shews that felicity consists not in the common abuse of outward things,
because that brings only vexation, but in the fear of God leading
to future happiness, and in the meantime in a thankful, comfortable
use of things present without anxiety of mind. Hence doth he fix his
conclusion, as the result of his experience, and often repeats it:
‘There is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink,
and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour,’ chap. ii.
24, iii. 12, 13, and v. 18, 19. Not that Solomon plays the epicure,
giving advice ‘to eat and drink, for to-morrow we die,’ nor that he
speaks deridingly to those that seek their felicity in this life, as
if he should say, ‘If ye do terminate your desires upon a terrene
felicity, there is nothing better than to eat and drink,’ &c. But he
gives a serious positive advice of enjoying the things of this life
with cheerfulness, which he affirms proceeds from the sole bounty of
God as his singular gift: ‘It is the gift of God,’ chap. iii. 13; ‘it
is our portion’—that is, our allowance, chap. v. 19, for these two
expressions, ‘our portion,’ and ‘God’s gift,’ they are of the same
signification with Solomon here; and when a man hath power to enjoy
this allowance in comfort, it is God that ‘answereth him in the joy of
his heart,’ ver. 20. It is plain, then, that God ‘sows good seed in his
field;’ the springing up, therefore, of these tares of vexation, which
so generally afflict the sons of men, must be ascribed to this, ‘the
enemy hath done it,’ [Mat. xiii. 28.]

[3.] It is also a considerable ground of suspicion that Satan can
do much in discomposures of spirit, in that sometimes those whose
tempers are _most cool and calm, and whose singular dependence upon,
and communion with God, must needs more strengthen them against these
passionate vexations, are notwithstanding precipitated into violent
commotions_. Moses was naturally meek above the common disposition
of men, and his very business was converse with God, whose presence
kept his heart under a blessed awe; yet, upon the people’s murmuring,
he was so transported with sullenness and unbelief, at the waters of
Meribah, Num. xx. 10-12, that ‘it went ill with him;’ which David
thus expresseth, Ps. cvi. 33, ‘They provoked his spirit, so that
he spake unadvisedly with his lips.’ Who can suppose less in this
matter than that Satan, having him at advantage, hurried him to this
rashness—specially seeing such vehemencies were not usual with Moses,
and that his natural temper led him to the contrary? This hath some
affinity with the next consideration, which is,

[4.] That when _men most foresee the occasions of their trouble, and
do most fear the trouble that might thence arise, and most firmly
design to keep their hearts quiet, yet are they oft forced, against
all care and resolution, upon extravagant heats_. David resolved
and strenuously endeavoured to possess his soul in serenity and
patience;—for what could be more than that solemn engagement? Ps.
xxxix. 1, ‘I said I will look to my ways;’ and what endeavours could be
more severe than to keep himself ‘as with bit and bridle’? what care
could be more hopeful to succeed than to be ‘dumb with silence’?—yet
for all this he could not keep his heart calm nor restrain his tongue:
ver. 3, ‘My heart waxed hot within me; while I was musing the fire
burned: then spake I with my tongue.’ Who suspects not the hand of
Satan in this?

[5.] It is also remarkable, that when we have _least reason to give way
to discomposure, when we have most cause to avoid all provocations,
yet then we have most occasions set before us_. When we would most
retire from the noise of the world for private devotion, when we would
most carefully prepare ourselves for a solemn ordinance, if we be
not very watchful, we shall be diverted by business, disturbed with
noises, or some special occasion of vexation shall importune us to
disquiet ourselves—when yet we shall observe, if we have not these
solemn affairs to wait upon, we shall have fewer of these occasions of
vexation to attend us. This cannot be attributed to mere contingency of
occasions, nor yet to our tempers solely; for why they should be most
apt to give us trouble when they are most engaged to calmness, cannot
well be accounted for. It is evidently, then, Satan that maliciously
directs these occasions—for they have not a malicious ingenuousness to
prepare themselves, without some other chief mover—at such times as he
knows would be most to our prejudice.

These general considerations amount to more than a suspicion, that it
is much in Satan’s power to give disturbances to the minds of men; yet,
for the clearer manifestation of the matter, I shall shew that he can
do much to bring about occasions of discomposure, and also to stir up
the passions of men upon these occasions.

1. That occasions are much in his hand, I shall easily demonstrate. For,

_First_, There being _so many occasions of vexation to a weak, crazy
mind, we may well imagine that one or other is still occurring_; and
while they thus offer themselves, Satan needs not be idle for want of
an opportunity.

_Second_, But if common occasions do not so exactly suit his design,
_he can prepare occasions_; for such is his foresight and contrivance,
that he can put some men—without their privity to his intentions, or
any evil design of their own—upon such actions as may, through the
strength of prejudice, misinterpretation, or evil inclination, be an
offence to others; and, in like manner, can invite those to be in the
way of these offences. I am ready to think there was a contrivance of
Satan—if we well consider all circumstances—to bring David and the
object of his lust together; while Bathsheba was bathing, he might use
his art in private motions to get David up to the roof of his house.
But more especially can the devil prepare occasions that do depend upon
the wickedness of his slaves; these are servants under his command, he
can ‘say to one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes.’
If contempt or injury, affronts or scorns, &c., be necessary for his
present work against any whom he undertakes to disturb, he can easily
put his vassals upon that part of the service; and if he have higher
employment for them, he ever finds them forward. And hence was it,
that when Satan designed to plunder Job, he could quickly perform it,
because he had the Chaldeans and Sabeans ready at a call.

_Third_, If both these should fail him, he can easily awaken in us _the
memory of old occasions that have been heretofore a trouble to us_.
These being raised out of their graves will renew old disturbances,
working afresh the same disquiets which the things themselves gave us
at first.

If Satan’s power were bounded here, and that he could do no more
than set before men occasions of vexation, yet we might justly, on
that single account, call him the troubler of the spirits of men;
considering that naturally the thoughts of men are restless, and
their imaginations ever rolling. If men sequester themselves from
all business, if they shut themselves up from commerce with men,
turn Eremites—as Jerome did—on purpose to avoid disquiet, yet their
thoughts would hurry them from place to place, sometimes to the court,
sometimes to the market, sometimes to shows and pastimes, sometimes to
quarrellings; sometimes they view fields, buildings, and countries;
sometimes they fancy dignities, promotions, and honours; they are ever
working upon one object or other, real or supposed, and according
to the object such will the affections be, high or low, joyful or
sorrowful; so that if the utmost of what Satan could do were no more
than to provide occasions, discomposures would follow naturally. The
evil dispositions of men would thereby be set a-working, though Satan
stood by as an idle spectator. The serpent—in our breasts, as Solomon
tells us, Eccles. x. 11—would ‘bite without enchantment,’ that is,
except it were charmed. But Satan can do more than tempt objectively,
when he hath provided the fuel he can also bring fire. For,

2. _He can also set our passions on work, and incense them to greater
fury than otherwise they would arrive at._ We see persons that are
distempered with passion may be whetted up to a higher pitch of rage
by any officious flatterer, that will indulge the humour and aggravate
the provocation. Much more then can Satan do it by whispering such
things to our minds as he knows will increase the flame; and therefore
is it, that where the Scripture doth caution us against anger—as the
proper product of our own corruption, calling it our wrath, Eph. iv.
26, 27—there also it warns us against the devil, as the incendiary,
that endeavours to heighten it. And where it tells us of the disorders
of the tongue,—which, though a little member, can of itself do great
mischief, James iii. 6—there it also tells us that the devil brings it
an additional fire from hell: ‘It is set on fire of hell.’ And there
are several ways by which Satan can irritate the passions. As,

[1.] _By presenting the occasions worse than they are, or were ever
intended, unjustly aggravating all circumstances._ By this means he
makes the object of the passions the more displeasing and hateful. This
must of necessity provoke to a higher degree.

[2.] _He can in a natural way move, as it were, the wheels, and set the
passions a-going, if they were of themselves more dull and sluggish_,
for he hath a nearer access to our passions than every one is aware
of. I will make it evident thus: our passions in their workings do
depend upon the fluctuations, excursions, and recursions of the blood
and animal spirits, as naturalists do determine.[326] Now that Satan
can make his approaches to the blood, spirits, and humours, and can
make alterations upon them, cannot be denied by those that consider
what the Scripture speaks in Job’s case, and in the cases of those that
were by possession of the devil made dumb, deaf, or epileptic; for if
he could afflict Job with grievous boils, chap. ii. 7, it is plain he
disordered and vitiated his blood and humours, which made them apt to
produce such boils or ulcers; and if he could produce an epilepsy, it
is evident that he could infect the _lympha_ with such a sharpness as
by vellicating the nerves might cause a convulsion; and these were
much more than the disorderly motions of blood, spirits, or humours,
which raise the passions of men. If any object to this, that then,
considering Satan’s malicious diligence, we must expect the passions of
men would never be at rest; it is answered, that this power of Satan is
not unlimited, but oft God prohibits him such approaches, and without
his leave he can do nothing; and also grace in God’s children, working
calmness, submission, and patience, doth balance Satan’s contrary
endeavour. For as hurtful and vexatious occasions, being represented by
the sense to the imagination, are apt to move the blood and spirits;
so, on the contrary, the ballast of patience and other graces doth so
settle the mind, that the blood and spirits are kept steady in their
usual course.

[3.] _When the passions are up, Satan can by his suggestions make
them more heady and violent._ He can suggest to the mind motives and
arguments to forward it, and can stir up our natural corruption, with
all its powers, to strike in with the opportunity. Thus he not only
kindles the fire, but blows the flame.

[4.] _And he can further fix the mind upon these thoughts, and keep
them still upon the hearts of men._ And then they eat in the deeper,
and like poison diffuse their malignity the further. We see that men,
who are at first but in an ordinary fret, if they continue to meditate
upon their provocation, they increase their vexation; and if they give
themselves to vent their passions by their tongues, though they begin
in some moderation, yet as motion causeth heat, so their own words whet
their rage, according to Eccles. x. 13, ‘The beginning of the words of
his mouth is foolishness, but the latter end of his talk is mischievous
madness.’ The same advantage hath Satan against men by holding down
their thoughts to these occasions of discomposure.

If occasions be so much in Satan’s power, and he have also so great a
hand over men’s passions, it is too evident that he can do very much
to discompose the spirits of men that are naturally obnoxious to these
troubles, except God restrain him, and grace oppose him. Thus have I
spoken my thoughts of the first sort of troubles, by which Satan doth
undermine the peace of men’s hearts.




