PART II.




CHAPTER I.

 _That it is Satan’s grand design to corrupt the minds of men with
 error—The evidences that it is so—And the reasons of his endeavours
 that way._


Next to Satan’s deceits in tempting to sin and against duty, his
design of _corrupting the minds of men by error_ calls for our search;
and indeed this is one of his principal endeavours, which takes up a
considerable part of his time and diligence. He is not only called in
Scripture an ‘unclean spirit,’ but also a ‘lying spirit,’ [1 Kings
xxii. 22,] and there are none of these cursed qualifications that
lie idle in him. As by his uncleanness we may easily conjecture his
attempts upon the will and affections to defile them by lust; so by
his lying we may conclude that he will certainly strive to blind the
understanding by error. But a clear discovery of this we may have from
these considerations:—

I. 1. First, _From God’s interest in truth, in reference to his great
designs of holiness and mercy in the world_. Truth is a ray and beam
of him who is the Father of lights.[210] All revealed truths are but
copies and transcripts of that essential, archetypal truth. Truth is
the rod of his strength, Ps. cx. 2, the sceptre of his kingdom, by
which he doth subdue the hearts of men to his obedience and service in
conversion. Truth is that rock upon which he hath built his church,
the foundations are the prophets and apostles, Eph. ii. 20—that is,
the doctrine of the prophets and apostles, in the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament. Truth is that great _depositum_ committed to
the care of his church, which is therefore called the pillar of truth,
1 Tim. iii. 15; because as princes or rulers put their proclamations
on pillars for the better information of their subjects, so doth his
church hold out truth to the world. Holiness is maintained by truth,
our ways are directed by it, and by it are we forewarned of Satan’s
devices, John xvii. 17. Now the prince of darkness carrying himself in
as full an opposition to the God of truth as he can in all his ways,
God’s interest in truth will sufficiently discover the devil’s design
to promote error; for such is his hatred of God, that, though he cannot
destroy truth, no more than he can tear the sun out of the firmament,
yet he will endeavour by corrupting the copy to disgrace the original.
Though he cannot break Christ’s sceptre, yet by raising error he would
hinder the increase of his subjects; though he cannot remove the rock
upon which the church is built, he will endeavour to shake it, or
to interrupt the building, and to tear down God’s proclamation from
the pillar on which he hath set it to be read of all; and if we can
conceive what a hatred the thief hath to the light, as it contradicts
and hinders his designs, we may imagine there is nothing against which
the devil will use greater contrivances than against the light of
truth. He neither can nor will make a league with any, but upon the
terms that Nahash propounded to the men of Jabesh-Gilead—that is, that
he may ‘put out their right eye,’ and so ‘lay it for a reproach upon
the Israel of God,’ 1 Sam. xi. 3. It is the work of the Holy Spirit ‘to
lead us into truth,’ and by the rule of contraries it is the devil’s
work to lead into error.

2. Secondly, Though the Scripture doth charge the sin and danger of
delusion and error upon those men that promote it to the deception of
themselves and others, yet doth it chiefly blame Satan for _the great
contriver of it, and expressly affirms him to be the grand deceiver_.
Instruments and engineers he must make use of to do him service in that
work, but still it is the devil that is a lying spirit in their mouths;
it is he that teacheth and prompts them, and therefore may they be
called, as Elymas was by Paul, the children of the devil, Acts xiii.
10, or, as Cerinthus of old, the first-born of Satan, πρωτότοκον τοῦ
Σατανᾶ.

The church of Corinth, among other distempers, laboured under
dangerous errors, against which when the apostle doth industriously
set himself, he doth chiefly take notice, (1.) Of the false teachers,
who had cunningly wrought them up to an aptitude of declining from
the ‘simplicity of the gospel.’ These he calls false apostles, as
having no commission from God, and Satan’s ministers, 2 Cor. xi. 13,
15; thereby informing us who it is that sends them out and employs
them upon this errand. (2.) He especially accuseth Satan as the great
contriver of all this evil. If any shut their eyes against the light,
he gives this for the principal cause, that ‘the god of the world
blinded their minds,’ 2 Cor. iv. 4. If any stumbled at the simplicity
of the gospel, he presently blames the ‘subtlety of the old serpent’
for it, 2 Cor. xi. 3. When false doctrine was directly taught, and
varnished over with the glorious pretexts of truth, still he chargeth
Satan with it, ver. 14, ‘No marvel, for Satan himself is transformed
into an angel of light;’ where he doth not only give a reason of the
corrupting or the adulterating the word of God by false apostles, as
vintners do their wines by mixtures; a metaphor which he makes use
of, chap. ii. 17, καπειλεύοντα; that they learned it of Satan, ‘who
abode not in the truth, but was a liar from the beginning;’ but also,
he further points at Satan, to furnish us with a true account of the
ground of that cunning craft which these deceitful workers used,
while they metamorphosed themselves, by an imitation of the way and
manner, zeal and diligence of the apostles of Christ, they were taught
by one who had exactly learned the art of imitation, and who could,
to all appearance, act to the life the part of an angel of light. And
to take away all objection or wonder, that so many with such seeming
earnestness and zeal should give up themselves to deceive by false
doctrine, he tells us that this hath been the devil’s work from the
first beguiling of Eve, ver. 3, and that as he then made use of a
serpent for his instrument, so ever since in all ages he hath made so
often and so much use of men as his emissaries, that it should now
neither seem a marvel, nor a great matter to see the devil at this work
by his agents, οὐ Θαυμαστόν, οὐ μέγα, ver. 14, 15.

3. Thirdly, That this is Satan’s great design, may be further cleared
from _the constant course of his endeavours_. The parable of the tares,
Mat. xiii. 25, shews that Satan is as busy in sowing tares, as the
master of the field is in sowing wheat. That by tares, not errors in
the abstract, but men are to be understood, is evident from the parable
itself; but that which makes men to be tares is sin and error; so
that, in a complex sense, we are taught how diligent the devil, who is
expressly signified by the enemy, ver. 39, is in that employment: much
of his time hath been taken up that way. ‘There were false prophets,’
saith Peter, 2 Epist. ii. 1, ‘and there shall be false teachers; that
is, so it was of old, and so it will be to the end. The shortest
abstract of Satan’s acts in this matter would be long and tedious;
judge of the rest by a few instances.

In the apostles’ times how quickly had the devil broached false
doctrine. That it was necessary to be circumcised, was early taught,
Acts xv. 1. In Col. ii. 8, the vain deceit of philosophy, traditions,
and the elements of the world, which were the body of Mosaical
ceremonies, are mentioned as dangerous intrusions; and in ver. 18, the
worshipping of angels, as it seems, was pleaded for, with no small
hazard to the church. The denial of the resurrection is expressly
charged upon some of the Corinthian church, 1 Cor. xv. 12; and that
‘the resurrection is past already,’ 2 Tim. ii. 18, is affirmed to have
been the doctrine of Hymeneus, Philetus, and others. But these are
comparatively little to that gross error of denying Christ, Jude 4, or
‘that Jesus is the Christ,’ 1 John ii. 22, or ‘Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh,’ 1 John iv. 3, which are branded for antichristian errors,
and were boldly asserted by many false prophets that were then ‘gone
out into the world;’ and to such a height came they at last, that they
taught the lawfulness of ‘committing fornication, and to eat things
offered to idols,’ Rev. ii. 20. All these falsehoods took the boldness
to appear before all the apostles were laid in their graves: and if we
will believe what Austin tells us [_De Hæeres._] from Epiphanius and
Eusebius, there were no less than ten sorts of heretical Antichrists
in the apostle John’s days, the Simonians, Menandrians, Saturnalians,
&c. This was an incredible increase of false doctrine in so short a
time, and in the times and preachings of the apostles themselves,
whose power and authority, one would think, might have made Satan
‘fall before them as lightning.’ What progress, then, in this work
of delusion might be expected when they were all removed out of the
world! They left, indeed, behind them sad predictions of the power
of delusion in after times: ‘Of yourselves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things.’ ‘After my departing shall grievous wolves enter,‘
&c., Acts xx. 30. ‘The Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith,’ 1 Tim. iv. 1; and Paul, 2
Thes. ii. 3, prophesies of a general apostasy, upon the revealing of
‘the man of sin,’ and the ‘mystery of iniquity,’ and that these should
be ‘perilous times,’ 2 Tim. iii. 1. To the same purpose, John mentions
the coming of the great Antichrist as a thing generally known and
believed, 1 John ii. 18. But before all these, Christ also had fully
forewarned his servants of false Christs, the power and danger of their
delusion, and of the sad revolt from the faith which should be before
his second coming, Mat. xxiv. 24. And as we have heard, so have we
seen; all ages since the apostles can witness that Satan hath answered
the prophecies that were concerning him. What a strange increase of
errors hath been in the world since that time! Irenæus and Tertullian
made catalogues long since; after them Epiphanius and Eusebius reckoned
about eighty heresies; Austin, after them, brings the number to
eighty-eight. Now though there be just exceptions against the largeness
of their catalogues, and that it is believed by many that there are
several branded in their rolls for heretics that merely suffer upon the
account of their name and nation, for Barbarism, Scythism, Hellenism
are mustered in the front; and others also stand there for very small
matters, as the _quarto-decimani_, &c., and that some ought altogether
to be crossed out of their books; yet still it will appear that the
number of errors is great, and that all those hard names have this
general signification, that the devil hath made a great stir in the
world by error and opinion. Aftertimes might also be summoned in to
speak their evidence, and our own knowledge and experience might,
without any other help, sufficiently instruct us, if it were needful,
of the truth of this, that error is one of Satan’s great designs.

II. Secondly, Let us next look into _the reasons which do so strongly
engage Satan to these endeavours of raising up errors_. If we set these
before us, it will not only confirm us in our belief that this is one
of his main employments—for if error yield him so many advantages for
the ruin of men and the dishonour of God, there can be no doubt of his
readiness to promote it. This also may be of use to put us in mind who
it is that is at work behind the curtain, when we see such things acted
upon the stage, and consequently may beget a cautious suspicion in our
minds against his proceedings. The reasons are such as these:—

1. First, _Error is sinful_, so that if Satan should be hindered in
his endeavours for any further mischief than the corrupting of any
particular person, yet he will reckon that he hath not altogether lost
his labour. Some errors, that overturn fundamentals of faith, are as
deadly poison, and called expressly ‘damnable’ by the apostle, 2 Pet.
ii. 1. These heresies are by Paul, Gal. v. 20, recounted among ‘the
works of the flesh,’ of which he positively affirms, that ‘they that
do such things cannot inherit the kingdom of God.’ Those that are of
a lower nature, that do not so extremely hazard the soul, can only
be capable of this apology, that they are less evil; yet as they
are oppositions to truth, propounded in Scripture for our belief and
direction, they cease not to be sins, though they may be greater or
less evils, according to the importance of those truths which they
deny, or the consequences that attend them; and if we go yet a step
lower, to the consideration of those rash and bold assertions about
things not clearly revealed, though they may possibly be true, yet the
positiveness of avouchments and determinations in such cases, where
we want sufficient reason to support what we affirm—as that of the
pseudo-Dionysius for the hierarchy of angels, and some adventurous
assertions concerning God’s secret decrees, and many other things
of like nature—are by the apostle, Col. ii. 18, most severely taxed
for an unwarrantable and unjust presumption, in setting our foot
upon God’s right; as if such men would by violence thrust themselves
into that which God hath reserved for himself—for so much the word
intruding—ἐμβατεύειν—imports. The cause of this he tells us is the
arrogancy of corrupt reason, the fleshly mind—suitable to that
expression, Mat. xvi. 17, ‘Flesh and blood hath not revealed it.’ The
bottom of it is pride, which swells men to this height; and the fruit,
after all these swelling attempts, is no other than as the apples of
Sodom, dust and vanity, ‘intruding into those things which he hath not
seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.’ If then Satan do but gain
this, that by error, though not diffused further than the breast of
the infected party, truth is denied, or that the heart be swelled into
pride and arrogancy, or that he hath hope so to prevail, it is enough
to encourage his attempts.

2. Secondly, But error is a sin _of an increasing nature, and usually
stops not at one or two falsehoods, but is apt to spawn into many
others_—as some of the most noxious creatures have the most numerous
broods; for one error hath this mischievous danger in it, that it
taints the mind to an instability in every truth; and the bond of
steadfastness being once broken, a man hath no certainty where he
shall stay: as a wanton horse, once turned loose, may wander far. This
hazard is made a serious warning against error: 2 Pet. iii. 17, ‘Beware
lest ye, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your
own steadfastness.’ One error admitted, makes the heart unsteady;
and besides this inconvenience, error doth unavoidably branch itself
naturally into many more, as inferences and conclusions resulting from
it, as circles in water multiply themselves. Grant but one absurdity,
and many will follow upon it, so that it is a miracle to find a single
error.[211] These locusts go forth by bands, as the experience of all
ages doth testify, and besides the immediate consequences of an error,
which receive life and being together with itself, as twins of the same
birth, we may observe a tendency in errors, to others that are more
remote, and by the long stretch of multiplied inferences, those things
are coupled together that are not very contiguous. If the Lutherans—it
is[212] Dr Prideaux his observation—admit universal grace, the
Huberians introduce universal election, the Puccians natural faith, the
Naturalists explode Christ and Scriptures at last as unnecessary. This
is then a fair mark for the devil to aim at; if he prevails for one
error, it is a hundred to one but he prevails for more.

3. Thirdly, Satan hath yet a further reach in promoting error, he knows
_it is a plague that usually infects all round about_; and therefore
doth he the rather labour in this work, because he hopes thereby to
corrupt others, and infected persons are commonly the most busy agents,
even to the ‘compassing of sea and land to gain proselytes’ to their
false persuasions. This harvest of Satan’s labour is often noted in
Scripture. ‘They shall deceive many,’ Mat. xxiv. 24; ‘Many shall follow
their pernicious ways,’ 2 Pet. ii. 2. How quickly had this leaven
spread itself in the church of Galatia, even to Paul’s wonder! Gal. i.
6, ‘I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called you into
the grace of Christ unto another gospel.’ Instances of the spreading of
error are frequent. Pelagianism rose about the year 415, but presently
spread itself in Palestine, Africa, Greece, Italy, Sicily, France, and
Britain. Arianism, like fire in straw, in a little time brought its
flame over the Christian world, and left her wondering at herself that
she was so suddenly become Arian. Socinianism had the like prevalency;
Lælius privately had sowed the seeds, and after his death, Faustus
Socinus, his nephew, did so bestir himself, that within ten years after
his confident appearing, whole congregations in Sarmatia submitted
themselves to his dictates, as Calovius affirms,[213] and within twenty
or thirty years more several hundreds of churches in Transylvania were
infected, and within a few years more the whole synod was brought
over to subscribe to Socinianism. We have also instances nearer home.
After the Reformation, in the reign of Edward VI., how soon did popery
return in its full strength when Queen Mary came to the crown! which
occasioned Peter Martyr, when he saw young students flocking to mass,
to say, ‘that the tolling of the bell overturned all his doctrine at
Oxford,’ _Hæc una notula omnem meam doctrinam evertit_. And of late we
have had the sad experience of the power of error to infect. No error
so absurd, ridiculous, or blasphemous, but, once broached, it presently
gained considerable numbers to entertain it.

4. Fourthly, Error is also eminently serviceable to Satan for the
bringing in _divisions, schisms, rents, hatreds, heart-burnings,
animosities, revilings, contentions, tumults, wars, and whatsoever
bitter fruits, breach of love, and the malignity of hatred can
possibly produce_. Enough of this might be seen in the church of
Corinth. The divisions that were amongst themselves were occasioned
by it, and a great number of evils the apostle suspected to have been
already produced from thence, as debates, envyings, wraths, strifes,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults, 2 Cor. xii. 20. He
himself escaped not from being evilly entreated by those among them
that were turned from the simplicity of the gospel. The quarrelsome
exceptions that they had raised against him he takes notice of. They
charged him with levity, in neglecting his promise to come to them,
2 Cor. i. 17. They called him carnal, one that walked according to
the flesh, chap. x. 2: they taunted him as a contemptible fellow,
ver. 10. They undervalued his ministry, which occasioned, not without
great apology, a commendation of himself; nay, they seemed to call him
a false apostle, and were so bold as to challenge him for a proof of
Christ speaking in him, 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

If the devil had so much advantage from error that was but in the
bud, and that in one church only, what may we imagine hath he done by
it, when it broke out to an open flame in several churches! What work
do we see in families when an error creeps in among them! The father
riseth up against the son, the son against the father, the mother
against the daughter, the daughter against the mother. What sad divided
congregations have we seen! what fierceness, prejudices, slanders,
evil surmises, censurings, and divisions hath this brought forth! what
bandying of parties against parties, church against church, hath been
produced by this engine! How sadly hath this poor island felt the smart
of it! The bitter contests that have been betwixt presbyterian and
independent, betwixt them and the episcopal, makes them look more like
factious combinations, than churches of Christ. The present differences
betwixt conformists and nonconformists, if we take them where they
are lowest, they do daily produce such effects as must needs be very
pleasing and grateful to the devil, both parties mutually objecting
schism, and charging each other with crime and folly. What invectives
and railings may be heard in all companies, as if they had been at
the greatest distances in point of doctrine! But whosoever loseth, to
be sure the devil gains by it. Hatreds, strife, variance, emulations,
lyings, railings, scorn, and contempt, are all against the known
duty of brotherly kindness, and are undoubted provocations against
the God of love and peace. What can we then think of that can be so
useful to Satan as error, when these above-mentioned evils are the
inseparable products of it? The modestest errors that ever were among
good men are still accompanied with something of these bitter fruits.
The differences about meats and days, when managed with the greatest
moderation, made the strong to despise the weak as silly, wilful,
factious humorists; and, on the contrary, the weak judged the strong as
profane, careless, and bold despisers of divine institutions; for so
much the apostle implies, Rom. xiv. 3, ‘Let not him that eateth despise
him that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not, judge him that
eateth.’ But should we trace error through the ruins of churches, and
view the slaughters and bloodshed that it hath occasioned, or consider
the wars and desolations that it hath brought forth, we might heap up
matter fit for tears and lamentations, and make you cease to wonder
that Satan should so much concern himself to promote it.

5. Fifthly, The greatest and most successful stratagem for the
hindering a reformation, is that of _raising up an army of errors_.
Reformation of abuses, and corruptions in worship or doctrine, we may
well suppose the devil will withstand with his utmost might and policy,
because it endeavours to pull that down which cost him so much labour
and time to set up, and so crosseth his end. They who are called out by
God to ‘jeopard their lives in the high places of the field,’ Judges
v. 18, undertake a hard task in endeavouring to check the power of the
mighty, whose interest it is to maintain those defilements which their
policy hath introduced, to fix them in the possession of that grandeur
and command which so highly gratifies their humours, and self-seeking
aspiring minds. But Satan knowing the strength of that power which
hath raised them up to oppose, with spiritual resolution, the current
of prevailing iniquity, usually provides himself with this reserve,
and comes upon their backs with a party of deluded, erroneous men,
raised up from among themselves, and by this means he hopes either to
discourage the undertakers for reformation, by the difficulty of their
work, which must needs drive on heavily when they that should assist
prove hinderers, or at least to straiten and limit the success; for
by this means, (1.) He divides the party, and so weakens their hands.
(2.) He strengthens their enemies, who not only gather heart from
these divisions, seeing them so fair a prognostic of their ruin, but
also improve them, by retorting them as an argument, that they are
all out of the way of truth. (3.) The erroneous party in the rear of
the reformers do more gall them with their arrows, even bitter words
of cursed reviling, and more hazard them with their swords and spears
of opposition, than their adversaries in the front against whom they
went forth. In the meanwhile, they that stand up for truth are as corn
betwixt two millstones—oppressed with a double conflict, beset before
and behind.

This hath been Satan’s method in all ages. And indeed policy itself
could not contrive anything that would more certainly obstruct
reformation than this. When the apostles, who in these last days were
first sent forth, were employed to reform the world, to throw down
the ceremonies of the Old Testament and heathen worship, Satan had
presently raised up men of corrupt minds to hinder their progress.
What work these made for Paul at Corinth, and with the Galatians,
the epistles to those churches do testify. The business of these men
was to draw disciples after them from the simplicity of the gospel,
nay, to another gospel; and this they could not do but by setting up
themselves, boasting of the Spirit, carrying themselves as the apostles
of Christ, and contemning those that were really so, insinuating
thereby into the affections of the seduced, as if they zealously
affected them, and that Paul was but ‘weak and contemptible,’ nay,
their very ‘enemy, for telling them the truth,’ [Gal. iv. 16.] What
unspeakable hindrance must this be to Paul! What grief of heart, what
fear and jealousy must this produce! He professeth he was afraid lest
he had ‘bestowed upon them labour in vain,’ Gal. iv. 11; and that he
did no less than ‘travail of them in birth the second time,’ ver.
19. If one Alexander could do Paul so much evil by ‘withstanding his
words,’ that he complains of him, and cautions Timothy against him, 2
Tim. iv. 24; if one Diotrephes, by ‘prating against John with malicious
words,’ prevailed with the church, that they ‘received him not, nor the
brethren,’ 3 John 10, what hurt might a multitude of such be able to do!

In the primitive times of the church, after the apostles’ days, when
those worthies were to contest with the heathen world, the serpent
‘cast out of his mouth water, as a flood, after the woman,’—which most
interpret to be a deluge of heresies, and some particularly understand
it of the Arian heresy,—that he might hinder the progress of the
gospel; which design of his did so take, that many complaints there
were of hindering the conversion of the heathens, by the errors that
were among Christians. Epiphanius tells us that pagans refused to come
near the Christians, and would not so much as hear them speak, being
affrighted by the wicked practices and ways of the Priscillianists.
Austin complains to the same purpose, that loose and lascivious
heretics administered matter of blaspheming to the idolatrous heathens.

In after-times, when religion grew so corrupt by popery, that God
extraordinarily raised up Luther, Calvin, and others in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, to discover those abominations, and to bring
back his people from Babylon, the devil gave them no small trouble
by a growth of errors, so that they were forced to fight against the
papists before and those Philistines behind; insomuch that reformation
attained not that height and universality which might rationally have
been expected from such blessed undertakings. This was the conjecture
of many, particularly of our countryman Dr Prideaux,[214] that if these
fanatic enthusiasts, which with so great a scandal to the gospel then
brake forth, had not retarded and hindered those glorious proceedings,
that apocalyptical beast of Rome had been not only weakened and
wounded, but utterly overthrown and slain. In particular cities, where
any of the faithful servants of Christ endeavoured to detect the
errors of popery, these instruments of Satan were ready to join with
the common adversary in reproaches and disturbances. How they opposed
Musculus at Augusta, and with what fierceness they called him viper,
false prophet, wolf in sheep’s clothing, &c., you may see in those
that write his life. How these men hindered the gospel at Limburg
against Junius, at Zurich against Zuinglius, at Augsburg against
Urbanus Regius, you may also see in their lives.[215] In all which, and
others of like nature, you will still find, (1.) That there was never
a reformation begun, but there were erroneous persons to hinder and
distract the reformers; (2.) That these men expressed as great hatred
against the reformers, and oftentimes more, than against the papists;
and were as spitefully bitter in lies, slanders, and scorns against
them, as the papists themselves.

6. Sixthly, Satan can also make use of error either to _fix men in
their present mistaken ways and careless course, or as a temptation
to atheism_. Varieties of opinions and doctrines do amuse and amaze
men. While one cries, ‘Lo, here is Christ,’ and another, ‘Lo, he is
here,’ men are so confounded that they do not know what to choose. It
is one of the greatest difficulties to single out truth from a crowd of
specious, confident pretences, especially seeing truth is modest, and
oftentimes out-noised by clamorous, bold error; yea, sometimes out-vied
by the pretensions of spirit and revelation in an antiscriptural
falsehood. At what a loss is an unskilful traveller where so many
waves[216] meet! While one party cries up this, another that, mutually
charging one another with error, they whose hearts are anything
loosened from a sense and reverence of religion, are easily tempted to
disbelieve all. Thus error leads to atheism, and lays the foundation
for all those slanderous exceptions against Scripture by which godless
men usually justify themselves in their religion. Now though all wicked
men are not brought to this, because the consciences of some do so
strongly retain the sentiments of a deity, that all Satan’s art cannot
obliterate those characters; yet the consideration of the multitude
of errors doth rivet them in the persuasion of the truth and goodness
of that way of religion wherein they had been educated. Papists are
hardened by this; and though they have no reason to boast of their
unity among themselves, as they have been often told, and now of late
by Dr Stillingfleet,[217] who hath manifested that their divisions
among themselves are as great, and managed with as great animosity,
as any amongst us; yet are their ears so beaten with the objection
of sects and schisms elsewhere, that they are generally confirmed to
stay where they are. Besides, this is a stumbling-block which the
devil throws in the way of poor ignorant people. If they are urged to
a serious strictness in religion, they are affrighted from it by the
consideration of sects and parties, and the woeful miscarriages of some
erroneous persons that at first pretended to strictness, imagining that
strictness in religion is an unnecessary, dangerous thing, and that
the sober, godly Christians are but a company of giddy, unsettled,
conceited, precise persons, who will in a little time run themselves
into madness and distraction, or into despair. And thus out of fear
of schism or error, they dare not be religious in good earnest; but
content themselves with ‘drawing near to God with their mouths, and
confessing him with their lips, whilst their hearts are far from him,
and in their works they deny him,’ [Titus i. 16.]

There is such a propensity in the hearts of men to be staggered by the
multitude and boldness of errors, that the apostle Paul expresseth
a sense of it, and seems tenderly careful to avoid that blow, which
he knew Satan would readily give through that consideration, by
the apology that he makes for God in his holy, wise, providential
permission of them, 1 Cor. xi. 19, ‘There must be heresies among you.’
His intent is not barely to put them off with this, that heresies are
unavoidable, but to satisfy them that there is a necessity of them,
and that they are useful, as God’s furnace and fan, to purify and to
cleanse, that ‘they which are approved may be made manifest.’ The
like care he hath in 2 Tim. ii. 19, 20, upon the mention of the error
of Hymeneus and Philetus, where he obviateth the offence that might
arise by reason of their apostasy, partly by removing the fears of the
upright, in affirming their safety whatever became of other men, seeing
‘the foundation of God standeth sure,’ and partly by declaring it no
more suitable or dishonourable for God to permit the rise of errors
in his church, than for great men to have in their houses not only
‘vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth; some to
honour, and some to dishonour.’ By these very apologies it appears that
Satan by this device of error designs to shake men’s faith and to drive
them from their religion.

7. Seventhly, Neither can this, _that corrupt doctrines bring forth
corrupt practices_, be of any less weight with Satan, or less engaging
for the pursuit of this design, than any of the forementioned reasons.

Corrupt doctrines are embraced as the very truth of God by the deluded;
and one way or other, directly or consequentially, they lead on
practice, and that with the highest security and confidence, as if they
were very truths indeed.

The devil then hath this great advantage by error, that if he can
but corrupt the minds of men, especially in the more weighty and
fundamental points of religion, then by a great ease and without any
more labour he hath gained them to the practice of whatsoever these
corrupted principles will lead unto. No course can be taken that with
greater expedition and prevalency can introduce profane debaucheries
than this. Thus he conquers parties and multitudes, as a victorious
general takes cities and whole countries, by surrender; whereas his
particular temptations to sin are but inconsiderable, less successful
_picqueerings_[218] in comparison; and when he hath once corrupted
the understandings of men, he hath by that means a command over their
consciences, and doth not now urge to evil in the notion of a devil or
tempter, but as an angel of light, or rather as a usurper of divine
authority. He requires, he commands these wicked practices as necessary
duties, or at least gives a liberty therein, as being harmless
allowances. This difference was of old observed in Satan’s management
of persecution and error, that in the former he did compel men to deny
Christ, but by the latter he did teach them. _In persecutione cogit
homines negare Christum, nunc docet._

That the lives and practices of men are so concerned by corrupt
doctrines, may appear to any that are but indifferently acquainted
with Scripture or history. We are told by the apostle Paul that faith
and conscience stand so related to each other that they live and die
together, and that when the one is shipwrecked the other is drowned for
company, 1 Tim. i. 19. In Phil. iii. 2, he seems severely harsh against
those of the concision; he calls them dogs, ‘Beware of dogs; beware of
evil workers.’ The reason of which expression I apprehend lies not so
much in these resemblances, that dogs spoil the flock by devouring,
or that they are fawning creatures, or that they are industrious in
prosecution of their prey,—though in all these particulars false
teachers may be compared to dogs, for they spare not the flock, they
compass sea and land to gain disciples, and they entice them with fair
speeches,—but rather he intends the similitude to express the profane
life and carriage of these seducers, for dogs are filthy creatures, to
a proverb, ‘The dog to his vomit.’ And common prostitutes, for their
uncleanness, were called dogs in the Old Testament. So some expound
Deut. xxiii. 18, ‘The hire of a whore, or the price of a dog.’ And we
have full and clear descriptions of seducers from their wicked and
abominable practices: 2 Peter ii. 10, ‘They that walk after the flesh,
in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government; presumptuous are
they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities: ver.
14, ‘Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; an
heart exercised with covetous practices; cursed children:’ ver. 18,
‘They allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness.’
Jude 4, ‘There are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation; ungodly men, turning the grace of
God into lasciviousness:’ ver. 16, ‘These are murderers, complainers,
walking after their own lusts,’ &c. 2 Tim. iii. 2-5, ‘Men shall be
lovers of their own selves; covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those
that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of God; of this sort are they which creep into houses.’
All which do set forth heretical persons as the most scandalous wicked
wretches that we shall meet with; grossly filthy in themselves,
corrupted in all the duties of their relations, natural and civil;
defiled in all the ways of their converse with men.

Neither are these wicked practices issuing from gross errors to be
looked upon as rare, accidental, or extraordinary effects thereof,
but as the natural and common fruits of them; for Christ makes this
to be the very special property and note whereby false prophets may
be discovered, Mat. vii. 16, ‘Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do
men gather grapes off thorns, or figs off thistles?’ &c. These fruits
were not their doctrines, but their lives; for to know false prophets
by false doctrines is no more than to know false doctrine by false
doctrine. If any object that many false teachers appeared in the shape
of seeming holiness and strictness of life, they may be answered from
Christ’s own words; for there he tells us, to avoid mistakes, that
their first appearance, and it may be the whole lives of some of the
first seedsmen of any error, is under the form of sanctity: ‘They come
to you in sheep’s clothing,’ in an outward appearance of innocency and
plausible pretences; but then he adds, that their fruits afterward will
discover them. A tree at its first planting is not discovered what it
is, but give it time to grow to its proper fruitfulness, and then you
may know of what kind it is; so that we need not affirm that damnable
doctrines produce wicked lives in all that entertain them at the very
first. It is enough for discovery if there be a natural consequential
tendency in such doctrines to practical impieties, or that at last they
produce them, though not in all, yet in many.

And that this matter hath been always found to be so, all history doth
confirm. Such there were in the apostles’ days, as is evident by their
complaints. Such there were in the church of Pergamos: Rev. ii. 14,
‘Thou hast them that hold the doctrine of Balaam; who taught Balak to
cast a stumbling-block before the children of Israel; to eat things
sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication.’ There were also the
Nicolaitans, of whom Christ declares his abhorrency, ver. 15. In the
church of Thyatira there was the ‘woman Jezebel, who taught and seduced
many’ of that church to the like abominable doctrines and practices,
ver. 20. Besides these, the apostle John was troubled with the
abominable Gnostics, [and] the filthy Carpocratians, who taught that
men must sin and do the will of all the devils, or else they could not
evade principalities and powers, who would no otherwise be pleased to
suffer them to escape to the superior heavens. Of these men and their
licentious doctrine doth he speak, 1 John iii. 6, &c., that they that
are born of God indeed, must not, dare not, cannot give themselves up
to a liberty in such abominations.

The same fruits of corrupt doctrine appeared after the apostles’ days.
What was Montanus, but an impure wretch? What were his two companion
prophetesses, Priscilla and Maximilla, but infamous adulteresses? The
Priscillianists, the Manichees, and abundance more, left the stink of
their profaneness behind them, by reason of whom, according to Peter’s
prophecy, 2 Peter ii. 2, ‘The way of truth was evil spoken of.’

Later times have also given in full evidence of this truth. How
shameful and abominable were the lives of John of Leyden and the
rest of those German enthusiasts! Who reads the story of Hacket and
Coppinger without detestation of their wicked practices! What better
have the Familists and libertines of New and Old England been! Some
were turned off to highest ranting, in all profaneness of swearing,
drinking, adultery, and the defying of a godly life; and this, under
the unreasonable boast of spirit and perfection.[219] The heavens may
blush and the earth be astonished at these things! But in the meantime
Satan hugs himself in his success, and encourageth himself to further
attempts in propagating error, seeing it brings in so great a harvest
of sin.

8. Eighthly, In this design of false doctrine Satan is never altogether
out; if he cannot thus defile their lives, yet it is a thousand to one
but _he obstructs their graces by it_. What greater hindrance can there
be to conversion than error! The word of truth is the means by which
God, through his Spirit, doth beget us; it is part of that image of God
that is implanted in us: it is God’s voice to the soul to awaken it. It
cannot then be imagined that God will give the honour of that work to
any error; neither can truth take place or have its effect upon a soul
forestalled with a contrary falsehood. Falsehood in possession will
keep truth at the door. Neither is conversion only hindered by such
errors as directly contradict converting truths, but also by collateral
non-fundamental errors; as they fill the minds of men with prejudice
against those that profess another persuasion, so that for their own
beloved error’s sake men will not entertain a warning or conviction
from those that dissent from their opinions: they first account them
enemies, and then they despise their message. It is no small matter in
Satan’s way to have such an obstruction at hand in the grand concern
of conversion. Yet this is further serviceable to him, to hinder
or weaken the graces of the converted already. If he can set God’s
children a-madding upon error, or make them fond of novelties, he will
by this means exhaust the vigour and strength of their hearts, so that
the substantials of religion will be neglected. For as hurtful plants
engross all the moisture and fatness of the earth where they stand, and
impoverish it into an inability for the nourishment of those that are
of greater worth, so doth error possess itself of the strength of the
spirit, and in the meantime neglected graces dwindle into emptiness,
and ‘fade as a leaf.’ The most curious questions and opinions that
are, contribute nothing to the establishment of the heart; it is
only grace that doth that: Heb. xiii. 9, ‘The heart is established
with grace,’ and not with disputes about meats; nay, they do grace a
prejudice, in that they make it sick and languishing—for to that sense
is the original, in 1 Tim. vi. 4, ‘Doting about questions,’ or growing
diseased, because of the earnest prosecution of opinions, Νοσῶν περὶ
ζητήσεις.

9. Ninthly, Error hath yet another mischief in it, which makes it not a
little desirable to Satan; and that is _the judgment or punishment that
it brings_. So that it every way answers the devil’s hatred against
both soul and body. The blessings of prosperity and peace do attend the
triumphal chariot of truth: Ps. lxxxv. 11, 12, ‘Truth shall spring out
of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from heaven.’ And then
it follows, that ‘the Lord shall give that which is good, and our land
shall yield her increase.’ But on the contrary, error doth more provoke
God than men are aware. How often did God desolate the Israelites, set
a fire in their cities, and gave them into the hands of their enemies,
because of their changing the truth of God into a lie, and worshipping
and serving the creature more than the Creator! God left not the church
of Pergamos and Thyatira without severe threatenings for the error of
the Nicolaitans: Rev. ii. 16, ‘Repent, or else I will come unto thee
quickly.’ Ver. 22, ‘I will cast them into great tribulation, except
they repent of their deeds, and I will kill her children with death.’
And accordingly God fulfilled his threatening upon them, by bringing
in the Saracens to desolate them, and to possess their land—as he
also brought the Goths upon the empire for the Arian heresy. How is
Satan pleased to labour in a design that will kindle the wrath of the
Almighty!




