CHAPTER X.

 _That Satan enticeth by our lust.—The several ways by which he doth
 it.—Of the power and danger of the violence of affections._


The way, then, by which he doth entice is by ‘stirring up our lust.’ By
‘lust’ I mean those general desirings of our minds after any unlawful
object which are forbidden in the tenth commandment. Thus we read of
‘worldly lusts,’ of the ‘lusts of the flesh,’ of ‘lustings to envy,’
and, in a word, we read of ‘divers lusts,’ the whole attempt and
striving of corrupt nature against the Spirit being set forth by this
expression ‘of lusting against the Spirit,’ Titus ii. 12; 1 Peter ii.
18; James iv. 5; Titus iii. 3; Gal. v. 17.

That Satan takes advantage of our own lusts, and so ploughs with our
heifer, turning our own weapons against ourselves, is evident by the
general vote of Scripture. The apostle James, chap. i. 14, tells us
that every temptation prevails only by the power and working of our
own lusts. Satan is the tempter, but our lusts are the advantages by
which he draws and enticeth. The corrupt principle within us is called
‘flesh,’ but the way whereby it works, either in its own proper motion
or as stirred up by the devil, is that of lust and affection; and
therefore he that would stop that issue must look to mortify it in its
affections and lusts, Gal. v. 24. We are further told by John, 1 Epist.
ii. 16, that all those snares that are in the world are only hazardous
and prevailing by our lusts. More generally the apostle Peter speaks,
2 Peter i. 4; the whole bundle of actual sins that have ever been in
the world came in at this door, ‘The corruption that is in the world
is through lust.’ In the stirring up our lusts Satan useth no small
art and subtlety, and ordinarily he worketh by some of these following
ways:—

1. First, He useth his skill _to dress up an object of lust that
it may be taking and alluring_. He doth not content himself with a
simple proposal of the object, but doth as it were paint and varnish
it, to make it seem beautiful and lovely. Besides all that wooing
and importunity which he useth to the soul by private and unseen
suggestions, he hath no doubt a care to gather together all possible
concurring circumstances, by which the seeming goodness or conveniency
of the object is much heightened and enlarged. We see those that have
skill to work upon the humours of men place a great part of it in
the right circumstantiating a motion, and in taking the tempers and
inclinations of men at a right time. And they observe that the missing
of the right season is the hazard of the design, even there where
the object and inclination ordinarily are suitable. There is much in
placing a picture in a right position, to give it its proper grace and
lustre in the eyes of the beholders. When a man is out of humour he
nauseates his usual delights, and grows sullen to things of frequent
practice. It is likely Eve was not a stranger to the tree of knowledge
before the temptation, but when the serpent suggests the goodness of
the fruit, the fruit itself seems more beautiful and desirable, ‘good
for food, and pleasant to the eyes,’ [Gen. ii. 9.] Though we are not
able to find out the way of Satan’s beautifying an object that it may
affect with more piercing and powerful delights, yet he that shall
consider that not only prudence, in an advantageous management of
things, adds an additional beauty to objects proposed, but also that
art, by placing things in a right posture, may derive a radiancy and
beam of beauty and light upon them, as an ordinary piece of glass may
be so posited to the sunbeams that it may reflect a sparkling light
as if it were a diamond,—he that shall consider this, I say, will not
think it strange for the devil to use some arts of this kind for the
adorning and setting off an object to the eye of our lusts.

2. Secondly, We have reason to suspect that he may have _ways of deceit
and imposture upon our senses_. The deceits of the senses are so much
noted, that some philosophers will scarce allow any credit to be given
them; not that they are always deceitful, but that they are often so,
and therefore always suspicious.[181] The soul hath no intelligence but
by the senses. It is then a business of easy belief, that Satan may
not altogether slight this advantage, but that when he sees it fit for
his purpose, he may impose upon us by the deception of our eyes and
ears. We little know how oft our senses have disguised things to us.
In a pleasing object, our eyes may be as a magnifying or multiplying
glass. In the first temptation Satan seems to have wrought both upon
the object and also upon the senses; she ‘saw it was good for food
and pleasant.’ Who can question but that she saw the fruit before?
But this was another kind of sight, of more power and attraction. An
instance of Satan’s cunning in both the forementioned particulars we
have from Austin, relating the story of his friend Alypius, who by the
importunity of his acquaintance consented to go to the theatre, yet
with a resolve not to open his eyes, lest the sight of these spectacles
should entice his heart; but being there, the noise and sudden
shouting of the multitude prevailed so far with him that he forgot his
resolution; takes the liberty to see what occasioned the shouting, and
once seeing, is now so inflamed with delight that he shouts as the rest
do, and becomes a frequenter of the theatre as others.[182] What was
there to be seen and heard he knew before by the relation of others;
but now being present, his eyes and ears were by Satan so heightened
in their offices, that those bloody objects seemed pleasant beyond all
that had been reported of them, and the lust of his heart drawn out by
Satan’s cunning disposal of the object and senses.

3. Thirdly, There is no small enticement arising from _the fitness and
suitableness of occasion_. An occasion exactly fitted is more than
half a temptation. This often makes a thief, an adulterer, &c., where
the acts of these sins have their rise from a sudden fit of humour,
which occasion puts them in, rather than from design or premeditation.
Cunningly contrived occasions are like the danger of a precipice. If
a man be so foolish as to take up a stand there, a small push will
throw him over, though a far greater might not harm him if he were upon
a level. It is Satan’s cunning to draw a man within the reach of an
occasion. All the resolves of Alypius were not safeguard to him, when
once he was brought within hearing and sight of the temptation. If he
had stayed at home, the hazard of Satan’s suggestions, though earnest,
had not been so much as the hearing of his ears and sight of his eyes.
In 2 Cor. ii. 11, Paul’s fears of Satan’s taking advantage against the
Corinthians, did manifestly arise from the present posture of their
church affairs: for if the excommunicated person should not be received
again into the church, an ordinary push of temptation might either have
renewed or confirmed their contentions, or precipitated[183] them into
an opinion of too much severity against an offending brother; and that
their present frame made them more than ordinarily obnoxious to these
snares, is evident from the apostle’s caution inserted here in this
discourse, so abruptly, that any man may observe the necessity of the
matter, and the earnestness of his affections did lead his pen.[184]
The souls of men have their general discrasias and disaffections, as
our bodies have, from a lingering distemperature of the blood and
humours; in which case, a small occasion, like a particular error of
diet, &c., in a declining body, will easily form that inclination into
particular acts of sin.

4. Fourthly, Satan hath yet a further reach in his enticements, by
_the power which he hath upon our fancies and imaginations_. That he
hath such a power was discovered before. This being then supposed,
how serviceable it is for his end it is now to be considered. Our
fancy is as a glass, which, with admirable celerity and quickness of
motion, can present before us all kinds of objects; it can in a moment
run from one end of the earth to the other; and besides this, it hath
a power of creating objects, and casting them into what forms and
shapes it pleaseth, all which our understanding cannot avoid the sight
of. Now the power of imagination is acknowledged by all to be very
great, not only as working upon a melancholy and distempered spirit,
of which authors give us large accounts,[185] but also upon minds
more remote from such peremptory delusions; as may be daily observed
in the prejudices and prepossessions of men, who by reason of the
impressions of imagination, are not without difficulty drawn over to
the acknowledgment of the truth of things, and the true understanding
of matters; neither is the understanding only liable to a more than
ordinary heat and rapture by it, but the will is also quickened and
sharpened in its desires by this means. Hence is it, as one of the
forecited authors observes,[186] that fancy doth often more toward
a persuasion by its insinuations than a cogent argument or rational
demonstration.

This is no less a powerful instrument in Satan’s hand, than commonly
and frequently made use of. Who amongst us doth not find and feel him
dealing with us at this weapon? When he propounds an object to our
lust, he doth not usually expose it naked under the hazard of dying
out for want of prosecution, but presently calls in our fancy to his
aid, and there raiseth a theatre, on which he acts before our minds the
sin in all its ways and postures. If he put us upon revenge, or upon
lusts of uncleanness, or covetousness, or ambition, we are sure, if we
prevent it not, to have our imagination presenting these things to us
as in lively pictures and resemblances, by which our desires may be
inflamed and prepared for consent.

5. Fifthly, Sometime he shews his art _in preparing and fitting our
bodies to his designs, or in fitting temptations to our bodies and
the inclinations thereof_. The soul, though it be a noble being, yet
is it limited by the body, and incommodated by the craziness and
indispositions thereof, so that it can no more act strenuously or
evenly to its principles in a disordered body, than it can rightly
manage any member of it, in its natural motions, where the bones are
disjointed. Hence sickness or other bodily weaknesses do alter the
scene, and add another kind of bias to the soul than what it had
before. This Satan takes notice of, and either follows his advantage
of the present indisposition, or, if he hath some special design,
endeavours to cast our body into such a disorder as may best suit his
intention. Asa was more easily drawn to be overseen in peevishness and
rash anger in his latter days, when his body grew diseased. Satan had
his advantage against Solomon to draw him to idolatry when old age and
uxoriousness had made him more ductile to the solicitations of his
wives; ‘When Solomon was old, his wives turned away his heart,’ 1 Kings
xi. 4. The devil, when he took upon him to foretell Job’s blaspheming
God to his face, yet he attempted not the main design till he thought
he had thoroughly prepared him for it, by the anguish and smart of a
distempered body and mind; and though he failed in the great business
of his boast, yet he left us an experiment in Job, that the likeliest
way to prevail upon the mind in hideous and desperate temptations, is
to mould the body to a suitable frame. He prevailed not against Job
to cause him curse God, yet he prevailed far, ‘he cursed the day of
his birth,’ and spake many things by the force of that distress, which
he professeth himself ashamed of afterwards. The body then will be in
danger, when it is disordered, to give a tincture to every action, as
a distempered palate communicates a bitterness to everything it takes
down.

6. Sixthly, _Evil company is a general preparatory to all kinds of
temptation_. He enticeth strongly that way. For, (1.) Evil society doth
insensibly dead the heart, and quench the heat of the affections to
the things of God. It hath a kind of bewitching power to eat out the
fear of the Lord in our hearts, and to take off the weight and power
of religious duty. It not only stops our tongues, and retards them in
speaking of good things, but influenceth the very heart, and poisons it
into a kind of deadness and lethargy, so that our thoughts run low, and
we begin to think that severe watchfulness of thoughts and the guard of
our minds to be a needless and melancholy self-imposition. (2.) Example
hath a strange insinuating force to enstamp a resemblance, and to beget
imitation. Joseph, living where his ears were frequently beaten with
oaths, finds it an easy thing, upon a feigned occasion, to swear by
the life of Pharaoh, [Gen. xlii. 15]. Evil company is sin’s nursery
and Satan’s academy, by which he trains up those whose knowledge and
hopeful beginnings had made them shy of his temptations; and if he can
prevail with men to take such companions, he will with a little labour
presently bring them to any iniquity.

7. Seventhly, But his highest project in order to the enticing of
men, is to _engage their affections to a height and passionateness_.
The Scripture doth distinguish betwixt the ἐπιθυμίας and παθήματα,
the affections and lusts, Gal. v. 24; clearly implying that the way
to procure fixed desires and actual lustings, is to procure those
passionate workings of the mind.

How powerful a part of his design this is, will appear from the nature
of these passions: which are,

[1.] First, _Violent motions of the heart_; the very wings and sails
of the soul, and every passion, in its own working, doth express a
violence.[187] Choler is an earnest rage; voluptuousness is nothing
less; fear is a desperate hurry of the soul; ‘love strong as death;
jealousy cruel as the grave;’ each of them striving which should excel
in violence, so that it is a question yet undetermined which passion
may challenge the superiority.

[2.] Secondly, _Their fury is dangerous and unbridled_; like so many
wild horses let loose, hurrying their rider which way they please.
They move not upon the command of reason, but oft prevent it in their
sudden rise; neither do they take reason’s advice for their course
proportionable to the occasion, for often their humour, rather than
the matter of the provocation, gives them spurs; and when they have
evaporated their heat, they cease, not as following the command of
reason, but as weakened by their own violence.

[3.] Thirdly, _They are not easily conquered_; not only because they
renew their strength and onset after a defeat, and, like so many
hydra’s heads, spring up as fast as cut off; but they are ourselves—we
can neither run from them, nor from the love of them.

[4.] Fourthly, And consequently _highly advantageous in Satan’s design
and enticement when they are driven up to a fury and passionateness_;
for besides their inward rage, which the Scripture calls burning, 1
Cor. vii. 9; Rom. i. 27, by which men are pricked and goaded on without
rest or ease, to ‘make provisions for the flesh,’ and to enjoy or act
what their unbridled violence will lead to in the execution of their
desires, they carry all on before them, and engage the whole man with
the highest eagerness ‘to fulfil every lust,’ Eph. ii. 3, to go up
to the highest degrees, and with an unsatiable greediness to yield
themselves ‘servants of iniquity unto iniquity,’ Rom. vi. 19.




