CHAPTER II.

 _Of the malice of Satan in particular.—The grounds and causes of that
 malice.—The greatness of it proved, and instances of that greatness
 given._


I shall first give some account of his malice, by which it shall appear
we do not wrong the devil in calling him malicious, the truth of which
charge will evidence itself in the following particulars:—

1. First, _The devil, though a ‘spirit,’ yet is a proper subject of
sin_. We need no other evidence for this than what doth by daily
experience result from ourselves. We have sins which our spirits and
hearts do act, that relate not to the body, called ‘a filthiness of
the spirit,’ in contradistinction to the ‘filthiness of the flesh,’
[2 Cor. vii. 1.] It is true, it cannot be denied but that those
iniquities which have a necessary dependence upon the organs of the
body, as drunkenness, fornication, &c., cannot properly, as to the
formality of the act, be laid at Satan’s door, though as a tempter and
provoker of these men he may be called the father of these sins; yet
the fore-mentioned iniquities, which are of a spiritual nature, are
properly and formally committed by him, as lying, pride, hatred, and
malice. And this distinction Christ himself doth hint: John viii. 44,
‘When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own,’ where he asserts
such spiritual sins to be properly and formally acted by himself. The
certainty of all appears in the epithets given him—‘the wicked one,’
‘the unclean spirit;’ as also those places that speak his fall, ‘They
kept not their first estate,’ Jude 6; ‘The angels that sinned,’ 2 Peter
ii. 4. If sins spiritual are in a true and proper sense attributed to
the devil, then also may malice be attributed to him.

2. Secondly, _The wickedness of Satan is capable of increase, a magis
et minus_. Though he be a wicked spirit, and as to inclination full of
wickedness, though so strongly inclined that he cannot but sin, and
therefore as God is set forth to us as the fountain of holiness, so is
Satan called the author and father of sin, yet seeing we cannot ascribe
an infiniteness to him, we must admit that, as to acts of sin at least,
he may be more or less sinful, and that the wickedness of his heart may
be drawn more out by occasions, motives, and provocations; besides, we
are expressly taught thus much, Rev. xii. 12, ‘The devil is come down,
having great wrath, because his time is short.’ Where we note (1.) That
his wrath is called ‘great,’ implying greater than at other times; (2.)
That external motives and incentives, as the shortness of his time,
prevail with him to draw forth greater acts of fury.

3. Thirdly, _Whatsoever occasions do draw out or kindle malice to a
rage, Satan hath met with them in an eminent degree, in his own fall
and man’s happiness_.[77] Nothing is more proper to beget malice than
hurts or punishments, degradations from happiness. Satan’s curse,
though just, fills him with rage and fretting against God, when he
considers that from the state and dignity of a blessed angel he is
cast down to darkness and to the basest condition imaginable. For the
part of his curse, which concerned Satan as well as the serpent, ‘Upon
thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shall be thy meat,’ implies a state
most base, as the use of the phrase proves: ‘They shall lick the dust
of thy feet,’ Isa. xlix. 23; ‘Thine enemies shall lick the dust,’ Ps.
lxxii. 9; ‘They shall lick the dust as a serpent,’ Micah vii. 17.
Where the spirit is so wicked that it cannot accept the punishment of
its iniquity, all punishment is as a poison, and envenoms the heart
with a rage against the hand that afflicted it. Thus doth Satan’s fall
enrage him, and the more when he sees man enstated into a possibility
of enjoying what he hath lost. The envy and pride of his heart boils up
to a madness—for that is the only use that the wretchedly miserable can
make of the sight of that happiness which they enjoy not, especially
if, having once enjoyed it, they are now deprived. This begot the rage
and wrath in Cain against Abel, and afterward his murder. The eye of
the wicked is evil where God is good. Hence may it be concluded that
Satan, being a wicked spirit, and this wickedness being capable of
acting higher or lower according to occasions, and with a suitableness
thereto, cannot but shew an inconceivable malice against us, our
happiness and his misery being such proper occasions for the wickedness
of his heart to work upon.

4. Fourthly, _This malice in Satan must be great_.

(1.) First, _If we consider the greatness of his wickedness in so
great and total an apostasy_. He is so filled with iniquity, that
we can expect no small matters from him as to the workings of such
cursed principles; not only is he wicked, but the spirit and extract
of wickedness, as the phrase signifies, Eph. vi. 12, [πνευματικὰ τῆς
πονηρίας.]

(2.) Secondly, _The Scripture lays to his charge all degrees, acts,
and branches of malice_; as [1.] Anger, _in the impetuous haste and
violence of it_. Rev. xii. 12, ‘Great wrath,’ θυμός, there signifies
_excandescentia_, the inflammation of the heart and whole man, which is
violent in its motion, as when the blood with a violent stream rusheth
through the heart and sets all spirits on fire; and therefore this
wrath is not only called great, but is also signified to be so, in its
threatening ‘a woe to the inhabitants of the earth.’ [2.] _Indignation_
is more than anger, as having more of a fixed fury; and this is applied
to him, Eph. iv. 27, in that those that have this παροργισμὸς, are
said ‘to give place to the devil,’ which is true not only in point of
temptation, but also in respect of the resemblance they carry to the
frame and temper of Satan’s furious heart. [3.] _Hatred_ is yet higher
than wrath or indignation, as having deeper roots, a more confirmed and
implacable resolution. Anger and indignation are but short furies, _ira
brevis furor_, which, like a land-flood, are soon down, though they are
apt to fill the banks on a sudden; but hatred is lasting, and this is
so properly the devil’s disposition, that Cain, in hating his brother,
is [in] 1 John iii. 12 said to be the proper offspring and lively
picture of that ‘wicked one,’ who is there so called rather than by the
name of the devil, because the apostle would also insinuate that hatred
is the masterpiece of Satan’s wickedness, and that which gives the
fullest character of him. [4.] All effects of his cruelty arise from
this root; this makes him accuse and calumniate, this puts him upon
breathing after those murders and destructions which damned spirits are
now groaning under.

(3.) Thirdly, _This malice is the result of that curse laid upon
Satan_: Gen. iii. 15, ‘I will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman,
betwixt her seed and thy seed.’ Which implies, [1.] A _great enmity_;
and some render it _inimicitias implacabiles_, implacable enmities.
[2.] A _lasting enmity_, such as should continue as long as the curse
should last. [3.] That this should be _his work and exorcise_, to
prosecute and be prosecuted with this enmity; so that it shews the
devil’s whole mind and desire is in this work, and that he is whetted
on by the opposing enmity which he meets withal. It is the work of his
curse, of his place, of his revenge, and that wherein all the delight
he is capable of is placed. In that part of the curse, ‘Dust shall be
thy meat,’ it is implied, if some interpret right,[78] that if Satan
can be said to have any delight or ease in his condition, it is in the
eating of this dust, the exercise of this enmity. No wonder, then,
if Christ speak of his desires and solicitations with God to have a
liberty and commission for this work: ‘Satan hath desired to have thee,
that he may winnow thee,’ [Luke xxii. 31.]

That this curse relates not only to the serpent, who was the
instrument, but also to Satan, who was the agent, is agreed by all
almost. That it was not the serpent alone, but the devil speaking by
it, is evinced from its speaking and reasoning. And that the curse
reached further than a natural enmity betwixt a serpent and a man,
is as evident, in that Christ is expressly held forth as giving the
full accomplishment of this curse against Satan: 1 John iii. 8, ‘The
devil sinneth from the beginning; for this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil,’ which is
a clear exposition and paraphrasis of the ‘woman’s seed bruising the
serpent’s head.’

(4.) Fourthly, _I shall add to this some few instances of Satan’s
malice, by which it will appear to be great_.

[1.] First, That malice must needs be great _which shews itself where
there is such a load of anguish and horror that lies upon him_. He is
now ‘reserved in chains of darkness in hell,’ 2 Peter ii. 4. He is in
hell, a place of torment; or, which is all one, hell is in him. He
carries it about him in his conscience, which, by God’s decree, binds
him to his horror like a chain. It is scarce imaginable that he should
have a thought free from the contemplation of his own misery, to spend
in a malicious pursuit of man. What can we think less of it than a
desperate madness and revenge against God, wherein he shews his rage
against heaven, and hunts after our blood as for a little water to cool
his tongue; and when he finds his hand too short to pull the Almighty
out of his throne, he endeavours, panther-like, to tear his image in
man, and to put man, created after his image, upon blaspheming and
dishonouring his Maker.

[2.] Secondly, That malice must needs be great that _seeks its own
fuel, and provides or begs its own occasions, and those such as give
no proper provocation to his anger_. Of this temper is his malice. He
did thus with Job: he begs the commission, calumniates Job upon unjust
surmises, presseth still for a further power to hurt him, insomuch
that God expressly stints and bounds him—which shews how boundless he
would have been if left to his own will—and gives him at last an open
check, Job ii. 3, wherein he lays open the malice of his heart in three
things: [1.] His own pressing urgency: ‘Thou movedst me;’ [2.] His
destructive fury: no less would serve than Job’s utter destruction;
[3.] Job’s innocency: all this without cause: ‘Thou movedst me to
destroy him without cause.’

[3.] Thirdly, That malice must needs be great that _will pursue a small
matter_. What small game will the devil play rather than altogether sit
out! If he can but trouble, or puzzle, or affright, yet that he will
do, rather than nothing; if he can, like an adder in the path, but
bite the heel, [Gen. xlix. 17,] though his head be bruised for it, he
will notwithstanding busy himself in it.

[4.] Fourthly, That malice must be great which will _put itself
forth where it knows it can prevail nothing, but is certain of a
disappointment_. Thus did Satan tempt Christ. Those speeches, ‘if thou
be the Son of God,’ do not imply any doubt in Satan; he knew what
was prophesied of Christ, and what had been declared from heaven in
testification of him, so that he could not but be certain he was God
and man; and yet what base unworthy temptations doth he lay before him,
as ‘to fall down and worship him’! Was it that Satan thought to prevail
against him? No surely; but such was his malice, that he would put an
affront upon him, though he knew he could not prevail against him.

[5.] Fifthly, _The malice of wicked men is an argument of Satan’s great
malice_. They have an antipathy against the righteous, as the wolf
against the sheep, and upon that very ground, that they are ‘called
out of the world.’ How great this fury is, all ages have testified.
This hath brought forth discord, revilings, slanders, imprisonments,
spoiling of goods, banishments, persecutions, tortures, cruel deaths,
as burning, racking, tearing, sawing asunder, and whatever the wit
of man could devise for a satisfaction to those implacable, furious,
murderous minds; and yet all this is done to men of the same image and
lineage with themselves, of the same religion with themselves, as to
the main; nay, sometime to men of their own kindred, their own flesh
and blood, and all to those that would live peaceably in the land. What
shall we say to these things? How come men to put on a savage nature,
to act the part of lions, leopards, tigers, if not much worse? The
reason of all we have, John viii. 54, ‘Ye are of your father the devil;
he was a murderer from the beginning:’ as also Gen. iii. 15, ‘I will
put enmity between her seed and thy seed so that all this shews what
malice is in Satan’s heart, who urgeth and provokes his instruments to
such bloody hatreds. Hence whoever were the agents [Rev. ii. 10] in
imprisoning the saints, the malice of Satan in stirring them up to it,
makes him become the author of it; ‘Satan shall cast some of you into
prison.’




