CHAPTER XVII.

 _Satan’s deceits against religious services and duties.—The grounds
 of his displeasure against religious duties.—His first design against
 duties is to prevent them.—His several subtleties for that end, by
 external hindrances, by indispositions bodily and spiritual, by
 discouragements; the ways thereof, by dislike; the grounds thereof, by
 sophistical arguings.—His various pleas therein._


Our next work is to take notice of the spite and methods of the serpent
against the ways of worship and service. That these are things against
which his heart carries a high fury, and for the overthrow of them
employs no small part of his power and subtlety, needs no proof, seeing
the experience of all the children of God is an irresistible evidence
in this matter. I shall therefore first only set forth the grounds of
his displeasure and earnest undertakings against them, before I come to
his particular ways of deceit, which are these:—

1. First, By this means, if he prevail, _he deprives us of our
weapons_. This is a stratagem of war which we find the Philistines
practised against Israel: they took away all their smiths, lest the
Hebrews should make them swords or spears; hence was it that in the
battle there was ‘neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of
the people that were with Saul and Jonathan,’ 1 Sam. xiii. 19, 22. The
word of God is expressly called ‘the sword of the Spirit,’ [Eph. vi.
17.] Prayer is as a spear, or rather a general piece of armour. If the
devil deprive us of these, he robs us of our ammunition; for by reason
of these the church is compared to ‘a tower built for an armoury,
wherein hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men,’ Cant. iv.
4; and the apostle expressly calls them ‘weapons of our warfare,’ 2
Cor. x. 4, of purpose given us for ‘the pulling down of strongholds,’
and the demolishing of those forts and batteries of ‘high imaginations’
that Satan rears up in the hearts of men against their happiness. If
these be taken away, our locks are cut, as Samson’s were, our strength
is departed, and we become weak as other men, [Judges xvi. 17,]—we are
open to every incursion and inroad that he pleaseth to make against us.

2. Secondly, If he hinders these, _he intercepts our food and cuts
off our provisions_. The word is called ‘milk, sincere milk of the
word.’ It is that by which we are born, nourished, and increase; it
is our cordial and comfort. Christ indeed is ‘the bread of life,’ and
the fountain of all our consolations, but the word and prayer are the
conduit pipes that convey all to us. If these be cut, we ‘fade as a
leaf,’ we languish, we consume and waste, we become as a ‘skin-bottle
in the smoke,’ ‘our moisture as the drought in summer,’ our ‘soul
fainteth,’ ‘our heart faileth, and we become as those that go down
to the pit’; so that if the devil gain his design in this, he hath
all. Give him this, and give him the kingdom also. This is the most
compendious way of doing his work, and that which saves him a labour in
his temptations. The strongest holds, that cannot otherwise be taken,
are easily subdued by famine; and, like fig-trees with their ripe figs
when they are shaken, ‘even fall into the mouth of the eater,’ Nahum
iii. 12. If our spiritual food fail us, of our own accord we yield up
ourselves to any lust that requires our compliance.

3. Thirdly, Besides these, there is no design whereby Satan can shew
_more malice and spite against God_. He doth all he can to maintain a
competition with the Almighty. His titles of ‘the god of the world,’
‘the prince of the power of the air,’ shew what in the pride of his
heart he aspires to, as well as what by commission God is pleased to
grant him. These duties of worship and service are the homage of God’s
children, by which they testify the acknowledgments of his deity. By
wresting these out of our hands, Satan robs God of that honour, and
makes the allegiance of his servants to cease. If he could do more
against God, doubtless he would; but seeing he hath not ‘an arm like
God,’ and so cannot pull him out of heaven, by this means he sets up
himself as the god of the world, and enlargeth his territories, and
staves off the subjects of the God of heaven from giving him ‘the
honour due to his name;’ and that the devil in these endeavours is
carried on by a spite against God, as well as by an earnest desire of
the ruin of souls, may be abundantly evidenced by his way of management
of that opposition that he gives to the duties of service and worship.
I shall only, to make out this, instance in three things:—(1.) That
where the devil prevails to set up himself as an object of worship,
there he doth it in a bold, insolent, presumptuous imitation of God’s
appointments in the ways of his service. He enjoins covenants, seals,
sacrifices, prayers, and services to his miserable slaves, as may
appear by undoubted histories, of which more in due place. (2.) He
never acknowledgeth the truth of God’s ways, but with an evil mind and
upon design to bring them under contempt. His confessions have so much
of deceit in them that Christ would not accept them; and therefore we
read that when the devil was sometime forward to give his testimony
to Christ, as Mark i. 25, ‘I know thee who thou art, the Holy One
of God,’ Jesus rebuked him, and commanded him to hold his peace. He
clearly saw that he confessed him not to honour him, but by such a
particular acknowledgment to stir up the rage and fury of the people
against him. To this end Satan, in Acts xvi. 17, many days together
publicly owns Paul and Silas, ‘These men are the servants of the most
high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation.’ Though he spake
truth, yet had he a malicious aim in it, which he accordingly brought
about by this means; and that was to raise up persecution against
them, and to give ground to that accusation which they afterwards met
withal; ver. 21, ‘That they taught customs which were not lawful to
be received.’ But (3.) his particular spite against God in seeking to
undermine his service is further manifested in this, that the devil
is not content to root out the service due to God, but when he hath
done that, he delights to abuse those places where the name of God
was most celebrated, with greatest profanations. I shall not in this
insist upon the conjecture of Tilenus,[198] that _Sylva Dodonœa_, a
place highly abused by the devil, and respected for an oracle, was the
seat or a religious place of Dodanim, mentioned in Gen. x. 4; nor upon
that supposal, mentioned also by the same author, that the oracle of
Jupiter Hammon was the place where Cham [Ham] practised that religious
worship which he learned in his father’s house. We have at hand more
certain evidences of the devil’s spite. Such was his abuse of the
tabernacle by the profane sons of Eli, who profaned that place with
their uncleanness and filthy adulteries. Such was his carriage to the
ark while it was captivated by the Philistines. Of like nature were
his attempts against the temple itself. Solomon in his latter days was
tempted to give an affront to it: he built a high place for Chemosh,
the abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, 1 Kings
xi. 7, in the very sight and face of the temple; but afterward he
prepared to defile the temple itself. Gilgal and Beth-aven are places
of such high profanation, that the prophet Hosea, chap. ix. 15, tells
them ‘all their wickedness was in Gilgal,’ none of their abominations
were like to those; and in chap. iv. 15, they are dehorted from going
to Gilgal or Beth-aven; and yet both these places had been famous for
religion before.[199] Gilgal was the place of the general circumcision
of the Israelites that were born in the wilderness; there was their
first solemn passover kept after their entering into the land. Bethel
was a place where God as it were kept house, ‘the house of God.’ Here
Jacob had his vision. But the more famous they had been for duties of
worship, the devil sought to put higher abuses upon them, so that
Gilgal became ‘an hatred,’ and Bethel became a Beth-aven, ‘an house of
vanity.’

4. Fourthly, Satan is the more animated to undertake a design against
the ways of religious service, because _he seldom or never misseth at
least something of success_. This attempt is like Saul and Jonathan’s
bow, that ‘returned not empty,’ [2 Sam. i. 22.] In other temptations
sometimes Satan comes off baffled altogether, but in this work, as
it was said of some Israelites, ‘he can throw a stone at an hair’s
breadth, and not miss,’ Judges xx. 16. He is sure in one thing or
other to have the better of us. His advantage in this case is from our
unsuitableness to our service. What we do in the duties of worship,
requires a choice frame of spirit. Our hearts should be awed with the
most serious apprehensions of divine majesty, filled with reverence,
animated with love and delight, quickened by faith, clothed with
humility and self-abhorrency, and in all the procedure of duties
there must be a steady and firm prosecution under the strictest
watchfulness. Of this nature is our work, which at the first view would
put a man to a stand, and out of amazement force him to say, ‘Who is
sufficient for these things? who can stand before such an holy Lord
God?’ But when we come to an impartial consideration of our manifold
weaknesses and insufficiencies in reference to these services, what
shall we say? we find such a narrowness of spirit, such ignorances,
sottishness, carelessness of mind, thoughts so confused, tumultuous,
fickle, slippery, and unconstant, and our hearts generally so deceitful
and desperately wicked, that it is not possible that Satan should
altogether labour in vain or catch nothing. This being then a sure
gain, we may expect it to be under a most constant practice.

5. Fifthly, If he so prevails against us that the services of worship
become _grossly abused or neglected, then doth he put us under the
greatest hazards and disadvantages_. Nothing so poisonous as duties
of worship corrupted; for this is to abuse God to his face. By this,
not only are his commands and injunctions slighted, as in other sins,
but we carry it so as if we thought him no better than the idols of
the heathens, that have ‘eyes and see not, that have ears and hear
not.’ To come without a heart, or with our idols in our heart, is it
anything of less scorn than to say, ‘Tush, doth the Most High see?’
Besides, he hath given such severe cautions and commands in these
matters as will easily signify the aggravation of the offence. You see
how sharply God speaks of those that came to inquire of the Lord with
‘the stumbling-block of their iniquity before their face,’ Ezek. xiv.
4, 7, ‘I will answer them according to the multitude of their idols; I
will answer them by myself.’ Saul’s miscarriage in offering sacrifice,
1 Sam. xiii. 13, was that great offence for which God determined to
take the kingdom from him. God’s severity against Nadab and Abihu,
his stroke upon Uzziah, do all shew the hazard of such profanations.
But, above all, that danger which both Old and New Testament speak
of—the hardening of the heart, blinding the eyes, dulling the ears,
that men should not hear nor see nor be converted and saved, but that
the word should, instead of those cordial refreshing smells which
beget and promote spiritual life in the obedient, breathe forth such
envenomed, poisonous exhalations when it is thus abused and profaned,
that it becomes ‘the savour of death unto death’—is most dreadful. No
wonder, then, if Satan be very busy against these holy things, when,
if he catch us at an advantage of this nature, it proves so deadly and
dangerous to us; for what can more please him that makes it his delight
and employment to destroy?

All these reasons evince that Satan hath an aching tooth against
religious services, and that to weaken, prevent, or overthrow them is
his great endeavour. Here then especially may we expect an assault,
according to the advice of Sirach: Ecclus. ii. 1, 2, ‘My son, when
thou enterest God’s service, stand fast in righteousness and fear, and
prepare thy soul for temptation.’

What are the subtleties of Satan against the holy things of God, I am
next to discover. Duties and services are opposed two ways: (1.) _By
prevention_, when they are hindered. (2.) _By corruption_, when they
are spoiled. He hath his arts and cunning, which he exerciseth in both
these regards:—

1. First, then, Of Satan’s policy for the preventing of religious
services. He endeavours by various means to hinder them. As,

(1.) First, _By external hindrances_. In this he hath a very great
foresight, and accordingly he foresees occasions and opportunities
at a distance, and by a long reach of contrivance he studies to lay
blocks and hindrances in the way. Much he doth in the dark for this
end that we know not. As God hath ‘secrets of wisdom that are double
to that which is known,’ Job xi. 6, so also hath Satan many ways and
actings that are not discerned by us. His contrivances of businesses
and avocations long aforehand are not so observed by us as they might
be. Where he misseth of his end it comes not to light, and often
where he is successful in his preventions we are ready to ascribe it
to contingencies and the accidental hits of affairs, when indeed the
hand and policy of Satan is in it. Paul, that was highly studied and
skilful in Satan’s devices, observing how his purposes of coming to
the Thessalonians were often broken and obstructed, he knew where the
blame lay, and therefore instead of laying the fault upon sickness, or
imprisonments, or the oppositions of false brethren—which often made
him trouble beyond expectation—he directly chargeth all upon Satan:
1 Thes. ii. 18, ‘We would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and
again, but Satan hindered us.’ At the same rate, understanding the
purposes of faithful men for the promoting the good of men’s souls, he
often useth means to stop or hinder them. Some have observed, having a
watchful and jealous eye over Satan, that their resolves and endeavours
of this nature have usually been put to struggle sore in their birth
when their purposes for worldly affairs and matters go smoothly on
without considerable opposition.

(2.) Secondly, He makes use of indispositions to hinder service; and
here he works sometimes upon the body, sometimes upon the soul, for
both may be indisposed.

[1.] First, Sometimes he takes the advantage of _bodily
indispositions_. He doth all he can to create and frame these upon us,
and then pleads them as a discharge to duty. If he can put the body
into a fit of drowsiness or distemper, he will do it: and surely he
can do more this way than every one will believe—he may agitate and
stir the humours. Hence some have observed more frequent and stronger
fits of sleepiness and illness to come upon them on the days and times
that require their attendance upon God, than on other days; when they
shall be lively, active, and free of dulness upon common occasions—at
sports, songs, interludes—when they shall not have the like command
of themselves in the exercises of worship. Surely it was more than an
ordinary drowsiness that befell the apostles, Mat. xxvi. 41. He had
told them the seriousness of the occasion, that he was ‘betrayed,’
that his ‘soul was exceeding sorrowful even to the death:’ these were
considerations that might have kept their eyes from slumber. When they
sleep, he awakens them with a piercing rebuke, ‘Could ye not watch with
me one hour?’ and adds to this an admonition of their own danger, and
the temptation that was upon them, and yet presently they are asleep
again, and after that again. Strange drowsiness! But he gives an
excuse for them, which also tells us the cause of it: the ‘spirit is
willing’—their hearts were not altogether unconcerned—‘but the flesh,’
that is, the body, that was ‘weak’—that is, subject to be abused by
Satan, who brought them into a more than ordinary indisposition, as is
noted ver. 43, ‘their eyes were heavy.’

[2.] Secondly, _The soul hath also its indispositions_, which he
readily improves against duty to hinder it. As,

_First_, It is capable of _a spiritual sluggishness and dulness_,
wherein the spiritual senses are so bound up, that it considers not,
minds not, hath no list nor inclination to acts of service. What a
stupefaction are our spirits capable of! as David in his adultery seems
not to mind nor care what he had done. In like manner are some in a
lethargy; as the prophet speaks, they ‘care not to seek after God.’
Bernard hath a description of it: _Contrahitur animus, subtrahitur
gratia, defervescit novitius fervor, ingravescit torpor fastidiosus_,
The spirit is contracted, grace withdrawn, fervour abates, sluggishness
draws on, and then duties are neglected.

_Secondly_, The spirit is indisposed by _a throng of worldly affairs,
and these oft jostle out duty_. Christ tells us they have the same
influence upon men that gluttony and drunkenness have, and these unfit
men for action. ‘Take heed,’ saith Luke xxi. 34, ‘to yourselves, lest
at any time your heart be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness,
and the cares of this life.’ These then may at so high a rate
overcharge the souls of men so as to make them frame excuses: ‘I have
bought a farm or oxen,’ and therefore ‘I cannot attend;’ and by this
means may they grow so neglective that the ‘day of the Lord may come
upon them at unawares.’

_Thirdly_, Sometimes the soul is _discomposed through passion_, and
then it is indisposed, which opportunity the devil espying, he closeth
in with it. Sometime he ‘blows the fire,’ that the heat of anger may
put them upon a carelessness. Sometimes he pleads their present frame
as an unfitness for service, and so upon a pretence of reverence to
the service, and ‘leaving the gift at the altar’ till they be in a
better humour, many times the gift is not offered at all, 1 Pet. iii.
7. The apostle directs husbands to manage their authority over their
wives with prudence, for the avoiding of brawls and contentions: ‘Ye
husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honour to the
wife as the weaker vessel;’ the reason of which advice he gives in
these words, ‘that your prayers be not hindered.’ Prayers are hindered
partly in their success when they prevail not, partly they are hindered
when the duty of prayer is put by and suspended; and this doubtless
the apostle aims at, to teach us that contentious quarrellings in a
family hinder the exercise of the duty of prayer. Elisha, 2 Kings iii.,
discomposed himself in his earnest reproof of Jehoram, for with great
vehemency he had spoken to him: ver. 13, 14, ‘What have I to do with
thee? get thee to the prophets of thy father. Were it not that I regard
the presence of Jehoshaphat, I would not look toward thee, nor see
thee.’ But when he set himself to receive the visions of God, he calls
for a minstrel, ver. 15, the reason whereof, as P[eter] Martyr and
others suppose,[200] was this, that however what he spake to Jehoram
proceeded from zeal, yet being but a man, and subject to the like
infirmities of other men, it had distracted and discomposed his spirit,
which made him unfit and uncapable to entertain the visions of God.
Music then being a natural means for the composure and quiet of the
mind, he takes that course to calm and fit himself for that work.

_Fourthly, Ignorance and prejudice are spiritual indispositions_, which
are not neglected by the devil. Knowledge is the eye and guide of the
soul. If there be darkness there, all acts which depend upon better
instruction must cease. The disciples’ ignorance of Scriptures brought
in their unbelief. Christ notes that as the fountainhead of all their
backwardness: Luke xxiv. 25, ‘O fools, and slow of heart to believe all
that the prophets have spoken.’ In like manner, if men are not clear
or knowing in the ways and necessities of duty and service, the devil
can easily prevail with them to forbear and neglect. Prejudice riseth
up to justify the disregard of duty, and offers reasons which it thinks
cannot be answered.

(3.) Thirdly, Satan endeavours to prevent duty _by discouragements_.
If he can make the ‘knees feeble,’ and the ‘hands hang down,’ he will
quickly cause activity and motion to cease. The ways by which he
endeavours to discourage men from the duties of service are these:—

[1.] First, He sets before them _the toil and burden of duty_. If a man
sets his face toward heaven, thus he endeavours to scare him off: Is
not, saith he, the way of religion a dull, melancholy way? Is it not
a toil—a tedious task? Are not these unreasonable injunctions: ‘Pray
continually,’ ‘Pray without ceasing,’ ‘Preach in season and out of
season’? This suggestion, though it be expressly contrary to command,
yet being so suitable to the idle and sluggish tempers of men, they
are the more apt to take notice of it, and accordingly they seek ways
and shifts of accommodating the command to their inclinations. In Amos
viii. 5, the toil of sabbaths and festival services, as they thought
it, makes them weary of the duty, ‘When will the new moon be gone, that
we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat?’ These
men thought their services tedious and entrenching upon their callings
and occupations: Mal. i. 13, ‘They said, Behold, what a weariness is
it!’ looking upon it as an insufferable burden, nay they proceeded
so far as to snuff at it. Now when the devil had so far prevailed
with them, it was easy to put them upon neglect; which, as the place
cited speaks, presently followed upon it, they ‘brought the torn, and
the lame, and the sick for a sacrifice.’ Satan first presented these
services as a wearisome burden, then they snuffed at them; next they
thought any service good enough, how mean soever, though to an open
violation of the law of worship; and lastly, from a pollution of the
table of the Lord they proceeded to a plain contempt of duty, ‘the
table of the Lord is polluted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat
is contemptible,’ ver. 12. In the management of this discouragement,
the devil hath most success upon those that have not yet tasted the
sweetness and easiness of the ways of the Lord, ‘his yoke is indeed
easy, his burden is light;’ his service is a true freedom to those that
are acquainted with God, and exercised in his service. But when men are
first beginning to look after God and duty, and are not yet filled and
‘satisfied with the fatness of his house,’ this temptation hath the
greater force upon them, and they are apt to be discouraged thereby.

[2.] Secondly, He endeavours to discourage them, from _the want of
success in the duties of worship_. When they have waited long and
sought the Lord, then he puts them upon resolves of declining any
further prosecution, as he did with Joram at the siege of Samaria; ‘Why
wait I upon the Lord any longer?’ 2 Kings vi. 33, said he, after he
had expected deliverance a long time without any appearance of help.
When Saul saw that God ‘answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by
Urim, nor by prophets,’ 1 Sam. xxviii. 6, 7, the devil easily persuaded
him to leave off the ordinary ways of attendance upon God, and to
consult with the witch of Endor. The profane persons mentioned in Mal.
iii. 14, that had cast off all regard to his laws, all respect to his
ordinances, were brought to this pitch of iniquity by the suggestions
of want of success; they said, ‘It is vain to serve God: and what
profit is it that we have kept his ordinances, and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of hosts?’ It seems they were like the
people spoken of in Isa. lviii. 2, 3: they had fasted and prayed, and
God delayed to answer them, which they looked upon as a disobligement
from duty, and that which they could peremptorily insist upon as a
reason which might justify their neglect. ‘Wherefore have we fasted,
say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and
thou takest no knowledge?’ Neither doth this discouragement fall heavy
only upon those whose hearts are departed already from God, who might
be supposed to be forward to embrace any excuse from his service; but
we shall find it bears hard upon the children of God. David was ready
to give over all, as a man forsaken of God: Ps. xxii. 1, 2, ‘Why hast
thou forsaken me? O my God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hearest not;
and in the night season, and am not silent.’ We may clearly gather from
his expressions that this temptation had sorely bruised him, and that
upon God’s delay of answer, he was ready to charge an unrighteousness
upon God’s carriage toward him; for in that he adds that he kept his
ground, and did not consent to it—as the words following, ‘But thou
continuest holy,’ do imply—it shewed what the devil was objecting to
him. And elsewhere, in Ps. lxix. 3, when he had cried and was not
answered, he began to be ‘weary, and his eyes failed; nay, his flesh
and heart failed;’ his spirit sunk, as a man almost vanquished and
overcome with the temptation.

[3.] Thirdly, This our adversary raiseth up discouragements to us
from _the unsuitableness of our hearts to our services_. Herein he
endeavours to deaden our hearts, to clog our spirits, to hinder and
molest us, and then he improves these indispositions and discomposures
against the duty, in which he hath a double advantage; for (1.) He
deprives us of that delight in duty which should whet on our desires
to undertake it, so that we come to the Lord’s table as old Barzillai,
without a taste or relish of what we eat or drink. When we come to
hear, ‘the ear that trieth words,’ as the palate tasteth meat, finds
no savour in what is spoken; and this Satan can easily do by the
inward deadness or disquiet of the heart, even as the anguish of
diseases takes away all pleasures which the choicest dainties afford;
as Job observes, ‘When a man is chastened with pain upon his bed,
his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat,’ chap. xxxiii. 20.
And when a man is brought to loathe his duties, as having nothing of
that sweetness and satisfaction in them which is everywhere spoken
of, a small temptation may put him upon neglect of them. (2.) He hath
plausible and colourable arguments by which he formeth an opinion in
the minds of men, that in cases of indisposition they may do better
to forbear than to proceed. He tells them they ought not to pray or
present any service while they are so indisposed, that no prayer is
acceptable where the Spirit doth not enliven the heart and raise the
affections; that they do but take his name in vain, and increase their
sin, and that they should wait till the Spirit fill their sails: and
to say the truth, it is a great difficulty for a child of God to hold
his feet in such slippery places. How many have I known complaining of
this, and persuading themselves verily that they might do far better
to leave off all service than to perform them thus! And scarcely
have I restrained them from a compliance with Satan, by telling them
that indispositions are no bar to duty, but that duty is the way to
get our indispositions cured; that duty is absolutely required, and
dispositions to be endeavoured; and that it is a less offence to keep
to duty under indispositions, than wholly upon that pretence to neglect
it; and indeed, where these indispositions are bemoaned and striven
with, the services are often more acceptable to God than pleasing to
ourselves. The principle is truly spiritual and excellent, a foundation
of sapphires and precious stones, upon which, if we patiently wait,
he will build a palace of silver; for that service is more spiritual
that is bottomed and carried on by a conscientious regard to a command,
when there are no moral motives from sense and comfort concurring, than
that which hath more of delight to encourage it, while the power of the
command is less swaying and influential.

[4.] Fourthly, Men are oft discouraged from _a sense of unworthiness of
the privilege of duty, a kind of excess of humility_, which principally
relates to the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, and prayer. The accuser
of the brethren tells them that they have nothing to do to take the
name of God in their mouths; that it is an insufferable presumption.
Hence some, like the woman with the bloody issue, dare not come to
Christ to ask a cure, while yet they earnestly desire it, and would
rather, if they could, privately steal it than openly beg it. The
publican [Luke xviii. 10, _seq._] is presented to us in the parable
as one that could scarce get over that objection. He is set forth
standing at a ‘distance, not daring to lift up his eyes to heaven;’
scarce attempting to speak, rather expressing his unworthiness to
pray, than setting upon the duty; his ‘smiting upon his breast,’ and
saying, ‘God be merciful to me a sinner,’ argued that much of these
discouragements lay upon him. The like we may see in the prodigal, who
it seems had it long in dispute whether he should go to his father,
whose kindness he had so abused; and so long as he could make any other
shift he yielded to the temptation: at last he came to that resolve, ‘I
will arise and go to my father, and say, I have sinned against heaven,
and thee, and am not worthy to be called thy son.’ Which shew that
the sense of this kept him off till necessity forced him over it. And
this is a discouragement the more likely to prevail for a neglect of
service, because part of it is necessary, as the beginning of those
convictions of our folly: to have such low thoughts of ourselves that
we are not worthy to come into his presence, nor to look toward him,
is very becoming; but to think that we should not come to him because
our conscience accuseth of unworthiness, is a conclusion of Satan’s
making, and such as God never intended from the premises, but the
direct contrary. Come, saith God, though unworthy. The like course doth
the devil take to keep men off from the Lord’s table. Oh, saith he, it
is a very solemn ordinance; he that partaketh of it unworthily, eateth
and drinketh damnation to himself. How darest thou make such bold
approaches? While the hearts of men are tender, their consciences quick
and accusing, the threatening begets a fear, and they are driven off
long, and debar themselves unnecessarily from their mercies.

(4.) Fourthly, Satan endeavours to hinder duty by bringing them into _a
dislike and loathing of duty_. This is a course most effectual. Dislike
easily bringeth forth aversation, and withal doth strongly fix the mind
in purposes of neglect and refusal. The devil bringeth this about many
ways; as,

[1.] First, _By reproaches and ignominious terms_. It was an old trick
of the wicked one to raise up nicknames and scoffs against the ways of
God’s service, thereby to beget an odium in the hearts of men against
them. ‘The seat of the scornful’ is a chair that Satan had reared up
from the beginning. By this art—when ‘God was known in Jewry, and
his name was great in Israel’—were the heathens kept off from laying
hold on the covenant of God. He rendered them and the ordinances of
worship ridiculous to the nations. The opprobrium of circumcision, and
their unreasonable faith, as the heathens thought it, upon things not
seen, was a proverb in every man’s mouth, _Credat Judœus Apella—non
ego_.[201] The Jews were slandered with the yearly sacrifice of a
Grecian. And Apion affirms that Antiochus found such a one in a bed in
the temple; and that they worshipped an ass’s head in the temple. Apion
slandered the Jews with ulcers in their privy parts every seventh day;
hence he derives _sabbath_, of _sabatosis_, which with the Egyptians
signifies an ulcer.[202]

Lysimachus slandered the Jews in Egypt as leprous church-robbers; and
that their city was hence called _Hierosola_.[203] When the Gentiles
were called into the fellowship of the gospel, it was aspersed with the
like scoffs and flouts. It was frequently called a sect, a babbling
and strange and uncouth doctrine, Acts xxviii. 22; besides a great
many lies and forgeries that were invented to make it seem odious;
and by this means it was ‘everywhere spoken against,’ Acts xvii.
18, 20. Machiavel, that propounded the policy of full and violent
calumniations to render an adversary odious, knowing that how unjust
soever they were, yet some impression of jealousy and suspicion would
remain, had learned it of this old accuser, who had often and long
experienced it to be a prevalent course, to bring the services of
God under dislike, _Calumniare fortiter; aliquid adhœrebit_. David,
speaking of what befell himself in this kind, Ps. lxix. 9-12, that his
zeal lay under reproach; his weeping and fasting became a proverb; and
that in all these he was ‘the song of the drunkard,’ he expresseth
such apprehensions of the power of this temptation upon the weak,
that he doth earnestly beg that Satan might not make it a snare to
them: ver. 6, ‘Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts,
be ashamed for my sake: let not those that seek thee be confounded
for my sake.’ And further declares it, as a wonderful preservation
and escape of this danger, that notwithstanding these reproaches, he
had not declined his duty: ver. 13, ‘But as for me, my prayer is unto
thee, Lord.’ Paul seems to speak his sense of this piece of policy;
his imprisonment administered matter of reproach to his profession.
Though his cause were good, yet he suffered trouble as ‘an evil-doer,’
2 Tim. ii. 9. This he knew the devil would improve to a shame and
disgrace unto the service of God, and therefore he chargeth Timothy
to be aware of that temptation: 2 Tim. i. 8, ‘Be not thou therefore
ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner.’ And ver.
16, he takes notice of Onesiphorus, that had escaped that snare, and
was not ‘ashamed of his chain.’ And we have the greater reason to fear
the danger of this art, when we find that the tempter made use of it
to turn away the affections of the Capernaumites from Christ himself:
Mat. xiii. 57, when he had preached in their synagogues to the applause
and astonishment of all his hearers, the devil, fearing the prevalency
of his doctrine, finds out this shift to bring them to a dislike of
him and his preaching: ‘Is not this the carpenter’s son? And they were
offended in him.’

[2.] Secondly, Duties are brought under dislike _by the hazards that
attend them_. The devil leaves it not untold what men shall meet with
from the world if they ‘run not with them into excess of vanity’ and
neglect. If bonds, imprisonments, banishments, hatreds, oppositions,
spoiling of goods, sufferings of all kinds will divert them, he is
sure to set all these affrightments before them; which though they
do not move some from their steadfastness—such as Daniel, whose
constancy in duty was not pierced by the fear of lions; and the three
children, who would not decline the ways of the Lord for the terror of
a fiery furnace—yet these considerations prevail with most; as Christ
notes, in those that received seed in stony places, whose joy in the
word was soon blasted, and they offended at the ways of duty, ‘when
tribulation and persecution because of the word arose,’ Mat. xiii. 21.
Christ pronouncing him blessed that should ‘not be offended in him,’
because of the dangers of his service, shews that the escape of such a
temptation is not a common mercy, Mat. xi. 6. And if we shall observe
Paul’s practice upon his first undertaking of the ministry, when ‘it
pleased God to call him to preach his Son Christ among the heathen,’
Gal. i. 16, we shall see, (1.) That he was aware of such objections as
these; (2.) That flesh and blood are apt to comply with them, and to
take notice of them; (3.) And that the best way to avoid them is to
stop the ears against them, and not to hearken to them or consult with
them; (4.) And that he that must do it to purpose, must, without delay,
immediately resolve against such hindrances; it being most difficult
for men that will be inclining to such motions, and hearkening to what
the devil offers, under pretence of self-preservation, to disengage
themselves after they have suffered their souls to take the impression.

[3.] Thirdly, _The meanness of religious appointments, as to the
outward view, is also made use of to beget a loathing of them_. In this
the devil hath this advantage, that however they are all ‘glorious
within,’ and ‘as the curtains of Solomon,’ yet are they, as to their
outward appearance, like ‘the tents of Kedar,’ without any of that
pomp and splendour which the sons of men affect and admire. Christ
himself, when he had veiled his glory by our flesh, was of no exterior
‘form or beauty.’ The ministration of his word, which is ‘the sceptre
of his kingdom,’ seems contemptible, and a very ‘foolishness to men;’
insomuch that Paul was forced to make an apology for it, in that it
wanted those outward braveries of ‘excellency of speech and wisdom,’
by shewing it was ‘glorious in its power,’ and was indeed a ‘hidden
wisdom’—though not like that ‘wisdom which the princes of wisdom’ and
philosophy affected—‘among such as were perfect,’ 1 Cor. ii. 1,4, 6.
The sacraments, both of the Old and New Testament, seemed very low and
contemptible things to a common eye; neither need we any other evidence
to shew that men are apt to disrelish them, and to entertain strange
thoughts of them upon this very account, than this, that some raise
up batteries against these ordinances upon this ground, that because
they seem low and mean to them, therefore they think it improbable
that God should have indeed appointed them to be used in the literal
sense, or that at best they are to be used as the first rudiments of
Christianity, and not enjoined upon the more grown Christians. Neither
may I altogether pass over that remarkable humour that is in some, to
give additional ornaments of outward garb and form for the greater
honour and lustre of these injunctions of Christ; so that while they
endeavour to shew their greatest respects to them, they betray their
inward thoughts to have carried some suspicion of their reality because
of their plainness; and by this means, whilst they endeavour to put
an honour upon Christ’s institutions, they really despise them, and
shew their respects to their own inventions. But that we may be further
satisfied that Satan works by this engine, let us consider that of
1 Cor. i. 23. The Jews were for signs from heaven to give a credit
and testimony to that doctrine which they would receive. The Greeks,
who were then the only people for learning, were for philosophical
speculations and disputes. Now, saith the apostle, the doctrine of
the gospel, which is the preaching of Christ crucified, because it
came not within the compass of what both these expected, therefore the
devil so wrought upon this advantage, that both contemned it; ‘It was
to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness.’ Of this
also he speaks more fully, 2 Cor. xi. 3, where he shews that the minds
of the Corinthians were ready to be corrupted with error against the
plain import of the gospel; and that which they took offence at was its
simplicity. They looked upon it as contemptible, because not containing
such gorgeous things as might suit a soaring and wanton fancy. Now
he resolves all this into a cheat of Satan, taking the advantage of
this, as he did upon Eve from the seeming inconsiderableness of the
prohibition of eating a little fruit, to persuade them that so mean a
thing as the gospel could not be of God. ‘I fear,’ saith he, ‘lest by
any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.’

[4.] Fourthly, _The sins of professors, through the craft of Satan,
beget a loathing of these holy things_. If God loathe his own
appointments, and ‘cannot bear them,’ because of the iniquities of
those that offer them, no wonder if men be tempted to disgraceful
apprehensions of them, when they observe some that pretend a high
care and deep respect for them live profanely. The sins of Eli’s sons
wrought this sad effect upon the people, that men, for their sakes,
abhorred the offerings of the Lord, 1 Sam. ii. 17. Those that fell off
to error, and thence to abominable practices, ‘caused the way of truth
to be evil spoken of,’ 2 Pet. ii. 2. The priests that departed out of
the way, ‘caused many to stumble at the law,’ Mal. ii. 8. Nay, so high
doth Satan pursue this sometimes, that it becomes an inlet to direct
atheism.

[5.] Fifthly, Satan also works mightily _in the profane dispositions
of men, and acts that principle to a disregard and weariness of the
services of God_. A flagitious wicked life naturally leads to it. Those
that ‘eat up God’s people as bread,’ Ps. xiv. 4, ‘called not upon
God.’ This eats out at last the very exterior and formal observation
of religious duties. In this Satan bends his force against them, (1.)
By heightening the spirits of men to an insolent defiance of God by
a continued prosperity. He draws out the pride and vanity of their
spirits to a bold contempt: ‘Who is the Lord that we should serve him?
We are lords; we will come no more at thee; our tongues are our own,’
&c., Jer. ii. 31. Thus they ‘set their mouths against heaven.’ Eliphaz
tells us this, as the usual carriage of those that lived in peace and
jollity: Job xxi. 15, ‘Therefore say they unto God, Depart from us;
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: who is the Almighty that
we should serve him?’ (2.) By hiding from them the necessities of duty.
Job speaking of the hypocrite, chap. xxvii. 10, describes him by these
neglects of duty, ‘Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he
always call upon God?’ Of this he gives the reason, ver. 9, ‘He will
call and cry when trouble comes upon him.’ When distresses make duties
necessary, then he will use them; in his ‘affliction he will seek him
early,’ Hosea v. 15; as the Israelites did, Ps. lxxviii. 34, ‘When he
slew them, then they sought him, and enquired early after God.’ But
when he is not thus pinched—and Satan will endeavour in this case,
that he be as far from the rod of God as he can make him—he gives over
seeking God and loathes it, nay, accounts it as ridiculous so to do;
they ‘mock at his counsel,’ and contemn his advice of waiting upon him.

[6.] Sixthly, Satan picks quarrels in men _at the manner of performance
of duty_. When duty cannot be spoken against, then he endeavours to
destroy it by the modes, circumstances, and way of performance: as
(1.) If those that act in them discover any weakness—as who doth not,
when he hath done his best?—this he endeavours to blemish the duty
withal. The bodily presence of Paul was objected against him, as being
‘contemptible,’ and his ‘speech as weak,’ [2 Cor. x. 10;] but the
design of that objection lay higher, the devil thereby endeavouring
to render the duties of his ministry as contemptible, and not to be
regarded. (2.) If the circumstances please not, he teacheth them to
take pet with the substance, and, like children, to reject all, because
everything is not suitable to their wills. (3.) If it be managed in any
way not grateful to their expectations, if too cuttingly and plain,
then they think they be justified to say they hate it, as Ahab did
Micaiah; if any way too high or abstrusely, then likewise they fling
off. On this point the devil persuaded many of Christ’s followers
to desert him, John vi. 66, because he had spoken of himself in
comparisons that they judged too high. When he said he was that ‘bread
that came down from heaven,’ ver. 58, they said ‘that was a saying not
to be borne;’ and on that occasion ‘they went back, and walked no more
with him.’

[7.] Seventhly, The devil brings a nauseating of the duties of worship,
by _a wrong representation of them, in the carriage and gestures of
those that engage in them_. It seems strange to some that are but as
idle spectators to observe the postures of saints, seriously lifting
up their eyes to heaven, or humbly mourning and smiting on their
breasts. These the devil would render ridiculous, and as the suspicious
managements of an histrionical or hypocritical devotion; as men at a
distance beholding the strange variety of actions and postures of such
as dance, being out of the sound of their music, shall think them a
company of madmen and frantic people. Such perverse prospects doth
he sometimes afford to those that come rather to observe what others
do, than to concern themselves in such duties, that, not seeing their
private influences, nor the secret spring that moves them, they judge
them foolish, and from thence they contract an inward loathing of the
duties themselves.

(5.) Fifthly, In order to the hindering or preventing of duty, Satan
useth to impose upon men _by fallacious arguings_: and by a piece of
his sophistry he endeavours to cheat them out of their services. I
shall note some of his remarkable dealings in this kind: as,

[1.] First, _He heightens the dignity of God’s children, upon a design
to spoil their duty_. He tells them they are ‘partakers of the divine
nature,’ [2 Pet. i. 4;] that they are ‘in God and Christ,’ and have
the communications of his Spirit, and therefore they need not now
drink of the cistern, seeing they enjoy the fountain; and that these
services, in their attainments, are as useless as scaffolds are when
once the house is built. To prosecute this he takes advantage, (1.)
of the natural pride of their hearts. He puffs them up with conceits
of the excellency of their condition—a thing which all men are apt
to catch at with greediness upon the least imaginary grounds, 1 Cor.
viii. 7; Col. ii. 18. If a man have but a little knowledge, or have
attained to any vain speculations, he is presently apt to be vainly
‘puffed up by his fleshly mind.’ The same hazard attends any conceited
excellency which a man apprehends he hath reached unto. Those monsters
of religion, mentioned by Peter and Jude, that made no other use of
the ‘grace of God’ but to ‘turn it into wantonness,’ Jude 4; yet were
they so tumefied with the apprehensions of their privileges, that
whilst they designed no other thing than plain licentiousness and a
wantonness in the lusts of the flesh, yet it seems they encouraged
themselves and allured others from a supposed liberty which their
privileges gave them; and to this purpose had frequently in their
mouths ‘great swelling words of vanity,’ 2 Pet. ii. 18, even whilst
they ‘walked after their own lusts,’ Jude 16. (2.) To strengthen their
proud conceits, the devil improves what the Scriptures speak of the
differences of God’s children—that some are spiritual, some are carnal;
some weak, others strong; some perfect, some less perfect; some little
children, some young men, some fathers, 1 Cor. ii. 1; Phil. iii. 15;
1 John ii. 12, 13. The end of all this is to make them apprehend
themselves Christians of a higher rank and order, which also makes way
consequently for a further inference, viz., that there must needs be
immunities and privileges suitable to these heights and attainments.
To this purpose (3.) he produceth those scriptures that are designed
by God to raise up the minds of men to look after the internal work
and power of his ordinances, and not to centre their minds and hopes
in the bare formal use of them, without applying their thoughts to God
and Christ, unto whom they are appointed to lead us. Such as these
scriptures: Rom. ii. 28, ‘He is not a Jew which is one outwardly;
neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: but he is
a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in
the spirit, and not in the letter.’ And Rom. vi. 7, we should ‘serve
in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.’ 2 Cor. v.
16, ‘Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him
no more.’ Eph. iv. 13, ‘He gave some apostles, and some prophets,’
&c., ‘for the perfecting of the saints, ... till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man.’ By a perverse interpretation of these, and some other
scriptures of like import, he would persuade them that the great thing
that Christ designed by his ordinances was but to ‘train up the weaker
Christians by these rudiments,’ as the A B C to children, to a more
spiritual and immediate way of living upon God; and that these become
altogether useless when Christians have gotten up to any of these
imaginary degrees of a supposed perfection. Enough of this may be seen
in the writings of Saltmarsh, Winstanly, and others, in the late times.
How great a trade Satan drove by such misapprehensions not long since
cannot easily be forgotten; so that God’s worship did almost lie waste,
and in many places ‘the way to Zion did mourn.’

[2.] Secondly, He will sometimes confess an _equality of privilege
among the children of God, and yet plead an inequality of duty_.
That God is as good and strong to us, and that we have all an equal
advantage by Christ, he will readily acknowledge; but then, when we
should propound the diligence of the saints in their services for our
pattern, as of David’s ‘praying seven times a-day,’ Daniel’s three
times, Anna’s serving God with fastings and prayers night and day,
&c.,[204] he tells us these were extraordinary services, and as it were
works of supererogation, more than the command of God laid upon them.
So that we are not tied to such strictness; and we, being naturally apt
to indulge ourselves in our own ease, are too ready to comply with such
delusions. And by degrees men are thus brought to a confident belief
that they may be good enough, and do as much as is required, though
they slacken their pace, and do not fast, pray, or hear so often as
others have done.

[3.] Thirdly, Another sophism of his _is to heighten one duty, to
the ruin of another_. He strives to make an intestine war among the
several parts of the services we owe to God; and from the excellency
of one, to raise up an enmity and undervaluing disregard of another.
Thus would he sever as inconsistent those things that God hath joined
together. As among false teachers, some say, ‘Lo, here is Christ,’ and
others, ‘Lo, he is there;’ so we find Satan dealing with duties. He
puts some upon such high respects to preaching, that, say they, Christ
is to be found here most frequently, rather than in prayer or other
ordinances; others are made to have the like esteem for prayer: and
they affirm in this is Christ especially to be met withal; others say
the like of sacraments or meditation. In all these Satan labours to
beget a dislike and neglect of other services. Thus, in what relates
to the constitution of churches, he endeavours to set up purity of
churches, to the destruction of unity, or unity to the ruin of purity.
A notable example hereof we have in the _Euchytæ_, a sect of praying
heretics, which arose in the time of Valentinian and Valens, who,
upon the pretence of the commands of Christ and Paul for praying
continually, or without ceasing and fainting, owned no other duty as
necessary; vilifying preaching and sacraments as things at best useless
and unprofitable.[205] The like attempts he makes daily upon men, where
though he prevail not so far as to bring some necessary duties of
service into open contempt, yet he carries them into too much secret
neglect and disregard, Luke xviii. 1; 1 Thes. xv. 17.

[4.] Fourthly, He improves the grace of the gospel to infer an
_unnecessariness of duty_; and this he doth not only from the advantage
of a profane and careless spirit in such as presumptuously expect
heaven, though they mind not the way that leads to it; for with such
it is usual, as one observes,[206] for Satan to sever the means from
the end in things that are good; to make them believe they shall have
peace, though they walk in the imaginations of their heart; to make
them lean upon the Lord for heaven, in the apparent neglect of holiness
and duty; as in evil things he severs the end from the means, making
them confident they shall escape hell and condemnation, though they
walk in the path that leads thither. But besides this, he abuseth the
understandings and affections of men by strange and uncouth inferences;
as that God hath received a satisfaction, and Christ hath done all, so
that nothing is left for us to do. The apostle Paul was so much aware
of this kind of arguing, that when he was to ‘magnify the grace of
God,’ he always took care to fence against such perverse reasonings,
severely rebuking and refelling such objections: as in Rom. iii. 7, 8,
where speaking that our ‘unrighteousness did commend the righteousness
of God,’ he falls upon that reply, ‘Why then am I judged as a sinner?’
which he sharply refells, as an inference of slanderous imputation to
the gospel, which hath nothing in it to give the least countenance to
that conclusion, ‘Let us do evil, that good may come;’ and adds, that
damnation shall justly overtake such as practise accordingly. The like
we have, Rom. vi. 1, ‘Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?’
which he rejected with the greatest abhorrency, ‘God forbid!’ From both
which places we may plainly gather, that as unsound as such arguings
are, yet men, through Satan’s subtlety, are too prone, upon such
pretences, to dispute themselves to a careless neglect of duty. This
might be enlarged in many other instances, as that of Maximus Tyrius,
who disputed all duties unnecessary upon this ground, ‘That what God
will give, cannot be hindered; and what he will not give, cannot be
obtained; and therefore it were needless to seek after anything.’
Much to the same purpose do many argue, if they be predestinated to
salvation, they shall be saved, though they do never so little; if
they be not predestinated, they shall not be saved, though they do
never so much. In all which inferences the devil proceeds upon a false
foundation of severing the means and the end, which the decree of
God hath joined together; but the main of the design is to hide the
necessity of duty from them.

[5.] Fifthly, By urging a necessity or conveniency for _suspending or
remitting duties_. In temptations to sin, he doth from a little draw
on the sinner to more; but in omissions of duty he would entice us
from much to little, and from little to nothing. Very busy he is with
us to break or interrupt our constant course of duty. Duties in order
and practice, are like so many pearls upon one string; if the thread
be broken, it may hazard the scattering of all. If we be once put out
of our way, we are in danger to rove far before we be set in our rank
again. To effect this, (1.) he will be sure to straiten or hinder us
in our opportunities if he can, and then to plead necessity for a
dispensation. It is true indeed, necessities, when unavoidable—as the
issue of providence rather than our negligence—may excuse an omission
of duty, because in such cases, God accepting the will for the deed,
will have mercy and not sacrifice. But necessity is most-what[207] a
pretence or cover to the slothfulness of professors, and the devil
will do all he can to gratify them in that humour, and to prepare
excuses for them from such hindrances or interruptions as business
or disturbances can make; yet if these be not in readiness, he will
(2.) endeavour to take off our earnestness by suggesting to us our
former diligence, that we at other times have been careful and active;
or (3.) by setting before us the greater negligence of those that
are below us. The meaning of both which insinuations is to this one
purpose, that we may make bold with some omissions, without any great
hazard of our religious intentions, or scandal and offence to others.
Now if he can by any of these ways bring us to any abatement of our
wonted care and exercise, he will then still press for more, and from
fervency of spirit to a cold moderation; from thence he will labour
to bring us down to seldom performances; from thence, to nothing. The
spiritual sluggard that will be overcome to some neglects, shall be
found a companion at last to a waster, Prov. xviii. 9, and will be
brought to a total neglect of all. The church of Ephesus, Rev. ii. 4,
5, may sadly give proof of this; they left their first love, and from
thence declined so far that at last God was provoked to ‘remove the
candlestick out of its place.’

[6.] Sixthly, Satan puts tricks upon men in order to the hindering
of duty, by putting us from a service _presently needful, with the
proposal of another, in which, at that time, we are not so concerned_.
In several duties of Christianity there is a great deal of skill
required to make a right choice, for present or first performance; and
to have a right judgment to discover the times and seasons of them,
is matter of necessary study. Our adversary observing our weaknesses
in this, when no other art will prevail, endeavours to put us upon
an inconvenient choice, when he cannot make us neglect all. As (1.)
by engaging us in a less duty, that we may neglect a greater; he is
willing that we, as the Pharisees, should ‘tithe mint and anise,’ upon
condition that we ‘neglect the greater things of the law.’ This was the
fault of Martha, Luke x. 41, who busied herself in making entertainment
for Christ’s welcome, and in the meantime neglected to hear his
preaching: which, as he notes, was the only necessary duty of that
time; ‘one thing’ is necessary. She is not blamed for doing that which
was simply evil in itself—for the thing she did was a duty—but for
not making a right choice of duty; for that rebuke, ‘Mary hath chosen
the better part,’ is only a comparative discommendation; as Austin
interprets, _Non tu malam, sed illa meliorem_, The thing thou doest is
not evil, if it had not put thee upon a neglect of a greater good. (2.)
He sometimes puts men upon what is good and necessary, but such as they
cannot come at without sin. Thus sacrificing in itself was a necessary
duty; and such was Saul’s condition, that it concerned him at that time
to make his peace with God, and to inquire his mind. Yet when the devil
upon that pretence put him upon offering a sacrifice, he put him upon
no small transgression, 1 Sam. xiii. 13. The like game Satan sometimes
plays with private Christians, who are persuaded beyond their station
and capacity in reference to some ordinances of God. (3.) He sometimes
puts men upon dangerous undertakings in pursuit of their fancy, of
gaining an advantage for some service; and so are they turned out of
the way of present obedience, in grasping at opportunities of duty out
of their reach. Saul spared the sheep and oxen of the Amalekites for
sacrifice, 1 Sam. xv. 15, 22, when obedience had been more acceptable
than sacrifice. (4.) There is a further cheat in the choice of duty,
when Satan employs them to provide for duties to come, to the neglect
of duties presently incumbent upon them; whereas we are more concerned
in that which at present is necessary, than in that which may be so for
the future; which is a mistake, like that of caring for the morrow,
while we use not what God puts in our hand for to-day.




