CHAPTER IV.

 _Of Satan’s second way of improving his advantages, which is by
 working upon the understanding indirectly by the affections.—This
 he doth—(1.) By a silent, insensible introduction of error.
 His method herein. (2.) By entangling the affections with the
 external garb of error, a gorgeous dress, or affected plainness.
 (3.) By fabulous imitations of truth. The design thereof.
 (4.) By accommodating truth to a compliance with parties that
 differ from it. Various instances hereof. (5.) By driving to a
 contrary extreme. (6.) By bribing the affections with rewards,
 or forcing them by fears. (7.) By engaging pride and anger.
 (8.) By adorning error with the ornaments of truth._


The usual arguments by which Satan doth directly blind the
understanding to a persuasion to accept darkness for light, we have now
considered. It remains that some account be given of the second way of
prevailing upon the understanding, and that is _by swaying it through
the power and prevalency of the affections_. In order to this he hath
many devices, the principal whereof are these:—

1. First, _By silent and insensible procedure he labours to introduce
errors_; and lest men should startle at a sudden and full presentment
of the whole, he thinks it policy to insinuate into the affections,
by offering it in parcels. Thus he prevents wonderment and surprisal,
lest men should boggle and turn away, and doth by degrees familiarise
them to that which at first would have been rejected with abhorrency.
We read in the parable of the tares that the envious man which sowed
them, who was Satan, took his opportunity ‘while men slept,’ and then
went away in the dark; insomuch that the discovery was not made at
the sowing, but at their coming up. In pursuance of this policy, we
find the principal instruments of Satan have followed the footsteps of
their master; they ‘creep in unawares,’ Jude 4; they ‘privily bring in
damnable heresies,’ 2 Pet. ii. 1; and, as if they were guilty of some
modest shamefacedness, they ‘_creep_ into houses,’ 2 Tim. iii. 6. The
steps by which the devil creeps into the bosoms of men to plant error
in the heart are these:—

[1.] First, He endeavours to gain the heart by _the ingenuous, sweet,
and delightful society of those that are corrupted already_. Error
hath a peculiar art to woo the good-will before it disclose itself.
It first steals the ear and affections to the person, and thence
insensibly derives it to the opinion. Truth is masculine, and persuades
by teaching, but error doth often teach by persuading. It is very
difficult to affect the person, and not to bestow upon the error better
thoughts than it deserves. Those therefore that are cunning in the art
of seduction, make extraordinary pretences of affectionate kindness,
and, as the apostle noted concerning the seducers of his time, Gal.
iv. 17, ‘they zealously affect’ those whom they would delude, ‘but
not well.’ Their art doth also teach them not to be over-hasty in
propounding their opinions, nor so much as to touch upon them, till
they perceive they have gained a firm persuasion of their amity, and of
the reality of those kindnesses which they have made show of; but when
they have once gained this point of advantage, they take opportunity
more freely to propound and press their doctrines. Thus are men at last
beguiled ‘with enticing words.’

It is also part of the same design that Satan sometimes makes use of
women seducers: For, (1.) They are more apt to be deluded themselves:
‘silly women’ are soon ‘led captive.’ (2.) Being deceived, they are
most earnestly forward in the heat of zeal to propagate their opinions.
(3.) And by the advantage of their nature they are most engaging;
their affectionate persuasions usually have a peculiar prevalency. The
daughters of Moab, through Balaam’s counsel, were made choice of as the
fittest instruments to seduce Israel to idolatry. Solomon, though a
wise man, was prevailed with by the importunity of his wives, against
his former practice and knowledge, to favour false worship. The woman
Jezebel, Rev. ii. 20, was Satan’s under-agent ‘to teach and seduce
God’s servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to
idols.’ (4.) Besides, they have a greater influence upon their children
to leaven them with their own opinions.

[2.] Secondly, Satan also observes _a gradual motion in fixing any
particular error_. If he attempt it immediately, without an external
agent, he first puts men upon the reading or consideration of some dark
passages that seem to look favourably upon his design; then he starts
the notion or objection; then begets a scruple or questioning. Having
once proceeded thus far, he follows his design with probable reasons,
till he have formed it into an opinion. When it is come to this, a
little more begets a persuasion, that persuasion he ripens into a
resoluteness and obstinacy, and then at last fires it with zeal for the
deluding of others. Having thus laid the foundation by one error, he
next endeavours to multiply it, and then brings in the inferences that
unavoidably follow; for as one wedge makes way for another, so from one
falsehood another will easily force itself, and from two or three who
knows how many? And though the consequences are usually more absurd
than the principles, yet are they with a small labour brought into
favour where the principles are first confidently believed; so that
those errors, which because of their ugly look Satan durst not at first
propound, lest he should scare men off from their reception, he can now
with an undaunted boldness recommend. It cannot be imagined that ever
men would at first have entertained opinions of contempt of ordinances
and libertinism, and therefore we may observe they usually come in the
rear of other opinions, which by a long tract of art prepare their way.

Yet may we note, that though Satan usually is forced to wait the
leisure of some men’s timorousness and bashfulness, and therefore
cannot ripen error to a hasty birth as he desires, hence is it that
one man often doth no more for his time, but only brew it, or, it may
be, makes only the rude draught of it, and another vents and adorns
it; for so it was betwixt Lælius and Faustus Socinus, betwixt David
George and his successors. And though he be so confined to the first
principles of error which he hath instilled that he cannot at present
enlarge them beyond their own just consequences; yet there are some
choice principles of his which, if he can but fasten upon the mind,
they presently open the gap to all kind of errors imaginable. They
are like the firing a train of gunpowder, which in a moment blows
up the whole fabric of truth. Such are the delusions of enthusiasm,
inspirations, and prophetic raptures. Let these be once fixed, and then
there is nothing so inhuman, irreligious, mad, or ridiculous, but Satan
can with ease persuade men to it, and also under the highest pretences
of religion and certainty. The experience of all ages hath made any
further proof of this altogether needless.

This is his way when he acts alone. But if he use instruments, though
he is also gradual in his procedure, yet it is in a different method;
for there he sometimes proceeds from the abuse of something innocent
and lawful, by the help of a long tract of time, to introduce the
grossest falsehood. Thus may we conceive he brought idolatry to
its height: first men admired the wisdom or famous acts of their
progenitors or benefactors; next they erected pillars or images of such
persons to perpetuate the names, honour, and memory of them and their
actions. Another age, being at a greater distance from the things done,
and consequently greater strangers to the true ends and reasons of such
practices, which being, as it usually falls out in such cases, abused
by false reports or misrepresentations of things—for time covers things
of this nature with so thick a mist that it is difficult to discover
the true metal of an original constitution—they in a devout ignorance
gave the images a greater respect than was at first intended. Then
did they slide into a conceit they were not of the ordinary rank of
mortals, or at least they were exalted to a condition which ordinary
mortals were not capable of. Thus they supposed them deities, and gave
them worship of prayers and sacrifices. Hence they went further, and
multiplied gods, and that of several sorts, according to the natures of
things that were good or hurtful to them; and then at last consulting
how mean their offerings were, and how unlikely to please their
godships, they concluded human sacrifices most suitable, especially to
expiate greater provocations, and in times of great calamity.

The burdensome heap of ceremonious superstitions in popery was the
work of several ages; they were not brought in all at once. One in a
devotional heat fancied such a ceremony as a fit testimony of zeal,
or a proper incitement of his affections; another deviseth a second,
and so all along. As the minds of men were best pleased with their
own inventions, and had so much credit or authority to recommend them
to others, they increased the sum by new additions, till at last
they are become a burden not to be borne; and still as they receded
from the primitive purity, and became more careless and corrupt in
their lives—for from good bishops they declined to but tolerable
archbishops, till at last they are become incurable Babylonians—so they
departed gradually from the simplicity of the gospel, and abounded in
contrivances of ceremonies.[289]

[3.] Thirdly, _In corrupting established truths_. Satan’s proceedings
are not by sudden and observable leaps, but by lingering and slow
motions—as flowers and plants grow insensibly, and as men gradually
wax old and feeble. Violent and hasty alterations he knows would beget
observation, dislike, and opposition; neither will he make such
attempts but where he is sure of a strong prevalent party, which
by force and power is able to carry all before it. In this case he
is willing to enforce error by fire and sword. Thus he propagated
Mohammedanism at first, and still continueth to do so by the conquering
arms of the Turks; but where he hath not this advantage, he betakes
himself to another course, and studieth to do his work so that he may
not be observed. The possibility of such a change, with the manner
of effecting it, we may observe in many churches that have declined
from the doctrine which they at first received, but most of all in
the church at Rome, which at first was a pure church, as the apostle
testifieth, but now so changed from the truths upon which they were
bottomed in their first constitution, as if she had not been the
same church. They boast indeed that as they were at first, so they
are now; but nothing is more evident than the contrary; and the
possibility of their insensible corruption is as demonstrable as the
alteration of doctrine in any other church. The manifold ways that
Satan takes in this matter, in the abuse of Scripture, by raising
perverse interpretations and unnatural inferences, and the advantages
of a long succession in authority; of the negligence and ignorance of
the common people; of the crafty subtlety of the teachers, especially
when religion began to be abused to secular interest, is described by
Acontius and others.[290] If we should single out any of their noted
errors, and follow up the history of it to its first original, we shall
find that whatever strong current it hath now gotten, it was very
small and inconsiderable in the fountain. The invocation of saints,
though it be now an established article among them, yet its first rise
was from the unwary _prosopopœias_ of the ancients, and the liberty
of their oratorical declamatory style. These gave occasion to some
private opinions, these opinions to some private devotional liberty in
practice, and from private opinions and practices, at last it obtained
so strong a party that it procured a public injunction. The like method
was used for the doctrine of transubstantiation, whose beginning was
from the abuse of such sentences as this in ancient writers, that
‘after consecration it was no more bread and wine, but the body and
blood of Christ;’ by which expression the authors intended no more
than this, that the bread and wine in the sacrament were relatively
altered, and were more than ordinary bread and wine, because they were
representatives of the body and blood of Christ: however, this gave
them courage to interpret literally and strictly these words of Christ,
‘This is my body;’ and thus by degrees from the opinion of a few it
became the judgment of many, and from the toleration of a private
opinion of some doctors, and unimposed, it obtained at last a canon to
make it authentic public doctrine.

[4.] Fourthly, This insensible proceeding is in nothing more evident
than _in the power of custom and education_. Custom doth by degrees
take off the startling of conscience; and those opinions or practices
which at first look affright it, are by a little familiarity made
more smooth and tolerable. The dissents of men by frequent seeing
and hearing become tame and gentle; but the force of education is
incomparably great, for this makes an error to become as it were
natural; they suck it in with their milk, and draw it in with their
air. This general advantage the devil hath over all the children of
erroneous parents, especially where countries or nations are of the
same persuasion; insomuch that Turks have as great belief of their
Alcoran as we of the Bible, and think as reverently of Mohammed as
Christians do of Christ. The children of idolatrous pagans have as
great a confidence of the truth of their way of heathenish worship, as
we have of God’s ordinances and institutions.

[5.] Fifthly, We may see something of this stratagem of silent
entanglement _in Satan’s surprisals_; for sometimes he inveigles men at
unawares, and engageth them in error while they know not what they are
doing. Weak heads cannot see the far end of a smooth-faced doctrine,
and they usually embrace it by wholesale, for some particular that
strikes upon their fancy, or gratifies their humour. If they read a
book that hath some good things in it, or is affectionate, for the sake
of these they swallow all the rest, though never so dangerous doctrine,
without further examination. The like advantage he hath from actions
that are bad or tolerable, according to the various respects which
they have to the ends or consequences that lie before them; for he
frequently doth interest men in an erroneous consequence, by concerning
them in actions that lead that way; and having thus beguiled them into
an evil mistake, instead of drawing their foot out of the snare, he
pusheth them forward to maintain their ground, and to justify their
proceedings. This was the case of some of the Corinthians; when the
heathens had offered a sacrifice to an idol, part of the sacrifice
was reserved, and either sold at the shambles, or used in a feast, to
which the heathens sometimes invited their Christian acquaintance or
relations. Those that went, knowing that ‘an idol was nothing,’ ate
what was set before them without any regard to the idol, and ‘making
no question for conscience sake;’ by their example others that ‘had
not that knowledge,’ 1 Cor. viii. 7, were emboldened, not only to eat
against their scruples and doubts of conscience,—which is all that
many interpreters think to be intended in that place,—but also—as the
words make probable—with some positive regard to the idol; so that by
the examples of those that sat in the idol’s temple, eating what was
set before them as common meat, others misinterpreting their actions,
proceeded to eat with a conscience of the idol, as if the idol had been
something indeed, and deserving a conscientious regard. Not unlike
to this was that art of Julian, mentioned by Sozomen, whereby he
endeavoured to twist something of paganism with actions and things that
were lawful or necessary.[291] He caused the images of Mars and Mercury
to be placed by his own, so that the respects that were payed to the
emperor’s picture, seemed to carry a concomitancy of reverence to those
idols. He also, in prosecution of the same policy, caused their meats
and drinks to be sprinkled or mixed with the lustral water, that so
every one that used them might be inured to give some regard to his
idols; and that some, at least, might be engaged to a justification of
that and such other practices.

All these are but instances of Satan’s silent insinuation, by which he
secretly steals the affections, and through these taints the judgment.
Next follows,

A second plot upon the affections, which is an endeavour to entangle
them by _the external garb of error_. In this he works by two contrary
extremes, that he may the better prevail with men’s different
dispositions.

[1.] First, He sometimes _clothes a false doctrine with the most
pompous, gorgeous, delightful attire_, that, like Solomon’s harlot,
it may entice those that are pleased with the highest gratifications
of the senses, ‘I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with
fine linen of Egypt,’ &c. Most men that are given up to an animal
life cannot be pleased with any religion but such as may most please
the senses. They so disrelish the simplicity of the gospel—which is,
notwithstanding, its particular mark and honour, 2 Cor. xi. 3—that they
cannot persuade themselves they do anything in religious worship except
they abound in costly ceremonious observances. Thus do some interpret
that fear of the heathens, which first put them upon images and outward
representations of their gods. They were afraid they should not have
any religion to their own satisfaction, except they proceeded in such a
course as might make their senses sure that they were doing something,
_primus in orbe deos timor fecit_. The devil, knowing well the force
of external beauties in religion, prepared the way to idolatry by it.
They had their costly temples, some of them admirable for antiquity and
magnificence, enriched with gifts and offerings, excellent for matter
and workmanship, adorned with images, lamps, beds, and tables of gold,
beautified by art, and natural pleasantness of situation; they had
also their groves in the most pleasant and delightful places, as that
of the Daphne, besides[292] Antiochia, which was environed with tall
cypress trees ten miles about, and within adorned with the sumptuous
temples of Apollo and Diana’s sanctuary. In these places they had
their music and solemn festivals, which were sometimes extraordinary
for cost and continuance. Antiochus at Daphne continued an incredible
solemnity, with a vast train and costly preparation, for thirty days’
together; and that nothing might be wanting, they had their annual
feasts, sacrifices, rites, the adornments of their priests, their white
garments, their coats of divers colours, their mitres, &c.; in a word,
nothing was lacking that might please the eye or ear. And doubtless
the devil found this course very successful to win the affections of
men to Gentilism. And if it were not for this consideration, it might
be admired that the Jews, who were instructed in the true worship of
God, should, notwithstanding, be so prone to idolatry, and so hardly
drawn from it; but surely their strong inclinations that way proceeded
from a natural delight that men have in a sensual religion, which,
by a powerful witchcraft, doth enchant them to an excess of love.
The same method the devil takes in popery. The chief enticement lies
in its glorious external appearance. All their religious places are
dressed up in the highest bravery, they are beautified with images
and pictures, with lights and costly adornments; they abound in
rites, ceremonies, gestures, and observances, and all this is but to
dazzle the eyes, and to win a reverence in men to their worship; and
accordingly they practise in these exterior things on purpose to ravish
men’s affections; their children are brought up to a confirmed delight
and resolution for popery, by pleasing them with shows, pictures,
representations, processions, and grateful observances. If a stranger
of another religion come among them, then, as their first essay, they
shew them all their play-things, that their affections may be tickled
with the outward pomp and ornament of their way, for they know by
experience that a glittering outside and a great deal ado of bodily
labour is the all of most men’s religion. If it have but body enough,
they never inquire whether it have spirit or life within. A dead
carcase in robes, that may put them to the exercise of their postures
and ceremonious compliments, doth make up a more grateful religion for
a carnal man than a living, spiritual service, that necessarily will
put them upon inward care and watchfulness in the constant exercise of
holy spiritual graces, without affording any considerable gratification
to the senses. Hence is it truly more difficult, and yet inwardly more
beautiful and glorious, to pray in faith and humility, even in short
breathings after God, than to say a thousand Ave Marias, or to perform
a task of ordinary penance. But as those that have no children of their
own delight themselves in playing with a monkey or baboon, so those
that know not how to worship God in spirit and truth seek to satisfy
themselves in the performance of external gesture and ceremony.

[2.] Secondly, On the other hand he sometimes is willing that an
error should affect _an excess of plainness and simplicity_. In this
he takes advantage of those expressions in Scripture, wherein the
gospel is commended for its simplicity; and the inventions of men,
under the pretences of wisdom, humility, and neglecting of the body,
are condemned. Upon this ground he runs men upon such an excess of
dotage, that they never think the things of God are rightly managed
but when they are brought down to a contemptible silliness. By this
means he arms conceited ignorant men with exceptions against learning,
and the necessary decencies of language in preaching; and with them
they are the only preachers, and most likely to be inspired, that use
least study and preparation for their work. It is indeed very true
that the affected fooleries of a bombast style or starched discourse,
and needless citations of sentences for ostentation, without any
true advantage to the matter in hand, are things very pedantic, and
exceedingly unsuitable to the gravity of the work of the ministry, and
renders it very ungrateful to a pious mind; but this contrary folly
makes the solemn ordinances of God so nauseous and contemptible, that
it often makes way, by Satan’s cunning improvement of the temptation,
to an atheistical rejection of all worship. In the meantime it is
wonderful to observe how some persons please themselves with this
conceit, that their way of worship is plain, and that they speak
what immediately comes into their mind; and though it be nonsense or
contradictions, which sufficiently evidenceth that it is nothing of
kin to the Spirit’s inspirations, which they utter, yet it is argument
enough to them that their opinions and ways are right, because they
proceed in a designed neglect of all necessary order, and under
pretence of the simplicity of the gospel they reduce all they do to
childish silliness. Neither is this all the mischief which the devil
raiseth out of this conceit, for the contempt and disuse of the
sacraments may in great part be ascribed to it. Those erroneous ways
of worship that are most noted for decrying those institutions of
Christ, have this for their plea, that the worship which God is best
pleased with is spiritual, and that all bodily services and external
observations are things that God stands not upon, such as profit
little, and were no further in use, but to recommend an internal
spiritual communion with God; so that the more they reject these
things, they persuade themselves they have a more true understanding
of the design of God in religion. Either of these ways Satan makes use
of for the befooling of men into a humour of pleasing themselves with
error. But,

[3.] Thirdly, He hath of old endeavoured _to cloud and enervate the
doctrine of the Bible by traditionary fables_. We meet with many
passages to this purpose. Sometimes he sets up unwritten traditions,
not only of equal authority to the written word, but as completions and
perfections of it. This he practised among the Jews with such success,
that the traditions of the elders were of greater force with them than
the commands of God, as Christ himself noted of them, Mat. xv. 13. Of
these unwritten traditions, which they called ‘the law by the word of
mouth,’ feigned by them to be given to Moses when he was in the mount,
and so delivered from hand to hand, the apostles gave many warnings,
and signified the hazards that truth stood in by them through the
cunning of Satan; as Col. ii. 8, ‘Beware lest any man spoil you through
the traditions of men;’ 1 Tim. i. 4, ‘Neither give heed to fables, and
endless genealogies;’ Titus i. 14, ‘Not giving heed to Jewish fables,
and commandments of men;’ 2 Tim. iv. 4, ‘And they shall turn away their
ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.’

The papists at this day give the same entertainment to this device
that the Jews did of old; they boast as high of their traditions, and
are every whit as fabulous and foolish in them as they were. Satan in
his attempts upon the Gentiles to confirm them in their false worship,
though he kept up the substance of this design, yet he was necessitated
to alter the scene a little, that he might more handsomely accommodate
it to their condition; and therefore he set up amongst them fabulous
imitations of the truths and ordinances of the Scripture, insomuch that
there is scarce any grand mystery or remarkable history or ordinance
mentioned in the Scripture but we may find something among the heathens
in tradition or practice that doth allude to it. What traditionary
imitations had they of the creation recorded in the book of Genesis!
That of Ovid concerning the chaos and first beginning of things is
known to every schoolboy. The Phœnicians in their theology give an odd
account of it from their Taautus, to this purpose:[293] ‘That the
first beginnings of all things were a dark, disordered chaos, and the
spirit of the dark air; hence proceeded _moth_, that is, mire, from
thence issued the seeds and generation of all creatures in earth and
heaven,’ &c. The wickedness of men before the flood—mentioned Gen.
vi. 1, 2—is fabulously related in an ancient book, falsely ascribed
to Enoch, wherein the watchmen or angels are reported to take them
wives of the daughters of men, and that from thence was the race of
giants.[294] For the description of paradise, the heathens had the
poetical fiction of the Elysian fields; as they had the story of
Deucalion, instead of Noah’s ark and the deluge. The story of Lot’s
wife was abused by the fiction of Orpheus his wife, suddenly snatched
from him for looking back. The history of Samson was turned into their
story of Hercules and his ten labours. From the sun standing still in
Joshua and Hezekiah’s time, came that fiction of Jupiter’s doubling
the night, that he might enjoy Alcmena. In some of these disguises
of sacred story, they go so near in name and circumstances, that it
is past doubt they imitated the true history, which they corrupted.
For instance, Herodotus relates that Sethon, king of Egypt and priest
of Vulcan, was helped by his god from heaven against Sennacherib,
which plainly relates to Hezekiah king of Judah, and the wonders that
God did for him.[295] So in imitation of Uriah’s letters to Joab for
his own destruction, we have in Homer and others the story of Prœtus
sending letters to Jobatas by Bellerophon, wherein his death was
commanded; the near affinity of the names Joab and Jobatas, shews with
what heifer the devil ploughed. The history of Abraham’s offering
up Isaac is by Porphyry applied to Saturn, who saith he was by the
Phœnicians called Israel; he had by Anobreth one only son called
Jeud,—an evident allusion, saith Godwyn, [Antiq., lib. iv. cap. 3,] to
Gen. xxii. 2, where Isaac is in the Hebrew called Jechid, that is, an
only-begotten,—him he offered up on an altar purposely prepared. Here
not only the matter, but the names, do clearly shew that Abraham’s
story is imitated in this. The like imitation I might shew to have
been among the heathen of doctrinal truths, as of the sacred mystery
of the Trinity. In Peru they worship the father, son, and brother; as
also their Tangatauga, which they say was one in three, and three in
one.[296] But their imitation of ordinances is everywhere remarkable,
so that I need say nothing of their temples, priests, sacrifices, and
other religious rites; only the devil’s imitation of the sacraments
of the New Testament deserves particular observation. Instances of an
apish imitation of baptism are everywhere obvious, and that of the
Lord’s supper or Christian communion was frequently resembled in the
chief Peruvian feasts, where they carried small loaves of bread in
great platters of gold, of which all present received and ate little
pieces, and this as a sign of honour and profession of obedience to
their gods and the ingua.[297] Not unlike to this were those morsels
of paste which the Mexicans used in their religious feasts, which they
laid at their idol’s feet, consecrating them by singing and other
ceremonies, and then they called them the flesh and bones of their
god Vitziliputzli, alluding directly to that of our Saviour, ‘This is
my body,’ &c., insomuch that Acosta thought the devil mocked their
transubstantiation by it. This was distributed among all, and was eaten
with a great deal of reverence, fear, and devotion.[298]

We may see by those instances that in these fabulous imaginations of
truth the devil hath industriously traded, and that which he aimed at
in this design may easily be conjectured to be,

[1.] _The despiting and discrediting of truth._ He renders it by this
means suspicious of some forgery; as if the Scripture were no better
than an uncertain tradition, as if, at the best, it were doubtful
whether Scripture or these traditionary fables had better authority.

[2.] He further intends _the entanglement of the affections to error
by this device_; for he doth, as it were, take the spoils of the
tabernacle to adorn his Dagon withal; and without doubt the heathens
were very much hardened in Gentilism by these traditionary stories.
Hence one observes,[299] the devil imitated the history of the miracle
done in favour of Hezekiah, that the Scriptures might lose their credit
and authority, and that the glory of such a wonder might be transferred
to their idols; and the consequence of both these is,

[3.] _To deprive the truth of its convincing power upon the consciences
of men._ The principles of Scripture convince by the evidence of their
truth. If that truth be questioned by the substitution of another
competitor, it presently loseth its force, and the commands thereof are
disregarded upon a supposition of its uncertainty.

[4.] Another of his ways to betray the understanding by the affections,
is by _putting men upon an accommodation of truth to a compliance
with parties differing from it_. And this hath been so much the more
successful, because it hath begun, and been carried on, upon the most
specious pretences. The avoiding of offences, the smoothing of the way
of religion for the gaining of the contrary minded, the preservation of
peace and unity, are pleas very plausible; and really, upon the account
of these things, the Scripture, both by its precepts and examples,
hath recommended to us condescensions and brotherly forbearances. The
Jews, who were dissatisfied at the first publication of the liberty
from the yoke of Mosaical ceremonies purchased for us by Christ, were
indulged in the use of circumcision, and observance of the difference
of meats for a long time, till they might be the better satisfied in
the truth. These pretences the devil makes use of to undermine truth.
And pleasing his agents with the honour of a pious design—and it may be
at first really so intended by them—he prevails with them, not only for
a present condescension to men of contrary practice, but to cast the
principles of truth into such a fixed mould that they may carry a more
near resemblance to those opinions which they do most directly oppose.
The appearance of sanctity, peaceableness, prudence, and successfulness
in such an undertaking, doth exceedingly animate the well-meaning
designers, which Satan, in the meantime, carries them beyond all
bounds, and so dangerously fixeth an unnatural representation of truth,
that it loseth its own splendour, and settles at last upon unsafe
notions. Thus by the continuance of such a compliance, error begins to
recruit its forces, and is as likely to draw over truth wholly to its
side—by the argument of resemblance, and the consequences following
thereupon—as truth is wholly to extirpate and conquer error. And if it
do not that, succeeding ages, that minded not the first design, finding
things so continued to them, in deep reverence to their predecessors,
form their prudential condescensions into perverse opinions.

If we follow the tract of time from the first preaching of the gospel,
we may find Satan’s footsteps all along. In the apostles’ times, when
the believing Jews were tolerated necessarily till time and experience
might fully convince them in their observation of the law of Moses,
which was certainly given of God, and so might very easily occasion an
opinion of the continuance of it, Acts xv. 1, 5, though the apostles
did not at all accommodate the standing precepts of the New Testament
to carry a perpetual resemblance of that opinion, neither did they
still countenance that practice, but did seasonably and fully declare
against it, exhorting Christians ‘to stand in the liberty wherewith
Christ hath made them free,’ Gal. v. 1, 2, yet Satan was busy to
take advantage of the present forbearances, which the Holy Ghost
had directed them unto; insomuch that instead of convincing all the
dissenters by that lenity, some dissenters waxed bold to persuade the
Christians ‘to another gospel.’ But after their days the devil pursued
this design with greater scope; for instance, in Constantine’s time,
when the Gentiles flocked into the church with dirty feet and in their
old rags, they were tolerated in some old customs of Gentilism, and
upon a design to win them, they made bold to bend the doctrine of the
gospel toward their former usages; they thought indeed it was best to
wink at things, and not to bear too hard upon them at first, but that,
tolerating a lesser evil, they might avoid a greater inconvenience;
and withal they deemed they had done great service to the church and
Christian religion, if they could any way divert the heathen from
worshipping their idols. And to effect this the easilier, they seemed
to cherish their customs and rites of worship, as consonant in the
general to the principles of Christianity, only they excepted against
the object of their worship as unlawful, so that upon the matter they
did no more than change the name. The manifold inconveniences that
followed this kind of dealing, they did not discover at first; but
besides the infecting the simplicity of Christian religion with the
dirt and dregs of paganism, which they might easily have seen, time
hath since discovered that here the devil secretly laid the chief
foundations of popery.

Whosoever shall impartially compare the rites, customs, usages, and
garbs of popery, with those of paganism, will to his admiration find
such an exact agreement and consonancy, that he must necessarily
conclude that either paganism imitated popery, or popery imitated
paganism; but the latter is true, and that these corruptions in
religion by popery came in by a designment of conforming Christianity
to heathenism, though it may be upon pious intentions at first, is
no difficult thing to evince; for besides that the rites of paganism
were more ancient, and so could not be borrowed from popery, which
came long after, the Scripture did foretell a great defection from
truth which should be in the ‘last days,’ and this under a profession
of religion; and the things particularised are such as shew that the
defection should carry an imitation of paganism: for no less seems to
be signified by 1 Tim. iv. 1, ‘The Spirit speaketh expressly, that
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;’ that is—as Mr Mede, whose
interpretation I follow,[300] doth prove—doctrines concerning devils
or demons: as in Heb. vi. 2, we have the phrase of ‘doctrines of
baptisms,’ which must needs signify doctrines concerning baptisms; the
Gentile theology of demons is the thing which Paul prophesies should be
introduced into Christianity. How clearly this relates to popery may be
evident to any that doth not wilfully blind himself by prejudice. Their
doctrine of demons was this: they supposed two sorts of gods, supreme
and inferior; the supreme they supposed did dwell in the heavenly
lights, sun, moon, and stars, without change of place; these they
judged were so sublime and pure, that they might not be profaned with
the approach of earthly things, and that immediate approaches to them
were derogatory to their sovereignty. The inferior order of gods they
imagined were of a middle sort, betwixt the supreme beings and men,
as participating of both. These they called mediators and agents, and
supposed their business was to carry up men’s prayers to God, and to
bring down blessings from God upon men. These were in Scripture called
Baalim, and by the Greeks demons; to this purpose Austin and others
speak.[301]

Now these demons they supposed were the souls of dead men, that had
been more than ordinarily famous in their generation. Thus Ninus
made an image to his father Belus after he was dead, and caused him
to be worshipped. Hermes confesseth that Æsculapius, grandfather to
Asclepius, and Mercury, his own grandfather, were worshipped as gods
of this order. Abundance of instances I might produce to this purpose;
but to go on, these demons, because to them was committed the care of
terrestrial affairs, as Celsus argues against Origen, and because of
the help and advantage that men might receive from them, they supposed
it gratitude and duty to worship them, and this worship they performed
at their images, sepulchres, and relics. To this purpose Plutarch tells
us of Theseus his bones, and Plato of the θῆκαι or shrines of their
demons.[302]

How evident is it that the papists in their doctrine and practice about
the invocation of saints and angels, have writ after this copy, and
that they are the men that have introduced this doctrine of demons,
the thing itself declares without further evidence. Had the heathens
their dead heroes for agents betwixt the supreme gods and men? so
have the papists their dead saints to offer up their prayers. Did
the heathen expect more particular aids from some of these demons in
several cases than from others? so do the papists. Instead of Diana
for women in labour, and Æsculapius for the diseased, they have their
St Margaret and St Mary for travailing; Sebastian and Roch against
the pestilence; Apollonia against the toothache; St Nicholas against
tempests, &c. Did the heathen pray to these demons for their aid? so
do the papists to their saints, as their breviaries, rosaries, and
Lady’s psalters testify. Had the heathen their feasts, their _statas
ferias_ to their demons? so have the papists. Had they their _Februalia
et Proserpinilia_ with torches and lights? so have the papists their
Candlemas with lights. Did the heathen erect images and pillars, or
keep the ashes and shrines of their demons? so do the papists; the
one had processions and adorations, so have the other; and a great
many more things there are wherein popery keeps a correspondence with
heathenism. To this purpose you may read enough in Monsieur de Croy,
‘Of the Three Conformities.’

To make it yet more clear that the corruptions in religion by popery
came in by the design of suiting Christian religion to paganism, I
shall in a testimony or two shew you that they professedly avouched
the design. Gregory the Great writes chidingly to Serenus, bishop of
Marseilles, who it seems was no forward man in this matter to this
purpose,[303] ‘Thou shouldst have considered that thou didst converse
chiefly with the Gentiles, to whom pictures are instead of reading,
to the end that no offence be given them under colour of lawful zeal,
wherewith thou art not cunningly endued.’ And in another epistle to
Mellitus,[304] he adviseth, ‘That the honours and offerings which the
heathens gave to their demons should be transferred to the martyrs
and their relics,’ and gives this reason for it, ‘It is impossible,’
saith he, ‘to cut off all at once from stubborn minds.’[305] Eusebius
also endeavours to persuade to Christianity by this argument, that
the Christians’ custom of honouring the memories of the martyrs, and
solemnly assembling at their sepulchres, did agree with the custom
of the Gentiles of doing the like honour to their demons, and having
mentioned what Hesiod speaks concerning Plato’s opinion, that their
champions became demons after death, helpers and protectors of men—for
which cause they were worshipped at their sepulchres as gods; he
adds to this purpose, that ‘if these honours had been given to the
favourites of God, and champions of true religion, it had been well
enough;’ and for this shews the example and custom of Christians then
to go to the tombs of martyrs, there to pray in honour of their blessed
spirits. And although at first they might be more modest in honouring
the martyrs than now they are, according to that of Austin, ‘These
observances at the tombs of martyrs,’ saith he, ‘are only ornaments of
their memories, not sacrifices to them as to gods.’[306] Yet this soon
slid into greater abuse, insomuch that Lud. Vives,[307] in his notes
on that chapter, blames those of his own time for worshipping saints
as gods, and tells us he cannot see the difference betwixt the opinion
concerning saints, as generally practised, and that of the heathens
concerning their gods. I might add the positive acknowledgment of
Beatus Rhenanus, Jacobus de Voragine, concerning the burning of candles
to the Virgin Mary, which custom they confess was borrowed from the
heathens, with a respect to the frowardness of paganism, and a design
not to exasperate them, that they might gain them.

I might also shew that the mischief of this design, of accommodating
truth to a compliance with different parties, hath not only shewn
itself in introducing strange actions and ceremonies, but hath also
discovered itself in leavening men’s judgments in reference to opinion.
Calvin conjectures[308] that those confident assertions of the powers
of nature were first occasioned by an over-officious willingness
to reconcile the doctrine of the Scripture with the opinions of
philosophy; and that men being unwilling to run the hazard of the
scorn which they might meet with in contradicting the general received
principles of philosophers, were willing to form the doctrine of
truth relating to human ability accordingly. Abundance of instances
of this kind may be given. Whence came the doctrine of purgatory, but
from hence? It is but Plato’s philosophy Christianised by the Roman
synagogue.[309] He divided all men into three ranks: the virtuous,
who are placed by him in the Elysian fields; the desperate ungodly,
these he adjudgeth to everlasting fire; and a third sort, betwixt the
perfectly virtuous and the desperately wicked, he sendeth to Acheron,
to be purged by punishment. All of this Eusebius makes mention of at
large.[310] That the papists derived their purgatory from hence is
generally affirmed by protestants—nay, not only in these cases, but
in very many more, corruptions have entered into Christianity by an
over-eager endeavour to make the doctrine of the Scriptures to run
even with the sayings and assertions of the schools of philosophers;
a thing complained of old by Tertullian, who plainly affirmed the
philosophers to be the patriarchs of the heretics.[311] To which
agrees that observation of Dr Owen, that those who either apologised
for Christians, or refuted the objections of the heathens against
Christianity, frequently cited the opinions or sentences of the
philosophers, and accommodated them to their purpose, that so they
might beget in their adversaries more friendly persuasions towards
the Christian religion, by evidencing that the mysteries thereof were
not absurd, nor dissonant from reason, seeing they might be justified
by the sayings of their own philosophers. And ‘here was laid, in this
design and its prosecution, (and surely it pleased its undertakers
not a little,) the foundation of that evil which religion hath since
groaned under, that men made bold with the tremendous mysteries of
Christianity, to accommodate them unwarily to the notions of the
Gentiles.’[312] And this the apostle Paul foresaw in that caution he
gave, Col. ii. 8, ‘Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy
and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of
the world, and not after Christ.’ Certainly the snare is neither
unusual nor weak, where the caution is so serious. It is a thing
naturally pleasing, to be the inventor of any new thing, or to make
new discoveries in religion, to raise new hypotheses, or to adventure
in unbeaten paths, for a reconcilement of religion to any notion or
practice famous for its antiquity, or pretence to beauty and decency.
Men hug themselves when they can make several things to hit right, and
an exact suiting of parallels is instead of demonstration. By this
foolish delight the devil makes men bold to make essays; and what doth
answer their humour passeth current for undoubted truth.

[5.] He doth sometime blind the understanding, _by working up the
affections to such an earnest opposition to some error, that in a
forward haste they cast the mind upon a contrary extreme_; so that
through a hasty, violent avoidance of one error, they are cast upon a
contrary, and, it may be, as dangerous as that they fly from. And this
the devil doth with great ease, having the plausible pretence of zeal
and care to truth, wherein the affections being highly engaged, the
mind in a careless confidence doth easily overshoot the truth, which
commonly lies in the middle, and thinks it doth well enough if it gives
the greatest contradiction to the error now to be abominated. Men in
this case, having their eyes only fixed upon what they would avoid,
consider not so much whither they are going, as from what they go. So
that seeking, as men in a fright, to avoid the pit that is before them,
they run backward into another behind them.

This is such a noted stratagem of Satan, that all men take notice of
it in the general, though all men do not improve the discovery for
their own particular caution. The wisest of men are often so befooled
by their violent resistance of an untruth, that they readily overshoot
themselves and miss the mark. The fathers, in the heat of dispute,
said many things so inconveniently, that those who come after do see
and lament these hasty oversights, and have no other way to salve
their credit but by giving this observation in excuse for them. And it
may be observed that some errors which have risen from this root at
first have so strongly fixed themselves, that they have grown up to
the great annoyance of the truth; while the contrary errors that did
occasion them are forgotten, and their memories are perished. I shall
but instance in one instead of many, and that shall be Arianism. How
sadly prevalent that hath been in its time, all men know that know
anything of church history. The Christian world once groaned under
it. But that which gave the first occasion to Arius to fix himself
in that error was the doctrine of Alexander, who, discoursing of
the unity in the Trinity too nicely, seemed to justify the error of
Sabellius, who had taught, as also Noetus before, that there was but
one person in the Trinity, called by divers names of Father, Son, and
Spirit, according to different occasions; the Trinity, according to
his doctrine, being not of persons, but of names and functions. While
Arius was dissatisfied with this account of the Trinity, he ran to a
contrary extreme; and that he might give the highest proof of a Trinity
of persons, he affirmed that Jesus Christ had a beginning, and that
there was a time when he was not, &c. Thus Socrates speaks of the rise
of that heresy.[313]

We might further follow the footsteps of this device, and trace it in
most opinions; where we might find the humour of running to a contrary
extreme hath still either set up a contrary error, or at least leavened
the truth with harsh and unjustifiable expressions and explanations.
The disputes betwixt faith and works have been thus occasioned and
aggravated. Some speak so of faith, as if they slighted works; others
so urge a necessity of works, as if they intended to make faith
useless. Some talk of grace, to an utter contempt of morality; others,
on the contrary, magnify morality to the annihilating of grace. Some
in their practice acquiesce in the outward performance of ordinances:
if they pray or receive the sacraments, though never so formally,
they are at peace, supposing they have done all that is required;
others observing the mistake, and knowing that God looks more to the
performance of the soul and spirit than to the act of the body, upon
a pretence of worshipping God in spirit, throw off the observation of
his ordinances altogether. Neither is there anything that doth more
generally and apparently undo us in the present dissensions, as many
have complained, than men’s violent overdoing and running to contrary
extremes.

[6.] Satan _makes use of rewards or punishments, on the one hand
to bribe, or on the other to force the affections, and they being
strongly possessed, easily prevail with the understanding to give
sentence accordingly_. Men are soon persuaded to take that for truth
which they see will be advantageous to them. Some men indeed take
up with a profession of truth, which yet their hearts approve not;
but the advantages they have by their profession, do silence their
dissatisfactions; these are said to use the profession of truth as
‘a cloak of covetousness,’ 2 Thes. ii. 5. But others go further, and
are really brought to an approbation of that doctrine or way that
makes most for their profit, their minds being really corrupted by a
self-seeking principle. They persuade themselves, where there is any
contest about doctrines, that that doctrine is true which is gainful,
and will accordingly dispute for it. Hence that expression in 1 Tim.
vi. 5, ‘supposing that gain is godliness.’

To this may be added, that the affections are quickly sensible of the
ease and sensual gratifications of any doctrine, and these are usually
thrown into the same scale to make more weight. Men have naturally a
good liking to that doctrine that promiseth fair for ease, liberty,
gain, and honour; and this hath made it a usual piece of Satan’s
business in all ages to gild an error with outward advantages, and to
corrupt the mind by secret promises of advancement.

On the other side, he labours as much to prejudice truth, by
representing it as hazardous and troublesome to the professors of
it. And this not only affrights some from an open confession of the
truth they believe, but also, by the help of the affections, doth
persuade some to believe that to be an error, which unavoidably brings
persecution with it. By this engine are the minds of men turned about
to think well or ill of a doctrine presented to them. This is so well
known that I shall forbear a further prosecution of this head, and
go to the next course that Satan takes to corrupt the judgment by the
affections; which he doth,

[7.] _By stirring up some particular passions, which in opinions do
usually more influence the understanding._ And here I shall only insist
upon these two, pride and anger, with the peculiar means that Satan
hath to engage them in his service.

That pride and anger are the two usual firebrands of contention and
fountains of error, all ages have acknowledged and bewailed. These two
companions in evil do so darken the mind, that the miserable captive in
whom they domineer is carried blindfold, he knows not whither, nor how.
Pride usually begins, and anger follows with all its forces, to justify
what pride hath undertaken. Hence the apostle, in 1 Tim. vi. 4, rakes
up all the concomitant filth of error, as envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings, and perverse disputings of men, and lays them at the door
of pride: ‘He is proud, knowing nothing.’

For the engaging of these two thieves, that rob the understanding
of its light, Satan hath many artifices in readiness. Pride, which
is forward enough of itself, is soon excited by laying before it an
opportunity of a seeming rare discovery, or of advancing the glory of
knowledge above the common pitch, of being seen and admired as more
excellent than others, &c.: for upon such unworthy grounds have some
dared to adventure upon strange notions; yet there is nothing that
doth more firmly engage it than contention or dispute: for though the
proper end of disputation be the sifting out of truth, yet such is
man’s pride, and Satan’s advantage by it, that it seldom attains its
true end in those that are engaged. Bystanders that keep their minds
calm and unbiased, may receive more satisfaction than the contenders
themselves; and there needs no other evidence of this than the common
experience which men have of our frequent contentions; where we
have confutations, answers and replies, and yet still all parties
continue in their opinions without conviction. So that they that would
unfeignedly seek truth, in my mind, take not the best course in their
pursuit, that presently engage themselves in a public dispute; for the
usual heats that are begot in a contention alienate their minds from
a just impartiality, and the dust they raise blinds their eyes, that
they discern not truly. Let us look into this artifice of engaging
pride by disputation, and by it the judgment. First we find that when
a humour of contending is raised, certain truths are neglected, as
to their improvement and practice; for so much of the strength of
the soul is laid out upon disputable questions, that little is left
for more weighty matters. Secondly, In disputes men’s credit is so
concerned, that it is a most difficult thing to preserve a faithful
regard to verity, especially where they are managed with affronts
and contumelies. They that by calm handling might be induced to
acknowledge a mistake, will scarce come near that point of ingenuity,
when they must be called fool, knave, or ass for their labour. Hence
ordinarily, though they profess otherwise, men seek rather victory than
truth. Thirdly, In disputes pride and passion are usually heightened,
and the stronger the passions are the weaker is the judgment. Eager
altercations bring a confusion, both upon the matter of which they
dispute and upon the understanding that should judge. Fourthly, In the
heat of disputation, when the mind is inflamed, men usually behave
themselves like those in a fray, where they snatch and throw anything
that comes to hand, and never mind where it hits; they will affirm or
deny anything that may seem any way to bring them off. Fifthly, These
assertions being once affirmed must be maintained, and so errors and
contentions increase without end. Disputes fix a man in his persuasion,
and do, as it were, tie him to the stake, so that right or wrong he
will go through with it. Sixthly, Some dispute in jest against their
present judgment, and yet at last dispute themselves into a belief of
what they wantonly at first affirmed; as some tell lies so long, that
at length they believe them to be true. Seventhly, A sadder mischief
often follows a disputing humour, which is a hazard of the loss of all
truth. Men dispute so long till they suspect all things, and after a
long trade of scepticism turn atheists.[314]

After the same manner doth the devil engage anger in all disputes and
controversies, for it keeps company with pride, wherever there is a
provocation. And besides this, anger stirring up injuries and wrongs,
hath often engaged men, as it were in revenge, to change their opinion,
and to take up another way or doctrine. Nay, often that simple mixture
of pride and anger which we call emulation, hath privately tainted the
integrity of mind, and prepared it for the next fair opportunity of
error. This is noted of Arius, by Theodoret, that when Alexander was
chosen bishop of Alexandria, he envied him the preferency, and from
thence sought occasions of contention, which after a little while the
devil brought to his hand, as we have heard.[315]

So great is the power of these two passions over the understanding,
that we have cause to wonder at their success. Seldom or never can it
be shewn that any ringleader in error was not visibly tainted with
pride, or not apparently soured with discontents and emulation.

[8.] To these ways of blinding the understanding by the affections
I shall add but one more, which is this: Satan endeavours mainly to
_adorn an error with truth’s clothing_. He takes its ornaments and
jewels to dress up a false doctrine, that it may look more lovely and
dutiful; I mean that he designs, where errors are capable of such an
imitation, to put them into the way, method, garb, and manner which
truth doth naturally use. If truth be adorned with zeal, order,
strictness, or have advantageous ways of managing itself, error must
straightway imitate it in all these things; and though he that looks
near may easily discern that it is not the natural complexion of error,
but an artificial varnish, and such as doth no more become it than a
court dress doth become a coarse, clownish, country person—for you may
at first look usually discover the wolf under sheep’s clothing, and
under the garb of the apostles of Christ you may see the ministers of
Satan—yet are the credulous usually affected with these appearances.
If they find a professed strictness, a seeming severity, an imitation
of the ways of truth, or of the fruits thereof, they commonly seek no
further, but judge that to be truth which doth the things that truth
doth; and if error can handsomely stand in competition with truth,
upon a pretence of being as effectual in good works, and doing things
of themselves lovely and of good report, it doth much gain upon the
good liking of those whose consideration leads them not much further
than fair appearances. I shall only exemplify this by the art and
policy which Julian used to set up paganism, and to ruin Christianity;
and those who have observed the ways which he took to gain his end,
will readily acknowledge he was as well skilled in advancing error
and suppressing truth as any whosoever, and knew exactly to suit his
designs to men’s inclinations. He observing that Christian religion
had some particular things in its practice and way which made its face
to shine, as that it had persons solemnly set apart by ordination for
teaching the mysteries of the gospel, and for managing the public
worship of God; that these persons were to be grave in their carriage,
and exemplary in a strict holy conversation; that the constitutions
of religion appointed certain necessary and effectual ways of
discipline, for punishment, and restoring of offenders, and bringing
them to repentance; that it took care of the comfortable maintenance
of those that had given up themselves to the ministry of the word and
prayer; that it also enjoined a relief of the poor and strangers, &c.:
taking notice, I say, of these excellencies in Christianity, and how
lovely they were in the eyes of their enemies, he appointed the like
constitutions for paganism, and ordained that the idol temples should
be suited in conveniency and comeliness to Christian churches: that
there should be seats and desks for the chief doctors and readers of
Gentilism, who at set times were to exhort the people and pray with
them; and that colleges and monasteries should be erected for them,
and for the relief of the poor and strangers; he commanded discipline
and penances for the chastisement of offenders; he required that their
priests should seriously give up themselves to the worship of God, as
also their families, that they should not frequent shows and taverns,
nor practise any infamous trade and art. Thus Sozomen reports him,[316]
and gives us a copy of his letter to Arsacius, high priest of Galatia,
to this purpose; and all this he did to bring Gentilism into credit
with the vulgar, whom he had observed to be affected to Christianity
for its order, strictness, and government.

Yet is not this the only instance that may be given in this kind: for
observe but any error that by schism sets up for itself in a distinct
party, and you shall see that though it departs from the truth of the
church, and from its communion, yet still, as the Israelites did with
the Egyptians, it carries away with it these jewels of the church, and
keeps to some considerable part of the church’s way, though modified
according to its own bent, that it might have a lustre with it, to make
it taking with others.

These eight particulars are the most remarkable ways of Satan whereby
the affections are gained to a good liking of error, and by them the
judgment secondarily corrupted to call it truth.




