CHAPTER II.

 _Of the advantages which Satan hath, and useth, for the introduction
 of error; as (1.) From his own power of spiritual fascination.
 That there is such a power, proved from Scripture, and from the
 effects of it. (2.) From our imperfection of knowledge;
 the particulars thereof explained. (3.) From the bias of
 the mind. What things do bias it, and the power of them to sway
 the understanding. (4.) From curiosity. (5.) From
 atheistical debauchery of conscience._


That Satan may the better speed in his design, he carefully takes
notice of, and diligently improves all advantages. Indeed all his
stratagems are advantages taken against us; for so the apostle, in his
caution to the Corinthians, calls his devices, ‘lest Satan should get
an advantage of us,’ 2 Cor. ii. 11. But here I only understand those
that are more general, which are the grounds and encouragements to his
particular machinations against men, and which also direct him in his
procedure. These are,

1. First, Satan’s own power of _spiritual fascination_, by which he
infatuates the minds of men, and deludes them, as the external senses
are deceived by enchantments or witchcraft.

That Satan is a cunning sophister, and can put fallacies upon the
understanding; that by subtle objections or arguments he can obtrude
a falsehood upon the belief of the unskilful and unwary; that he can
betray the judgment by the affections, are things of common practice
with him. But that which I am now to speak of is of a higher nature,
and though it may probably take in much of his common method of
ordinary delusion, yet in this it differs, at least that it is more
efficacious and prevalent; for as his power over the children of
disobedience is so great that he can ‘lead them captive at his will,’
except when he is countermanded by the Almighty, so hath he, by special
commission, a power to lead those to error effectually, without missing
his end, that have prepared themselves for that spiritual judgment by a
special provocation; and for aught we know, as he hath an extraordinary
power which he exerts at such times, so may he have an extraordinary
method which he is not permitted to practise daily, nor upon all.

That such a power as this the devil hath, is believed by those whose
learning and experience have made their judgments of great value with
serious men; and thus some do describe it: It is a delusion with a kind
of magical enchantment; so Calvin, Gal. iii. 1: a satanical operation
whereby the senses of men are deluded; thus Perkins, who after he had
asserted that Satan can corrupt the fantasy or imagination, he compares
this spiritual witchcraft to such diseases of melancholy, that make men
believe that they are, or do, what they are not or do not, as in the
disease called _lycanthropia_; and to the enchantments of Jannes and
Jambres, who deluded the senses of Pharaoh. Others more fully, call it
‘a more vehement operation of the great impostor, whereby he obtrudes
some noxious error upon the mind, and persuades with such efficacy that
it is embraced with confidence, defended strenuously, and propagated
zealously.’[220]

A particular account of the way and manner by which the devil doth
this, is a task beyond sober inquiry. It may suffice us to know that
such power he hath, and this I shall confirm from Scripture, and from
the effects of such delusion.

(1.) First, There are several scriptures which assert a power in Satan
to bewitch the minds of men into error, from which I shall draw such
notes as may confirm and in part explain this truth in hand.

And I shall begin with that of Gal. iii. 1, ‘O foolish Galatians, who
hath bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth?’ &c. The word
which the apostle here useth for bewitching, as grammarians and critics
note,[221] is borrowed from the practice of witches and sorcerers, who
use by secret powers to bind the senses, and to effect mischiefs. It
is true he speaks of false apostles, but he intends Satan as the chief
workman; and this he transfers to signify Satan’s power upon the mind,
in blinding the understanding for the entertainment of error. Neither
can anything be objected why this place should not prove a fascinating
power in Satan, such as we have been speaking of, but this, that it
may be supposed to intend no more than an ordinary powerful persuasion
by arguments. Yet this may be answered, not only from the authority of
learned interpreters, who apprehend the apostle and his expression to
intend more, but also from some concomitant particulars in the text. He
calls them ‘foolish Galatians,’ as we translate it, but the original
goes a little higher, to signify a madness; and withal he seems to
be surprised with wonder at the power of Satan upon them, which
had not only prevailed against the truth, but against such evident
manifestations of it as they had when they were so plainly, fully, and
efficaciously instructed; for ‘before their eyes Jesus Christ had been
evidently set forth;’ which expressions and carriage cannot rationally
be thought to befit a common ordinary case.[222]

Next to this, let us a little consider that famous scripture in 2
Thes. ii. 9-11, ‘Whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all
power ... and for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions,
that they should believe a lie.’ I shall from this place observe a
few things, which if put together will clear the truth we speak of:
As, first, In this delusion here mentioned, the apostle doth not only
set down extraordinary outward means, as signs and lying wonders,
but also suits these extraordinary means with a suitable concomitant
inward power; for by ‘power’ I do not understand, as some, [Piscator
and Sclater,] a power of shewing signs and doing wonders, as if the
apostle had said, ἐν δυνάμει σημέιων καὶ τεράτων, with the power of
signs and wonders—for the words will not well bear that without some
unnatural straining; but I understand by it a power, distinct from the
signs and wonders, by which he moves their hearts to believe, by an
inward working upon their minds, striking in with the outward means
of lying miracles propounded to their senses. And we may the better
satisfy ourselves in this interpretation, if we compare it with Rom.
xv. 19,[223] where not only the power of doing wonders is expressed by
a phrase, proper and different from this of the text in hand, ‘through
mighty signs and wonders,’ or in the power of signs and wonders, but
it is also clearly distinguished from the power of the Spirit of
God, in working upon the hearts, to make those wonders efficacious
and persuasive; so that, as in the Spirit of God we observe a power
to do wonders, and a power to work upon the heart by these wonders,
we may conclude that this wicked spirit hath also, in order to sin
and delusion, this twofold power. But secondly, I note further, That
this power is called a special energy of peculiar force and efficacy
in its working—κατ’ ἔνέργειαν τοῦ Σατανᾶ. The strange inexpressible
strength of it seems to stand in need of many words for explanation.
He calls it ‘all power’—ἐν πάσῃ δυνάμει—which as well notes the degree
and height, as the variety of its operations, and then the energy,
the virtue, operativeness, and strength of power. Thirdly, It is also
to be observed that Satan’s success and exercise of this power of
delusion depends upon the commission of God, and that therefore it is
extraordinary, and not permitted to him but upon special occasions and
provocation, ‘for this cause God shall send,’ &c. Fourthly, The success
of this power when exercised is certain. They are not only strong
delusions, in regard of the power from whence they come, but also in
regard of the event; those upon whom they come cannot but believe.
Infatuation and pertinaciousness are the certain fruits of it.[224]
Fifthly, The proof of all is manifest in the quality of the errors
entertained, for they are palpable gross lies, and yet believed as the
very truths of God, and they are in such weighty points as do evidently
determine the soul to ruin, ‘lies to be damned,’ which two things are
sufficient proofs of spiritual fascination; it being unimaginable that
rational men, and especially such as were instructed to a belief of a
contrary truth, should so far degenerate from the light of reason as
to be deluded by gross and apparent lies, and of such high importance,
except their minds had been blinded in some extraordinary way. Some
further confirmation may be added to this truth from 1 Kings xxii.
21, ‘And there came forth a spirit and stood before the Lord, and
said, I will persuade him.... I will go forth, and I will be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt
persuade him, and prevail also.’ I might here take notice of Satan’s
readiness in this work, as wanting neither skill nor will, if he were
but always furnished with a commission; as also the powerful efficacy
of spiritual witchcraft, where it pleaseth the Lord to permit to Satan
the exercise of his power, ‘Thou shalt persuade, and prevail also.’ But
that which I would observe here, is something relating to the manner
of his proceeding in these delusions. He attempted to deceive the
false prophets, and by them to delude Ahab; and both, by being a lying
spirit in the mouth of the prophets, which necessarily, as Peter Martyr
observes, implies, (1.) That Satan had a power so strongly to fix upon
their imaginary[225] faculty the species, images, or characters of what
was to be suggested, that he could not only make them apprehend what
he presented to their minds, but also make them believe that it was a
divine inspiration, and consequently true; for these false prophets
did not speak hypocritically what they knew to be false, but what they
confidently apprehended to be true, as appears by the whole story.
(2.) He could irritate and inflame their desires to publish these
their persuasions to the king, after the manner of divine prophecies.
(3.) He had a further power of persuading Ahab that his prophets spake
truth.[226]

That passage of Rom. i. 28, ‘God gave them over to a reprobate mind,’
doth give some account how men are brought by the devil into these
false persuasions. A reprobate mind is a mind injudicious, a mind that
hath lost its power of discerning—Νοῦς ἀδοκιμός. It is plain then that
he can so besot and blind the mind that it shall not be startled at
things of greatest absurdity or inconveniency.

If any yet further inquire how he can do these things; we must answer,
that his particular ways and methods in this case we know not: only
it may be added, that, Eph. iv. 17, Paul tells us he can make their
‘minds vain, and darken their understandings.’ By mind, Νοὸς, the seat
of principles is commonly understood. By understanding, Διάνοια, the
reasoning or discursive faculty, which is the seat of conclusions: so
that his power seems to extend to the obliterating of principles, and
can also disable them to make right inferences, insomuch that he wants
nothing that may be necessary to the begetting of strong persuasions of
any falsehood which he suggests, according to what is intimated, Gal.
v. 3, ‘This persuasion cometh not of him that called you’—that is, not
of God, but of the devil.

From all these scriptures then it appears that this spiritual
fascination is a power in Satan, which he exerts, by special
commission, upon those that receive not the truth in the love of it, by
which he can so strongly imprint falsehoods upon their minds, that they
become unable to discern betwixt truth and a lie, and so by darkening
their understanding, they are effectually persuaded to believe an error.

(2.) Secondly, There is yet another proof of this spiritual witchcraft,
from the consideration _of the effects of it upon the deluded, and the
uncouth, strange, unnatural way of its proceeding_. Let all particulars
of this kind be put together, and it will not be found possible to give
any other rational account of some errors than that of extraordinary
delusion.

[1.] First, Let us take notice of the _vileness and odiousness of
some errors that have prevailed upon men_. Some have been plainly
sottish, so evidently foolish that it cannot be imagined that men that
entertained them had at that time the use of reason, or any competent
understanding. This very consideration the prophet Isaiah insists
upon largely, chap. xliv. 9-21, where he taxeth them smartly for the
senseless doltishness of their error in worshipping idols. He tells
them the matter of it is the work of nature, a cedar, oak, or ash, that
they themselves possibly had planted, and the rain did nourish it,
ver. 14. He tells them also that the form of it was from the art of
the workman, the smith, or carpenter: ver. 12, 13, ‘The smith with the
tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and
worketh it with the strength of his arms.... The carpenter stretcheth
out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes,
and he marketh it out with a compass.’ He further minds them, that
without any reverence they make use of the residue of the materials out
of which they formed their idol to common services of dressing their
meat and warming themselves. ‘He burneth part thereof in the fire; with
part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied; yea,
warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire,’
ver. 16. Then he accuseth them of sottishness, in that the ‘residue
thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down to it,
and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for
thou art my god,’ ver. 17. And from all this he concludes, that seeing
this is so directly contrary to common reason and understanding—which
in the ordinary exercise of it would easily have freed them from such
a dotage; for if they had but ‘knowledge or understanding to say, I
have burnt part of it in the fire; I have baked bread, and shall I
make the residue an abomination?’ ver. 19, they could not have been
so foolish. It must, then, of necessity be a spiritual infatuation.
‘Their eyes were shut that they cannot see, and their hearts, that they
cannot understand,’ ver. 18. ‘A deceived heart hath turned him aside,’
ver. 20. Other errors there are that lead to beastly and unnatural
villanies, such as directly cross all the sober principles of mankind,
the natural principles of modesty, the most general and undoubted
principles of religion and holiness, as when adulteries, swearing,
ranting, going naked, cruelties, murders, outrageous confusions and
madness, are clothed with pretences of spirit, revelation, freedom
in the use of the creature, exercise of love, and having all things
common, &c.: of which sad instances have been given more than once.
Let any sober man consider how it could come to pass, that men that
have reason enough to defend them against such furies, and the
knowledge of Scripture, which everywhere—with the greatest happiness
imaginable and highest earnestness—doth prohibit such practices as
most abominable, and doth direct to a sober, just, modest, humble,
inoffensive life, should entertain notwithstanding, such errors as
transform men into beasts, monsters, or rather devils, and religion
into the grossest impieties; and all this as the perfection and top of
religious attainment commanded in the word of God or by his Spirit, and
well-pleasing to most holy and pure divine majesty! Let it, I say, be
left to the consideration of men how it should be, without some such
extraordinary cause as hath been mentioned.

[2.] Secondly, Let it be observed also, that some errors bring with
them some _extraordinary, strange, unnatural, unusual actions_, and
put men into such odd garbs, postures, and behaviours, that it is
easy to see they are acted by a force or power not human. Some have
been carried to do things beyond whatsoever might have been expected
from the age and capacities of the parties; as ecstasies, trances,
and quakings of little children; their prophesying and speaking
Scripture threatenings after such fits. Some have been acted in a way
of ecstatical fury; as Montanus, of whom Eusebius witnesseth,[227]
that ‘sometimes he would be seized upon by a kind of malignant
spirit, and would suddenly break forth into a rage and madness, and
presently utter rash and bold speeches, strange, unusual voices, with
prophesyings; insomuch that he was judged by those that saw him to be
acted by the devil.’ Others have been as in a more sober spiritual
rapture; an instance whereof I shall give you from Mr Baxter in these
words: ‘I have heard from an ancient godly man that knew Arthington
and Coppinger, that they were possessed with the spirit of the
Grundletonians. The same man affirmed that he went but once among them
himself, and after prayer they breathed on him as giving him the Holy
Ghost; and he was so strangely transported for three days that he was
not the same man, and his family wondered what was the matter with
him: he had no confession of sin, but an elevated strain in prayer,
as if he had been in strange raptures; and after three days he was
as before, and came no more at them.’[228] Some have been carried
into childish and ridiculous actions: such was the behaviour of Jo.
Gilpin in his delusion at Kendal in Westmoreland; as his going to the
fiddler’s house, playing upon a bass viol in token of spiritual melody;
his creeping up the streets upon hands and knees in token of bearing
his cross; his making marks on the ground, and beating it, as his
mortification of sin; and a great many more things of like nature.[229]

Such things as these are as spiritual marks and characters engraven
upon errors, by which a diabolical power, moving and acting such
deluded creatures, like so many puppets, is evidently discovered.

[3.] Thirdly, When we see not only idiots, and those whose defect of
understanding might put them under the power of an ordinary cheat, thus
imposed upon, _but men otherwise intelligent, rational, and serious_,
blinded with follies, taken with apparent dotages, admiring trifles,
and carried away with things which common reason would teach them
to abhor, it is more than suspicious that it is not any probability
of truth or excellency in the error that prevails with them, but a
spiritual power that doth bewitch them. When we consider that such a
learned man as Tertullian begins to admire such a wretch as Montanus;
or such a one as Arthington led away with Hacket and Coppinger; or such
a man as Kneperdollin seduced by John of Leyden; and especially such
numbers of wise and seemingly sober and religious persons, going down
the stream after irrational and plainly irreligious errors,—what else
can be apprehended to be the cause but a powerful satanical delusion?

[4.] Fourthly, Add we to these the consideration of _the suddenness of
the prevalency of such errors against plain and evident truths_, which
is a circumstance taken notice of by the apostle: Gal. i. 6, ‘I marvel
that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of
Christ unto another gospel.’ In which case we may observe it usually
falls out that men’s affections prevent their discoveries; at the first
view they are taken, before they understand what the error is, and they
are persuaded before they know.

[5.] Fifthly and lastly, That _the earnestness of the prosecution by
which they maintain and propagate the error is a kind of unnatural
fury, which hurries men with violence into an unyielding stiffness,
to the stifling of all kind of charity and consideration_. These
things put together, I say, makes the matter in hand evident; when
men otherwise rational are at first touch highly enamoured with, and
violent in the pursuit of errors that are sottish or devilish, we can
resolve it into nothing less than into that of the apostle, ‘Who hath
bewitched you?’ The improvement of this first and great advantage for
the introduction of errors is more than can be well expressed; but he
hath besides other advantages which he noway neglects: among which,

2. Secondly, _Our imperfection in knowledge_ is none of the least. If
our knowledge had been perfect, it would have been a task too hard for
the devil to make us erroneous; for men do not err but so far as they
are ignorant. To impose upon men against clear and certain knowledge is
impossible. Men cannot believe that to be true which they know to be
false. It would be as silly for Satan to make such attempts as for a
juggler to endeavour the deception of those that know and see the ways
of his conveyances as well as himself. That our knowledge is imperfect,
I shall prove and explain in the following particulars:—

[1.] First, _The Scripture plainly asserts it_. The greatest number of
men which are in an unregenerate estate are expressly called foolish,
blind, ignorant—men that are in darkness, men that do not know nor
consider, that perish through ignorance. Others that, in comparison to
these, are called ‘children of the light,’ and such as ‘see with open
face,’ are notwithstanding, when compared to a state of perfection,
represented to be in the non-age of their knowledge, unripe, imperfect.
The apostle doth so express it, 1 Cor. xiii. 9, ‘We know in part,
we prophesy in part.’ In the explanation of this, he compares our
attainments in this world to the understanding, thoughts, and speakings
of children, ver. 11: concludes, ver. 12, that all our knowledge gives
us but a dark, imperfect reflection of things: ‘we see through a glass
darkly.’

[2.] Secondly, _Men that have had the clearest heads, and have been at
the greatest pains in their inquiries to find out truths, have brought
back the clear conviction of their own ignorance_. Austin confesseth
that in the Scriptures—which he made his chief study—the things which
he knew not were more than the things he understood.[230] Chytræus,
in humble modesty, goes a little further: ‘My dearest knowledge,’
saith he, ‘is to know that I know nothing;’ and it will be a clear
demonstration of that man’s ignorance that boasts of his knowledge; his
own mouth will prove against him that ‘he knows nothing as he ought to
know,’ [1 Cor. viii. 2.]

[3.] Thirdly, The consideration of _the nature of the things which are
the objects upon which we employ our search_ will sufficiently convince
us that we do comprehend but very little. For though the Scripture hath
expressed the main concerns of eternal life so fully that they are as
clear as light, and need no such stretch of the brain but that the
meanest capacities may as certainly understand them as they understood
anything of common business; as, that Christ died for sinners; that
without faith it is impossible to please God; that without holiness
no man shall see his face, &c. Yet, as Peter speaks, 2 Pet. iii. 16,
‘There are many things that are hard to be understood,’ δυσνόητά τινα.
There are difficulties, depths, and mysteries. Some things, whereof
we have but dark touches in Scripture, though enough to let us know
that such things there are, and, to humble us for our ignorance, are
in their own nature sublime, bounded on all sides with rocks and
precipices, where our near and bold approaches are prohibited: such
are those things that concern the decrees of God, the Trinity, &c.
Other things are dark and uncertain to us, from their very proximity
to us—as some are pleased to fancy the reason. Such are the nature,
faculties, and workings of our own souls within us—which we cannot
directly see, as the eye sees not itself, and do but, as it were, guess
by dark reflections. Some things in Scripture are accidentally obscure
to us that were plain to those that heard them first, to whom they
were spoken and written; for now to the understanding of a great many
passages there is necessary the knowledge of the tongues in which they
were dictated, of the histories of those times to which they severally
related; as also of the particular customs of the Jewish nation, which
gave a mould and form to a great many Scripture assertions; all which
were easy and familiar to those that knew the exact propriety of such
languages, were acquainted thoroughly with such histories, customs,
usages, and manner of speakings; and besides all these, the application
of general rules to particular cases—where a little circumstance may
make a great alteration—is full of puzzle and intricacy; insomuch that
some have thought that there are several cases of conscience that are
not yet fully determined, and that are like so to remain.[231]

[4.] Fourthly, Neither is _the nature of knowledge itself_ without
an argument to prove the insufficiency of our knowledge. To know is
properly to understand things by their causes, or at least by their
effects, and to make a right result of particulars from a general
maxim. Such a kind of knowledge is necessary in religion, for setting
aside some particulars of mysterious height, about which God hath
set bounds, lest men in presumptuous boldness should adventure to
‘break through unto the Lord to gaze;’ and some things which are the
principles of nature, or their next results, which are, upon that
score, beyond all need of inquiry—in all which it is enough to believe
that what the Scripture saith is true, without asking a further
account; yet in other things the Scripture gives us the grounds,
reasons, and proofs of what it declares or asserts, as may appear
by infinite examples; so that to know Christ died, or that we are
justified by faith, or that Christ shall come to judgment, without a
knowledge of the grounds and reasons of these things, is indeed but
gross ignorance. The like may be said of the knowledge of general
precepts, without the knowledge of their necessary application.

But how few are there that do thus know! The greatest part of men
satisfy themselves with the bare affirmations of Scripture, and they
resolve all into this, that the word of God saith so, or that it is the
will of God it should be so, without further inquiry.

And as for others, though they may know the reasons of many things,
yet are there a vast number of particulars whose reasons we know
not, though the Scripture may contain them; and as for consequences,
and the application of general rules, their just limitation, and the
enumeration of the cases wherein they are true or false, it is that
that keeps the wits of men upon the rack perpetually.

[5.] Fifthly, _The unsuitableness of our capacities to those objects of
knowledge_ may be particularly considered as a further confirmation of
our ignorance. The incapacity of the vulgar is generally observed. Some
we find so grossly ignorant, that they are incapable to comprehend the
easiest matters; and this makes their persuasion to some plain truths
so very difficult, that when they are, as it were, ‘brayed in a mortar’
by a multitude of unreasonable[232] arguments, yet their ignorance
‘departs not from them,’ but they will stubbornly hold the conclusion
of their own fancy, whatever become of the premises. Those that are
of a higher form, and seem to understand a great many particulars in
religion, are ordinarily unable to conjoin all truths into one entire
proportionable body: they heap up several notions that they hear here
and there, but know not their consistencies; insomuch that they either
are like children, who know all the letters of the alphabet, without
the skill to frame words or sentences out of them, being unable to
give an account how their notions are related one to another, or to
the whole; or if they attempt such a thing, they hang inconsistent
things on the same thread, and do but _humano capiti cervicem jungere
equinam_. If these instances, and a great many more of like kind, were
not at hand, yet the very condescensions of our great prophet the
Lord Jesus, and of his disciples in their ways of teaching, do evince
that the capacities of men are low—that they are ‘dull of hearing,
children in understanding.’ The course they took was to instruct them
in a plain, familiar way, by parables and examples. Thus were they
‘fed as babes in Christ,’ according to the apostle’s similitude, with
‘milk, and not with strong meat, because they were not able to bear
it,’ 1 Cor. iii. 1. And yet Christ sometimes complained that this would
not do. For so he speaks, John iii. 12, ‘If I have told you earthly
things,’ that is, divine truth in earthly and common similitudes, ‘and
ye believe not,’ _i.e._, cannot apprehend them, ‘how shall ye believe
if I tell you of heavenly things?’ How unable, then, would you be to
understand these truths if I should speak in language and expression
properly suited to their natures? A great check to our slowness of
apprehension.

But possibly some may expect higher matters from those that are exalted
above the common rank of men by the repute they have of learning. And
indeed it cannot be denied but such have very great advantages for the
widening of their capacities; yet are they not such as wholly take
away the distemper, but still so much incapacity may be seen in them
as will sufficiently justify the charge of imperfection in knowledge
against the most learned. Let us bring in some instances, and it will
be evident:

(1.) _The greatest errors that have most disturbed the church in all
ages have had their rise from learned men._ The names of their authors
are marked upon their foreheads. These known errors are so many, that
they fill whole volumes. The result of which consideration will be
this, that learned men have often been very dangerously mistaken.

(2.) _The present contentions and disputes of men_, managed on all
hands with so much earnestness, wherein one party triumphs over
another, and all, in their own apprehensions, are victorious. Instead
of conquests by arguments and answers, each party is but more confirmed
in its own apprehensions; and yet the one-half is certainly wrong,
and perhaps in many things both parties are mistaken. This, I say,
sufficiently shows the incapacities of the learned; for if every
capacity were truly correspondent to truth, there would be no more
disputes nor differences.

(3.) _The most learned find the business of their own persuasion and
satisfaction in many truths, in which common people have no scruple
nor doubt, very difficult_; because they see more objections to be
answered, and more of the weakness of arguments than others do; but
this shews their capacities are not so large as some would think.

(4.) Let us once for all consider _that which seems to be the highest
evidence for knowledge and understanding in the learned, and we shall
find, upon just examination, it is no more than an argument of their
ignorance_. What is there wherein they seem more acute and eagle-eyed
than in their distinctions, by which they would give us the most minute
differences of things, and appear so exact as if they would divide
an atom, and give everything its just weight and measure? But let us
consider that, though all distinctions are not unprofitable, their
multitude is become oppressive and troublesome, and more time must
be spent in learning terms and words of art than things; and their
nicety and subtlety so great, that they rather darken truth, and give
occasion to bold spirits to undertake the defence of any paradox. Nay,
if we could sever these clearly from their abuses, yet, seeing it is
certain there are more distinctions of terms than things, they will
evince that our knowledge is more verbal than real, and that often for
a mountain of words we have but a molehill of substantial matter. Nay,
seeing we make but a sorry shift at best by these artifices to come
to some rude conceptions of things, which otherwise we cannot in any
tolerable manner comprehend, it is as great a proof of our imperfection
in knowledge, as the necessary use of staves and crutches is an
evidence of lameness. If I should pass from this to the consideration
of the multitude beyond all number of books that are written, we
shall find them but so many proclamations of our ignorance; for if
we could believe them all to contain so many wholesome precepts of
necessary truth, which yet we cannot rationally imagine, this would
imply that the greatest part wanted these informations; and that common
ignorance is not only a general distemper, but also a distemper hard
to be cured, that stands in need of such multitudes of instructors and
such varieties of helps. But if we believe that among this infinite
number of volumes there are thousands of lies, millions of unproved
conjectures, millions of millions of idle, unprofitable fancies, then
do we in express terms pronounce them guilty of ignorance, and of
ignorance so much the more dangerous, by how much the more bold it is
to avouch itself in the light, and to obtrude itself upon the belief of
others, who, instead of being better informed by it, shall but increase
their own blindness. Were there nothing to be said but this, that there
are such a vast multitude of commentators upon the Bible, which do all
pretend to expound and explain it, it would of necessity admit of these
conclusions:—[1.] That the Bible hath in it things so dark, or at least
our capacities are so dull, that there is need of great endeavours to
explain the one, or assist the other. [2.] That the knowledge of men
is imperfect; for if all or most men could certainly interpret the
Scripture, there needed not so many volumes, but that one or two might
have signified as much as now whole libraries can do.

The imperfection of our knowledge being thus laid open, it is easy
to see what advantages the devil may make out of it for the promoting
of error; for it must now become our wonder, not that any man errs,
but that all do not. We find it easy to impose anything upon children;
it is an easy matter for a trifle to cheat them out of all they have.
Surely then Satan may do as much by men, who are but ‘children in
understanding.’ The apostle, Eph. iv. 14, puts us in mind of this
hazard under that very similitude, ‘that we henceforth be no more
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine.’ How fitly doth he resemble us to children! Their weaknesses
are, [1.] Want of discerning; they see not the true worth of things.
[2.] Credulity; they believe all fair speeches and specious promises:
and the hazard of both these is in this, that it makes them unconstant,
uncertain, and fickle; and such are we made by our ignorance, so little
do we truly discern, so apt are we to believe every pretence, for the
simple believes every word, Prov. xiv. 15; that, as the apostle’s
metaphors do tell us, we are easily tossed from one conceit or opinion
to another, as a ship is by the waves, or a feather in the wind.
κλυδονιζόμενοι καὶ περιφερόμενοι.

3. Thirdly, A third advantage which the devil takes against us in his
design of error, is _the bias of the mind_. Were our understandings
purely free, in a just and even balance toward all things propounded
to its deliberation and assent, though it were imperfect in its light,
the danger were the less; but now, in regard of the bent and sway it
is under, it is commonly partial, and inclined to one side more than
to another, and yet the matter were the less, if only one or two noted
things had the power of setting up a false light before the mind; but
there are many things that are apt to do us this mischief, which have
the same effect upon us that bribes have upon persons interested in
judgment, which not only tempts them to do wrong, but so blinds their
eyes that they know not they do so, or at least not in so great a
measure. The mind is biassed,

(1.) First, _Naturally to error rather than truths_. The corruption
of our nature is general, and doth not only dispose the will and
affections to practical iniquities, but doth also incline the
understanding to error and misapprehension. And that seems to be the
ground of Christ’s assertion against the Jews: John v. 43, ‘I am come
in my Father’s name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come
in his own name, him ye will receive.’ Which implies that men are
naturally more prone to believe an impostor, than one that speaks
the most certain and profitable verities; and besides this general
inclination to vanities and lies, there are, if some think right, some
errors that are formally engraven in the nature of fallen man—as that
opinion to be saved by works.[233] For not only do all men that have
any apprehensions of a future eternal state resolve that question of
obtaining salvation into works as the proper cause,—and indeed no
other could have been imagined, if the Scripture had not revealed the
redemption by the blood of Jesus—but the Jews in John vi. 28, when they
propound that question, ‘What shall we do, that we might work the works
of God?’ take it for granted, that works of some kind or other are the
causes of happiness. Possibly some impression of that notion, while it
was a truth, as in the state of innocency it was, may yet remain upon
our natures, though by the fall the case is altered with us.

(2.) Secondly, The mind is biassed _by bodily temper and complexional
inclination_. The varieties of complexions introduce varieties of
humours and dispositions; and the understanding being necessitated to
look through these, as so many coloured glasses, is apt to judge, that
is, to misjudge, according to the misrepresentation of objects.

(3.) Thirdly, Sometimes _habitual acquirements have the same influence
upon the understanding that natural humours have_. The arts and
sciences we study, our ways of education and employment, are but so
many prejudicate prepossessions that do secretly taint the mind.

(4.) Fourthly, There are also _accidental inclinations_, which, though
not customary, have the force of a second nature, because their
working is violent and impetuous, and these, which are from a wounded
conscience or excesses of melancholy, have a bias more than ordinary;
they lay violent hands upon the understanding, and with a mighty
torrent run it down. So that if an error be offered that is suitable
to such fears or misapprehensions, it can scarce miss of success. The
extraordinary turbulences of some other passions, as anger, love, &c.,
have the like effect.

(5.) Fifthly, _Vicious habits_ do so much bias the mind, that the
understanding must needs be defiled by them. Nothing can more prepare
the mind to a wicked error than a wicked life. An error of indulgence
being so grateful to corruption may readily find favour with the
understandings of those that know not to do good, because they have
accustomed themselves to do evil.

(6.) Sixthly, There are _external things_ that have no less power on
the understanding than any of the foregoing; and these are custom,
education, and interest. These stick so close, and work so subtly, that
though there are few that are not, in disputable cases, influenced by
them, yet none are able or willing to take notice how and by what steps
they do engage them to pass sentence against truth. And indeed that
man must have a singular measure of suspicious watchfulness and clear
integrity that is not deceived by them. And the best way to keep clear
of the mischief that these may do us, is to be severe in our suspicions
on that side to which custom and interest have their tendencies.

(7.) Seventhly, I might note that there is something considerable to
this purpose _in the nature of spirits_. Some spirits are unfixed and
volatile, and these are soon altered by their own unsteadiness. Others
are tenacious and unflexible; and if such be first set wrong, it is
not an easy thing that will reduce them to truth. Others are soft and
ductile, persuaded by good words as soon as strong arguments. And
again, some are of such a rough, sour, contradictious temper, that
they will sooner choose to run wrong than comply with the persuasions
of those that offer truth, even for that reason, because they are
persuaded to it; so that the truth which, if none had minded them, they
of themselves would have embraced, they will now refuse when it is
pressed upon them, out of a cross and thwarting humour, because they
hate nothing more than to do as they are bidden.

To come a little nearer, let us consider how these things shew their
power upon the mind to sway and incline it. It is indeed true, that in
things that are clearly and strongly propounded to the understanding,
it cannot but judge according to the evidence of truth, and cannot be
guided by the will to judge contrary; nay, the will—though in things
purely speculative it may retain its averseness, as also in things
practical, while they are considered only as what may be done before
the understanding hath come up to its final resolve, determining that
such things must or ought to be done—cannot but follow the light and
information of the understanding, and that according to the proportion
of its conviction; so that though in some cases a man would have things
otherwise than he believes them to be, yet he cannot believe what he
will, neither can he refuse to will what is certainly represented to be
good and necessary. _Tantum quisque vult, quantum intelligit se velle
debere._ Notwithstanding all this, the forementioned particulars may so
bias the mind that it shall not act truly and steadily, as we may see
in these three particulars:

[1.] First, _In things clearly demonstrated to the understanding_,
though the will cannot directly oppose, nor prevail to have them judged
false, yet it can indirectly hinder the procedure of the understanding,
and divert it from fixing its consideration upon the truth, or from
working itself into positive determinations for bringing it into
practice. _Intellectus sequitur voluntatem quoad exercitium, non quoad
specificationem._ Thus many that cannot but believe there is a God,
and that his law is true, being biassed by their lusts, the power of
pleasures or interest, &c., do prevail upon their understandings to
take up other objects of consideration; so that they are said to forget
God, and to cast his commandments behind their backs, as also not to
remember their latter end, though they cannot but believe that they
shall die. Truth may be imprisoned and fettered, where it cannot be
slain. We read of ‘holding the truth in unrighteousness,’ Rom. i. 18,
which was this, that those heathens of whom the apostle speaks, by
reason of their vicious inclinations and practices, though they could
not obliterate those notices of equity and religion that were imprinted
on their minds, yet they kept them at under, as captives in a dungeon,
and suffered them not to rise up in a just practical improvement. Now
the wrong that is done to truth this way is not only by rendering
it unfruitful and useless at present, but hereby the devil hath his
advantage in the gaining of time to gather together more forces against
that truth, and by frequent onsets of contrary arguings, especially
upon the advantage of the mind’s indifferency and remissness, begot by
long and often diversions, to set another face upon it, and by degrees
to overturn former persuasions. This was the very case of the heathens
in the place last cited, who, being first swayed by their impieties,
became unwilling to give way to those dictates of light and justice
which they had; and having thus gratified their lusts, the devil
further prevailing with them to find evasions from the power of those
truths, they began to make unsuitable inferences from these premises,
which they could not deny, and so became sottish and vain in their
reasonings, ‘changing the glory of the uncorruptible God, into an image
made like unto corruptible man.’ And by such practices against truth,
they at last changed the truth into a lie, ver. 25, and at long-run
obliterated the knowledge of God out of their minds. This is Satan’s
old method of overturning truth at last, by diverting the mind from
receiving the present powerful impressions of those principles.

[2.] Secondly, But in things doubtful, where there is not a clear
certainty what is truth, but contrary opinions strive with such
equal confidence, that it is difficult to determine which hath the
conquest, there the mind may be so swayed by its bias that it _may give
approbation to error; nay, where, upon a fair and indifferent trial,
truth hath the greater appearance of strength, and error nothing else
than little shadows or appearances of reason to shelter itself under_;
yet that way may the mind be inclined by the aforesaid things. We have
a more easy and facile belief for what we would have than for what we
would not. Though there is nothing more noted by common experience
than this, that men are usually drawn aside by humours, inclinations,
interests, and education, &c., to judge well of that which an
unprejudiced person would easily see to be weak, unjust, ridiculous, or
unreasonable; yet how these considerations and tempers do exert their
force upon the understanding to draw it into a compliance, or by what
secret art they can heighten probabilities, and lessen objections; or
by what insensible progress they move, that men thus carried do not
perceive that they are under such a force, is not so very discernible.
How often may we observe men, that are rational enough to discover the
pitiful shifts and poor allegations of others, with such gravity and
confidence, where their own interests are concerned, to offer such low
reasonings and extravagant impertinences, that all that hear them are
ready to laugh at their folly; and yet they themselves entertain no
less than persuasions of the invincibleness of their arguings. They
so eagerly desire what they would establish, that they think anything
is enough to justify it, and are apt to imagine that their shifts and
excuses appear as strong to others as to themselves. I have known some
that, by the sway of interest, have changed their opinions in religious
matters, and have really become otherwise persuaded than they had been
formerly, and not as some who, for advantage, will knowingly take up
what they cannot believe to be true, and have not been able to say that
they have met with new arguments or new answers to objections, but
I know not how arguments, which they had contemned, and laid by for
weak, began to look big upon them. The arguments by which their former
persuasion was upheld grew insensibly feeble in their hands; the one
revived, gathered strength, after they had a little cherished them,
by thinking there might be something in them, though before they knew
all the particulars, and could not instance in anything which they had
not formerly notified and answered; and the other sort of arguments
grew weaker and weaker, till at last they parted with all good conceit
of them; so that such a change was but as the turning of the tables.
That which acted behind the curtain, and wrought this change of the
fancy, could be no other than some of the forementioned things that
biassed their mind; for where the arguments, _pro_ and _con_, were the
same, the alteration of opinion, where men are not so wicked as to go
directly against their own light, must of necessity be imputed to the
different positions of external things, and the different humours and
inclinations begot by them, even as the different stations of men in
the prospect of some pictures represent them variously; one way they
give the shape of a beautiful face, another way they express the ugly
deformity of a devil; or as different reflections of the sunbeams upon
the same object clothe it with several colours. The Scripture doth
also give us notice of this advantage which the devil takes from the
inclinations of men to lead them into mistakes. That of Micah ii. 11,
‘If a man, walking in the spirit of falsehood, do lie, saying, I will
prophesy unto thee of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be the
prophet of this people,’ hath this for its foundation, that, let the
error be never so gross and palpable, as if a man should prophesy a
liberty for drunkenness, if it be suitable to the sway of people’s
humours, it will readily enough be embraced, ‘he shall be a prophet to
this people,’ that is, such a prophet will easily prevail with such
a people; their vicious inclinations fit them for any impression of
a suitable error. The apostle Paul also found this too true in the
heresies of his own times; for he tells us that seducers had learned
that cunning from the devil to draw men to error by the sway of their
lusts: 2 Tim. iii. 6, ‘They creep into houses, and lead captive silly
women laden with sins, and led away with divers lusts;’ as also 2 Tim.
iv. 6, he prophesies of the future use of this stratagem, ‘After their
own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers.’ So that the usual
prevalency of error was and is from the underground working of lusts,
humours, habits, and inclinations, which make men willing to entertain
an opinion, which can but gratify them with a suitableness or fitness.

[3.] Thirdly, Where the forementioned particulars of inclination,
natural or acquired humours, custom, education, &c., do neither divert
the understanding, nor engage it to close with error; yet often do
they discover how powerfully they can bias the mind, in that these
prevail with men _to modify and mould a truth according to the bent
or form of their inclinations_; as a bowl which is skilfully aimed
at a mark, goes nevertheless by a compass which its bias forceth it
unto, according to the risings or fallings of the ground it meets with
in the way. Men may arrive at real truth in the main, and yet may
shape it according to their humours. For instance, let us consider
the different modes or forms in which the same truth is represented
under the workings of different tempers. A melancholy person conceives
of all things under such reflections as fear and sadness do usually
give. If he consider God, he looks upon him in the notion of greatest
severity and justice; if upon the ways of duty, he colours them all in
black, and can scarce account anything piety which is not accompanied
with sadness and mourning; if he calls his soul to a reckoning, his
conclusions concerning himself are sad, doleful, or at best suspicious.
On the contrary, a hilarious, cheerful temper censures all sadness for
sullenness, and is apt to accuse those that go mourning in their way
for unthankful murmurers and unbelieving complainers; it interprets
God’s favourable condescensions to the weak in the greatest latitude,
and is easily persuaded to those things that are upon the utmost brink
of liberty, to which others of a more timorous disposition dare not
approach for fear of offending. This puts a higher excellency upon
the duties of praise, as the other upon fasting and mourning. Those
men that are morose and severe, they are apt to think that God ‘is
such an one as themselves;’ and though they acknowledge there is such
a grace as charity, yet under a pretence of strictness they cannot
believe they are bound to exercise it towards any that are under any
failing of which they judge themselves to be free; and therefore such
men are usually very difficult in all cases wherein condescension is to
be used; they are hard to be reconciled, and after the miscarriage of
any person, are not easily satisfied of their repentance; and in cases
of dissent from their way and practice of religion, they are commonly
censorious, and conclude the worst. They again that are naturally mild
and gentle, under a pretence of charity and meekness, are apt to become
remiss in their carriages towards any brother; and because ‘charity
thinks not evil,’ they model their acknowledged duty into the form
of their own disposition, and so think they must ‘see, and yet not
perceive;’ and instead of covering the ‘infirmities’ of a brother, they
have a mantle to cast over every transgression. At the same rate also
do they frame their conceptions of God, as if he was so merciful that
he would scarce reckon any abomination to be above the height of an
ordinary infirmity. These are apt to think that the mercies of God, so
much praised in Scripture, signify little less than an indulgence in
transgression far above what precisians are apt to imagine; and that
it is as easy to obtain forgiveness from God for any offence, as it
is to say, ‘The Lord be merciful to me a sinner.’ Those that accustom
themselves to the delights of the senses are apt to bend the way of
their religion to that humour; and think that nothing can be solemn
in worship that is not set out with garnishings that may please the
eye or ear. Nay, it is observable enough that religion borrows some
taint or shape from the various studies and sciences of men; in some,
as in many of the fathers, we may see religion dipped in Platonism
or Peripateticism. Some introduce the distinctions and definitions
of philosophy, others compel all scriptures to submit to the laws of
strict logical analysis. Thus, according to the various mediums that
men look through, are truths discoloured and dressed up in several
shapes. It is easy from these instances to imagine that Satan must have
a great advantage against us, in point of error, from the bias of the
mind.

4. Fourthly, _Adventurous curiosity_ is another general advantage by
which he works. This ariseth partly from a desire of knowledge, and
partly from pride; and both these make way for his design.

A desire after knowledge is natural, and withal very bewitching.
_Divinum est scire quam-plurima_, To know hath something in it more
than ordinary. This is noted in Job xi. 12, ‘Vain man would be wise,
though man be born like a wild ass’s colt.’ Though he be foolish, yet
he affects wisdom, and the very delight of knowing doth engage men to
curious prying searches, though with much labour and hazard. Of this
temper were the Athenians: Acts xvii. 21, ‘They spent their time in
nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing;’ not barely
in telling news, but in inquiries after new notions and discoveries,
and this made them willing to hear Paul, as ‘a setter forth of strange
gods, and a new doctrine.’

When this desire after knowledge is animated with pride, as oft it is,
for ‘knowledge puffeth up,’ then it is more dangerous. When men are
upon a design to seem higher than others, to be singular, to see more
than what all men see, to be admired, to out-talk their neighbours,
what adventures will they not make! How fair do they lie open to any
conceit that may serve this end!

That Satan labours to improve this curiosity is without doubt; he
carefully affords fuel to this burning, and diligently blows it up
into a flame. The first temptation had that ingredient in it, ‘Ye
shall be as gods, knowing good and evil,’ [Gen. iii. 5.] And we see it
was a great enticement to Eve: that which would make ‘one wise’ was
therefore desirable. The blame of Israel’s first idolatry seems to be
laid at this door: Deut. xxxii. 17, ‘They sacrificed to gods whom they
knew not,’ to new gods that came newly up; implying that they were
drawn aside from their old established way of worship by a curiosity
to try the new ways of the heathens. And so great a hand hath this
generally in errors, that Paul, 2 Tim. iv. 3, makes this itch after
novelty the great ground of that defection from truth which he foresaw
was coming, ‘They shall heap to themselves teachers, having itching
ears,’ _Pruritus aurium est scabies ecclesiarum_. This itch of the
ear is the usual forerunner of a scab in the church, because it doth
dispose men to receive any kind of teacher. God indeed doth sometimes
take the advantage of our natural curiosity for our good. By this means
many of John’s hearers, who went out into the wilderness to him, as
to a ‘strange sight,’ as those words imply, ‘What went ye out into
the wilderness to see?’ [Mat. xi. 7,] were converted. By this means,
the gospel afterwards made a large progress, as we see commonly new
teachers affect most at first; for when men grow acquainted with their
gifts, their admiration decays, and the success of their labours is
not so great many times. The devil also observing the prevalency of
curiosity, and that men are more pleased with new notions than with old
truths, he endeavours also to plough with this heifer, and oft makes
a great harvest by it. There is yet another advantage more that he
sometimes useth, and that is,

5. Fifthly, _Atheistical debauchery_. When men by long custom in
sinning have arrived to habitual carelessness and presumption, then
they become practical atheists. Their vicious habits work upon their
understandings to obliterate all principles. When men are gone so far,
they are fit engineers for Satan; for while they disbelieve all things,
they can, to serve a design or to head a party, take up any opinion,
and pretend the greatest seriousness in the propagating it, though in
the meantime they secretly laugh at the credulity of the vulgar.

These men let out themselves and all their parts to the devil, and he
knows how to make use of them, to bring on the delusion and deception
of others. Many ages have given examples of such. Those seducers
mentioned in the New Testament were, some of them, of this rank, and
therefore called ‘deceitful workers,’ [2 Cor. xi. 13.] Such as were not
really under those persuasions which they thought to fix upon others,
but upon design, transformed themselves into the apostles of Christ;
such as served not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and
yet by good words and fair speeches deceived the hearts of the simple:
Rom. xvi. 18, ‘Who, through covetousness, with feigned words, made
merchandize of men,’ 2 Pet. ii. 3. Balaam was such, and the woman
Jezebel, that called herself a prophetess, Rev. ii. 20. Such was the
Archbishop of Spalato,[234] who for advantage could at pleasure take up
and lay down his religion. Such a one was the false Jew, not so long
since discovered in this place, who being a Romish emissary, pretended
to be a Jew converted; and seeking a pure church, under that vizor,
designing to overthrow, by private insinuations, the faith of the
simple, uncautious admirers![235] By such instruments Satan works where
he hath opportunity.




