CHAPTER IX.

 _Of Satan’s deceits in particular.—What temptation is.—Of tempting to
 sin.—His first general rule.—The consideration of our condition.—His
 second rule.—Of providing suitable temptations.—In what cases he
 tempts us to things unsuitable to our inclinations.—His third
 rule.—The cautious proposal of the temptation, and the several ways
 thereof.—His fourth rule is to entice.—The way thereof in the general,
 by bringing a darkness upon the mind through lust._


Our next business is to inquire after these ways of deceit in
particular; in which I shall first speak of such as are of more general
and universal concernment—such are his temptations to sin, his deceits
against duty, his cunning in promoting error, his attempts against the
peace and comfort of the saints, &c.—and then I shall come to some ways
of deceits that relate to cases more special.

As an introduction to the first, I shall speak a word _of temptation
in the general_. This in its general notion is a trial or experiment
made of a thing. The word that signifies to tempt, comes from a word
that signifies to pierce, or bore through,[172] implying such a trial
as goes to the very heart and inwards of a thing. In this sense it is
attributed to God, who is said to have tempted Abraham, and to put our
faith upon trial; and sometime to Satan, who is said to have tempted
Christ, though he could not expect to prevail. But though God and
Satan do make these trials, yet is there a vast difference betwixt
them, and that not only in their intentions—the one designing only
a discovery to men of what is in them, and that for most holy ends;
the other intending ruin and destruction—but also in the way of their
proceedings.[173] God by providence presents objects and occasions;
Satan doth not only do that, but further inclineth and positively
persuadeth to evil. Hence is it that temptations are distinguished
into trials merely, and seducements; suitable to that of Tertullian,
[De Orat.] _Diabolus tentat, Deus probat_, The devil tempts, God
only tries. We speak of temptation as it is from Satan, and so it is
described to be a drawing or moving men to sin under colour of some
reason.[174] By which we may observe that, in every such temptation,
there is the object to which the temptation tends, the endeavour of
Satan to incline our hearts and draw on our consent, and the instrument
by which is some pretence of reason; not that a real and solid reason
can be given for sin, but that Satan offers some considerations to us
to prevail with us, which, if they do, we take them to be reasons. This
may a little help us to understand Satan’s method in tempting to sin,
&c., of which I am first to speak.

In temptations to sin, we may observe, Satan walks by four general
rules:—

1. First, _He considers and acquaints himself with the condition of
every man, and for that end he studies man_. God’s question concerning
Job, ‘Hast thou considered my servant Job?’ Job i. 8, doth imply, not
only his diligent inquiry into Job’s state—for the original expresseth
it by Satan’s ‘putting his heart upon Job, or laying him to his
heart’[175]—but that this is usual with Satan so to do; as if God had
said, It is thy way to pry narrowly into every man: hast thou done this
to Job? Hast thou considered him as thou usest to do? And indeed Satan
owns this as his business and employment in his answer to God, ‘I come
from going to and fro in the earth, from walking up and down in it.’
This cannot be properly said of him who is a spirit. Bodies go up and
down, but not spirits; so that his meaning is, he had been at his work
of inquiring and searching. And so Broughton translates it,[176] from
searching to and fro in the earth; as it is said of the eyes of God,
that they ‘run to and fro,’ which intends his intelligence, search, and
knowledge of things. It is such a going to and fro as that in Dan. xii.
4, which is plainly there expressed to be for the increase of knowledge.

The matter of his inquiry or particulars of his study are such as
these: (1.) Man’s state; he considers and guesseth whether a man
be regenerate or unregenerate. (2.) The degree of his state: if
unregenerate, how near or far off he is the kingdom of God; if
regenerate, he takes the compass of his knowledge, of his gifts, of his
graces. (3.) He inquires into his constitution and temper; he observes
what disposition he is of. (4.) His place, calling, and relation; his
trade, employment, enjoyments, riches, or wants. (5.) His sex. (6.) His
age, &c.

The way by which he knows these things is plain and easy. Most of
these things are open to common observation; and what is intricate or
dark, that he beats out, either by comparing us with ourselves, and
considering a long tract of actions and carriage; or by comparing us
with others, whose ways he had formerly noted and observed.

The end of this search is to give him light and instruction in point
of advantage; hence he knows where to raise his batteries, and how to
level his shot against us. This Christ plainly discovers to be the
design of all his study, John xiv. 30, where he tells his disciples
he expected yet another onset from Satan, and that near at hand; ‘for
the prince of the world’ was then upon his motion, he was a-coming;
but withal, he tells them of his security against his assaults, in
that there was ‘nothing in Christ’ of advantage in any of these
forementioned ways to foot a temptation upon. It appears, then, that
he looks for such advantages, and that without these he hath little
expectancy of prevailing.

2. Secondly, Satan having acquainted himself with our condition, makes
it his next care to provide _suitable temptations, and to strike in the
right vein_; for he loves to have his work easy and feasible, he loves
not [to] go against the stream. Thus he considered Judas as a covetous
person, and accordingly provided a temptation of gain for him. He
did the like with Achan; and hence was it that he had the Sabeans so
ready for the plunder of Job; he had observed them a people given to
rapine and spoil; and accordingly, Job’s goods being propounded to
them as a good and easy booty, he straightway prevailed with them. It
was easy for him to draw Absalom into an open rebellion against his
father; he had taken notice of his ambitious and aspiring humour, and
of the grudges and dissatisfactions under which he laboured; so that,
providing him a fit opportunity, he engaged him immediately. According
to this rule, where he observes men of shallow heads and low parts, he
the more freely imposeth upon them in things palpably absurd; where he
takes notice of a fearful temper, there he tempts them with terrors and
affrightful suggestions. He hath temptations proper for the sanguine
complexion and for the melancholy; he hath his methods of dealing with
the lustful and wanton, with the passionate and revengeful; he hath
novelties at hand for the itching ear, and suggestions proper for those
that are atheistically inclined.

_Obj._ To this may be objected, That experience tells us Satan doth not
always walk in this road, nor confine himself to this rule: sometime he
tempts to things which are cross to our tempers and inclinations, &c.

_Ans._ It is true he doth so; but yet the general rule is not
prejudiced by this exception, especially if we consider,

[1.] First, _That Satan being still under the commands and restraint
of the Almighty, he cannot always tempt what he would, but according
to a superior order and command_. Of this nature I suppose was that
temptation of which Paul complained so much; ‘he kept down his body,’
1 Cor. ix. 27, upon this very design, that he might have it in
subjection, and yet is he buffeted with a temptation which expected
an advantage usually from the temper and frames of our bodies—for so
much, I suppose, that phrase, ‘a thorn in the flesh,’ will unavoidably
imply—though it still leave us at uncertainties what the temptation was
in particular. Here Satan tempts at a disadvantage, and contrary to
this rule; but then we must know that he was not the master of his own
game—God expressly ordering such a temptation as was disagreeing with
the apostle’s disposition, that it might the less prevail or hazard
him, and yet be more available to keep him low, ‘lest he should be
exalted above measure,’ which was God’s design in the matter.

[2.] Secondly, _Sometime our temper alters_; as the tempers of our
bodies in a sickness may in a fit be so changed that they may desire at
that time what they could not endure at another. A special occasion or
concurrence of circumstances may alter for the time our constitution,
and so an unusual temptation may at that time agree with this design.

[3.] Thirdly, _Sometime by one temptation Satan intends but to lay the
foundation of another_; and then of purpose he begins with a strange
suggestion, either to keep us at the gaze while he covertly doth
something else against us, or to move us to a contrary extreme by an
over-hasty rashness.

[4.] Fourthly, _Sometime he tempts when his main design is only
to trouble and disquiet us_; and in such cases the most unnatural
temptations, backed with a violent impetuousness, do his work the best.

3. Thirdly, Satan’s next work is _the proposal of the temptation_.
In the two former he provided materials and laid the trains; in this
he gives fire, by propounding his design; and this also he doth with
caution these several ways:—

[1.] First, He makes _the object speak for him, and in many he is
scarce put to any further trouble_: the object before them speaks
Satan’s mind, and gains their consent immediately; yet is there no
small cunning used in fitting the object and occasion, and bringing
things about to answer the very nick of time which he takes to be
advantageous for him.

[2.] Secondly, Sometime he appoints _a proxy to speak for him_; not
that he is shamefaced in temptation, and not always at leisure for his
own work, but this way he insinuates himself the more dangerously into
our affections, and with less suspicion, using our friends, relations,
or intimate acquaintance to intercede for a wicked design. He did
not speak himself to Eve, but chose a serpent: he thought Eve would
sooner prevail upon Adam than the serpent could. He tempted Job by the
tongue of his wife, as if he had hoped that what so near a relation had
counselled would easily be hearkened to. He tempted Christ to avoid
suffering by Peter, under a pretence of highest love and care, ‘Master,
spare thyself,’ [Mat. xvi. 23;] yet our Saviour forbears not to note
Satan’s temptation closely twisted with Peter’s kindness. At this rate
are we often tempted where we little suspect danger.

[3.] Thirdly, If he finds the two first ways unhopeful or unsuitable,
then he _injects the motion, and so plainly speaks to us inwardly
himself_, ‘Do this act, take this advantage for pleasure or profit,’
&c. He thought it not enough to tempt Judas by the object of gain, but
he brake his mind in direct terms, and ‘put it into his heart,’ John
xiii. 2. He did the like to Ananias, whose heart he filled with a large
motion for that lie, and backed it with many considerations of the
necessity and expediency of it, Acts v. 3. There is no question to be
made of this. Dr Goodwin gives clear proofs of it, and so do several
others.[177] When we consider that thoughts are sometime cast upon the
minds of men which are above their knowledge, and that they say and
do things sometime which are far beyond any of their accomplishments
and parts, and yet in the nature of it wicked, we must be forced to
run so high as to charge it upon Satan. Saul’s prophesying, 1 Sam.
xviii. 10, was by the influence of the evil spirit; and this—as Junius,
Tirinus, and others interpret[178]—must of necessity be understood of
such a kind of action and speaking as the true prophets of the Lord
usually expressed under the influences of the blessed Spirit; for from
the likeness of the action in both must the name be borrowed. The
experience that we have of inward disputings, the bandying of arguments
and answers in several cases, is a proof of this beyond exception.
Wounded consciences express an admirable dexterity in breaking all
arguments urged for their peace and establishment; as also in framing
objections against themselves, so far above the usual measure of common
capacities, that we cannot ascribe it to any other than Satan’s private
aid this way.

[4.] Fourthly, The motion being made, if there be need, he doth
_irritate and stir up the mind to the embracement of it_; and this he
doth two ways:—

_First, By an earnestness of solicitation_; when he urgeth the
thing over and over, and gives no rest; when he joins with this an
importunity of begging and entreating with the repeated motion;
when he draws together and advantageously doth order a multitude of
considerations to that end; and when in all this he doth hold down the
mind and thoughts, and keep them upon a contemplation of the object,
motions, and reasons. Thus he provoked David, 1 Chron. xxi. 1; and this
kind of dealing occasioned the apostle to name his temptations and our
resistance by the name of ‘wrestlings,’ in which usually there appears
many endeavours and often repeated, to throw down the antagonist.

_Secondly_, He doth irritate _by a secret power and force that he
hath upon our fancies and passions_. When men are said to be carried
and led by Satan, it implies, in the judgment of some,[179] more than
importunity; and that though he cannot force the spring of the will,
yet he may considerably act upon it by pulling at the weights and
plummets—that is, by moving and acting our imaginations and affections.

4. Fourthly, The motion being thus made, notwithstanding all his
importunity, often finds resistance; in which case he comes to the
practice of a fourth rule, which is _to draw away and entice the heart
to consent_—as it is expressed, James i. 14, ‘Every man is tempted,
when he is drawn away and enticed.’[180] I shall avoid here the variety
of the apprehensions which some declare at large about the meaning of
the words, satisfying myself with this, that the apostle points at
those artifices of Satan by which he draws and allures the will of
man to a compliance with his motions, which when he effects in any
degree, then may a man be said to be prevailed upon by the temptation.
But then here is the wonder, how he should so far prevail against
that reason and knowledge which God hath placed in man to fence and
guard him against a thing so absurd and unreasonable as every sin is.
The solution of this knot we have in 2 Cor. iv. 4, ‘The god of this
world blinds the eyes of men,’ draws a curtain over this knowledge,
and raiseth a darkness upon them: which darkness, though we cannot
fully apprehend, yet that it is a very great and strange darkness may
be discovered, (1.) Partly by considering the subject of it—man, a
rational creature, in whom God hath placed a conscience, which is both
a law, and witness, and judge. It cannot be supposed an easy matter to
cloud or obliterate that law, to silence or pervert that witness, or to
corrupt that judge; but it will rise higher in the wonder of it if we
consider this in a godly man, one that sets God before him, and is wont
to have his fear in his heart—such a man as David was, that in so plain
a case, in so high a manner, so long a time, with so little sense and
apprehension of the evil and danger, Satan should so quickly prevail,
it is an astonishment: neither will it be less strange if we consider,
(2.) The issue and effect of this blindness. Some rise up against
this law of conscience, arguing it false and erroneous, and making
conclusions directly contrary, as Deut. xxix. 19, ‘I shall have peace,
though I walk on in the imaginations of my heart;’ ‘I have fellowship
with him, though I walk in darkness,’ 1 John i. 6; ‘We will not hearken
unto thee, but will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth out of our own
mouth,’ Jer. xlv. 16, 17; in which cases the συντήρησις, or principles
of conscience, are quite overthrown. Some are hardened, and as to any
application of their acts to this rule, quite dead and senseless.
Though they rise not up against the light, yet are they willingly
ignorant, without any consideration of what they are doing. Here the
συνείδησις, or witnessing and excusing power of conscience, is idle and
asleep. Some, though they know the law, and in some measure see their
actions are sinful, yet they pass no judgment, apprehend no danger:
‘No man smites upon his thigh, saying, What have I done?’ Jer. viii.
6. Nay, some are so far from this, that they presumptuously justify
themselves, though they see their own blame and ruin before them: ‘I do
well to be angry, and that to the death,’ saith Jonah, when Satan had
spread a darkness upon him.

What shall we say of these things? Here is darkness to be felt,
Egyptian darkness. To explain the way of it fully is impossible for
us; to do it in any tolerable way is difficult. To make some discovery
herein I shall, (1.) Shew that the devil doth entice to sin by
‘stirring up our lust;’ (2.) That by the power and prevalency of our
lust he brings on the blindness spoken of.




