CHAPTER VIII.

 _Of Satan’s third way to hinder peace, by spiritual sadness.—Wherein,
 1. Of the degrees of spiritual sadness. 2. Of the
 frequency of this trouble, evidenced several ways. Of the difference
 betwixt God and Satan in wounding the conscience. 3. Of the
 solemn occasions of this trouble. 4. The engines by which
 Satan works spiritual sadness. (1.) His sophistry. His
 topics enumerated and explained. [1.] Scriptures perverted.
 [2.] False notions. [3.] Misrepresentations of God.
 [4.] Sins: how he aggravates them. [5.] Lessening their
 graces: how he doth that. (2.) His second engine, fear: how he
 forwards his design that way._


Besides the troubles already mentioned under the heads of discomposures
of spirit and affrightments, there is a third kind of trouble which
Satan gives to the children of God, and this may, for distinction sake,
be called _spiritual sadness_. These spiritual sadnesses _are troubles
raised in the mind, relating to the conscience and spiritual state or
condition of men_. They differ exceedingly from the two former sorts
of trouble: for, (1.) These troubles wholly concern the conscience in
point of regeneration, and men’s suitableness thereunto; whereas simple
discomposures of spirit firstly relate to outward things. (2.) In these
the conscience is immediately concerned, but in other troubles the
conscience is either wholly untouched, or wounded only secondarily, by
continuance and progress of the discomposure of the spirit. (3.) In
these troubles, conscience is the great instrument by which the devil
works; whereas, in the trouble of affrightments, the devil acted alone,
the heart being in the meantime uncompliant and resisting. For the
opening of this trouble I shall explain—

1. _The several degrees thereof._ It is a trouble of conscience unduly
aggravated by Satan, wherein he confines himself to the operations
of conscience. But then, as he suggests the troubles of men by the
voice of conscience, so he doth all he can to make it irregular in its
actings, and excessive in that irregularity. So that in this case the
conscience is evil, and employs itself in that mistake, to inquire
into men’s regeneracy or holiness, always being either a neuter or an
adversary, and the devil helps this forward all he can.

The apostle, in Heb. x. 22, makes mention of an ‘evil conscience,’
and that chiefly as it doth occasion fear, hindering our comfortable
access to God. This the conscience doth when it doth not execute its
office aright, either in ‘not excusing’ when it ought, or in ‘accusing’
when it should not; and these false accusations cause different sorts
of troubles according to the variety of the matter for which it doth
condemn. Hence is it that there are three degrees of trouble of
conscience below the trouble of despair:—

[1.] The lowest degree is when _a regenerate person doth not positively
determine the case of his soul, whether he be regenerate or not, but
is only kept in suspense betwixt hope that he is, and fear that he is
not, the conscience in the meantime forbearing to witness for him,
though it hath just cause to excuse him_. This we may call a doubting
or questioning conscience; and though it comes far short of these
distresses in which some men are plunged upon the account of their
souls, yet is it a trouble, for their peace is hereby hindered and
their desires of satisfaction frustrated, which in matters of so great
concern, as are these of everlasting life and everlasting misery,
must be very disquieting. When the affections are earnest, their
satisfaction cannot be delayed without trouble; for ‘hope deferred
makes the heart sick,’ Prov. xiii. 12; not only doth it faint under its
doubts, but is by that means so weak in its purposes that it is easily
drawn to admit of greater inconveniences, which may lay the foundation
of more perplexing disturbances.

That the conscience may be in such a distemper that it will not witness
for a man, when yet it cannot witness against him, is the observation
of those that have treated of the nature of conscience.[338] Sometimes
it will not make application of God’s promises. Though it will believe
that he that forsakes sin is regenerate, that he that truly repents
shall be pardoned, yet it will not affirm for a man that he forsakes
sin or repents, though he really do so; or if it cannot deny that, yet
it will sometimes refuse to make that conclusion which one would think
would follow of itself by natural consequence, and so refuseth to judge
the person regenerate or pardoned, though it cannot deny but that he
forsakes sin and repents. The greatness of the blessing, the remainders
of unbelief, the deep sense of unworthiness, with other considerations,
do keep off the heart from making, as I may say, so bold with the
promises; but all this while the devil is doing his utmost to aggravate
these considerations, affrighting the conscience from that just
absolution which it ought to give.

[2.] Another degree of trouble arising from an evil conscience, is when
_the condition of a regenerate person is determined by conscience, but
falsely, to be very bad_. I must here, as some others have done,[339]
for want of better terms, distinguish betwixt the state of regeneracy
and a man’s condition in that state, though the words _state_ and
_condition_ are used promiscuously the one for another. A man may be in
a regenerate state, and yet his condition in that state may be very
bad and blameworthy, as not walking worthy of so holy a calling; as a
person may be a man, and yet unhealthy or languishing. Thus many of
the Asian churches were true churches, and yet in a bad condition;
some ‘lukewarm;’ some had ‘a name to live,’ and yet were comparatively
‘dead,’ because their works were not full or ‘perfect before God;’
and others had ‘left their first love.’ To this purpose is that of
the apostle, 2 Cor. xiii. 5, ‘Know ye not your own selves, how that
Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?’—εἰ μή τι ἀδόκιμοί
ἐστε—where the word ‘reprobate’ is not to be taken in the strict,
severe sense for one ‘not elected,’ but for one whose conversation is
not so sound and approved as it should be: for this relates not to
their being in Christ, but to their assurance of being in that state,
which the apostle affirms they might know, except the fault lay in
their negligent, careless conversation.

This kind of trouble then is of this nature: the conscience doth not
accuse a man to be unregenerate, yet it condemns him for a carriage
unsuitable to the gospel; and this sometimes when his actions are not
absolutely evil, but partly good, partly bad. When the conscience
condemns the actions as altogether sinful, because of some mixture of
infirmities, in which case we should imitate the apostle, in Rom. vii.,
who when by reason of the remainders of sin in him, he could not do the
good he would—that is, in such a manner and degree as he desired, nor
avoid the evil which he would so clearly and fully as he wished, some
imperfections in his best endeavours still cleaving to him; yet his
conscience took a right course, he was humbled for his imperfections,
but withal acquits himself in point of integrity; his conscience
testified, ver. 16, that he ‘consented to the law as good;’ and ver.
22, that he ‘delighted in the law of God, after the inward man.’ But in
this case of spiritual trouble, the conscience takes all in the worst
sense; it only fixeth upon the imperfections, and makes them to serve
for proofs against the sincerity. Thus if a man in praying be troubled
with wandering thoughts, then a distempered conscience condemns that
prayer as a sinful profanation of the name of God. If the great concern
of God’s glory run along in such a way as is also advantageous to the
person in outward things, then will such a conscience condemn the man
for self-seeking, though his main design were truly the honour of God.
In all actions where there is infirmity appearing with the most serious
endeavours, or where God’s glory and man’s good are twisted together,
the disordered conscience will be apt to take part with Satan, accusing
and condemning the action. Yea, very often when the actions are very
good, no way justly reprovable, the conscience shall condemn. If he
have had peace, he shall be judged for security; if he have faith in
God’s promises, it will call it presumption; if he have a zeal for God,
it will be misinterpreted for carnal rigour; if he have joy, it shall
be misjudged to be natural cheerfulness or delusion; in a word, all his
graces shall be esteemed no better than moral virtues. At this rate are
the children of God put to great trouble, losing, as I may say, the
things they have wrought, sadly bemoaning their hardness of heart, or
want of faith and love, when in their carriage and complainings, they
give very high proofs of all. In this also Satan is busy to nourish
the conscience in its jealousies, and doth suggest many objections
to confirm it in its distemper. The conscience is not always of a
peevish or perverse humour; for sometimes it will smite a man for a
miscarriage,—as it did to David when he cut off the lap of Saul’s
garment,—and yet not break his peace: which is a sufficient evidence
that it is put, in this case, far out of order; which advantage Satan
works upon to disquiet the heart, to make men unthankful for the
mercies they have received, and to incapacitate them for more. This,
for distinction sake, we may call the trouble of a grieved or dejected
conscience, according to that of Ps. xlii. 5, 11, ‘Why art thou cast
down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?’ Though such
men are under God’s favour, yet they misdeem it, and think God is angry
with them; their heart pants, their soul thirsts, their tears are their
meat, they are ready to say unto God, ‘My rock, why hast thou forsaken
me?’ and though they have some hopes for the future, that God ‘will
command his loving-kindness,’ and that they ‘shall yet praise him;’ yet
their present apprehension of their spiritual wants and weaknesses, and
of the displeasure of God, which they suppose they are under, makes
them go mourning all the day.

[3.] The third degree of trouble of conscience is when the conscience
_peremptorily denies the state of regeneration_. Hereby a man that is
really regenerate, is concluded to be yet ‘in the gall of bitterness,
and bond of iniquity;’ his former hopes are taxed for self-delusion,
and his present state to be a state of nature. This trouble is far
greater than the two former, because the party is judged to be in
greater hazard, and by many degrees more remote from hope. It is the
frequent and sad thought of such, that if death should in that estate
cut off their days, oh, then they were for ever miserable! The fears
and disquiets of the heart on this account are very grievous, but
yet they admit of degrees, according to the ignorance of the party,
the distemper of the conscience, the strength of the objections, or
severity of the prosecution, in regard the conscience is now sadly out
of order. We may call this degree of grief, for distinction, ‘a wounded
spirit;’ which how hard it is to be borne Solomon tells us, Prov.
xviii. 14, by comparing it with all other kind of troubles, which the
spirit of a man can make some shift to bear, making this heavier than
all, and above ordinary strength.

Some make inquiry what may be the difference betwixt a wounded spirit
in the regenerate and the reprobate? To which it may be answered,
(1.) That in the party’s apprehension there is no difference at all;
both of them may be compassed about with the sorrows of death, and
suppose themselves to be in the belly of hell. (2.) Neither is there
any difference in the degree of the trouble; a child of God may be
handled with as much seeming severity, as he whom God intends for a
future Tophet. (3.) Neither is there any such remarkable difference in
the working of the spirits of the one and other, that they themselves
at present, or others that are bystanders, can easily observe. Yet a
formal difference there is; for grace being in the heart of the one,
will in some breathing or pulse discover its life. And though sometimes
it acts so low or confusedly that God only can distinguish, yet often
those that are experienced observers will discover some real breathings
after God, and true loathing of sin, and other traces of faith and
love, that are not so discernible to the parties themselves. (4.) But
in God’s design the difference is very great; the wicked lie under his
lash as malefactors, but the regenerate are as patients under cure,
or children under discipline. (5.) And accordingly the issue doth
determine, that God’s intention in wounding their spirits were not
alike to both; the one at last coming out of the furnace as gold, the
other still remaining as reprobate silver, or being consumed as dross.
Thus have ye seen the nature and degree of spiritual sadness.

2. For the further explanation whereof I shall next shew you that this
is a usual trouble to the children of God.

Which, (1.) I might evidence from several _instances of those that
have suffered much under it_; as David, whose complaints in this case
are very frequent, and Heman, who left a memorial of his griefs in Ps.
lxxxviii. Jonah also, in the belly of the whale, had a sharp fit of it,
when he concluded that he was ‘cast out of God’s sight,’ and his ‘soul
fainted within him,’ Jonah ii. 4, 7. Neither did Hezekiah altogether
escape it, for though his disquiet began upon another ground, it ran
him into spiritual trouble at last. But besides these, innumerable
instances occur. One shall scarce converse with any society of
Christians but he shall meet with some who, with sad complaints, shall
bemoan the burden of their hearts, and the troubles of their conscience.

(2.) _The provisions which God hath made in his word for such, is
an evidence that such distempers are frequent._ He that in a city
shall observe the shops of the apothecaries, and there take notice of
the great variety of medicines, pots, and glasses full of mixtures,
confections, and cordials, may from thence rationally conclude, that it
is a frequent thing for men to be sick, though he should not converse
with any sick person for his information. Thus may we be satisfied from
the declarations, directions, and consolations of Scripture that it is
a common case for the children of God to stand in need of spiritual
physicians and spiritual remedies to help them when they are wounded
and fainting. Solomon’s exclamation, ‘A wounded spirit who can bear?’
shews that the spirit is sometimes wounded. The prophet’s direction,
‘He that walks in darkness and sees no light, let him trust in the
Lord,’ [Isa. l. 10,] clearly implies that some there are that walk
in darkness. God’s creating the ‘fruit of the lips, Peace, peace;’
his promises of restoring ‘comforts to mourners;’ his commands to
others to comfort them; do all inform us that it is a common thing for
his children to be under such sadnesses of spirit, that all this is
necessary for their relief.

(3.) _The reasons of this trouble_ do also assure us of the frequency
of it; for of them we may say, as Christ speaks of the poor, [Mat.
xxvi. 11,] ‘we have them always with us;’ so that the grounds of
spiritual sadness considered, it is no wonder to find many men
complaining under this distemper. The reasons are,

[1.] _The malice of Satan_, who hath no greater revenge against a child
of God, when translated from the power of darkness to the kingdom of
Christ, than to hinder him of the peace and comfort of that condition.

[2.] _The many advantages which Satan hath against us._ For the
effecting of this we cannot imagine that one so malicious as he is
will suffer his malice to sleep, when so many fair opportunities of
putting it in practice do offer themselves. For, _first, The questions
to be determined for settling the peace of the soul are very intricate,
and often of greater difficulty than doctrinal controversies_. How
hard is it to conclude what is the _minimum quod sic_, the lowest
degrees of true grace! or the _maximum quod sic_, the highest degree
of sin consistent with true grace! To distinguish betwixt a child
of God at the lowest, and a hypocrite or temporary believer at the
highest, is difficult. In mixed actions, to be able to shew how the
soul doth manage its respect to God, when the man hath also a respect
to himself, especially when it is under any confusion, is not easy.
And in these actions, where the difference from others of like kind
lies only in the grounds and motives of the undertaking, or where the
prevailing degree must distinguish the act in reference to different
objects that are subordinate to one another—as our loving God above
the world or ourselves, our fearing God above men, &c.—it is not
every one that can give a satisfactory determination. _Second_,
As the intricacies of the doubts to be resolved give the devil an
advantage to puzzle us, so is the advantage heightened exceedingly
_by the great injudiciousness and unskilfulness of the greatest part
of Christians_. These questions are in their notion difficult; more
difficult in their application to particular persons, where the ablest
Christian may easily be nonplussed; but most difficult to the weak
Christians. These Satan can baffle with every poor objection, and
impose what he will upon them. _Third_, Especially having the advantage
of _the working guilt of conscience_, which he can readily stir up to
present to a man’s remembrance all his failings and miscarriages of
what nature soever. And when guilt rageth in an unskilful heart, it
must needs create great disquiet. _Fourth_, But most of all when our
_natural fears are awakened_; as when a man hath been under any great
conviction, though he be cured of his trouble, yet it usually leaves
a weakness in the part, as bruises and maims do in any member of the
body, which at the change of weather or other accidental hurt will
renew their old trouble; and then when fresh guilt begins to press
hard upon the conscience, not only do the broken bones ache, by the
reviving of former fears, but the impressions of his old suspicions,
bad conceit of himself, and jealousies of the deceitfulness of his
heart, which had then fixed themselves by a deep rooting, do now make
him most fearful of entertaining any good thought of himself. So that
if any consideration tending to his support be offered, he dare not
come near it, suspecting his greatest danger to lie on that hand. These
advantages considered, we should not think it strange that any child of
God is driven to spiritual sadness, as some do, but may rather wonder
that this is not the common condition of all Christians.

[3.] Another reason that must be assigned for these troubles is _divine
dispensation_. Such are his children, some so careless, others proud,
others stubborn, many presumptuous, that God is forced to correct them
by this piece of discipline, and to cure them by casting them into
a fever. Others of his children he thus exerciseth for other ends,
sometimes to take occasion therefrom of making larger discoveries of
his love; sometimes thereby preventing them from falling under some
grievous miscarriage, or for the trial and exercises of their graces.
We may observe, accordingly, that there are three sorts of men that
usually have exercises of this kind.

(1.) Those who at their conversion are either _ignorant, melancholy, or
were grossly scandalous, are usually brought through with great fear
and sadness_. And this is so observable, that by the mistake of men it
is made a general rule that none are converted but they are under great
and frightful apprehensions of wrath and dismal terrors. This indeed
is true of some, but these ordinarily are the scandalous, melancholy,
and ignorant sort—though sometimes God may deal so with others, for who
can limit him? Yet are there many whose education hath been good, and
their instruction aforehand great, whose conversion is so gradual and
insensible, that they are strangers to these troubles of conscience,
and profess that if these heights of fear be necessary to conversion,
they must be at a loss; neither can they give an account of the time of
their conversion, as others may.

(2.) Those whose conversion was easy, when after their conversion _they
miscarry by any great iniquity, they meet with as great a measure of
terror and fear, and some think far greater, as those whose new birth
was more difficult_. David’s greatest troubles of soul came upon him
after he began to appear more public in the world; for then he met
with many temptations, and great occasions for God’s exercising his
discipline over him. I believe, when he kept his father’s sheep, his
songs had more of praises and less of complainings than afterward. It
is the opinion of some that God’s dealing in this kind of dispensation,
even when miscarriage is not the cause, is more sharp usually to those
whose conversion hath been most easy.

(3.) _There is another sort of men, to whom God vouchsafes but seldom
and short fits of spiritual joy, as breathing times, betwixt sharp
fits of soul-trouble, for necessary refreshment and recovery of
strength_; but the constant course which God holds with them is to
exercise them under fears, while he hides his face from them, and
suffers Satan to vex them, by urging his objections against their
holiness and integrity. Heman was one of this rank, and the great
instance which God hath given in his word for the support of others
that may be in the same case. For he testifies, Ps. lxxxviii., that
he suffered the terrors of God almost to distraction, and this from
his youth up. It is not fit for us too narrowly to question why God
doth thus to his children, seeing his ‘judgments are unsearchable,’
and his ‘ways past finding out;’ but we may be sure that God sees this
dealing to be most fit for those that are exercised therewith. It may
be to keep pride from them, or to prevent them from falling into some
greater inconvenience or sin, unto which he takes notice of a more than
ordinary proneness in their disposition; or for the benefit of others,
who may thereby take notice what ‘an evil and bitter thing it is’ to
sin against God, and what a malicious adversary they have to deal with.
Whoso shall consider these reasons of spiritual sadness, must needs
confess, that seeing the advantages which men give to a malicious
devil to vex their consciences are so many and great, and the weakness
of God’s children so hazardous, for the prevention whereof, a wise,
careful Father will necessarily be engaged to exercise his discipline,
it cannot be expected but that spiritual troubles should be very
frequent among the servants of God.

_Quest._ Here it is requisite that I give satisfaction to this query.
Seeing that God doth sometime wound the consciences of his children,
and that Satan also wounds them, what are the differences betwixt God
and Satan in inflicting these wounds?

_Ans._ For the right understanding of this question I shall propound
two things:

(1.) That it is a truth that _God doth sometimes wound the consciences
of his children_; and this,

[1.] _Before conversion_: but in order to it, as preparatory to that
change, men are then in their sins, walking in the vanity of their
minds. To translate them from this estate he awakens the conscience,
shews them their iniquities, and the danger of them, that at present
they are ‘in their blood,’ ‘children of wrath, as well as others,’ and
that without Christ they are miserable. The effect of this must needs
be serious consideration, deep thoughts of heart, with some trouble;
only as to the measure and degree there is great difference. God doth
not in the particular application of these things to the conscience tie
up himself exactly to the same manner and measure of proceeding, though
he keep still to his general method. Hence is it that some, in regard
of God’s gentle, leisurely dealing, and the frequent interposure of
encouragements, are, if compared with the case of others, said to be
allured and ‘drawn with cords of love.’ But others have a remarkable
measure of trouble, sharp fits of fear and anguish; and those most
commonly are such whose conversion is more quick, and the change
visible from one extreme to another, as Paul, when converted in the
midst of his persecuting rage, or those whose ignorance or melancholy
makes their hopes and comforts inaccessible for the present. These
troubles God owns to be the work of his Spirit. The same Spirit, which
is a ‘Spirit of adoption’ to the converted, is a ‘spirit of bondage’
to these, Rom. viii. 16. And accordingly we find it was so to the
converts in Acts ii., who being ‘pricked in their hearts’ by Peter’s
sermon, ‘cried out, Men and brethren, what shall we do?’ The like did
the jailor. And the promise which God makes of calling the Jews, Zech.
xii. 10, doth express God’s purpose of dealing with them in this very
method: ‘They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and shall
mourn for him as one that mourneth for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him; ... in that day shall be a great mourning.’

[2.] God also sometimes wounds the conscience of his children _after
conversion_; and this he doth to convince and humble them for some
miscarriage which they become guilty of.[340] As when they grow secure,
carnally confident of the continuance of their peace—when they are
carelessly negligent of duty and the exercises of their graces—when
they fall into gross and scandalous sins, or wilfully desert the ways
of truth, and in many more cases of like kind. When his children make
themselves thus obnoxious to divine displeasure, then God hides his
face from them, takes away his Spirit, signifies his anger to their
consciences, threatens them with the danger of that condition, from
whence follows grief and fear in the hearts of his people. In this
manner God expressed his displeasure to David, as his complaints in Ps.
li. do testify: ‘Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which
thou hast broken may rejoice. Hide thy face from my sins. Cast me not
away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore
unto me the joy of thy salvation,’ &c.

(2.) Notwithstanding all this, there is _a great difference betwixt God
and Satan in this matter_, which mainly appears in two things:—

[1.] _God doth limit himself in all the trouble which he gives his
children, to his great end of doing them good, and healing them_, and
consequently stints himself in the measure and manner of his work to
such a proportion as his wisdom sees will exactly suit with his end.
So that his anger is not like the brawlings of malicious persons that
know no bounds. He will not ‘always chide;’ his debates are in measure,
and this ‘lest the spirit should fail before him,’ Isa. lvii. 16. So
that when he wounds the conscience before conversion, it is but to
bring them to Christ, and to prevent their taking such courses as might
through delusion make them take up their stand short of him. So much
of mourning and fear as is requisite for the true effecting of this,
he appoints for them, and no more. When he wounds after conversion,
it is but to let them feel that it is an evil and bitter thing to sin
against him, that their ‘godly sorrow may work repentance’ suitable
to the offence, and that they may be sufficiently cautioned for the
time to come to ‘sin no more, lest a worse thing befall them.’ He
that afflicts not willingly, will put no more grief upon them than is
necessary to bring them to this. But Satan, when he is admitted—and
God doth often permit him in subservience to his design, to wound the
conscience—he proceeds according to the boundless fury of his malice,
and plainly manifests that his desire is to destroy and to tread them
down that they may never rise again. This though he cannot effect, for
God will not suffer him to proceed further than the bringing about
his holy and gracious purpose, yet it hinders not but that still his
envious thoughts boil up in his breast, and he acts according to his
own inclination. For it is with Satan as it is with wicked men. If
God employ them for the chastisement of his children, they consider
not who sets them on work, nor what measures probably God would have
them observe, but they propose to themselves more work than ever God
cut out for them; as Assyria, when employed against Jerusalem, Isa.
x. 7, had designs more large and cruel than was in God’s commission.
God had stinted him in his holy purpose; yet the ‘Assyrian meant
not so, neither did his heart think so; but it was in his heart to
destroy and cut off nations not a few.’ So that when God is ‘a little
displeased,’ as he speaks, Zech. i. 15, they do all that lies in them
to help forward the affliction. Thus doth the devil endeavour to make
all things worse to God’s children than ever God intended. Here is one
difference betwixt God and Satan, in the wounding of consciences. But,

[2.] They are yet further differenced, in that all that God doth in
this work is still _according to truth_. For if he signify to the
unconverted that they are in a state of nature, liable to the damnation
of hell, unless they accept of Christ for salvation upon his terms,
this is no more than what is true. God doth not misrepresent their
case to them at that time. Again, if he express his displeasure to
any of his converted children that have grieved his Spirit by their
follies, by setting before them the threatenings of his word, or the
examples of his wrath, he doth but truly tell them that he is angry
with them, and that _de jure_, according to the rigour of the law and
the demerit of their offence he might justly cast them off; but he doth
not positively say that, _de eventu_, it shall infallibly be so with
them. But Satan, in both these cases, goes a great way further. He
plainly affirms to those that are in the way to conversion, that God
will not pardon their iniquities, that there is no hope for them, that
Christ will not accept them, that he never intended the benefit of his
sufferings for them. And when the converted do provoke God, he sticks
not to say the breach cannot be healed, and that they are not yet
converted. All which are most false assertions. And though God can make
use of Satan’s malice, when he abuseth his children with his falsehoods
to their great fear, to carry on his own ends by it, and to give a
greater impression to what he truly witnesseth against them; yet is
not God the proper author of Satan’s lying, for he doth it of his own
wicked inclination. The effect of these desperate false conclusions,
which is the putting his children into a fear in order to his end, may
be ascribed to God; but the falsehood of these conclusions are formally
Satan’s work and not God’s; for he makes use of so much of Satan’s
wrath as may be to his praise, and the ‘remainder of his wrath he doth
restrain,’ [Ps. lxxvi. 10.]

I have discovered the nature and degrees of these spiritual troubles,
and that it is a common thing for the children of God to fall under
them. For the further opening of them I shall next discover,

3. The usual solemn occasions that do, as it were, invite Satan to give
his onset against God’s children; and they are principally these six:—

[1.] _The time of conversion._ He delights to set on them when they are
in the straits of a new birth, for then the conscience is awakened,
the danger of sin truly represented, fear and sorrow, in some degree,
necessary and unavoidable. At this time he can easily overdrive them.
Where the convictions are deep and sharp, ready to weigh them down,
a few grains more cast into the scale will make the trouble, as Job
speaks, ‘heavier than the sand,’ [chap. vi. 3;] and where they are
more easy or gentle, yet the soul being unsettled, the thoughts in
commotion, they are disposed to receive a strong impression, and
to be turned, as wax to the seal, into a mould of hopelessness and
desperation. That this is one of Satan’s special occasions, we need
no other evidence for satisfaction than the common experience of
converts. Many of them do hardly escape the danger, and after their
difficult conquest of the troubles of their heart—which at that time
are extraordinarily enlarged—do witness that they are assaulted with
desperate fears that their sins were unpardonable, and sad conclusions
against any expectation of favour from the Lord their God. These
thoughts we are sure the Spirit of God will not bear witness unto,
because false, and therefore we must leave them at Satan’s door.

[2.] Another occasion which Satan makes use of, is the time of
_solemn repentance for some great sin committed after conversion_.
Sometimes God’s children fall, to the breaking of their bones. What
great iniquities they may commit through the force of temptation, I
need not mention. The adultery and murder of David; the incest of
the Corinthian; Peter’s denial of Christ, with other sad instances
in the records of the Scriptures, do speak enough of that. These
sins—considering their heinousness, the scandal of religion, the
dishonour of God, the grieving of his Spirit, the condition of the
party offending against love, knowledge, and the various helps
which God affords them to the contrary, with other aggravating
circumstances—being very displeasing to God, their consciences at
least, either compelled to examination by God immediately, or mediately
by some great affliction, or voluntarily awakening to a serious
consideration of what hath been done, by the working of its own light,
assisted thereunto by quickening grace, 1 Cor. xi. 31, 32,—call them to
a strict account. Thence follow fear, shame, self-indignation, bitter
weeping, deep humiliation. Then comes Satan; he rakes their wounds, and
by his aggravations makes them smart the more. He pours in corrosives
instead of oil, and all to make them believe that their ‘spot is not
the spot of God’s children,’ [Deut. xxxii. 5;] that their backslidings
cannot be healed. An occasion it is, as suitable to his malice as he
could wish; for ordinarily God doth severely testify his anger to them,
and doth not easily admit them again to the sense of his favour. At
which time the adversary is very busy to work up their hearts to an
excess of fear and sorrow. This was the course which he took with the
incestuous Corinthian, taking advantage of his great transgressions to
‘overwhelm him with too much sorrow,’ 2 Cor. ii. 7, 11.

[3.] Satan watcheth _the discomposures of the spirits of God’s
children, under some grievous cross or affliction_. This occasion also
falls fit for his design of wounding the conscience. When the hand of
the Lord is lifted up against them, and their thoughts disordered by
the stroke, suggesting at that time God’s anger to them and their sins,
he can easily frame an argument from these grounds, that they are not
reconciled to God, and that they are dealt withal as enemies. David
seldom met with outward trouble, but he at the same time had a conflict
with Satan about his spiritual condition or state, as his frequent
deprecations of divine wrath at such times do testify; ‘Lord, rebuke me
not in thy wrath,’ &c. There is indeed but a step betwixt discomposure
of spirit and spiritual troubles, as hath been proved before.

[4.] _When Satan hath prepared the hearts of God’s children by
atheistical or blasphemous thoughts, he takes that occasion to deny
their grace and interest in Christ_, and the argument at that time
seems unanswerable. Can Christ lodge in a heart so full of horrid
blasphemies against him? Is it possible it should be washed and
sanctified, when it produceth such filthy, cursed thoughts? All the
troubles of affrightment, of which before, are improvable to this
purpose.

[5.] Another spiritual occasion for spiritual trouble is _melancholy_.
Few persons distempered therewith do escape Satan’s hands. At one time
or other he casts his net over them, and seeks to stab them with his
weapon. Melancholy indeed affords so many advantages to him, and those
so answerable to his design, that it is no wonder if he make much of
it. For, 1. Melancholy affects both head and heart; it affords both
fear and sadness, and deformed, misshapen, delirious imaginations to
work upon, than which nothing can be more for his purpose.[341] For
where the heart trembles and the head is darkened, there every object
is misrepresented. The ideas of the brain are monstrous appearances,
reflected from opaque and dark spirits, so that Satan hath no more to
do but to suggest the new matter of fear. For that question, Whether
the man be converted, &c., being once started, to a mind already
distempered with fear, must of itself, it being a business of so high
a nature, without Satan’s further pursuit, summon the utmost powers
of sadness and misreprehension[342] to raise a storm. 2. Besides,
the impressions of melancholy are always strong. It is strong in its
fears, or else men would never be tempted to destroy themselves; it is
strong in its mistakes, or else they could never persuade themselves
of the truth of foolish, absurd, and impossible fancies; as that of
Nebuchadnezzar, who by a delusive apprehension, believing himself to
be a beast, forsook the company of men, and betook to the fields to
eat grass with oxen. The imaginations of the melancholic are never
idle, and yet straitened or confined to a few things; and then the
brain, being weakened as to a true and regular apprehension, it
frames nothing but bugbears, and yet with the highest confidence of
certainty. 3. These impressions are usually lasting, not vanishing as
an early dew, but they continue for months and years. 4. And yet they
have only so much understanding left them as serves to nourish their
fears. If their understanding had been quite gone, their fears would
vanish with them, as the flame is extinguished for want of air; but
they have only knowledge to let them see their misery, and sense to
make them apprehensive of their pain.[343] And therefore will they
pray with floods of tears, unexpressible groanings, deepest sighing,
and trembling joints, to be delivered from their fears. 5. They are
also apt after ease of their troubles to have frequent returns. What
disposition, all these things being considered, can be more exactly
shaped to serve Satan’s turn? If he would have men to believe the
worst of themselves, he hath such imaginations to work upon as are
already misshapen into a deformity of evil surmising. Would he terrify
by fears or distress by sadness? he hath that already, and it is but
altering the object, which oftentimes needs not—for naturally the
serious melancholic employs all his griefs upon his supposed miserable
estate of soul, and then he hath spiritual distress. Would he continue
them long under their sorrows, or take them upon all occasions at his
pleasure, or act them to a greater height than ordinary? still the
melancholic temper suits him. This is sufficient for caution, that we
take special care of our bodies, for the preventing or abating of that
humour by all lawful means, if we would not have the devil to abuse us
at his will.

[6.] _Sickness or death-bed_ is another solemn occasion which the devil
seldom misseth with his will. Death is a serious thing; it represents
the soul and eternity to the life. While they are at a distance, men
look slightly upon these; but when they approach near to them, men
usually have such a sight of them as they never had before. We may
truly call sickness and death-bed an hour of temptation, which Satan
will make use of with the more mischievous industry, because he hath
but ‘a short time’ for it. That is the last conflict, and if he miss
that, we are beyond his reach for ever. So that in this case Satan
encourageth himself to the battle with a _now or never_. And hence we
find that it is usual for the dying servants of God to undergo most
sharp encounters. Then to tell them, when the soul is about to loose
from the body, that they are yet ‘in their blood’ ‘without God and
hope,’ is enough to affright them into the extremest agonies, for
they see no time before them answerable to so great a work, if it be
yet to do. And withal they are under vast discouragements from the
weariness and pains of sickness, their understandings and faculties
being also dull and stupified, so that if at this last plunge God
should not extraordinarily appear to rebuke Satan and to pluck them out
of these great waters, as he often doth, by the fuller interposition
of the light of his face, and the larger testimony of his Spirit,
after their long and comfortable profession of their faith and holy
walking, their light would be ‘put out in darkness,’ and they would
‘lie down in sorrow.’ Yet this I must note, that as desirous as Satan
is to improve this occasion, he is often remarkably disappointed,
and that wherein he, it may be, and we would least expect, I mean in
regard of those who, through a timorous disposition or melancholy,
or upon other accounts, are, as I may so say, ‘all their lifetime
subject to bondage.’ Those men who are usually exercised with frequent
fits of spiritual trouble, when they come to sickness, death-bed, and
some other singular occasions of trouble, though we might suspect
their fears would then be working, if ever, yet God, out of gracious
indulgence to them, considering their mould and fashion, or because he
would prevent their extreme fainting, &c., doth meet them with larger
testimonies of his favour, higher joys, more confident satisfactions
in his love, than ever they received at any time before, and this,
to their wonder, their high admiration, making the times which they
were wont to fear most, to be times of greatest consolation. This
observation I have grounded not upon one or two instances, but could
produce a cloud of witnesses for it. Enough it is to check our forward
fears of a future evil day, and to heal us of a sighing distemper,
while we afflict ourselves with such thoughts as these: If I have so
many fears in health, how shall I be able to go through the valley of
the shadow of death?

4. I have one thing more to add for these discoveries of these
spiritual troubles, and that is to shew you _the engines by which Satan
works them_, and they are these two, sophistry and fears.

I. _As to his sophistry_, by which he argues the children of God into a
wrong apprehension of themselves, it is very great. He hath a wonderful
dexterity in framing arguments against their peace; he hath variety
of shrewd objections and subtle answers to the usual replies by which
they seek to beat him off. There is not a fallacy by which a cunning
sophister would seek to entangle his adversary in disputation, but
Satan would make use of it; as I might particularly shew you, if it
were proper for a common auditory. Though he hath so much impudence
as not to blush at the most silly, contemptible reason that can be
offered, notwithstanding he hath also so much wit as to urge, though
never true, yet always probable arguments. How much he can prevail
upon the beliefs of men, in cases relating to their souls, may be
conjectured by the success he hath upon the understandings of men, when
he argues them into error, and makes them believe a lie. We usually
say, and that truly, that Satan cannot in any case force us properly to
consent; yet considering the advantages which he takes, and the ways
he hath to prepare the hearts of men for his impressions, and then his
very great subtlety in disputing, we may say that he can so order the
matter that he will seldom miss of his aim. It would be an endless work
to gather up all the arguments that Satan hath made use of to prove
the condition or state of God’s children to be bad. But that I may not
altogether disappoint your expectations in that thing, I shall present
to your view Satan’s usual topics, the commonplaces or heads unto which
all his arguments may be reduced. And they are,

[1.] _Scripture abused and perverted._ His way is not only to suggest
that they are unregenerate, or under an evil frame of heart, but to
offer proof that these accusations are true. And because he hath to
do with them that profess a belief of Scriptures as the oracles of
God, he will fetch his proofs from thence, telling them that he will
evidence what he saith from Scripture. Thus sometimes he assaults the
weaker, unskilful sort of Christians, Thou art not a child of God;
for they that are so are enlightened, translated from darkness, they
are the children of the light; but thou art a poor, ignorant, dark,
blind creature, and therefore no child of God. Sometimes he labours
to conclude the like from the infirmities of God’s children, abusing
to this purpose that of 1 John iii. 9, ‘He that is born of God doth
not commit sin,’ and ‘he cannot sin, because he is born of God,’ Thus
he urgeth it, Can anything be more plainly and fully asserted? Is not
this scripture? Canst thou deny this? Then he pursues, But thou sinnest
often; that is thine own complaint against thyself, thy conscience also
bearing witness to the truth of this accusation; therefore thou canst
be no child of God. Sometimes he plays upon words that are used in
divers senses—a fit engine for the devil to work by—for what is true in
one sense will be false in another; and his arguing is from that which
is true to that which is false. I remember one that was long racked
with that of Rev. xxi. 8, ‘The fearful and unbelieving,’ &c., ‘shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone.’ From
whence the party thus argued: The proposition is true, because it is
scripture, and I cannot deny the assumption. ‘Fearful I am, because I
am doubtful of salvation; and unbelieving I am, for I cannot believe
that I am regenerate, or in a state of grace, and therefore I cannot
avoid the conclusion.’ To the same purpose he disputes against some
from 1 John iv. 18, ‘There is no fear in love: but perfect love casteth
out fear; but thou art full of fears, therefore thou lovest not God.’
Sometimes he makes use of those scriptures that make the prevailing
degree of our love and respects to God above the world and the things
of this life, to be the characters of true grace; as that of John, ‘If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him;’ and that
of Christ, ‘If a man love anything more than me, he is not worthy of
me: he that forsakes not all for me cannot be my disciple,’ &c. Then
he urgeth upon them their love of the world, and unwillingness to part
with their estates; and so brings the conclusion upon them. Instances
might be infinite; but by these you may judge of the rest. Let us now
cast our eye upon his subtlety in managing his arguments against men.
1. He grounds his arguments on Scripture, because that hath authority
with it, and the very troubled conscience hath a reverence to it. 2. He
always suits his scriptures, which he thus cites, to that wherein the
conscience is most tender. If there be anything that affords matter of
suspicion or fear, he will be sure to choose such an arrow out of the
quiver of Scripture as will directly hit the mark. 3. Though in the
citation of Scripture he always urgeth a sense which the Holy Ghost
never intended, yet there will be always something in those scriptures
which he makes use of, which, in words at least, seem to favour his
conclusion; as appears in the instances now given. For when he would
conclude a man not to be a child of God because of his ignorance,
something of his argument is true: it may be the man is sensible that
his knowledge is but little, compared with the measures which some
others have; or that he is at a loss or confused in many doctrinal
points of religion; or hath but little experience in many practical
cases, &c. This as it is true, so it is his trouble; and whilst he
is poring upon his defect, Satan claps an arrest upon him of a far
greater debt than God chargeth upon him, and from scriptures that speak
of a total ignorance of the fundamentals of religion, as that there
is a God, that Christ Jesus is God and man, the Redeemer of mankind
by a satisfaction to divine justice, &c., or of a wilful ignorance
of the worth of the proffer of the gospel, or its reality, which is
discovered in the refusal of the terms thereof, he concludes him to be
in a state of darkness; whereas the ignorance which the man complains
of is not the ignorance which those scriptures intend. So in the next
instance, the sins which a child of God complains of are those of daily
incursion, which he labours and strives against; but that committing
sin mentioned in the text hath respect to the Gnostics, who taught a
liberty in sinning, and fancied a righteousness consistent with the
avowed practice of iniquity. Hence doth John, 1 Epist. iii. 7, directly
face their opinion in these terms, ‘Little children, let no man deceive
you; he that doth righteousness is righteous;’ and, ‘He that is born
of God’ neither doth nor can avouch a liberty of sinning, it being
contrary to the principles of the new nature. So that the miscarriages
of infirmity which the child of God laments in himself are not the
same with that of the text, upon which Satan grounds the accusation.
The like may be said of the third instance, from Rev. xxi. 18. The
threatening there is against such a fear to lose the comforts of the
world, that they dare not believe the gospel to be true, and accept it
accordingly; which is nothing to those fears and doubtings that may
be in a child of God, in reference to his happiness. Thus in all the
rest the fallacy lies in misapplying the Scripture, to suit them to
that wherein the conscience is tender, under a sense which was never
intended by them; yet in another sense, the thing charged upon the
conscience is true. (4.) Yet is Satan so subtle, that when he disputes
by such fallacious arguments, he chiefly endeavours to draw off the
defendant’s eye and consideration from that part of the argument
wherein its weakness lies, which in this case is always in the abuse of
the scripture to a wrong sense. This he doth, partly from the advantage
which he hath from the reverence that they carry to Scripture; they
believe it to be true, and are not willing to suspect the sense; and
many are so weak that if they should, Satan is so cunning that he can
easily baffle them in any distinction that they can make. And partly
from the sense they have of that whereof they are accused, they feel
themselves so sore in that place, and for that very end doth Satan
direct his scripture to hit it, that they readily take it for granted
that the hinge of the controversy turns upon it, and that the whole
dispute rests upon it. Now Satan having these fair advantages, by a
further improvement of them hides the weakness of his argument. For,
[1.] He takes that sense of the Scripture, in which he misapplies it,
for granted, and that with great confidence, making as if there were
no doubt there. [2.] He turns always that part of the argument to them
which they can least answer, pressing them eagerly with the matter of
charge, which they are as ready to confess as he is to accuse them of,
and aggravating it very busily. And because the unskilful have no other
direction for the finding the knot of the controversy than Satan’s
bustle—though he, like the lapwing, makes the greatest noise when he
is furthest from his nest, on purpose to draw them into a greater
mistake—they look no further; and then, not being able to answer, they
are soon cast, and striking in with the conclusion against themselves,
they multiply their sorrows, and cry out of themselves as miserable.

[2.] Another piece of his sophistry is, the improving certain _false
notions, which Christians of the weaker sort have received, as proofs
of their unregeneracy or bad condition_. As there are vulgar errors
concerning natural things, so there are popular errors concerning
spiritual things. These mistakes in a great part have their original
from the fancies or misapprehensions of unskilful men. Some indeed
have, it may be, been preached and taught as truths, others have risen
without a teacher from mere ignorance, being the conclusions and
surmises which weak heads have framed to themselves, from the sayings
or practices of men, which have not been either so cleared from the
danger of mistake, or not so distinctly apprehended as was necessary.
These false inferences, once set on foot, are traditionally handed
down to others, and in time they gain among the simple the opinion of
undoubted truths. Now, wherever Satan finds any of these that are fit
for his purpose—for to be sure whatever mistake we entertain, he will
at one time or other cast it in our way—he will make it the foundation
of an argument against him that hath received it, and that with very
great advantage. For a falsehood in the premises will usually produce
a falsehood in the conclusion. And these falsehoods being taken for
granted, the devil is not put to the trouble to prove them. If then
he can but exactly fit them to something in the party which he cannot
deny, he forthwith carries the cause, and condemns him by his own
concessions, as out of his own mouth.

It is scarce possible to number the false notions which are already
entertained among Christians relating to grace and conversion, much
less those that may afterward arise. But I shall mention some that
Satan frequently makes use of as grounds of objection.

_First_, It is a common apprehension among the weaker sort, that
conversion _is always accompanied with great fear and terror_. This is
true in some, as hath been said, and though none of the preachers of
the gospel have asserted the universality of these greater measures
of trouble, yet the people, taking notice that many speak of their
deep humiliations in conversion, and that several authors have set
forth the greatness of distress that some have been cast into on that
occasion—though without any intention of fixing this into a general
rule—have from thence supposed that all the converted are brought to
their comforts through the flames of hell. Upon this mistake the devil
disquiets those that have not felt these extreme agonies of sorrow in
themselves, and tells them that it is a sure sign that they are not
yet converted. Though it is easy for a man that sees the falsehood
of the notion to answer the argument, yet he that believes it to be
true cannot tell what to say, because he finds he never was under such
troubles, and now he begins to be troubled because he was not troubled
before, or, as he supposeth, not troubled enough.

_Second_, Another false notion is, that a convert can _give an account
of the time and manner of his conversion_. This is true in some, as in
Paul and some others, whose change hath been sudden and remarkable,
though in many this is far otherwise; who can better give account
that they are converted, than by what steps, degrees, and methods
they were brought to it. But if any of these receive the notion, they
will presently find that Satan will turn the edge of it against them,
and will tell them that they are not converted, because they cannot
nominate the time when, nor the manner how, such a change was wrought.

_Third_, Some take it for granted that conversion is accompanied with
a _remarkable measure of gifts for prayer and exhortation_; and then
the devil objects it to them, that they are not converted, because
they cannot pray as others, or speak of the things of God so readily,
fluently, and affectionately as some others can. Thus the poor, weak
Christian is baffled for want of abilities to express himself to God
and men.

_Fourth_, False notions about _the nature of faith are a sad
stumbling-block to some_. Many suppose that saving faith is a certain
belief that our sins are pardoned, and that we shall be saved, making
faith and assurance all one. This mistake is the deeper rooted in
the minds of men because some have directly taught so, and those men
of estimation, whose words are entertained with great reverence by
well-meaning Christians. For whom notwithstanding this may be pleaded
in excuse, that they have rather described faith in its height than
in its lowest measures. However it be, those that have no other
understanding of the nature of faith can never answer Satan’s argument,
if he takes them at any time at the advantage of fear or doubting: for
then he will dispute thus, Faith is a belief that sins are pardoned,
but thou dost not believe this, therefore thou hast no faith. Oh, what
numbers of poor doubting Christians have been distressed with this
argument!

_Fifth_, Some take it for a truth that _growth of grace is always
visible, and the progress remarkable_. And then because they can make
no such discovery of themselves, the devil concludes their grace to be
counterfeit and hypocritical.

_Sixth_, Of like nature are some _mistaken signs of true grace, as that
true grace fears God only for his goodness_. And then if there be any
apprehension of divine displeasure impressed upon the heart, though
upon the necessary occasion of miscarriage, they, through the devil’s
instigation, conclude that they are under ‘a spirit of bondage,’ and
their supposed grace not true, or not genuine at least, according to
that disposition which the New Testament will furnish a man withal.
It is also another mistaken sign of grace, that it doth direct a man
to love God singly for himself, without the least regard to his own
salvation; for that, they think, is but self-love. Now, when a child
of God doth not see his love to God so distinct, but that his own
salvation is twisted with it, Satan gets advantage of him, and forceth
him to cast away his love as adulterate and selfish. Like to this
mistake, but of a higher strain, is that of some, that where grace is
true, it is so carried forth to honour God, that the man that hath it
can desire God may be honoured though he should be damned. God doth
not put us to such questions as these, but upon supposition that this
is true, the grace of most men will be shaken by the objection that
Satan will make from thence; he can and will presently put the mistaken
to it, Canst thou say thou art willing to go to hell, that God may be
glorified? If not, where is thy grace? From such mistakes as these
he disputes against the holiness of the children of God; and it is
impossible but that he should carry the cause against those who grant
these things to be true. Satan can undeniably shew them that their
hearts will not answer such a description of a convert or gracious
heart as these false notions will make. So long then as they hold these
notions they have no relief against Satan’s conclusions; no comfort
can be administered till they be convinced that they have embraced
mistakes for truths. And how difficult that will be in this case,
where the confidence of the notion is great, and the suspicion strong,
that the defect is only in the heart, hath been determined by frequent
experience already.

[3.] The third piece of Satan’s sophistry from whence he raiseth false
conclusions, is his _misrepresentation of God_. In this he directly
crosseth the design of the Scriptures, where God in his nature and
dealings is so set forth, that the weakest, the most afflicted and
tossed, may receive encouragement of acceptance, and of his fatherly
care over them in their saddest trials. Yet withal, lest men should
turn his grace into wantonness, and embolden themselves in sin because
of his clemency, the Scriptures sometimes give us lively descriptions
of his anger against those that wickedly presume upon his goodness,
and continue so to do. Both these descriptions of God should be taken
together, as affording the only true representation of him. He is
so gentle to the humbled sensible sinner, that ‘he will not break
their bruised reed, nor quench their smoking flax,’ [Mat. xii. 20.]
And so careful of health that, for their recovery, he will not leave
them altogether unpunished, nor suffer them to ruin themselves by a
surfeit upon worldly comforts; yet with ‘the froward he will shew
himself froward,’ Ps. xviii. 26. And ‘as for such as turn aside unto
their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity,’ Ps. cxxv. 5. He will ‘put out the candle of the wicked,’
for he sets them in ‘slippery places, &c., so that they are cast down
into destruction, and brought into desolation as in a moment; they are
consumed with terrors,’ [Ps. lxxiii. 19.] Now Satan will sometimes
argue against the children of God, and endeavour to break their hopes
by turning that part of the description of God against them, which is
intended for the dismounting of the confidence of the wicked, and the
bringing down of high looks. By this means he wrests the description of
God to a contrary end, and misrepresents God to a trembling afflicted
soul. This he doth,

_First_, By misrepresenting _his nature_. Here he reads a solemn
lecture of the holiness and justice of God, but always with reflection
upon the vileness and unworthiness of the person against whom he
intends his dart. And thus he argues: Lift up thine eyes to the
heavens, behold the brightness of God’s glory: consider his unspotted
holiness, his infinite justice. The heavens are not clean in his
sight; how much more abominable and filthy then art thou! His eyes
are pure, he cannot wink at nor approve of the least sin; how canst
thou then imagine, except thou be intolerably impudent, that he hath
taken such an unclean wretch into his favour? He is a jealous God,
and will by no means acquit the guilty; canst thou then with any show
of reason conclude thyself to be his child? He beholds the wicked
afar off; he shuts out their prayer; he laughs at their calamity; he
mocks when their fear comes; and therefore thou hast no cause to think
that he will hear thy cry, though thou shouldst make many prayers. It
cannot be supposed that he will incline his ear. It is his express
determination, that if any man regard iniquity in his heart, the Lord
will not hear his prayer. This, and a great deal more will he say.
And while Satan speaks but at this rate, we may call him modest,
because his allegations are in themselves true, if they were applied
rightly. Sometimes he will go further, and plainly belie God, speaking
incredible falsehoods of him: but because these properly appertain to
a higher sort of troubles, of which I am next to speak, I shall not
here mention them. However, if he stops here, he saith enough against
any servant of God that carries a high sense of his unworthiness. For
being thus brought to the view of these astonishing attributes, he
is dashed out of countenance, and can think no other, but that it is
very unlikely that so unworthy a sinner should have any interest in so
holy a God. Thus the devil affrights him off, turning the wrong side
of the description of God to him; and in the meantime hiding that part
of it that speaks Gods wonderful condescensions, infinite compassions,
unspeakable readiness to accept the humble, broken-hearted, weary,
heavy-laden sinner, that is prostrate at his footstool for pardon. All
which are on purpose declared in the description of God’s nature, to
obviate this temptation, and to encourage the weak.

_Second_, He misrepresents God _in his providence_. If God chastise
his children by any affliction, Satan perversely wrests it to a bad
construction, especially if the affliction be sharp, or seem to be
above their strength, or frequent, and most of all if it seem to
cross their hopes and prayers; for then he argues, These are not the
chastisements of sons. God indeed will visit their transgressions
with rods, but his dealing with thee is plainly of another nature,
for he ‘breaketh thee with his tempests,’ And whereas he corrects his
sons that serve him in measure, thou art bowed down with thy trouble
to distress and despair: but he will lay no more upon his sons than
they are able to bear. He will not always chide his servants; but
thou art afflicted every morning. And besides, if thou wert pure and
upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation
of thy righteousness prosperous: for to his sons he saith, ‘Call upon
me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee; and thou shalt glorify
me,’ Ps. l. 15. Hence comes the complaint of many, that they are not
regenerated, because they think God deals not with them as with others.
Oh, say they, we know God chastiseth ‘every son whom he receiveth;’ but
our case is every way different from theirs, our troubles are plagues,
not rods; our cry is not heard, our prayers disregarded, our strength
faileth us, our hearts fret against the Lord, so that not only the
nature and quality of our affections, but the frame of our heart under
them, in not enduring the burden,—which is the great character of the
chastisement of sons, Heb. xii. 7,—plainly evinceth that we are under
God’s hatred, and are not his children. This objection, though it might
seem easy to be answered by those that are not at present concerned,
yet it will prove a difficult business to those that are under the
smart of afflictions. How much a holy and wise man may be gravelled by
it, you may see in Ps. lxxii., where the prophet is put to a grievous
plunge upon this very objection; ver. 14, ‘All the day long have I been
plagued, and chastised every morning.’

And yet in all this Satan doth but play the sophister, working upon the
advantages which the nature of the affliction and the temper of men’s
hearts do afford him. For, 1. Afflictions are a great depth, one of the
secrets of God, so that it is hard to know what God intends by them. 2.
The end of the Lord is not discovered at first, but at some distance,
when the fruits thereof begin to appear. 3. The mind of the afflicted
cannot always proceed regularly in making a judgment of God’s design
upon them: especially at first, when it is stounded by the assault,
and all things in confusion; faith is to seek, patience awanting, and
love staggering. After it hath recollected itself, and attained any
calmness to fit it for a review of the ways of God and of the heart,
it is better enabled to fix some grounds of hope: Lam. iii. 19-21,
‘This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope,’ 4. Afflictions
have a light and a dark side, and their appearances are according to
our posture in which we view them: as some pictures, which if we look
upon them one way, they appear to be angels, if another way, they seem
devils. 5. Some men in affliction do only busy themselves in looking
upon the dark side of affliction. Their disposition, either through
natural timorousness or strong impressions of temptation, is only to
meditate terrors, and to surmise evils. These men out of the cross can
draw nothing but the wormwood and the gall, while others, that have
another prospect of them, observe mixtures of mercy and gentleness,
and do melt into submission and thankfulness. These, considered
together, are a great advantage to Satan in disputing against the peace
of God’s afflicted children, and it often falls out, that as he doth
misrepresent God’s design, so do they, urged by temptation, upon that
account misjudge themselves.

_Third_, He also misrepresents God _in the works of his Spirit_. If God
withdraw his countenance, or by his Spirit signifies his displeasure
to the consciences of any, if he permit Satan to molest them with
spiritual temptations, presently Satan takes occasion to put his false
and malignant interpretation upon all; he tells them that God’s hiding
his face is his casting them off; that the threatenings signified to
their conscience are plain declarations that their present state is
wrath and darkness; that Satan’s molestations by temptations shew them
to be yet under his power; that the removal of their former peace,
joy, and sensible delight which they had in the ways of God is beyond
contradiction an evidence that God hath no delight in them, nor they
in him; that their faith was but that of temporaries, their joy but
that of hypocrites, which is only for a moment. How often have I
heard Christians complaining thus: We cannot be in a state of grace;
our consciences lie under the sense of God’s displeasure, they give
testimony against us, and we know that testimony is true, for we feel
it. It is true, time was when we thought we had a delight in hearing,
praying, meditating, but now all is a burden to us, we can relish
nothing, we can profit nothing, we can remember nothing. Time was when
we thought we had assurance, and our hearts rejoiced in us; sometimes
we have thought our hearts had as much of peace and comfort as they
could hold, now all is vanished, and we are under sad fears; if God
had had a favour to us, would he have dealt thus with us? Thus are
they cheated into a belief that they never had any grace; they take
all for granted that is urged against them; they cannot consider God’s
design in hiding his face, nor yet can they see how grace acts in them
under these complainings; how they express their love to God in their
desires and pantings after him, in their bewailing of his absence, in
abhorring and condemning themselves, &c.; but their present feeling—and
an argument from sense is very strong—bears down all before it.

Thus doth Satan frame his arguments from misrepresentations of God,
which, though a right view of God would easily answer them, yet how
difficult it is for a person in an hour of temptation to dispel, by
a right apprehension of the ways of the holy God, doth abundantly
appear from Ps. lxxvii., where the case of Asaph, or whoever else he
was, doth inform us—1. That it is usual for Satan, for the disquieting
of the hearts of God’s children, to offer a false prospect of God.
2. That this overwhelms their hearts with grief, ver. 3. 3. That the
more they persist in the prosecution of this method, under the mists
of prejudice, they see the less, being apt to misconstrue everything
in God to their disadvantage, ver. 3, ‘I remembered God, and was
troubled.’ 4. The reason of all that trouble lies in this, that they
can only conclude wrath and desertion from God’s carriage toward
them. 5. That till they look upon God in another method, and take up
better thoughts of him and his providences, even while they carry the
appearance of severity, they can expect no ease to their complainings.
For before the prophet quitted himself of his trouble, he was forced
to acknowledge his mistake, ver. 10, in the misconstruction he made of
his dealings, and to betake himself to a resolve of entertaining better
thoughts of God, ver. 7. His interrogation, ‘Will the Lord cast off
for ever?’ &c., shews indeed what he did once think, being misled by
Satan, but withal that he would never do so again. ‘Will the Lord cast
off for ever?’ is not here the voice of a despairing man, but of one
that, through better information, hath rectified his judgment, and now
is resolved strongly to hold the contrary to what he thought before: as
if he should say, It is not possible that it should be so; he will not
cast off for ever, and I will never entertain such perverse thoughts
of God any more. 6. But before they can come to this, it will cost
them some pains and serious thoughts. It is not easy to break these
fetters, to answer this argument, but they that will do so must appeal
from their present sense to a consideration of the issues of these
dealings upon other persons, or upon themselves at other times; for the
prophet, ver. 5, ‘considered the days of old, and the years of ancient
times;’ and ver. 6, he also made use of his own experience, calling to
remembrance that after such dealings as these, God by his return of
favour gave him ‘songs in the night.’

[4.] Another common head from whence this great disputant doth fetch
his arguments against the good condition and state of God’s servants,
is their _sin and miscarriages_. Here I shall observe two or three
things in the general concerning this, before I shew how he draws his
false conclusions from thence. As,

_First_, That with a kind of _feigned ingenuity_[344] he will grant a
difference betwixt sin and sin—betwixt sins reigning and not reigning,
sins mortified and not mortified; betwixt the sins of the converted and
the unconverted; and upon this supposition he usually proceeds. He doth
not always, except in case of great sins, argue want of regeneration
from one sin; for that argument, This is a sin, therefore thou art not
a convert, would be easily answered by one that knows the saints have
their imperfections; but he thus deals with men: These sins whereof
thou art guilty are reigning sins, such as are inconsistent with a
converted estate, and therefore thou art yet unregenerated.

_Second_, He produceth usually, for the backing of his arguments, such
scriptures as _do truly represent the state of men unsanctified_;
but then his labour is to make the parties to appear suitable to the
description of the unregenerate. And to that purpose he aggravates all
their failings to them; he makes severe inquiries after all their sins,
and if he can charge them with any notorious crime, he lays load upon
that, still concluding that a regenerate person doth not sin at such a
rate as they do.

_Third_, This is always a _very difficult case_; it is not easy to
answer the objections that he will urge from hence; for, (1.) If
there be the real guilt of any grievous or remarkable scandal which
he objects, the accused party, though never so knowing, or formerly
never so holy, will be hardly put to it to determine anything in favour
of his estate. [1.] The fact cannot be denied. [2.] The Scripture
nominates particularly such offences as render a man unfit for the
kingdom of God. [3.] Whether in such cases grace be not wholly lost, is
a question in which all are not agreed. [4.] However, it will be very
doubtful whether such had ever any grace. The Scripture hath given no
note of difference to distinguish betwixt a regenerate and unregenerate
person in the acts of murder, adultery, fornication, &c. It doth not
say the regenerate commits an act of gross iniquity in this manner, the
unregenerate in that, and that there is a visible distinction betwixt
the one and the other, relating to these very acts. And whatever may be
supposed to be the inward workings of grace in the soul, while it is
reduced to so narrow a compass as a spark of fire raked up in ashes,
yet the weight of present guilt upon the soul, when it is charged
home, will always poise it toward the worst apprehensions that can be
made concerning its state. Former acts of holiness will be disowned
under the notion of hypocrisy; or if yet owned to be true, they will
be apt to think that true grace may be utterly lost. Present acts of
grace they can see none, so that only the after-acts of repentance can
discover that there is yet a being and life of grace in them, and till
then they can never answer Satan’s argument from great sins. But, (2.)
In the usual infirmities of God’s children the case is not so easy. For
the Scriptures give instances of some whose conversations could not be
taxed with any notorious evils; who, though they were not ‘far from
the kingdom of God,’ yet were not ‘of the kingdom of God,’ [Mark xii.
34:] a freedom then from great sins is not pleadable as an undoubted
mark of grace. And if others that are not converted may have no greater
infirmities than some that are, the difference betwixt the one and the
other must depend upon the secret powers of grace giving check to these
infirmities and striving to mortify them; and this will be an intricate
question. The apostle, Rom. vii. 15, notes indeed three differences
betwixt the regenerate and unregenerate in this case of sins of
infirmity. [1.] Hatred of the sin before the commission of it: ‘What I
hate, that do I.’ [2.] Reluctancy in the act: ‘What I would, that do I
not.’ [3.] Disallowance after the act: ‘That which I do, I allow not.’
Yet seeing natural light will afford some appearances of disallowance
and reluctancy, it will still admit of further debate whether the
principles, motives, degrees, and success of these strivings be such as
may discover the being and power of real grace.

While Satan doth insist upon arguments from the sins of believers for
the proof of an unconverted estate, he only aims to make good this
point, that their sins are reigning sins, and consequently that they
cannot be in so good a condition as they are willing to think. And to
make their sins to carry that appearance, his constant course is to
aggravate them all he can. This is his design, and the means by which
he would effect it. His great art in this case is to heighten the sins
of the regenerate. This he doth many ways. As,

(1.) _From the nature of the sin committed, and the manner of its
commission_; and this he chiefly labours, because his arguments from
hence are more probable, especially considering what he fixeth upon
usually is that which may most favour his conclusion: as, [1.] If any
have fallen into a great sin which a child of God doth but rarely
commit, then he argues against him thus: They that are in Christ do
mortify the flesh with the affections and lusts, they cast away the
works of darkness; and these works of the flesh are manifest, Gal. v.
19, ‘Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations,’ &c. ‘Because of these things
cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.’ ‘Be not
therefore partakers with them;’ ‘have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness,’ Eph. v. 6, 11. But thou hast not put these away,
nor mortified them, as thy present sin doth testify, therefore thou art
no child of God. [2.] If any do more than once or twice relapse into
the same sin, suppose it be not so highly scandalous as the former,
then he pleads from thence that they are backsliders in heart, that
they have broken their covenant with God, that they are in bondage to
sin. Here he urgeth, it may be, that of 2 Pet. ii. 19, 20, ‘Of whom
a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.... The dog
is returned to his vomit.’ [3.] Or if any have by any offence more
remarkably gone against their knowledge or violated their conscience,
then he tells them that they sin wilfully, that they reject the counsel
of the Lord, that they are the servants of sin; ‘for his servants ye
are to whom ye obey,’ Rom. vi. 16; ‘and that where there is grace,
though they may fall, yet it is still against their wills,’ &c. [4.] If
he have not so clear ground to manage any of the former charges against
them, then he argues from the frequency of their various miscarriages.
Here he sets their sins in order before them, rakes them all together,
that he may oppress them by a multitude, when he cannot prevail by an
accusation from one or two acts; and his pleading here is, Thou art
nothing but sin, thy thoughts are evil continually, thy words are vain
and unprofitable, thy actions foolish and wicked, and this in all thy
employments, in all relations, at all times. What duty is there that
is not neglected or defiled? what sin that is not some way or other
committed? &c. Can such a heart as thine be the temple of the Holy
Ghost? For the temple of the Lord is holy, and his people are washed
and cleansed, &c.

These are all of them strong objections, and frequently made use of by
Satan, as the complaints of the servants of God do testify, who are
made thus to except against themselves: If our sins were but the usual
failings of the converted, we might comfort ourselves, but they are
great, they are backslidings, they are against conscience, they are
many; what can we judge but that we have hitherto deceived ourselves,
and that the work of conversion is yet to do? The objections that are
from great sins, or from recidivation[345] or wilful violation of
conscience, do usually prevail for some time against the best that are
chargeable with them; they cannot determine that they are converted,
though they might be so, so long as they cannot deny the matter of
fact upon which the accusation is grounded. Till their true repentance
give them some light of better information, they are in the dark, and
cannot answer the argument. Jonah being imprisoned in the whale’s belly
for his stubborn rebellion, at first concluded himself a castaway:
chap. ii. 4, ‘Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight.’ Neither could
he think better of himself till, upon his repentance, he recovered
his faith and hope of pardon: ‘Yet will I look again toward thy holy
temple.’ Yea, those objections that are raised from the multitude and
frequency of lesser failings, though they may be answered by a child of
God while his heart is not overshadowed with the mists and clouds of
temptation, yet when he is confused with violent commotions within, his
heart will fail him, and till he can bring himself to some composure
of spirit, he hath not the boldness to assert his integrity. David was
gravelled with this objection: Ps. xl. 12, ‘Innumerable evils have
compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that
I am not able to look up; they are more than the hairs on my head,
therefore my heart faileth me.’

(2.) He aggravates the sinfulness of our condition from _the frequency
and violence of his own temptations_. It is a usual thing for him
to give young converts incessant onsets of temptation to sin. Most
commonly he works upon their natural constitution; he blows the coals
that are not yet quite extinguished, and that have greater forwardness,
from their own inclination, to kindle again, as lust and passion. The
first motions of the one, though it go no further than those offers
and risings up in the heart, and is there damped and kept down by
the opposing principle of grace; and the occasional outbreakings of
the other, which he provokes by a diligent preparation of occasion
from without, and violent incitations from within, furnish him with
sufficient matter for his intended accusations; and sometimes—being,
as it were, wholly negligent of the advantages which our tempers give
him, or not being able to find any such forwardness to these evils in
our constitution as may more eminently serve his ends—he satisfies
himself to molest us with earnest motions to any sins indifferently;
and all this to make us believe that sin is not crucified in us, which
some are more apt to believe, because they observe their temptations
to these sins to importune them more, and with greater vehemency,
than they were wont to do before; and this doth yet the more astonish
them, because they had high expectations that, after their conversion,
Satan would fall before them, and their temptations abate; that their
natures should be altered, and their natural inclinations to these sins
wholly cease; but now, finding the contrary, they are ready to cry
out—especially when Satan violently buffets them with this objection—We
are yet in our sins, and under the dominion thereof; neither can it be
that we are converted, because we find sin more active and stirring
than formerly; it is not then surely mortified in us, but lively and
strong. Though in this case it be very plain that temptations are only
strong, and sin weak, and that grace is faithfully acting its part
against the flesh, arguing, not that grace is so very weak, but that
Satan is more busy than ordinary. The sins are not more than formerly,
but the light that discovers them more is greater, and the conscience
that resents the temptation is more tender. Yet all this doth not at
first give ease to the fears that are now raised up in the mind. They
find sin working in them; their expectations of attaining a greater
conquest on a sudden, and with greater ease, are disappointed, and
the desire of having much makes a man think himself poor; and withal
they commonly labour under so much ignorance or perverse credulity,
that they conclude they consent to everything which they are tempted
to, insomuch that it is long before these clouds do vanish, and the
afflicted brought to a right understanding of themselves.

(3.) From some _remarkable appearances of God doth Satan aggravate
our sinful condition_. If God shew any notable act of power, he
makes the beams of that act reflect upon our unworthiness with a
dazzling light. When Peter saw the power of Christ in sending a great
multitude of fishes into his net, having laboured all night before
and caught nothing, it gave so deep an impression to the conviction
of his vileness, that he was ready to put Christ from him, as being
altogether unfit for his blessed society: ‘Depart,’ saith he, ‘from
me, for I am a sinful man,’ [Luke v. 8.] If God discover the glorious
splendour of his holiness, it is enough to make the holiest saints,
such as Job and Isaiah, to cry out they are undone, being ‘men of
unclean lips,’ Isa. vi. 5; and to ‘abhor themselves in dust and ashes,’
Job xlii. 6. The like may be said of any discovery of the rest of the
glorious attributes of God. Of all which Satan makes this advantage,
that the parties tempted should have so deep a consideration of their
unworthiness as might induce them to believe—as if it were by a voice
from heaven—that God prohibits them any approaches to him, and that
they have nothing to do to take God’s name within their mouths. And
though these remarkable discoveries of God, either by his acts of power
and providence, or by immediate impressions upon the soul, in the
height of contemplation, have ordinarily great effects upon the hearts
of his children, but not of long continuance; yet where they strike in
with other arguments, by which they were already staggered as to their
interest in God, they mightily strengthen them, and are taken for no
less than God’s own determination of the question against them.

But this is not all the use that Satan makes of them; for from hence he
sometimes hath the opportunity to raise new accusations against them,
and to tax them with particular crimes, which, in a particular manner,
seem to prove them unregenerate. For what would seem to be a clearer
character of a man dead in trespasses and sins than a hard heart, that
can neither be sensible of judgments nor mercies? This he sometimes
chargeth upon the children of God, from the great disproportion that
they find in themselves betwixt the little sense that they seem to
have—and that which is disproportionable, they reckon to be nothing—and
the vast greatness of God’s mercy or holiness. I have observed some
to complain of utter unthankfulness and insensibleness of heart—from
thence concluding confidently against themselves—because, when God
hath remarkably appeared for them in deliverances from dangers, or
in unexpected kindnesses, they could not render a thankfulness that
carried any proportion to the mercy. While they were in the highest
admiration of the kindness, saying, ‘What shall I render to the Lord?’
they were quite out of the sight of their own sense and feeling, and
thought they returned nothing at all, because they returned nothing
equivalent to what they had received. Others I have known, who, from
the confusion and amazement of their spirit, when they have been
overwhelmed with troubles, have positively determined themselves to
be senseless, stupid, past feeling, hardened to destruction; when, in
both cases, any might have seen the working of their hearts to be an
apparent[346] contradiction to what Satan charged them withal. For
they were not unapprehensive either of mercies or judgments; but, on
the contrary, had only a greater sense of them than they were able to
manage.

(4.) To make full measure, Satan doth sometimes aggravate the
miscarriages of those whom he intends to accuse, _by comparing their
lives and actions with the holy lives of some eminent servants of God,
especially such as they have only heard of and not known personally_.
For so they have only their virtues represented, without their
failings. Here Satan takes a liberty of declaiming against them: and
though he could never spare a saint a good word out of respect, yet
that others might be put out of heart and hope, he will commend the
holiness, strictness, care, constancy of dead saints to the skies. And
then he queries, Art thou such a one? Canst thou say thou art anything
like them, for a heavenly heart, a holy life, a contempt of the
world, a zeal for God, for good works, for patient suffering? &c. All
this while not a word of their weaknesses. These, saith he, were the
servants of the Most High: their examples thou shouldst follow, if thou
expectest their crown. Had they any more holiness than they needed? And
if thou hast not so much, thou art nothing. What can humility, modesty,
and sense of guilt speak in such a case? They go away mourning, their
fears increase upon them, and what God hath set before them, in the
examples of his servants, for the increase of their diligence, they
take to be as a witness against them, to prove them unconverted.

(5.) The last part of Satan’s sophistry is to lessen their _graces,
that so he may altogether deny them_. In this he proceeds upon such
scriptures as do assert the fruits of the Spirit, and urgeth for his
foundation that none are the children of God but such as ‘are led by
the Spirit,’ [Rom. viii. 14;] and that he that hath ‘not the Spirit of
Christ is none of his,’ [Rom. viii. 9.] The necessity of faith, love,
patience, humility, with the fruits of these and other graces, he
presseth; but still in order to a demonstration, as he pretends, that
such are not to be found in those whose gracious state he calls into
question, and consequently that they are not the children of God.

The rule by which he manageth himself in this dispute is this: The
more graces are heightened in the notions, that must give an account
of their nature and beings, the more difficult it will be to find out
their reality in the practice of them. His design then hath these two
parts: 1. He heightens grace in the notion, or abstract, all he can;
2. He lessens it in the concrete, or practice, as much as is possible,
that it may appear a very nullity, a shadow and not a substance. I
shall speak a little of both.

(1.) As to the first part of his design, he hath many ways by which
he _aggravates grace in the notion_. We may be sure, if it lie in his
way, he will not stick to give false definitions of grace, and to
tell men that it is what indeed it is not. He is a liar, and in any
case whatsoever he will lie for his advantage, if he have hope his
lie may pass for current; but he cannot always use a palpable cheat in
this matter, where the nature of any grace is positively determined
in Scripture, except it be with the ignorant, or where the nature of
grace is made a business of controversy among men. I will not make
conjectures what Satan may possibly say in belying the nature of grace,
to make it seem to be quite another thing than it is; but shall rather
shew you the more usual plausible ways of deceit which herein he
exerciseth; and they are these that follow:—

_First_, As the same graces have different _degrees in several persons,
and these different degrees have operations suitable_: some acts being
stronger, some weaker, some more perfected and ripened, others more
imperfect and immature; so when Satan comes to describe grace, he sets
it forth in its _highest excellencies and most glorious attainments_.
You shall never observe him to speak of graces at their lowest pitch,
except where he is carrying on a design for presumption, and then he
tells men that any wishing or woulding is grace; and every formal
‘Lord forgive me’ is true repentance; but, on the contrary, he offers
the highest reach of it that any saint on earth ever arrived at, as
essentially necessary to constitute its being; and tells them if they
have not that, they have nothing. Let us see it in the particulars.

[1.] Grace sometimes hath its _extraordinaries_, as I may call them. We
have both precept and example of that nature in Scripture, which are
propounded, not as the common standard by which the being and reality
of grace is to be measured, but as patterns for imitation, to provoke
us to emulation, and to quicken us in pressing forward. Of this nature
I reckon to be the example of Moses, desiring to be blotted ‘out of
God’s book,’ [Exod. xxxii. 32,] whatever he meant by it, in his love
to the people; and the like of the apostle Paul, wishing himself to be
‘accursed from Christ for his brethren’s sake,’ [Rom. ix. 3.] Of this
nature also we have many precepts; as, ‘rejoice evermore,’ [1 Thes. v.
16,] of ‘waiting and longing for the appearance of Christ,’ [2 Thes.
iii. 5,] of ‘rejoicing when we fall into divers temptations,’ [James i.
2,] and many more to this purpose, all which are heights of grace that
do rarely appear among the servants of God at any time.

[2.] Grace hath sometimes its _special assistances_. This is when
the occasion is extraordinary; but the grace befitting that occasion
is promised in ordinary, and ordinarily received. When God calls any
to such occasions, though compared with that measure of grace which
usually is acted by the children of God upon ordinary occasions, it is
a special assistance of the Spirit. Of this nature is that boldness
which the servants of Christ receive, to confess Christ before men
in times of persecution, and to die for the truth, with constancy,
courage, and joy.

[3.] There are also singular _eminences of grace_, which some diligent,
careful, and choice servants of God attain unto, far above what the
ordinary sort arrive at. Enoch had his conversation so much in heaven,
that he was said to ‘walk with God,’ [Gen. v. 24.] David’s soul was
often full of delight in God. Some in the height of assurance rejoice
in God with ‘joy unspeakable, and full of glory,’ [1 Pet. i. 8.] Moses
was eminent in meekness, Job in patience, the apostle Paul in zeal for
promoting the gospel, &c. Now Satan, when he comes to question the
graces of men, he presents them with these measures; and if they fall
short, as ordinarily they do, he concludes them altogether graceless.

_Second_, Satan also can do much to heighten the _ordinary work and
usual fruits of every grace_. His art herein lies in two things. [1.]
He gives us a description of grace as it is _in itself_, abstracted
from the weakness, dulness, distraction, and infirmities, that are
concomitant with it, as it comes forth to practice. He brings to our
view grace in its glory, and without the spots by which our weakness
and Satan’s temptation do much disfigure it. [2.] He presents us with
grace in its _whole body_, completed with all its members, faith, love,
hope, patience, meekness, gentleness, &c. From both these he sets
before those whom he intends to discourage a complete copy of an exact
holy Christian; as if every true Christian were to be found in the
constant practice of all these graces at all times, on all occasions,
and that without weakness or infirmity. Whereas indeed a true Christian
may be found sometimes evidently practising one grace, and weak, or at
present defective, in another. And sometimes the best of his graces is
so interrupted with temptation, so clogged with infirmity, that its
workings are scarce discernible.

_Third_, He hath a policy in heightening those _attainments and
workings of soul_, in things relating to God and religion, which are to
be found in _temporary believers_; which, because they sometimes appear
in the unconverted as well as in the converted, though all unconverted
men have them not, are therefore called common graces. This he doth
that he may from thence take occasion to disprove the real graces of
the servants of God; of whom ‘better things, and things that accompany
salvation,’ that is, special saving graces, are to be expected, Heb.
vi. 9. His way herein is, [1.] To shew the utmost _bravery of these
common graces_; how much men may have, how far they may go, and yet
at last come to nothing. For gifts, they may have powerful eloquence,
prophecy, understanding of mysteries, faith of miracles. For good
works, they may give their estates to relieve the poor. In moral
virtues they may be excellent, their illumination may be great; they
may taste the ‘good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,’
Heb. vi. 4. Their conversation may be ‘without offence,’ and their
conscience honest, as Paul’s was before his conversion. [2.] With these
heights of common grace, he compares _the lowest degree of special
grace_. And because the principles, motives, and ends which constitute
the difference betwixt these two, are, as it were, underground,
more remote from sense and observation, and oftentimes darkened by
temptation; he takes the boldness to deny the truth of grace, upon
the account of the small, inconsiderable appearance that it makes,
confidently affirming that special grace must of necessity make a far
greater outward show than these common graces. In what manner, and to
what end, Satan doth heighten grace in the abstract, we have seen. It
remains that we discover—

(2.) How he doth _lessen grace in the concrete_. This is the centre of
his design. He would not extol grace so much, but that he hopes thereby
to ‘condemn the generation of the just,’ and to make it appear that
there are few or none that are truly gracious. When he comes to apply
all this to the condition of any child of God, he deals treacherously:
and his cunning consists of three parts:—

[1.] He compares _the present state of any one with whom he deals, to
the highest attainments and excellencies of grace_; allowing nothing
to be grace, but what will answer these descriptions he had already
given. Here the tempter doth apparently make use of a ‘false balance,
and a bag of deceitful weights.’ For thus he puts them to it: Thou
sayest thou hast grace, but thou dost altogether deceive thyself, for
indeed thou hast none at all. Compare thyself with others that were
in Scripture noted as undoubtedly gracious, and thou wilt see that
in the balance thou art lighter than vanity. Abraham had faith, but
he believed above hope. Moses and Paul had love, but they manifested
it by preferring their brethren’s happiness before their own. David
was a saint, but he had a heart ravished with God. The martyrs spoken
of in Heb. xi., they could do wonders; they were above fears of men,
above the love of the world; they loved not their lives to the death:
how joyfully took they the spoiling of their goods! how courageously
did they suffer the sharpest torments! Besides, saith he, all the
children of God are described as sanctified throughout, abounding with
all fruits of righteousness; their faith is working; their love still
laborious; their hope produceth constant patience: what art thou to
these? That in thee which thou callest faith, or love, or patience,
&c., it is not fit to be named with these. Thy fears may tell thee that
thou hast no faith, and so may thy works; thy murmurings under God’s
hand is evidence sufficient that thou hast no patience. The little
that thou dost for God, or especially wouldest do, if it were not for
thy own advantage, may convince thee that thou hast no love to him;
thy weariness of services and duties, thy confessed unprofitableness
under all, do proclaim thou hast no delight in God nor in his ways.
He further adds, for the confirmation of all this: Consider how far
temporaries may go, that shall never go to heaven. Thou art far short
of them; thy gifts, thy works, thy virtues, thy illumination, thy
conversation, thy conscientiousness, are nothing like theirs: how is
it possible then that such a one as thou, a pitiful, contemptible
creature, shouldest have anything of true grace in thee? Thus he makes
the application of all the discovery of grace which he presented to
them. Though he needs not urge all these things to every one, any one
of these particulars frequently serves the turn. When a trembling heart
compares itself with these instances, it turns its back, yields the
argument, and is ashamed of its former hopes, as those are of their
former confidence who flee from battle. Hence then do we hear of these
various complaints: one saith, Alas! I have no grace, because I live
not as other saints have done, in all exactness. Another saith, I have
no faith, because I cannot believe about[347] reason, and contrary
to sense, as Abraham did. A third cries out, he hath no love to God,
because he cannot find his soul ravished with desire after him. Another
thinks, he hath a hard heart, because he cannot weep for sin. Another
concludes against himself, because he finds not a present cheerful
resolve, while he is not under any question for religion, to suffer
torments for Christ. Some fear themselves, because temporaries in some
particulars have much out-gone them. You see how complaints may upon
this score be multiplied without end; and yet all this is but fallacy.
Satan tells them what grace is at the highest, but not a word of what
it is at lowest; and so unskilful is a tossed, weak Christian, that he
in examining his condition looks after the highest degrees of grace, as
affording clearer evidence, and not after the sincerity of it, which
is the safest way for trial, where graces are weak. In a word, this
kind of arguing is no better than that of children, who cannot conclude
themselves to be men, because their present stature is little, and they
are not as tall as the adult.

[2.] Another part of his cunning in lessening the real graces of
God’s children, is to take them at an advantage, _when their graces
are weakest, and themselves most out of order_. He that will choose
to measure a man’s stature while he is upon his knees, seems not to
design to give a faithful account of his height. No more doth Satan,
who, when he will make comparisons, always takes the servants of God
at the worst. And indeed many advantages do the children of God give
him, insomuch that it is no wonder that he doth so oft baffle them,
but rather a wonder that they at any time return to their comforts.
_First_, Sometimes he takes them to task while they are yet young
and tender, when they are but newly converted, before their graces
are grown up, or have had time to put forth any considerable fruit.
_Second_, Or when their graces are tired out by long or grievous
assaults of temptation, for then they are not what they are at other
times. _Third_, When their hearts are discomposed or muddied with fear,
for then their sight is bad, and they can so little judge of things
that differ, that Satan can impose almost anything upon them. _Fourth_,
Sometimes he comes upon them when some grace acts his part but poorly,
as not having its perfect work, and is scarce able to get through,
sticking, as it were, in the birth. _Fifth_, Or when the progress of
grace is small and imperceptible. _Sixth_, Or while in the absence of
the sun, which produceth flowers and fragrancy, and is the time of the
singing of birds, Cant. ii. 11, 12, it is forced to cast off its summer
fruits of joy and sensible delights, and only produceth winter fruits
of lamenting after God, longing and panting after him, justifying of
God in his dealings and condemning itself, all this while ‘sowing in
tears’ for a more pleasing crop. _Seventh_, Or while expectations
are more than enjoyments: the man it may be promised himself large
incomes of greater measures of comforts, ease, or strength, under
some particular ordinances or helps which he hath lately attained to,
and not finding things presently to answer what he hoped for, is now
suspicious of his case, and thinks he hath attained nothing, because
he hath not what he would. _Eighth_, Sometimes Satan shews them his
face in this glass when it is foulest, through the spots of some
miscarriage. _Ninth_, Or he takes advantage of some natural defects,
as want of tears, which might be more usual in former times, but are
now dried up; or from the ebbings and uncertainty of his affections,
which are never sure rules of trials. _Tenth_, Or in such acts that are
of a mixed nature in the principles and motives, where it may seem to
be uncertain to which the act must be ascribed as to the true parent.
The heart of a gracious person being challenged upon any of these
points, and under so great a disadvantage, being called out to give a
proof of himself, especially in the view of grace set forth in all its
excellency and glory, shall have little to plead, but will rather own
the accusation. And the rather because,

[3.] It is another part of Satan’s cunning to urge them, whilst they
are thus at a stand, _with a possibility, nay, a probability of their
mistaking themselves, by passing too favourable an opinion formerly
of their actions_. To confirm them in this apprehension, _first_, He
lays before them the consideration of the deceitfulness of the heart,
Jer. xvii. 6, which, being so above all things, and desperately wicked
beyond ordinary discovery, makes a fair way for the entertainment
of a suspicion of self-delusion in all the former hopes which a man
hath had of himself. Satan will plainly speak it: Thou hast had some
thoughts and workings of mind towards God, but seeing they carry so
great a disproportion to rule and example, and come so far short of
common graces, it is more than probable that such poor, weak, confused
appearances are nothing. How knowest thou that thine adherence to and
practice of the command and services of God are any more than from
the power of education, the prevalency of custom, or the impressions
of moral suasion? How dost thou know that thy desires after God,
and thy delight in him, are any more than the products of natural
principles, influenced by an historical faith of Scripture doctrine?
It is oftentimes enough for Satan to hint this. A suspicious heart,
as it were greedy of its own misery, catcheth at all things that make
against it; and hence complains that it hath no grace, because it sees
not any visible fruits, or makes not a sufficient appearance at all
times when opposed or resisted; or because it wants sensible progress,
or gives not the summer fruits of praises, rejoicings, and delights
in God; or because it seems not to meet with remarkable improvements
in ordinances; or because it cannot produce tears and raise the
affections; and because the party doth not know but his heart might
deceive him in all that he hath done. Which the devil yet further
endeavoureth to confirm, _second_, By a consideration of the seeming
holiness and graces of such as believed themselves to be the children
of God, and were generally by others reputed so to be, who yet, after
a glorious profession, turned apostates. This being so great and
undeniable an instance of the heart’s deceitfulness, makes the poor
tempted party conclude that he is certainly no true convert.

Thus have we seen Satan’s sophistry in the management of those five
grand topics from whence he draws his false conclusions against the
children of God, pretending to prove that they are not converted; or at
least if they be in a state of grace, that they in that state are in a
very bad, unsuitable condition to it. For if his arguments fall short
of the first, they seldom miss the latter mark. This was his first
engine. Now follows,

II. The other engine by which he fixeth these conclusions, which,
though it be not argumentative, yet it serves to sharpen all his
fallacies against the comforts of God’s children—this is _fear_, which,
together with his objections, he sends into the mind. That Satan can
raise a storm and commotion in the heart by fear, hath been proved
before. I shall now only in a few things shew how he doth forward his
design by astonishing the heart with his frightful thunderings.

[1.] _His objections being accompanied with affrightments, they pass
for strong undeniable arguments, and their fallacy is not so easily
detected._ Fear, as well as anger, darkens reason, and disables the
understanding to make a true, faithful search into things, or to give a
right judgment. As darkness deceives the senses, and makes every bush
affrightful to the passenger, or as muddied waters hinder the sight, so
do fears in the heart disable a man to discover the silliest cheat that
Satan can put upon it.

[2.] They are also very _credulous_. When fear is up, any suggestion
takes place. As suspicious incredulity is an effect of joy,—the
disciples at first hearing that Christ was risen, ‘for joy believed
it not’—so suspicious credulity is the effect of fear. And we shall
observe several things in the servants of God that shew a strange
inclination, as it were a natural aptitude, to believe the evil of
their spiritual estate which Satan suggests to them. As, _first_, There
is a great forwardness and precipitancy in the heart to close with evil
thoughts raised up in us. When jealousies of God’s love are injected,
there is a violent hastiness forthwith—all calm deliberation being
laid aside—to entertain a belief of it. This is more than once noted
in the Psalms. In this case, David acknowledgeth this hasty humour, ‘I
said in my haste,’ Ps. xxxi. 22, and cxvi. 11. This hasty forwardness
to determine things that are against us without due examination,
Asaph calls a great weakness: ‘This is my infirmity,’ Ps. lxxvii.
10. _Second_, There is observable in those that are under spiritual
troubles, a great kind of delight, if I may so call it, to hear
threatenings rather than promises, and such discourses as set forth the
misery of a natural state, rather than such as speak of the happiness
of the converted; because these things, in their apprehension, are
more suitable to their condition, and more needful for them, in
order to a greater measure of humiliation, which they suppose to be
necessary. However, thus they add fuel to the flame. _Third_, They
have an aptitude to hide themselves from comfort, and with a wonderful
nimbleness of wit and reasoning, to evade and answer any argument
brought for their comfort, as if they had been volunteers in Satan’s
service to fight against themselves. _Fourth_, They have also so great
a blasting upon their understanding, that Satan’s tempting them to
doubt of their good estate is to them a sufficient reason to doubt
of it; and that is ground enough for them to deny it, because Satan
questions it.

[3.] These fears make all Satan’s suggestions _strike the deeper_; they
point all his arrows and make them pierce, as it were, ‘the joints and
marrow;’ they poison and envenom them, to the great increase of the
torment and hindrance of the cure; they bind the objections upon them,
and confirm them in a certain belief that they are all true.

We have now viewed Satan’s engines and batteries against the servants
of the Lord, for the destruction of their joy and peace, by spiritual
troubles; but these are but the beginnings of sorrows, if compared with
those distresses of soul which he sometimes brings upon them. Of which
next.




