CHAPTER IV.

 _That Satan hath a great measure of knowledge, proved by comparing him
 with the knowledge of Adam in innocency, and by his titles.—Of his
 knowledge, natural, experimental, and accessory.—Of his knowledge of
 our thoughts.—How far he doth not know them, and how far he doth, and
 by what means.—Of his knowledge of things future, and by what ways he
 doth conjecture them.—The advantages in point of temptation that he
 hath by his knowledge._


In the discovery of Satan’s knowledge, I shall first give evidence and
demonstration thereof. To which purpose—

1. Let us consider _the knowledge of Adam in innocency_; which being
found to be great, it will thence be easily concluded that Satan’s
knowledge is far greater. Two notable discoveries we have of Adam’s
knowledge, the one was his giving of names to all creatures, Gen. ii.
29, which was not only a sign of his dominion, but also a notable
instance of his understanding, seeing the names were given according
to the natures of creatures; whereof Bochartus gives a large account,
as the camel is called גמל, because it is apt to repay
injuries; the kite, דאה, from its sharpness of sight; the
pelican is named קאת, from its usual vomiting, &c.[91] The
consideration of the aptness of names imposed on creatures made Plato
acknowledge that it was a work above ordinary capacity. The other
discovery of Adam’s knowledge was his knowledge of the original of Eve
at first sight, Gen ii. 23; he said, ‘This is now bone of my bones,
and flesh of my flesh,’ &c. This instance Luther made use of to prove
the knowledge that we shall have of one another in heaven; which shews
that Adam’s understanding was then incomparably more sublime than
ours, and of a nearer approach to the knowledge which a state of glory
shall furnish us withal. To this might be added a further proof from
the rare inventions and excellent discoveries that some raised wits
have made, of things that have laid deep and far out of the view of
common capacities. As also those views, sights, and more than ordinary
comprehensions which the souls of men have had, when they were a little
freed from the clog and hindrance of the body, either in ecstasies or
by approaching death; all which put together will go far to prove a
very great measure of knowledge in Satan, if we take along with us this
foundation, that in all the works of God we find the highest knowledge
in the noblest being. Living creatures are more excellent than stones
or trees, and therefore hath God furnished them with senses, and hath
also distinguished them by higher degrees of sagacity, according to
their excellency above others. Thus the ape, fox, elephant, &c., have
such abilities above the worm and fly, &c., that some have questioned
whether they had not some lower degrees of reason: yet as these are
below man, so doth his reason far excel their greatest quickness of
sense. Angels are a higher being than man—for he made him ‘lower than
the angels’—and consequently their knowledge is proportionably greater.
So that if Adam in innocency understood the nature of things, how much
more exactly and fully must we imagine Satan to know them!

2. Secondly, But the proof is more full and direct, from those
_appellations and titles which the Scripture and the experience of men
have put upon him_; his usual name, Δαίμων, _quasi_ Δαήμων, which—in
Mat. viii. 31; Mark v. 12; Rev. xvi. 14—we translate _devil_, properly
signifieth one that is wise, knowing, or skilful. And however the
wickedness of that spirit hath so far dishonoured this word, that it
is always, as some think, used to signify ‘unclean spirits;’ yet still
it carries an evidence of their nature in reference to knowledge, that
though they are wicked creatures, yet are they wise and knowing. It is
said, Gen. iii. 1, ‘The serpent was more subtle than any beast of the
field;’ which, though it be true literally of the serpent, whose wisdom
and subtlety naturalists have abundantly noted, yet that expression
hath an eye upon Satan, who was the principal agent; and the serpent
there is called subtle, as influenced by Satan, whose instrument he
was:[92] which we may believe, not only upon the credit of Austin and
Lyra, but more securely upon the testimony of other scriptures, which
name him ‘the old serpent,’ Rev. xvii. 9, and impute all that craft
in the management of that temptation to a particular remarkable skill
and subtlety of Satan. ‘The serpent beguiled Eve through subtlety,’ 2
Cor. xi. 3; and, if Beza conjecture right, the appellation Δαίμων do
so fitly suit this history of the tree of knowledge, that the title of
knowledge seems to be given him for this singular masterpiece of craft.

3. Thirdly, That Satan hath great knowledge is by these arguments
discovered; but if further inquiry be made into the _nature of his
knowledge_, we shall be nearer to a satisfaction in this particular;
and here we may observe a threefold knowledge in Satan.

(1.) First, _A natural knowledge_; which the schoolmen have
distinguished into these two: [1.] _An evening knowledge_, which
he received from things created, whereby the _species_ of things
were impressed upon his mind, and so received, being a knowledge _à
posteriori_, from the effects of things; which, because it is more
dark and obscure than that which ariseth from the causes of things,
they termed evening knowledge. [2.] The other is _morning knowledge_,
which is a knowledge of things in the power and wisdom of God, in
which he saw the ideas and images of all things. This knowledge they
prefer before the other, as lines and figures are better known from
mathematical instruction than by their bare tract as written in
dust.[93]

(2.) Secondly, Besides this he hath an _experimental knowledge_; which
is the improvement of that natural stock, by further acquisitions and
attainments. And indeed Satan had very high advantages for an increase
of knowledge. He had a great stock to begin withal; he hath had fit
and suitable objects to work upon in his contemplations, so that by
comparing things with things in so large a field of variety, and that
for so many years together, it cannot be but that he should be grown
more experienced and subtle than he was at first; and the Scripture
doth fairly countenance this supposition, by telling us of his devices,
2 Cor. ii. 11; of his wiles, Eph. vi. 11; and of his depths, Rev. ii.
24.[94] All which phrases imply that Satan hath so studied the point
of temptation, that he hath now, from long experience and observation,
digested it into an art and method, and that with such exactness that
it is become a mystery and a depth, much covered and concealed from the
notice and observation of men.

(3.) Thirdly, To both the former may be added another knowledge,
which because it is from another spring, I may call it an _accessory
knowledge_, consisting in occasional discoveries made to him, either
when God is pleased to make known so much of his mind and purpose,
as he employs him, as an instrument or servant, to execute, as he
did in the case of Job and Ahab; or when he informs himself from the
Scriptures, or catcheth hints of knowledge from the church and the
ordinances thereof. If good angels have an increase of knowledge this
way, as is evident they have, ‘for to principalities and powers in
heavenly places is made known by the church the manifold wisdom of
God,’ Eph. iii. 10, we cannot but imagine that Satan hath some addition
of knowledge from such discoveries. While we are upon this point, it
will be necessary to offer some satisfaction to two questions.

_Quest._ 1. First, Whether Satan knows our thoughts?

_Ans._ 1. It is undoubtedly God’s prerogative to know the thoughts. He
knows them intuitively, which is beyond the power of any creature: Jer.
xvii. 9, ‘Who can know it?’ This is a challenge to all, implying the
utter impossibility of it to any but to God alone; ‘I the Lord search
the heart;’ he knows the most inward thoughts: Rev. ii. 23, ‘I am he
which searcheth the reins, and the heart;’ he knows them evidently and
certainly: Heb. iv. 13, ‘All things are naked and open[95] before him
with whom we have to do.’ Those secret thinkings and intendments which
are hid from others, and which we ourselves cannot distinctly read,
because of their secret intricacy or confusedness, yet the very inside
and outside of them are uncased, cut up and anatomised by his eye; in
all which expressions God is careful to reserve this to himself, ‘I the
Lord do it,’ or ‘I am he, &c., that searcheth;’ and signifies that none
else is able to do the like.

_Ans._ 2. Yet Satan can do much this way; for if we consider how he
can come so near to our spirits, as to communicate his injections to
us, and that he often entertains a dispute with us in this secret way
of access that he hath to our thoughts; if we observe his arguings,
his answers and replies to our refusals, so direct, so pertinent, so
continued, we shall be constrained to grant that he can do more this
way than is commonly imagined. That I may explain this with a due
respect to God’s prerogative of knowing the heart, I shall,

1. First, _Shew that there are two things which are clearly out of
Satan’s reach_. [1.] Our future thoughts; he cannot tell what shall be
our thoughts for time to come. He may possibly adventure to tell what
suggestions he resolves to put into our hearts, but what shall be our
resolves and determinations thereupon he knows not. This is singled
out as one part of God’s prerogative, that he knoweth the determinate
purposes and resolves of the heart aforehand, because he turneth the
heart as he pleaseth, Prov. xxi. 1. [2.] Our present formed thoughts,
the immediate and imminent[96] acts of the mind he cannot directly
see into. He may tell what floating thinkings he hath put into our
heart, but our own proper thoughts, or formed resolves, he cannot
directly view. This is also particularly insisted on as proper to God
alone: John ii. 24, 25, ‘Christ knew all men,’ so directly, that ‘he
needed not that any should testify of man.’ This Satan stands in need
of; he sometimes knows men and their thoughts, but he needs a sign
or notification of these thoughts, and cannot immediately look into
them. The reason why Christ needed not this, is rendered thus: ‘For he
knew what was in man,’ Mat. xii. 25, that is, intuitively he knew his
thoughts, and could immediately read them.

2. Secondly, _I shall endeavour to explain how much, or how far he can
pry into our thoughts_. Several things are granted which argue Satan
can go a great way toward a discovery. As,

(1.) First, _That he knows the objects in our fancy or phantasms_, and
this as clearly as we do behold things with our eyes. And the proof
given hereof is this: that there are diabolical dreams, in which the
devil cannot create new species, and such as our senses were never
acquainted withal, as to make a blind man dream of colours, but that
he can only call forth and set in order those objects, of which our
imagination doth retain the shadows or impressions; and this he could
not do if he did not visibly behold them in our fancy.[97]

(2.) Secondly, It is certain he knows _his own suggestions and
temptations darted into our minds_, upon which he can at present know
what our thoughts are busied upon.

(3.) Thirdly, He knows _the secret workings of our passions, as love,
desire, fear_, &c., because these depend upon, or are in a concomitancy
of the motions of the blood and spirits, which he can easily discern,
though their motions and workings may be kept secret from the
observation of all bystanders.

(4.) Fourthly, Some go further, as Scotus, (_referente Barthol.
Sybilla_,)[98] supposing that he knows what is in our thoughts at any
time, only he knows not to what these thoughts incline; but I leave
this to those that can determine it certainly. In the meantime I
proceed,

3. Thirdly, _To shew what a guessing faculty he hath of what he doth
not directly know_. He hath such grounds and advantages for conjecture,
that he seldom fails of finding our mind. As,

(1.) First, _His long experience hath taught him what usually men
do think_, in such cases as are commonly before them. By a cunning
observation of their actions and ways he knows this.

(2.) Secondly, _He by study and observation knows our temper and
inclination_, and consequently what temptations do most suit them, and
how we do ordinarily entertain them.

(3.) Thirdly, He knows this the more, _by taking notice of our prayers,
our complainings and mournings over our defects and miscarriages_.

(4.) Fourthly, _He is quick and ready to take notice of any exterior
sign, by which the mind is signified_, as the pulse, the motion of the
body, the change of the countenance, all which do usually shew the
assent or dissent of the mind, and at least tell him what entertainment
his offers have in our thoughts.

(5.) Fifthly, Being so quick-sighted, he can understand _those
particular signs which would escape the observation of the wisest
men_.[99] There are some things small in themselves, and therefore
unobserved, which yet to wise men are very great _indicia_ of things.
The like may be said of us, in reference to our inclinations, our
acceptance or resistance of temptations, which yet he hath curiously
marked out.

(6.) Sixthly, No doubt but he hath ways to _put us upon a discovery of
our thoughts, while we conceal them_, as by continuing and prosecuting
temptations or suggestions, till our trouble or passions do some way
discover how it is with us. By all which it appears that his guessings
and conjectures do seldom fail him. It is now time to speak to the
other question, which is,

_Quest._ 2. Whether and how far Satan knows things to come?

_Ans._ To this I shall return answer in these two conclusions:

_Conclusion_ 1. First, There is a way of knowing future things, _which
is beyond the knowledge of devils, and proper only to God_, Isa. xli.
23; there God puts the competition betwixt himself and idols, about the
truth of a deity, upon this issue, that ‘he that can shew the things
that are to come hereafter, he is God;’ which because they cannot do,
he doth hereby evince them to be no gods. If Satan could truly and
properly have done this, he had had a plea for a godhead. In divine
predictions two things are to be considered. [1.] The matter foretold;
when the events of things contingent, and as to second causes casual,
depending upon indeterminate causes, are foretold. [2.] The manner;
when these things are not uncertainly, or conjecturally, or darkly, but
clearly, certainly, infallibly, and fully predicted. Of this nature are
divine predictions, which Satan cannot perform, nor yet the angels in
heaven.

_Conclusion_ 2. Secondly, _Yet Satan hath such advantages for the
knowledge of future things, and such means and helps for a discovery of
them, that his conjectures have often come to pass_.

[1.] First, He knows _the causes of things, which are secret to us_.
Upon which he seems to foretell many things strange to us; as a
physician may foretell the effects, workings, and issues of a disease,
as seeing them in the causes, which would pass for little less than
prophecy among the vulgar. Thus an astrologer foretells eclipses, which
would be taken for a divine excellency, where the knowledge of the
ground of these foretellings had not taken away the wonder.

[2.] Secondly, Many things are made known to him _by immediate divine
revelation_. We know not the intercourse betwixt God and Satan in
the matter of Job. Satan having obtained his commission to afflict
him, might have made a long prophecy of what should come to pass in
reference to Job, his children and substance. How many such predictions
he might make, we little know.

[3.] Thirdly, He hath _a deep insight in affairs of kingdoms and
states_, and so might, from his experience and observation, easily
conjecture mutations and alterations. A politician may do much this
way. For aught we know, Satan’s prophecy, in the likeness of Samuel, to
Saul, of his ruin, and the translation of his kingdom to David, might
be no more than a conjectural conclusion, from his comparing the order
of the present providence with former threatenings and promises.

[4.] Fourthly, He hath _a greater understanding of Scripture
prophecies, than ordinarily the wisest men have_, so that at second
hand he might be able to foretell what shall come to pass; whilst we
that do not so clearly see into Scripture predictions, may not be able
to find out the matter. Hence by oracle he foretold Alexander of his
success, which he knew from the prophecy of Daniel, chap. xi., long
before.[100]

[5.] Fifthly, He hath advantage from his nature _as a spirit, by
which he overhears and sees the private actings, complottings, and
preparations of men in reference to certain undertakings_, and can
easily, by his agents, communicate such counsels or resolves in remote
countries and kingdoms, which must pass for real predictions, if the
event answer accordingly.

[6.] Sixthly, _He can foretell, and with probability of success, such
things as he by temptation is about to put men upon, especially seeing
he can choose such instruments as he, from experience, knows are not
likely to fail his enterprise_.

[7.] Seventhly, To this may be added, _the way and manner by which
he expresseth himself, either in doubtful or enigmatical terms, or
in general expressions_, which may be applied to the event, what
way soever it should happen. Of these, authors have observed many
instances, which were superfluous to enumerate.[101]

Satan’s knowledge being thus explained, it is easy to imagine what an
advantage it is to him in the management of his temptations. For,

First, He by this means knows our tempers and dispositions.

Secondly, And what is most likely to prevail with us.

Thirdly, How inclinable we are upon any motion made to us, and what
hope to gain upon us.

Fourthly, He knows fit times, seasons, and advantages against us.

Fifthly, He knows how to pursue suggestions, and can choose strong
reasons to urge us withal.

Sixthly, He knows how to delude our senses, to disturb our passions.

Seventhly, He knows all the ways and arts of affrightments, vexations,
disquietments, hindrances, and disturbances of duty.

[8.] Eighthly, He by this means is furnished _with skill for his public
cheats and delusions in the world_; how to amuse, astonish, and amaze
men into errors and mistakes, which he hath always endeavoured with
very great success in the world, as we shall see hereafter.




