CHAPTER XVIII.

 _Satan’s second grand design against duties is to spoil them. (1.)
 _In the manner of undertaking, and how he effects this. (2.) In the
 act or performance, by distracting outwardly and inwardly. His various
 ways therein, by vitiating the duty itself. How he doth that. (3.)
 _After performance, the manner thereof._


The chief of Satan’s ways for the hindering and preventing of duty have
been noted; what he comes short in this design he next labours to make
up, by spoiling and depraving them: and this he doth endeavour three
ways:—

I. 1. First, By putting us upon services _in such a manner as shall
render them unacceptable and displeasing unto God, and unprofitable to
us_: as by a careless and rash undertaking of service. We are commanded
to ‘take heed’ to ourselves ‘how we hear’ or pray; and to ‘watch’
over our hearts, that they be in a fit posture for meeting with God,
because the heart in service is that which God most looks at, and our
services are measured accordingly. If then by a heedless undertaking we
adventure upon them, not keeping our ‘foot when we go into the house of
God,’ Eccles. v. 1, we offer no other than ‘the sacrifice of fools,’
and give occasion to God to complain that we do but ‘draw near to him
with our lips, while our hearts are far from him.’

2. Secondly, The like spoil of duty is made when we adventure upon
it _in our own strength, and not in the strength of Christ_. Satan
sees the pride of our heart, and how much our gifts may contribute to
it, and how prone we are to be confident of a right performance of
what we have so often practised before; and therefore doth he more
industriously catch at that advantage to make us forget that our
‘strength is in God,’ and that we cannot come to him acceptably but
by his own power. Christians are often abused this way. When their
strength is to seek, duty is oft perversely set before them, that they
may act as Samson did when his locks were cut, who thought to ‘shake
himself, and to go out as at other times,’ and so fell into the hands
of the Philistines, [Judges xvi 20.]

3. Thirdly, If he can substitute _base ends and principles, as motives
to duty, instead of these that God hath commanded_, he knows the
service will become stinking and loathsome to God. Fasting, prayers,
alms, preaching, or any other duty may be thus tainted, when they
are performed upon no better grounds than ‘to be seen of men,’ or
out of envy, or to satisfy humour, or when from custom, rather than
conscience. How frequently did the prophets tax the Jews for this,
that they fasted to themselves! and brought forth fruit to themselves!
How severely did Christ condemn the Pharisees upon the same account!
telling them that in hunting the applause of men, by these devotions,
they had got all the reward they were like to have.

4. Fourthly, When we do our services _unseasonably_, not only the
grace and beauty of them is spoiled; but often are they rendered
unprofitable. There are times to be observed, not only for the right
management of common actions, but also for duties. What is Christian
reproof, if it be not rightly suited to season and opportunity? The
same may be said of other services.

5. Fifthly, Services are spoiled, when men set upon them _without
resolutions of leaving their sins_. While they come with their ‘idols
in their heart,’ and ‘the stumbling-block of their iniquity before
their face, God will not be inquired of by them,’ Ezek. xiv. 3. He
requires of those that present their services to him, that at least
they should not affront him with direct purposes of continuing in
their rebellions against him; nay, he expects from his servants that
look for a blessing in their duties, that they come with their ‘hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and their bodies washed with pure
water,’ Heb. x. 22. If they come to hear the word, they must ‘lay aside
all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness,’ James i. 21; if they
pray, they must ‘lift up pure hands,’ 1 Tim. ii. 8; if they come to
the Lord’s Supper, they must eat that feast ‘with the unleavened bread
of sincerity and truth,’ 1 Cor. v. 8. And albeit, he may accept the
prayers of those that are so far convinced of their sins—though they
be not yet sanctified—that they are willing to lay down their weapons,
and are touched with a sense of legal repentance; for thus he heard
Ahab, and regarded the humiliation of Nineveh: yet while men cleave to
the love of their iniquity, and are not upon any terms of parting with
their sins, God will not look to their services, but abhor them. For
thus he declares himself, Isa. i. 11, ‘To what purpose is the multitude
of your sacrifices? Bring no more vain oblations. I cannot away with
them, it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting,—my soul hateth them,
they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them: when you spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when you make
many prayers, I will not hear.’ The ground of all this is, that their
heart was no way severed from the purposes of sinning, ‘Your hands are
full of blood,’ ver. 15. Satan knowing this so well, he is willing
that they engage in the services of God, if they will keep up their
allegiance to him, and come with intentions to continue wicked still;
for so, while he cannot prevent the actual performance of duty,—which
yet notwithstanding he had rather do, because he knows not but God may
by that means some time or other rescue these slaves of Satan out of
his hand, —he makes their services nothing worth, and renders them
abominable to God.

6. Sixthly, In the manner of undertaking duties are spoiled, when men
have not _a submissive ingenuity[208] in them, by giving themselves up
to the direction and disposal of the Almighty_; but rather confine and
limit God to their wills and desires. Sometimes men by attempting of
services to God, think thereby to engage God to humour them in their
wills and ways. With such a mind did Ahab consult the prophets about
his expedition to Ramoth-Gilead; not so much seeking God’s mind and
counsel for direction, as thinking thereby to engage God to confirm
and comply with his determination. With the same mind did Johanan and
the rest of the people consult the Lord concerning their going down to
Egypt, Jer. xlii. 5. Though they solemnly protested obedience to what
God should say, ‘whether it were good or evil;’ yet when the return
from God suited not with their desires and resolutions, they denied
it to be the command of God; and found an evasion to free themselves
of their engagement, Jer. xliii. 2. Such dealings as these being the
evident undertakings of a hypocritical heart, must needs render all
done upon that score to be presumptuous temptings of God; no way
deserving the name of service.

II. Secondly, Not only are services thus spoiled in those wrong grounds
and ways of attempting, or setting about them, but in _the very act
or performance of them_. While they are upon the wheel—as a potter’s
vessel in the prophet—they are often marred; and this Satan doth two
ways. (1.) By disturbing our thoughts, which should be attentive and
fixed upon the service in hand. (2.) By vitiating the duty itself.

1. First, _By distracting or disturbing our thoughts_. This is a usual
policy of Satan. Those fowls which came down upon Abraham’s sacrifice
are supposed by learned expositors to signify those means and ways by
which the devil doth disorder and trouble our thoughts in religious
services, Gen. xv. 12. And Christ himself compares the devil stealing
our thoughts from duty, to the ‘fowls of the air,’ that gather up
the seed as soon as it is sown, Mat. xiii. 4. There are many reasons
that may persuade us that this is one of his masterpieces of policy.
As (l.) in that the business of distraction is oft easily done. Our
thoughts do not naturally delight in spiritual things, because of their
depravement; neither can they easily brook to be pent in or confined
so strictly as the nature of such employments doth require; so that
there is a kind of preternatural force upon our thoughts, when they
are religiously employed; which as it is in itself laborious, like
the stopping of a stream, or driving Jordan back, so upon the least
relaxing of the spring, that must bend our thoughts heavenward, they
incline to their natural bend and current; as a stone rolled up a hill,
hath a _renitentia_, a striving against the hand that forceth it, and
when that force slackens it goes downward. How easily then is it for
Satan to set our thoughts off our work! If we slacken our care never so
little, they recoil and tend to their old bias; and how easy is it for
him to take off our hand, when it is so much in his power to inject
thoughts and motions into our hearts, or to present objects to our
eyes, or sounds to our ears, which by a natural force raiseth up our
apprehension to act, for in such cases _non possumus non cogitare_; we
cannot restrain the act of thinking, and not without great heedfulness
can we restrain the pursuit of those thinkings and imaginations.
(2.) Satan can also do it insensibly. Our distractions or rovings of
thoughts creep and steal upon us silently, we no more know of it when
they begin than when we begin to sleep, or when we begin to wander in
a journey, where oft we do not take ourselves to be out of the way,
till we come to some remarkable turning. (3.) And when he prevails to
divide our thoughts from our duty, he always makes great advantage, for
thus he hinders at least the comfort and profit of ordinances. While
we are busied to look to our hearts, much of the duty goeth by, and we
are but as those that in public assemblies are employed to see to the
order and silence of others, who can be scarce at leisure to attend for
their own advantage. Besides, much of the sweetness of ordinances are
abated by the very trouble of our attendance. When we are put to it,
as Abraham was, to be still driving away those fowls that come down
upon our sacrifice, the very toil will eat out and eclipse much of the
comfort. Thus also he at least provides matter to object against the
sincerity of the servants of God; and will assuredly find a time to
set it home upon them to the purpose, that their hearts were wandering
in their services. Thus he further gets advantage for a temptation to
leave off their duty, and will not cease to improve such distractions
as we have heard to an utter overthrow of their services. Nay, if he
prevail to give us such distractions as wholly takes away our minds and
serious attentions from the service, then is the service become nothing
worth, though the outward circumstances of attendance be never so exact
and saint-like. Who could appear in a more religious dress than those
in Ezek. xxxiii. 31, who came and sat, and were pleased with divine
services, as to all outward discovery, as God’s people; yet was all
spoiled with this, that their hearts were after their covetousness?

Now this distraction Satan can work two ways.

(1.) First, _By outward disturbances_. He can present objects to the
eyes on purpose to entice our thoughts after them. The closing of
the eyes in prayer is used by some of the servants of God to prevent
Satan’s temptations this way. And we find, in the story of Mr Rothwel,
that the devil took notice of this in him, that he ‘shut his eyes to
avoid distraction in prayer;’[209] which implies a concession in the
devil, that by outward objects he useth to endeavour our distraction
in services. The like he doth by noises and sounds. Neither can we
discover how much of these disturbances, by coughings, hemmings,
tramplings, &c., which we hear in greater assemblies, are from Satan,
by stirring up others to such noises. We are sure the damsel that had
an unclean spirit, Acts xvi., that grieved and troubled Paul, going
about these duties with her clamours, was set on by that spirit within
her, to distract and call off their thoughts from the services which
they were about to undertake. Besides the common ways of giving trouble
to the servants of God in outward disturbances, he sometimes, though
rarely, doth it in an extraordinary manner; thus he endeavoured to
hinder Mr Rothwel from praying for a possessed person, by rage and
blaspheming. The like hindrance we read he gave Luther and others; and
truly so strict an attendance in the exercise of our minds, spiritual
senses and graces, is required in matters of worship, and so weak are
our hearts in making a resistance or beating off these assaults, that a
very small matter will discompose us, and a smaller discomposure will
prejudice and blemish the duty.

(2.) Secondly, He distracts or disturbs us also _by inward workings,
and injections of motions, and representations of things to our minds_:
and as this is his most general and usual way, so doth he make use of
greater variety of contrivance and art in it. As,

[1.] First, _By the troublesome impetuousness and violence of his
injections, they come upon us as thick as hail_. No sooner do we put by
one motion but another is in upon us. He hath his quiver full of these
arrows, and our hearts, under any service, swarm with them; we are
incessantly infested by them and have no rest. At other times, when we
are upon worldly business, we may observe a great ease and freedom in
our thoughts; neither doth he so much press upon us; but in these Satan
is continually knocking at our door, and calling to us, so that it is a
great hazard that some or other of these injections may stick upon our
thoughts, and lead us out of the way; or if they do not, yet it is a
great molestation or toil to us.

[2.] Secondly, He can so order his dealings with us, that he provokes
us sometimes _to follow him out of the camp, and seeks to ensnare us by
improving our own spiritual resolution and hatred against him_; even as
courage, whetted on and enraged, makes a man venture some beyond the
due bounds of prudence or safety. To this end he sometimes casts into
our thoughts hideous, blasphemous, and atheistical suggestions, which
do not only amaze us, but oftentimes engage us to dispute against them,
which at such time is all he seeks for; for whereas in such cases we
should send away such thoughts with a short answer, ‘Get thee behind
me, Satan,’ we by taking up the buckler and sword against them are
drawn off from minding our present duty.

[3.] Thirdly, He doth sometimes seek to allure and draw our thoughts
to the object _by representing what is pleasant and taking_. (1.) He
will adventure to suggest good things impertinently and unseasonably,
as when he puts us upon praying while we should be hearing; or while
we are praying, he puts into our hearts things that we have heard in
preaching. These things, because good in themselves, we are not so
apt to startle at, but give them a more quick welcome. (2.) He also
can allure our thoughts by the strangeness of the things suggested.
Sometimes we shall have hints of things which we knew not before, or
some fine and excellent notions, so that we can scarce forbear turning
aside after them to gaze at them; and yet when all is done, except we
wholly neglect the duty for them, they will so vanish, that we can
scarce remember them when the duty is over. (3.) Sometimes he suits
our desires and inclinations with the remembrances of things that are
at other times much in our love and affection; and with these we are
apt to comply, the pleasure of them making us forget our present duty.
Thoughts of estates, honours, relations, delights, recreations, or
whatever else we are set upon at other times, will more easily prevail
for audience now.

[4.] Fourthly, He hath a way to betray and circumvent us _by
heightening our own jealousies and fears against him_; and here he
outshoots us in our own bow, and by a kind of overdoing makes us undo
our desired work. For where he observes us fearful and watchful against
wandering, he doth alarm us the more: so that (1.) instead of looking
to the present part of duty, we reflect upon what is past, and make
inquiries whether we performed that aright, or whether we did not
wander from the beginning. Thus our suspicions that we have miscarried
bring us into a miscarriage: by this are we deceived, and put off from
minding what we are doing at present. Or (2.) an eager desire to fix
our thoughts on our present service doth amaze and astonish us into
a stupid inactivity, or into a saying or doing we know not what; as
ordinarily it happens to persons, that out of a great fearfulness to
offend in the presence of some great personages, become unable to
do anything right, or to behave themselves tolerably well; or as an
oversteady and earnest fixing the eye weakens the sight, and renders
the object less truly discernible to us.

[5.] Fifthly, Sometimes _the exercise of fancy acting or working
according to some mistake which we have entertained as to the manner of
performance, doth so hold our thoughts doing, that we embrace a cloud
or shadow when we should have looked after the substance_. I will give
an instance of this in reference to prayer, which, I have observed,
hath been a snare and mistake to some, and that is this: because in
that duty the Scripture directs us to go to God, and to set him before
us, therefore have they thought it necessary to frame an idea of God
in their thoughts, as of a person present to whom they speak. Hence
their thoughts are busied to conceive such a representation; and when
the shadow of imagination vanisheth, their thoughts are again busied to
inquire whether their hearts are upon God. Thus by playing with fancy,
they are really less attentive upon their duty.

[6.] Sixthly, Satan can lay _impressions of distraction upon men
before they come to religious services_, which shall then work and
shew their power to disturb and divide our hearts, which is by a
strong prepossession of the heart with anything that we fear, or hope,
or desire, or doth any way trouble us. These will stick to us, and
keep us company in our duties, though we strive to keep them back.
And this was the ground of the apostle’s advice to the unmarried
persons, to continue in single life,—times of persecution and distress
nearly approaching,—that they might ‘attend upon the Lord without
distraction,’ 1 Cor. vii. 37; implying that the thoughtfulness and more
than ordinary carefulness which would seize upon the minds of persons
under such straits and hazards, would unavoidably follow them in their
duties, and so distract them.

2. Secondly, The other way, besides this of distraction, by which Satan
spoils our duties in the act of performance, is _by vitiating duty
itself_; and this he commonly doth three ways.

(1.) First, _When he puts men upon greater care for the outward garb
and dress of a service than for the inward work of it_. He endeavours
to make some devotionaries deal with their duties, as the pharisees did
with their cups, washing and adorning the outside, while the inside is
altogether neglected. Thus the papists generally are for the outward
pomp and beauty of services, being only careful that all things should
have their external bravery, as the tombs of the prophets were painted
and beautified, which yet were full of rottenness. And the generality
of Christians are more taken up with this than with the service of the
heart. Paul was so sensible of this snare in the work of preaching,
where ordinarily men cared for ‘excellency of speech or wisdom,’ 1 Cor.
ii. 2, that he determines another course of preaching; not notions, or
rhetoric, and enticing words, but the doctrine of Christ crucified in
sincerity and plainness, 1 Cor. ii. 2. It is not indeed the outward
cost and fineness of ordinances that God regards. ‘Incense from Sheba,
and the sweet cane from a far country,’ Jer. vi. 20, are not to any
purpose where the heart doth not most design a spiritual service; for
these are rather a satisfaction to the humours of men than to please
God: an offering to themselves rather than to him. And therefore is
it, that what Jeremiah confessed they did, (chap. vi. 20,) in buying
incense and the sweet cane, Isaiah (chap, xliii. 24) seems to deny,
‘Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money’—that is, though thou
didst it, yet it was to thyself, rather than to me: I accepted it not,
and so was it all one as if thou hadst not done it.

(2.) Secondly, Duties and services are more apparently vitiated
by _human additions_; a thing expressly contrary to the second
commandment, and yet is there a strange boldness in men this way, which
sometimes riseth to such a height, that the plain and clear commands
of God are violated under the specious pretence of decency, order, and
humility; and nothing doth more take them than what they devise and
find out. Satan knows how displeasing this is to God, and how great
an inclination there is in men to be forward in their inventions and
self-devised worship, that he can easily prevail with the incautious.
This was the great miscarriage of the Jewish nation all along the
Old Testament; and of the pharisees, who, though they declined the
idolatries of their fathers, yet were so fond upon their traditions,
that they made their worship vain, as Christ tells them. And this
humour also in Paul’s time was insinuating itself into Christians,
managed by a great deal of deceit [Col. ii. 8] and ‘show of wisdom,’
ver. 23, which accordingly he doth earnestly forewarn them of. There
are indeed several degrees of corrupting a service or ordinance by
human additions, according to which it is more or less defiled: yet the
least presumption this way is an offence and provocation.

(3.) Thirdly, Duties are vitiated _in their excess_. Natural worship,
which consists in fear, love, faith, humility, &c., can never be too
much, but instituted worship may. Men may preach too much, and pray
too long—a fault noticed by Christ in the pharisees; they made ‘long
prayers’—Even in duties, a man may be righteous overmuch. Timothy was
so in his great pains and over-abstemious life, to the wasting of his
strength—which the apostle takes notice of, and adviseth against it,
‘Drink no longer water,’ &c., [1 Tim. v. 23.] The Corinthians were so,
when out of a high detestation of the miscarriage of the incestuous
person, they were backward to forgive him, and to receive him into the
church again. Peter is another instance to us of excess, John xiii. 8.
First, in a modest humility, he refuseth to let Christ ‘wash his feet;’
but after understanding the meaning of it, then he runs to the other
extreme, and offers not ‘only his feet, but his hands and his head.’
When the servants of God are conscious of defects in their services,
as if they would make amends for these by the length and continuance
of their services, they are easily drawn into an excess every way
disadvantageous to themselves and the service.

III. Thirdly, When Satan’s designs do not take to spoil the duties,
either by the manner of the attempt or in the act, he then seeks
to play an after-game, and endeavours to spoil them _by some
after-miscarriage of ours in reference to these services_. As,

(1.) First, _When he makes us proud of them_. We can scarce perform any
service with a tolerable suitableness, but Satan is at hand to instil
thoughts of applause, vainglory, and boasting: and we readily begin to
think highly of ourselves and performances; as if we were better than
others, whom we are apt to censure as low and weak in comparison of
ourselves. Though this be an apparent deceit, yet it is a wonder how
much the minds, even of the best, are apt to be tainted with it; even
where there are considerable endeavours for humility and self-denial,
these thoughts are apt to get too much entertainment. Now though we
run well, and attain some comfortable strength and watchfulness in
the services of God; yet if they be afterward fly-blown with pride,
or if we think to embalm them with praises, or reserve them as matter
of ostentation; though they be angels’ food, yet, like the manna of
the Israelites when kept too long, they will putrify and breed worms,
and so be good for nothing, after that we have been at the pains of
gathering it.

(2.) Secondly, When well-performed services are perverted _to
security_, then are they also spoiled. We are ready to say of them,
as the rich man of his abundance, ‘Soul, take thine ease: thou hast
much laid up for many years,’ [Luke xii. 19.] Satan is willing, for
a further advantage, that we think ourselves secure from him; and as
after a full meal we are apt to grow drowsy, so after services we are
apt to think ourselves out of harm’s way. The church after a high feast
with Christ, presently falls asleep, and highly miscarries in security
and neglect, Cant. v. 2. By this means do the best of saints sometimes
lose the things they have wrought, and throw down what they formerly
built up.


NOTE.

 Agreeably to Note at the beginning, there will be found below the more
 specific title page of Part II.—G.

_DÆMONOLOGIA SACRA_:

OR, A

TREATISE

OF

Satans Temptations:

The Second Part.

CONTAINING

The manifold Subtilties and Stratagems of Satan, for the corrupting of
the minds of Men with Error; and for the destruction of the Peace and
Comfort of the Children of God.

By _R. G._

_London_, Printed by _J. D._ for _Richard Randel_, and _Peter
Maplisden_, Booksellers in _New-Castle_ upon _Tine_, 1677.




