IV

THE NEED OF INSTRUMENTS

Aristotle's first doctrine, then, is that we must work for worthy ends.
The second follows directly from it. We must have tools to work with;
means by which to gain our ends. General Gordon, who was something of a
Platonist, remarked to Cecil Rhodes, who was a good deal of an
Aristotelian, that he once had a whole room full of gold offered him,
and declined to take it. "I should have taken it," replied Mr. Rhodes.
"What is the use of having great schemes if you haven't the means to
carry them out?" As Aristotle says: "Happiness plainly requires external
goods; for it is impossible, or at least not easy, to act nobly without
some furniture of fortune. There are many things that can be done only
through instruments, so to speak, such as friends and wealth and
political influence; and there are some things whose absence takes the
bloom off our happiness, as good birth, the blessing of children,
personal beauty. Happiness, then, seems to stand in need of this kind of
prosperity."

How different this from all our previous teachings! The Epicurean wants
little wealth, no family, no official station; because all these things
involve so much care and bother. The Stoic barely tolerates them as
indifferent. Plato took especial pains to deprive his guardians of most
of these very things. Aristotle on this point is perfectly sane. He says
you want them; because, to the fullest life and the largest work, they
are well-nigh indispensable. The editor of a metropolitan newspaper, the
president of a railroad, the corporation attorney cannot live their
lives and do their work effectively without comfortable homes, enjoyable
vacations, social connections, educational opportunities, which cost a
great deal of money. For them to despise money would be to despise the
conditions of their own effective living, to pour contempt on their own
souls.

Is Aristotle, then, a gross materialist, a mere money-getter,
pleasure-lover, office-seeker? Far from it. These things are not the end
of a noble life, but means by which to serve ends far worthier than
themselves. To make these things the ends of life, he explicitly says is
shameful and unnatural. The good, the true end, is "something which is a
man's own, and cannot be taken away from him."

Now we have two fundamental Aristotelian doctrines. We must have an end,
some section of the world which we undertake to mould according to a
pattern clearly seen and firmly grasped in our own minds.

Second, we must have instruments, tools, furniture of fortune in the
shape of health, wealth, influence, power, friends, business and social
and political connections with which to carry out our ends. And the
larger and nobler our ends, the more of these instruments shall we
require. If, like Cecil Rhodes, we undertake for instance to paint the
map of Africa British red, we shall want a monopoly of the product of
the Kimberley and adjacent diamond mines.


V

THE HAPPY MEAN

The third great Aristotelian principle follows directly from these two.
If we are to use instruments for some great end, then the amount of the
instruments we want, and the extent to which we shall use them, will
obviously be determined by the end at which we aim. We must take just so
much of them as will best promote that end. This is Aristotle's much
misunderstood but most characteristic doctrine of the mean. Approached
from the point of view which we have already gained, this doctrine of
the mean is perfectly intelligible, and altogether reasonable. For
instance, if you are an athlete, and the winning of a foot-ball game is
your end, and you have an invitation to a ball the evening before the
game, what is the right and reasonable thing to do? Dancing in itself is
good. You enjoy it. You would like to go. You need recreation after the
long period of training. But if you are wise, you will decline. Why?
Because the excitement of the ball, the late hours, the physical effort,
the nervous expenditure will use up more energy than can be recovered
before the game comes off upon the morrow. You decline, not because the
ball is an intrinsic evil, or dancing is intrinsically bad, or
recreation is inherently injurious, but because too much of these
things, in the precise circumstances in which you are placed, with the
specific end you have in view, would be disastrous. On the other hand,
will you have no recreation the evening before the game; but simply sit
in your room and mope? That would be even worse than going to the ball.
For nature abhors a vacuum in the mind no less than in the world of
matter. If you sit alone in your room, you will begin to worry about the
game, and very likely lose your night's sleep, and be utterly unfitted
when the time arrives. Too little recreation in these circumstances is
as fatal as too much. What you want is just enough to keep your mind
pleasantly diverted, without effort or exertion on your part. If the
glee club can be brought around to sing some jolly songs, if a funny man
can be found to tell amusing stories, you have the happy mean; that is,
just enough recreation to put you in condition for a night's sound
sleep, and bring you to the contest on the morrow in prime physical and
mental condition.

Aristotle, in his doctrine of the mean, is simply telling us that this
problem of the athlete on the night before the contest is the personal
problem of us all every day of our lives.

How late shall the student study at night? Shall he keep on until past
midnight year after year? If he does, he will undermine his health, lose
contact with society, and defeat those ends of social usefulness which
ought to be part of every worthy scholar's cherished end. On the other
hand, shall he fritter away all his evenings with convivial fellows, and
the society butterflies? Too much of that sort of thing would soon put
an end to scholarship altogether. His problem is to find that amount of
study which will keep him sensitively alive to the latest problems of
his chosen subject; and yet not make all his acquisitions comparatively
worthless either through broken health, or social estrangement from his
fellow-men. How rare and precious that mean is, those of us who have to
find college professors are well aware. It is easy to find scores of men
who know their subject so well that they know nothing and nobody else
aright. It is easy to find jolly, easy-going fellows who would not
object to positions as college professors. But the man who has enough
good fellowship and physical vigour to make his scholarship attractive
and effective, and enough scholarship to make his vigour and good
fellowship intellectually powerful and personally stimulating,--he is
the man who has hit the Aristotelian mean; he is the man we are all
after; he is the man whom we would any of us give a year's salary to
find.

The mean is not midway between zero and the maximum attainable. As
Aristotle says, "By the mean relatively to us I understand that which is
neither too much nor too little for us; and that is not one and the same
for all. For instance, if ten be too large and two be too small, if we
take six, we take the mean relatively to the thing itself, or the
arithmetical mean. But the mean relatively to us cannot be found in this
way. If ten pounds of food is too much for a given man to eat, and two
pounds too little, it does not follow that the trainer will order him
six pounds; for that also may perhaps be too much for the man in
question, or too little; too little for Milo, too much for the beginner.
And so we may say generally that a master in any art avoids what is too
much and what is too little, and seeks for the mean and chooses it--not
the absolute but the relative mean. So that people are wont to say of a
good work, that nothing could be taken from it or added to it, implying
that excellence is destroyed by excess or deficiency, but secured by
observing the mean."

The Aristotelian principle, of judging a situation on its merits, and
subordinating means to the supreme end, was never more clearly stated
than in Lincoln's letter to Horace Greeley: "I would save the Union. If
there be those who would not save the Union unless they could at the
same time save slavery, I do not agree with them. If there be those who
would not save the Union unless they could at the same time destroy
slavery, I do not agree with them. My paramount object in this struggle
is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery.
If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I would do it; and
if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it; and if I
could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would do that.
What I do about slavery and the coloured race, I do because I believe it
helps to save the Union; and what I forbear, I forbear because I do not
believe it would help to save the Union. I shall do less whenever I
believe what I am doing hurts the cause, and I shall do more when I
shall believe doing more will help the cause."


