CHAPTER IV

THE ARISTOTELIAN SENSE OF PROPORTION


I

ARISTOTLE'S OBJECTIONS TO PREVIOUS SYSTEMS

Our principles of personality thus far, though increasingly complex,
have all been comparatively simple. To get the maximum of pleasure; to
keep the universal law; to subordinate lower impulses to higher
according to some fixed scale of value, are all principles which are
easy to grasp and by no means difficult to apply. The fundamental
trouble with them all is that they are too easy. Life is not the
cut-and-dried affair which they presuppose. A man might have a lot of
pleasure, and yet be contemptible. He might keep all the commandments,
and yet be no better than a Pharisee. Even Plato's principle in actual
practice has not always escaped the awful abyss of asceticism.

In opposition to Epicurus Aristotle says, "Pleasure is not the good and
all pleasures are not desirable. No one would choose to live on
condition of having no more intellect than a child all his life, even
though he were to enjoy to the full the pleasures of a child. With
regard to the pleasures which all admit to be base, we must deny that
they are pleasures at all, except to those whose nature is corrupt. What
the good man thinks is pleasure will be pleasure; what he delights in
will be truly pleasant. Those pleasures which perfect the activity of
the perfect and truly happy man may be called in the truest sense the
pleasures of a man. The pleasure which is proper to a good activity is
therefore good; that attached to a bad one is bad. As, then, activities
differ, so do the pleasures which accompany them."

In our discussion of Epicureanism we saw that the principle of pleasure
consistently carried out produced bad results, and, as in the case of
Tito Melema, developed the most contemptible character. Aristotle shows
conclusively why this must be so. Pleasure is the sign and seal of
healthful exercise of function. A life which has all its powers in
effective and well-proportioned exercise will, indeed, be a life crowned
with pleasure. You cannot, however, reverse this proposition, as the
Epicurean attempts to do, and say that a life which seeks the maximum of
pleasure will inevitably have the healthy and proportionate exercise of
function as its consequent. According to Aristotle healthy exercise of
function in a well-proportioned life in devotion to wide social ends and
permanent personal interests, is the cause of which happiness is the
appropriate and inevitable effect. Seek the cause and you will get the
effect. Seek directly the effect, and you will miss both the cause you
neglect and the effect which only the cause can bring. The criticism
which we quoted from George Eliot on the career of Melema is the
quintessence of the Aristotelian doctrine. To put it in a figure: Build
a good fire and warm your room, and the mercury in the thermometer will
rise. The cause produces the effect. But it does not follow that because
you raise the mercury in the thermometer by breathing on the bulb, or
holding it in your hand, that the fire will burn, or the room will be
warmed. The Epicureans and hedonists are people who go about with the
clinical thermometer of pleasure under their tongues all the time, and
expect to see the world lighted with benevolence and warmed with love in
consequence. Aristotle bids them take their clinical thermometers out of
their mouths; stop fingering their emotional pulse; go to work about
some useful business; pursue some large and generous end; and then, not
otherwise, in case from time to time they have occasion to feel their
pulse and take their temperature, they will as a matter of fact find
that they are normal. But it isn't taking the temperature and feeling
the pulse that makes them morally sound; it is doing their proper work
and keeping in vigorous exercise that gives them the healthy pulse and
normal temperature.

There are, however, two apparently contradictory teachings about
pleasure in Aristotle, and it is a good test of our grasp of his
doctrine to see whether we can reconcile them. First he says, "In all
cases we must be especially on our guard against pleasant things, and
against pleasure; for we can scarce judge her impartially. And so, in
our behaviour toward her, we should imitate the behaviour of the old
counsellors toward Helen, and in all cases repeat their saying: If we
dismiss her, we shall be less likely to go wrong." "It is pleasure that
moves us to do what is base, and pain that moves us to refrain from what
is noble."

On the other hand he says: "The pleasure or pain that accompanies the
acts must be taken as a test of character. He who faces danger with
pleasure, or, at any rate, without pain, is courageous, but he to whom
this is painful is a coward. Indeed we all more or less make pleasure
our test in judging actions."

Can we reconcile these two seemingly contradictory statements?
Perfectly. On the one hand if we do an act simply for the pleasure it
will give, without first asking how the proposed act will fit into our
permanent plan of life, we are pretty sure to go astray. For pleasure
registers the goodness of the isolated act; not the goodness of the act
as related to the whole plan of life. Thus if I drink strong coffee at
eleven o'clock at night, the taste is pleasant and the immediate effect
is stimulating. But if it keeps me awake half the night and unfits me
for the duties of the next day, in spite of the pleasure gained, the act
is wrong. And it is wrong, not fundamentally because of the pains of
wakefulness it brings; it is wrong because it takes out of my life as a
whole, and my contribution to the life of the world, something for which
the petty transient pleasure I gained at the moment of indulgence is no
compensation whatsoever. Is not Aristotle right? Do we not pity as a
miserable weakling, hardly fit to have been graduated from the nursery,
any man or woman who will let the mere physical sensation of a few
moments at the end of an evening count so much as the dust in the
balance against the efficiency of the coming forenoon's life and work?

If we see this half of Aristotle's truth, we see that the other is not
its contradiction but its complement. If we are sorely and grievously
tempted by the coffee, if we give it up with pain, if saying "No, I
thank you," comes fearfully hard, if we cannot forego it cheerfully
without so much as seriously considering the drinking of it as possible
for us, why then it reveals how little we care for the life and work of
the morrow; and since life and work are but a succession of to-morrows,
how little we care for our life and work anyway. If we had great aims
burning in our minds and hearts, wide interests to which body and soul
were devoted, it would not be a pain, it would be a pleasure, to give up
for the sake of them ten thousand times as big a thing as a cup of
coffee, if it stood in the way of their accomplishment. Yes; Aristotle
is right on both points. Pleasure isolated from our plan of life and
followed as an end will lead us into weakness and wickedness every time
we yield to its insidious solicitation. On the other hand, the resolute
and consistent prosecution of large ends and generous interests will
make a positive pleasure of everything we either endure or do to promote
those ends and interests. Pleasure directly pursued is the utter
demoralisation of life. Ends and interests, pursued for their own sakes,
inevitably carry with them a host of noble pleasures, and the power to
conquer and transform what to the aimless life would be intolerable
pains.

Aristotle rejects the Epicurean principle of pleasure; because, though a
proof that isolated tendencies are satisfied, it is no adequate
criterion of the satisfaction of the self as a whole. He rejects the
Stoic principle of conformity to law; because it fails to recognise the
supreme worth of individuality. He rejects the Platonic principle of
subordination of appetites and passions to a supreme good which is above
them; because he dreads above all things the blight of asceticism, and
strives for a good which is concrete and practical.

What, then, is this good, which is neither a sum of pleasures, nor
conformity to law; nor yet superiority to appetite and passion? What is
this principle which can at once enjoy pleasure to the full, and at the
same time forego it gladly; which can make laws for itself more severe
than any lawgiver ever dared to lay down; and yet is not afraid to break
any law which its own conception of good requires it to break; which
honours all our elemental appetites and passions, uses money and honour
and power as the servants of its own ends, without ever being enslaved
by them? Evidently we are now on the track of a principle infinitely
more subtle and complex than anything the pleasure-loving Epicurean, or
the formal Stoic, or the transcendental Platonist has ever dreamed of.
We are entering the presence of the world's master moralist; and if we
have ever for a moment supposed that either of these previous systems
was satisfactory or final, it behooves us now to take the shoes from off
our feet, and reverently listen to a voice as much profounder and more
reasonable than them all, as they are superior to the senseless
appetites and blind passions of the mob. For if we have a little
patience with his subtlety, and can endure the temporary shock of his
apparent laxity, he will admit us to the very holy of holies of
personality.


