V

THE CULTIVATION OF LOVE

Love is so akin to our nature, so eager to enter our souls, that to want
is to get it; to seek is to find it; to open our hearts to its presence
is to discover it already there. Whoever knows what true prayer is--the
intense, eager yearning for good of insistent, importunate hearts--knows
that there never was and never can be one unanswered prayer. No man who
has longed to have Love the law of his life, and struggled for it as a
miser struggles for money, or a politician strives to win votes, ever
failed to get what he wanted. For every person we meet gives occasion
for Love, and every situation in life affords a chance to express it.
The difficulty is not to get all we want, but to want all we can have
for the asking.

"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you, for every one that asketh receiveth; and he
that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. Or
what man is there of you, who, if his son shall ask him for a loaf,
will give him a stone, or if he shall ask for a fish, will give him a
serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good
things to them that ask him?"

Love will not grow in our hearts without deep, unseen communion with the
Spirit of Love, who is God. To dwell reverently on the Infinite Love; to
keep in one's heart a sacred place where His holy name is adored; to
eagerly seek for Love's coming in our own hearts, in the hearts of all
men, and in all the affairs of the world; to gratefully receive all
material blessings as gifts for use in Love's service; to beseech for
ourselves and bestow on others that forgiveness which is Love's attitude
toward our human frailties and failings; to fortify ourselves in advance
against the allurements of sense, and the base desire to gain good for
ourselves at cost of evil to others; to remember that all right rule,
all true strength, all worthy honour inhere in and flow from Love, and
Love's Father, God,--to do this day by day sincerely and simply without
formality or ostentation,--this is to pray, and to insure prayer's
inevitable answer--a life through which Love freely flows to bless both
the world and ourselves.

"And when ye pray, ye shall not be as the hypocrites, for they love to
stand and pray in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that
they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have received their
reward. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thine inner chamber, and
having shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy
Father which seeth in secret shall recompense thee. And in praying use
not vain repetitions, as the Gentiles do; for they think that they shall
be heard for their much speaking. Be not therefore like unto them; for
your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him.
After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in heaven,
so on earth. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts,
as we also have forgiven our debtors. And bring us not into temptation,
but deliver us from the evil one."

Our only ground of assurance that Love forgives us is our loving
forgiveness of others. In the light of that fact of experience it is
easy and obvious to believe that the Father whose children we are, is
not less loving and forgiving than we. If we restore to our esteem and
friendship those who have wronged us, then we are sure that Love at the
heart of the Universe, Love in the Father, Love in all the Father's true
children, fully and freely forgives us. If we have this experience of
our own forgiveness of our fellows, we know that Love would not be Love,
but hate, God would not be God, but a devil, if any sincerely repented
wrong or shortcoming of which we have been guilty could remain
unforgiven.

"For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will
your Father forgive your trespasses."

To judge harshly another man's failings, however bad they may be, shows
that we are less loving than he. For he may have failed through strength
of appetite, or heat of passion,--failings that are still consistent
with Love; but harsh judgment has no such excuse, and is therefore a
deadly--that is, loveless--sin. We would never think of proclaiming to
the idly curious or the coldly critical the failings of one whom we
love; hence proclamations of any one's failings is a sure sign that we
have no Love for him, and as long as there are any whom we do not love
and protect, we have no part or lot in the great Love of God. Yet such
charitableness does not forbid our practical judgment of the difference
between sheep and wolves, good men and bad, when important issues are
involved. That Love requires. What it forbids is the rolling as a sweet
morsel under our tongue, and the gleeful recital to others, of the
mistake or the sin of another, as something in which we take mean
delight because we think it makes him inferior to ourselves.

"Judge not that ye be not judged. For with what judgement ye judge, ye
shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured
unto you. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye,
but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou
say to thy brother, Let me cast out the mote out of thine eye, and lo,
the beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam
out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the
mote out of thy brother's eye."

Love will waste no time trying to explain itself to the selfish. If Love
does not commend itself by its own light and warmth to a man, no forms
of words can make him understand it. The sensual, the greedy, the hard,
and the cruel Love will treat as gently and kindly as circumstances
permit; yet expect as a matter of course that they will interpret Love's
justice as hardness, kindness as weakness, temperance as asceticism,
forbearance as cowardice, sacrifice as stupidity. Those who love will
not mind being misunderstood by those who do not; knowing that any
attempted explanation would only increase their conceit and hardness of
heart, and so make a bad matter worse.

"Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast your pearls
before the swine, lest haply they trample them under their feet, and
turn and rend you."

Since Love is "the greatest thing in the world," we are bound to stand
ready with girt loins, and trimmed, burning lamps, to shed its light far
and wide. To cover it up would be to deprive ourselves and our fellows
of the one sight in all the world best worth seeing, and so to hinder
its spread. False modesty that would keep Love's good works out of sight
is as bad as false pride that would thrust oneself forward. Though works
done merely to be seen are not good at all, yet good works genuinely
done for Love's sake gain added influence and lustre when frankly and
freely allowed to be seen as the beautiful things that they are. The
Christian is under spiritual compulsion to be a missionary. Other
systems draw their little circles of disciples about them, as Jesus
drew His twelve. One cannot hold what he believes to be a true and
helpful view of life without wishing to communicate it to others. Yet
this tendency, which is natural to every principle, is characteristic of
Christianity in a unique degree. For the Christian Spirit consists in
Love, the desire to give to others the best one has. And what can be so
good, so desirable to impart, as this very Spirit of Love, which is
Christianity itself? That is why the Christian must, in some form or
other,--by journeying to foreign lands, by contribution to missionary
work at home, by gifts to Christian education, by support of settlement
work, or perhaps best of all by the silent diffusion of a Christian
example in the neighbourhood, or the unnoticed expression of the
Christian Spirit in the home,--be a propagator of the Spirit of Love he
has himself received.

"Ye are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hid.
Neither do men light a lamp and put it under the bushel, but on the
stand; and it shineth unto all that are in the house. Even so let your
light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven."


