IV

THE WHOLE-HEARTEDNESS OF LOVE

Love asks for the whole heart or nothing; and all the heart has, be it
little or much, must go with it. The pursuit or possession of wealth, as
an end in itself, or a means to mere selfish ends, will drive Love out
of the soul.

All the wealth we can give to Love's service is most useful and welcome;
but the retention of any for miserly pride, or vain ostentation, or
indolent uselessness for ourselves or our children, fills the heart so
full of self that Love can find there no room. Not that giving away all
one has is essential or desirable; but that every dollar one gives,
spends, keeps, invests, or controls be held subject to the orders of
Love.

Wealth is not so essential to the Christian as it was to Epicurus and
Aristotle, for God can be glorified and man can be served with very
little furniture of fortune; and therefore the Christian is able, in
whatsoever material state he is, therewith to be content. On the other
hand, the Christian cares more for money than either the Stoic or Plato;
for there are ranges in God's universe of beauty, truth, and goodness
which cannot be aesthetically appreciated and artistically and
scientifically appropriated without large expenditure of labour and the
wealth by which labour is supported; and there are wide spheres of
business enterprise and social service essential to human welfare which
only the rich man or nation can effectively promote. Divine and human
service is possible in poverty; it is more effective and at the same
time more difficult in wealth. The Christian rich and the Christian poor
serve the same Lord, and have the same Spirit; but the accomplishment of
the Christian rich man can be so much greater than that of the
Christian widow with her mite, that the Christian who is strong enough
to stand it is in duty bound to treat money as a talent which in all
just ways he ought to multiply. On the contrary, the moment it begins to
make him less sympathetic, less generous, less thankful, less
responsible, he must give it away as the only alternative to the loss of
his soul, the deterioration of his personality.

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust
doth consume, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for
yourselves treasure in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth consume,
and where thieves do not break through nor steal, for where thy treasure
is, there will thy heart be also."

Toward science and art, business and politics, the application of the
Christian Spirit is different from anything we have met before. The
Christian will not shirk these things, like the Epicurean and the Stoic;
because they are ways of serving that truth, beauty, welfare, and order
which are included in the Father's will for all His human children. In
all these things we are co-workers with God for the good of man.
Diligence and enthusiasm, devotion and self-sacrifice in one or more of
these directions is the imperative duty, the inestimable privilege of
every one who would be a grateful and obedient son of God, a helpful and
efficient brother to his fellow-men.

Yet in all his devotion to science or art, in all the energy with which
he gives himself to business or politics, the Christian can never forget
that God is greater than any one of these points at which we come in
contact with Him; and that, when we have done our utmost in one or
another of these lines, we are still comparatively unprofitable servants
in His vast household. As God is more than the thing at which we work,
so the Christian, through relation to Him, is always more than his work.
He never lets his personality become absorbed and evaporated in the work
he does; but ever renews his personal life at the fountain which is
behind the special work he undertakes to do. Thus the true Christian is
never without some useful social work to do; and he never lets himself
get lost in doing it. To keep this balance of energy in the task and
elevation above it, which enables one to take success without elation
and bear failure without depression, is perhaps the crowning achievement
of practical Christianity.

"The lamp of the body is the eye; if therefore thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole
body shall be full of darkness. If, therefore, the light that is in thee
be darkness, how great is the darkness! No man can serve two masters;
for either he will hate the one, and love the other, or else he will
hold to one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon."

He who heartily loves and serves others will trust Love in God and his
fellows to take proper care of himself. One who really loves others will
take reasonable care not to be a burden to them, and to the world, and
will avail himself of the insurance company, the savings bank, and the
bond market as the devices of a complex modern society to distribute
losses and conserve gains to the common advantage of all. Love does not
make the individual or his family a parasite on the economy and industry
of society. Love makes a man bear his own permanent burden as a
preliminary to being of much use and no harm to his family, his friends,
and his community. Such prudent provision of the means of Love's
independence and service is consistent with entire absence of worry
about one's personal fortunes. The essential question which Love, and
Jesus as the Lord and Master of Love, puts to a man is not "How much
money have you?" but "What use do you intend to make of whatever you
have, be that little or much?" If that aim is selfish, and the money is
either saved or spent in sordid, worried selfishness, that low aim makes
the money a curse. If held subject to whatever drafts Love may make upon
it,--whether gifts to the poor, or support of good causes, or employment
of honest workmen, or development of industrial enterprises, be the form
Love's drafts take,--then all wealth so held is a blessing to the world
and an honour to its owner, a glory to God and a service to man.

"Therefore I say unto you, Be not anxious for your life, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put
on. Is not the life more than the food, and the body than the raiment?
Behold the birds of the heaven, that they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are not ye
of much more value than they? And which of you by being anxious can add
one cubit unto his stature? And why are ye anxious concerning raiment?
Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither
do they spin; yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these. But if God doth so clothe the grass of
the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, shall
he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? Be not therefore
anxious, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or,
Wherewithal shall we be clothed? For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek; for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all
these things."

Though material means sought as ends are fatal to Love, Love's ends kept
in view insure needed means. To worry about to-morrow is to fail in
devotion to the tasks of to-day, and so spoil both days. To do our best
work to-day is to gain power for to-morrow. Competition complicates, but
does not render insoluble, the problem of making all that we have and
all that we do express Love to all whom our action affects. To be sure,
there are city slums, uninsured accidents and sickness, unsanitary
tenements, unjust conditions of labour, where even the service of Love
does not bring to the worker appropriate means and rewards; but it is
because Love has not quite kept pace at these points with swift-moving
modern conditions. But public spirit, political progress, economic
reform, are more sensitive to these violations of its laws than ever
before, and eagerly bent on finding and applying the remedy,--more Love
of all for each, and each for all.

"But seek ye first his kingdom, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. Be not therefore anxious for the morrow,
for the morrow will be anxious for itself. Sufficient unto the day is
the evil thereof."

Love throws off all that hampers its action, as a runner his coat for a
race. Love requires the sound body, the clear mind, the strong will, the
sensitive heart, and foregoes all indulgences that impair these things,
though in themselves innocent as eating and drinking. Yet Love makes no
fuss about its sacrifices, takes them as a simple matter of course, not
worth mentioning; for what Love gives up in mere sensuous indulgence is
as nothing to the widened affections and enlarged interests gained. To
be solemn or sad over what we give up, to proclaim or parade one's
self-denials, would be an insult to Love; it would show that the persons
we love and the causes we serve are not really as dear to our hearts as
the pitiful things we forego for their sake--would show that our Love
was a sham.

All pleasure that comes from healthy exercise of body, rational exercise
of mind, sympathetic expansion of the affections, strenuous effort of
the will, in just and generous living, is at the same time a glorifying
of God and an enrichment of ourselves. All pleasure which sacrifices the
vigour of the body to the indulgence of some separate appetite, all
pleasure which enslaves or degrades or embitters the persons from whom
it is procured, all pleasure which breaks down the sacred institutions
on which society is founded,--is shameful and debasing, a sin against
God, and a wrong to our own souls. The Christian will forego many
pleasures which Epicurus and even Aristotle would permit, because he is
infinitely more sensitive than they to the effect his pleasures have on
poor men and unprotected women whose welfare these earlier teachers did
not take into account. On the other hand, the Christian will enter
heartily into the joys of pure domestic life, and the delights of
struggle with untoward social and political conditions, from which Plato
and the Stoics thought it honourable to withdraw. Where God can be
glorified and men can be served, there the Christian will either find
his pleasure, or with optimistic art, create a pleasure that he does not
find.

"Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance;
for they disfigure their faces, that they may be seen of men to fast.
Verily I say unto you, They have received their reward. But thou, when
thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face, that thou be not seen
of men to fast, but of thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father,
which seeth in secret, shall recompense thee."

Just because Love includes the interests of all the persons we deal
with, it excludes all mean, selfish traits from our hearts. There can be
no pride and guile, no lust and cruelty, no avarice and hypocrisy, no
malice and censoriousness, in a heart which welcomes to its interest and
affection, and serves and loves as its own, the aims and needs of its
fellows. That is why Love's true disciples are few, and the slaves of
selfishness many. Ask how many,--not entirely succeed, for none do,--but
how many make it the constant aim of their lives to treat others as more
widely extended aspects of themselves, and, in order to do that,
endeavour to keep out all the greed, hate, lust, pride, envy, jealousy,
that would draw lines between self and others, and we see the answer:
that the way must be narrow, a way few find, and still fewer follow when
found.

"Enter ye in by the narrow gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the
way, that leadeth to destruction, and many be they that enter in
thereby. For narrow is the gate, and straitened the way, that leadeth
unto life, and few be they that find it."


