VI

THE ARISTOTELIAN VIRTUES AND THEIR ACQUISITION

The special forms that the one great virtue of seeking the relative mean
takes in actual life bear a close correspondence to the cardinal virtues
of Plato; yet with a difference which marks a positive advance in
insight. Aristotle, to begin with, distinguishes wisdom from prudence.
Wisdom is the theoretic knowledge of things as they are, irrespective of
their serviceableness to our practical interests. In modern terms it is
devotion to pure science. This corresponds to Plato's contemplation of
the Good. According to Aristotle this devotion to knowledge for its own
sake underlies all virtue; for only he who knows how things stand
related to each other in the actual world, will be able to grasp aright
that relation of means to ends on which the success of the practical
life depends. Just as the engineer cannot build a bridge across the
Mississippi unless he knows those laws of pure mathematics and physics
which underlie the stability of all structures, so the man who is
ignorant of economics, politics, sociology, psychology, and ethics is
sure to make a botch of any attempts he may make to build bridges
across the gulf which separates one man from another man; one group of
citizens from another group. Pure science is at the basis of all art,
consciously or unconsciously; and therefore wisdom is the fundamental
form of virtue.

Prudence comes next; the power to see, not the theoretical relations of
men and things to each other, but the practical relationships of men and
things to our self-chosen ends. Wisdom knows the laws which govern the
strength of materials. Prudence knows how strong a structure is
necessary to support the particular strain we wish to place upon it.
Wisdom knows sociology. Prudence tells us whether in a given case it is
better to give a beggar a quarter of a dollar, an order on a central
bureau, a scolding, or a kick. The most essential, and yet the rarest
kind of prudence is that considerateness which sensitively appreciates
the point of view of the people with whom we deal, and takes proper
account of those subtle and complex sentiments, prejudices, traditions,
and ways of thinking, which taken together constitute the social
situation.

Temperance, again, is not the repression of lower impulses in the
interest of those abstractly higher, as it came to be in the popular
interpretations of Platonism, and as it was in Stoicism. With Aristotle
it is the stern and remorseless exclusion of whatever cannot be brought
into subjection to my chosen ends, whatever they may be. As Stevenson
says in true Aristotelian spirit, "We are not damned for doing wrong: we
are damned for not doing right." For temperance lies not in the external
thing done or left undone; but in that relation of means to worthy ends
which either the doing or the not doing of certain things may most
effectively express. We shall never get any common basis of
understanding on what we call the temperance question of to-day until we
learn to recognise this internal and moral, as distinct from the
external and physical, definition of what true temperance is. Temperance
isn't abstinence. Temperance isn't indulgence. Neither is it moderation
in the ordinary sense of that term. True temperance is the using of just
so much of a thing,--no more, no less, but just so much,--as best
promotes the ends one has at heart. To discover whether a man is
temperate or not in anything, you must first know the ends at which he
aims; and then the strictness with which he uses the means that best
further those ends, and foregoes the things that would hinder them.

Temperance of this kind looks at first sight like license. So it is if
one's aims be not broad and high. In the matter of sexual morality,
Aristotle's doctrine as applied in his day was notoriously loose.
Whatever did not interfere with one's duties as citizen and soldier was
held to be permissible. Yet as Green and Muirhead, and all the
commentators on Aristotle have pointed out, it is a deeper grasp of this
very principle of Aristotle, a widening of the conception of the true
social end, which is destined to put chastity on its eternal rock
foundation, and make of sexual immorality the transparently weak and
wanton, cruel and unpardonable vice it is. To do this, to be sure, there
must be grafted on to it the Christian principle of democracy,--a regard
for the rights and interests of persons as persons. The beauty of the
Aristotelian principle is that it furnishes so stout and sturdy a stock
to graft this principle on to. When Christianity is unsupported by some
such solid trunk of rationality, it easily drops into a sentimental
asceticism. Take, for example, this very matter of sexual morality.
Divorced from some such great social end as Aristotelianism requires,
the only defence you have against the floods of sensuality is the vague,
sentimental, ascetic notion that in some way or other these things are
naughty, and good people ought not to do them. How utterly ineffective
such a barrier is, everybody who has had much dealing with young men
knows perfectly well. And yet that is pretty much all the opposition
current and conventional morality is offering at the present time. The
Aristotelian doctrine, with the Christian principle grafted on, puts two
plain questions to every man. Do you include the sanctity of the home,
the peace and purity of family life, the dignity and welfare of every
man and woman, the honest birthright of every child, as part of the
social end at which you aim? If you do, you are a noble and honourable
man. If you do not, then you are a disgrace to the mother who bore you,
and the home where you were reared. So much for the question of the end.
The second question is concerned with the means. Do you honestly believe
that loose and promiscuous sexual relations conduce to that sanctity of
the home, that peace and purity of family life, that dignity and welfare
of every man and woman, that honest birthright of every child, which as
an honourable man you must admit to be the proper end at which to aim?
If you think these means are conducive to these ends, then you are
certainly an egregious fool. Temperance in these matters, then, or to
use its specific name, chastity, is simply the refusal to ignore the
great social end which every decent man must recognise as reasonable and
right; and the resolute determination not to admit into his own life, or
inflict on the lives of others, anything that is destructive of that
social end. Chastity is neither celibacy nor licentiousness. It is far
deeper than either, and far nobler than them both. It is devotion to the
great ends of family integrity, personal dignity, and social stability.
It is including the welfare of society, and of every man, woman, and
child involved, in the comprehensive end for which we live; and holding
all appetites and passions in strict relation to that reasonable and
righteous end.

Aristotelian courage is simply the other side of temperance. Temperance
remorselessly cuts off whatever hinders the ends at which we aim.
Courage, on the other hand, resolutely takes on whatever dangers and
losses, whatever pains and penalties are incidental to the effective
prosecution of these ends. To hold consistently an end, is to endure
cheerfully whatever means the service of that end demands. Aristotelian
courage, rightly conceived, leads us to the very threshold of Christian
sacrifice. He who comes to Christian sacrifice by this approach of
Aristotelian courage, will be perfectly clear about the reasonableness
of it, and will escape that abyss of sentimentalism into which too
largely our Christian doctrine of sacrifice has been allowed to drop.

Courage does not depend on whether you save your life, or risk your
life, or lose your life. A brave man may save his life in situations
where a coward would lose it and a fool would risk it. The brave man is
he who is so clear and firm in his grasp of some worthy end that he will
live if he can best serve it by living; that he will die if he can best
serve it by dying; and he will take his chances of life or death if
taking those chances is the best way to serve this end.

The brave man does not like criticism, unpopularity, defeat, hostility,
any better than anybody else. He does not pretend to like them. He does
not court them. He does not pose as a martyr every chance that he can
get. He simply takes these pains and ills as under the circumstances the
best means of furthering the ends he has at heart. For their sake he
swallows criticism and calls it good; invites opposition and glories in
overcoming it, or being overcome by it, as the fates may decree; accepts
persecution and rejoices to be counted worthy to suffer in so good a
cause.

It is all a question here as everywhere in Aristotle of the ends at
which one aims, and the sense of proportion with which he chooses his
means. In his own words: "The man, then, who governs his fear and
likewise his confidence aright, facing dangers it is right to face, and
for the right cause, in the right manner, and at the right time, is
courageous. For the courageous man regulates both his feelings and his
actions with due regard to the circumstances and as reason and
proportion suggest. The courageous man, therefore, faces danger and does
the courageous thing because it is a fine thing to do." As Muirhead sums
up Aristotle's teaching on this point: "True courage must be for a noble
object. Here, as in all excellence, action and object, consequence and
motive, are inseparable. Unless the action is inspired by a noble
motive, and permeated throughout its whole structure by a noble
character, it has no claim to the name of courage."

The virtues cannot be learned out of a book, or picked up ready-made.
They must be acquired, by practice, as is the case with the arts; and
they are not really ours until they have become so habitual as to be
practically automatic. The sign and seal of the complete acquisition of
any virtue is the pleasure we take in it. Such pleasure once gained
becomes one's lasting and inalienable possession.

In Aristotle's words: "We acquire the virtues by doing the acts, as is
the case with the arts too. We learn an art by doing that which we wish
to do when we have learned it; we become builders by building, and
harpers by playing on the harp. And so by doing just acts we become
just, and by doing acts of temperance and courage we become temperate
and courageous. It is by our conduct in our intercourse with other men
that we become just or unjust, and by acting in circumstances of danger,
and training ourselves to feel fear or confidence, that we become
courageous or cowardly." "The happy man, then, as we define him, will
have the property of permanence, and all through life will preserve his
character; for he will be occupied continually, or with the least
possible interruption, in excellent deeds and excellent speculations;
and whatever his fortune may be, he will take it in the noblest fashion,
and bear himself always and in all things suitably. And if it is what
man does that determines the character of his life, then no happy man
will become miserable, for he will never do what is hateful and base.
For we hold that the man who is truly good and wise will bear with
dignity whatever fortune sends, and will always make the best of his
circumstances, as a good general will turn the forces at his command to
the best account."

This doctrine that virtue, like skill in any game or craft, is gained by
practice, deserves a word of comment. It seems to say, "You must do the
thing before you know how, in order to know how after you have done it."
Paradox or no paradox, that is precisely the fact. The swimmer learns to
swim by floundering and splashing around in the water; and if he is
unwilling to do the floundering and splashing before he can swim, he
will never become a swimmer. The ball-player must do a lot of muffing
and wild throwing before he can become a sure catcher and a straight
thrower. If he is ashamed to go out on the diamond and make these
errors, he may as well give up at once all idea of ever becoming a
ball-player. For it is by the progressive elimination of errors that the
perfect player is developed. The only place where no errors are made,
whether in base-ball or in life, is on the grand stand. The courage to
try to do a thing before you know how, and the patience to keep on
trying after you have found out that you don't know how, and the
perseverance to renew the trial as many times as necessary until you do
know how, are the three conditions of the acquisition of physical skill,
mental power, moral virtue, or personal excellence.


