II

RIGHTEOUSNESS WRIT LARGE

The Republic is Plato's answer to this question. Why, you may ask,
should he give us a treatise on politics in answer to a question of
personal character? Because the state is simply the individual writ
large, and as we can read large letters more easily than small letters,
we shall get at the principle of righteousness more readily if we first
consider what it is in the large letters of the state. In presenting
this analogy of the state I shall freely translate Plato's teachings
into their modern equivalent. What, then, is the difference between a
righteous and unrighteous state?

An unrighteous state is one in which the working-men in each industry
are organised into a union which uses its power to force the wages of
its members up to an exorbitant level, and uses intimidation and
violence to prevent any one else from working for less or producing more
than the standards fixed by the union; it is a state in which the owners
of capital, in each line of industry, combine into overcapitalised
trusts for the purpose of making the small sums which they put into the
business, and the larger sums which they do not put in at all, except on
paper, earn exorbitant dividends at the expense of the public; it is a
state in which the politicians are in politics for their pockets, using
the opportunities for advantageous contracts which offices afford, and
the opportunities for legislation in favour of private schemes, to
enrich themselves out of the public purse; it is a state in which the
police intimidate the other citizens, and sell permission to commit
crime to the highest bidder; it is a state in which the scholars concern
themselves exclusively about their own special and technical interests,
and as long as the institutions with which they are connected are
supported by the gifts of rich men, care little how the poor are
oppressed and the many are made to suffer by the corrupt use of wealth
and the selfish misuse of power. Such is the unrighteous state. And
wherein does its unrighteousness consist? Obviously in the fact that
each of the great classes in the state--working-men, capitalists,
police, politicians, scholars--are living exclusively for themselves and
are ready to sacrifice the interests of the community as a whole to
their private interests. Now a state which should be completely
unrighteous, in which everybody should succeed in carrying out his own
selfish interests at the expense of everybody else, would be
intolerable. United action would be impossible. No one would wish to
live in such a state. There must be honour even among thieves; otherwise
stealing could not be successful on any considerable scale. The trouble
with it is that each part is arrayed in antagonism against every other
part, and the whole is sacrificed to the supposed interests of its
constituent members.

What, then, in contrast to this would be a righteous state? It would be
a state in which each of these classes fulfils its part well, with a
view to the good of the whole. It would be a state where labour would be
organised into unions, which would not insist on having the greatest
possible wages for the least possible work, but which would maintain a
high standard of efficiency, and intelligence, and character in the
members, with a view to doing the best possible work in their trade, at
such wages as the resources and needs of the community, as indicated by
the normal action of demand and supply, would warrant. It would be a
state in which the capitalists would organise their business in such a
way that they might invite public inspection of the relation between the
capital, enterprise, skill, economy, and industry expended, and the
prices they charge for commodities furnished and services rendered. It
would be a state in which the police would maintain that order and law
which is the equal interest of the rich and poor alike. It would be a
state in which the men in political offices would use their official
positions and influence for the protection of the lives and promotion of
the interests of the whole people whom they represent and profess to
serve. It would be a state in which the colleges and universities would
be intensely alive to economic, social, and public questions, and devote
their learning to the maintenance of healthful material conditions, just
distribution of wealth, sound morals, and wise determination of public
policy.

Wherein, then, does the difference between an unrighteous and a
righteous state consist? Simply in this--that in the unrighteous state
each class in the community is playing for its own hand and regarding
the community as a mere means to its own selfish interests as the
supreme end,--while a righteous state on the contrary is one in which
each class in the community is doing its own work as economically and
efficiently as possible, with a view to the interests of the community
as a whole. In the unrighteous state the whole is subordinated to each
separate part; in the righteous state each part is subordinated to the
common interests of the whole. If, then, we ask as did Adeimantus in the
Republic, "Where, then, is righteousness, and in which particular part
of the state is it to be found," our answer will be that given by
Socrates, "that each individual man shall be put to that use for which
nature designs him, and every man will do his own business so that the
whole city will be not many but one." Righteousness, then, in the state
consists in having each class mind its own business with a view to the
good of the whole. On this, which is Plato's fundamental principle, we
can all agree.

As to the method by which the righteous state is to be brought about
probably we should all profoundly differ from him. His method for
securing the subordination of what he calls the lower class of society
to what he calls the higher class is that of repression, force, and
fraud. The obedience of the working-men is to be secured by
intimidation; the devotion of the higher classes is to be secured partly
by suppression of natural instincts and interests, partly by an
elaborate and prolonged education. The rulers are to have no property
and no wives and families that they can call their own. He attempts to
get devotion to the whole by suppressing those more individual and
special forms of devotion which spring from private property and family
affection. In all these details of his scheme we must frankly recognise
that Plato was profoundly wrong. The working classes cannot and ought
not to be driven like dumb cattle to their tasks by a force external to
themselves. The ruling class, the scholars and statesmen, can never be
successfully trained for disinterested public life by taking away from
them those fundamental interests and affections out of which, in the
long run, all public spirit takes its rise and draws its inspiration. In
opposition to this communism based on repression and suppression by
force and fraud, the modern democracy sets a community of interest and a
devotion of personal resources, be they great or small, to the common
good on the part of every citizen of every class. The utter inadequacy
and impracticability of the details of Plato's communistic schemes
about the wives and property of his ruling class should not blind us to
the profound truth of his essential definition of righteousness in a
state: That each class shall "do the work for which they draw the wage"
with a view to the effect it will have, not on themselves alone, but
primarily on the welfare of the whole state, of which each class is a
serving and contributing member. This essential truth of Plato our
modern democracy has taken up. The difference is that, while Plato
proposed to have intelligence and authority in one, and obedience and
manual labour in another class, the problem of modern democracy is to
give an intelligent and public-spirited outlook to the working-man, and
a spirit of honest work to the scholar and the statesman.

The defect of Plato lies in the external arrangements by which he
proposed to secure the right relation of parts to the whole. His
measures for securing this subordination were partly material and
physical, partly visionary and unnatural, where ours must be natural,
social, intellectual, and spiritual. But he did lay down for all time
the great principle that the due subordination of the parts to the
whole, of the members to the organism, of the classes to society, of
individuals to the state is the essence of righteousness in a state,
and an indispensable condition of political well-being.


