V

AN EXAMPLE OF EPICUREAN CHARACTER

The clearest example of the shortcomings of Epicureanism is the
character of Tito Melema in George Eliot's "Romola." Pleasure and the
avoidance of pain are this young Greek's only principles. He is "of so
easy a conscience that he would make a stepping-stone of his father's
corpse." "He has a lithe sleekness about him that seems marvellously
fitted for slipping into any nest he fixes his mind on." "He had an
unconquerable aversion to any thing unpleasant, even when an object very
much loved and admired was on the other side of it." According to his
thinking "any maxims that required a man to fling away the good that was
needed to make existence sweet, were only the lining of human
selfishness turned outward; they were made by men who wanted others to
sacrifice themselves for their sake." "He would rather that Baldassarre
should not suffer; he liked no one to suffer; but could any philosophy
prove to him that he was bound to care for another's suffering more than
for his own? To do so, he must have loved Baldassarre devotedly, and he
did not love him: was that his own fault? Gratitude! seen closely, it
made no valid claim; his father's life would have been dreary without
him; are we convicted of a debt to men for the pleasure they give
themselves?" "He had simply chosen to make life easy to himself--to
carry his human lot if possible in such a way that it should pinch him
nowhere; but the choice had at various times landed him in unexpected
positions." "Tito could not arrange life at all to his mind without a
considerable sum of money, and that problem of arranging life to his
mind had been the source of all his misdoing." "He would have been equal
to any sacrifice that was not unpleasant." "Of other goods than pleasure
he can form no conception." As Romola says in her reproaches: "You talk
of substantial good, Tito! Are faithfulness, and love, and sweet
grateful memories no good? Is it no good that we should keep our silent
promises on which others build because they believe in our love and
truth? Is it no good that a just life should be justly honoured? Or, is
it good that we should harden our hearts against all the wants and hopes
of those who have depended on us? What good can belong to men who have
such souls? To talk cleverly, perhaps, and find soft couches for
themselves, and live and die with their base selves as their best
companions."

This pleasure-loving Tito Melema, "when he was only seven years old,
Baldassarre had rescued from blows, had taken to a home that seemed like
opened paradise, where there was sweet food and soothing caresses, all
had on Baldassarre's knee; and from that time till the hour they had
parted, Tito had been the one centre of Baldassarre's fatherly cares."
Instead of finding and rescuing this man who, long years ago, had
rescued Tito when a little boy from a life of beggary, filth, and cruel
wrong, had reared him tenderly and been to him as a father, Tito sold
the jewels which belonged to his father and would have been sufficient
to ransom him from slavery, and finally, when found by Baldassarre in
Florence, denied him and pronounced him a madman. He betrayed an
innocent, trusting young girl into a mock marriage, at the same time
ruining her and proving false to his lawful wife. He sold the library
which it was Romola's father's dying wish to have kept in Florence as a
distinct memorial to his life and work. He entered into selfish
intrigues in the politics of the city, ready to betray his associates
and friends whenever his own safety required it.

What wonder that Romola came to have "her new scorn of that thing called
pleasure which made men base--that dexterous contrivance for selfish
ease, that shrinking from endurance and strain, when others were bowing
beneath burdens too heavy for them, which now made one image with her
husband." In her own distress she learns from Savonarola that there is a
higher law than individual pleasure. "She felt that the sanctity
attached to all close relations, and therefore preeminently to the
closest, was but the expression in outward law, of that result toward
which all human goodness and nobleness must spontaneously tend; that the
light abandonment of ties, whether inherited or voluntary, because they
had ceased to be pleasant, was the uprooting of social and personal
virtue. What else had Tito's crime toward Baldassarre been but that
abandonment working itself out to the most hideous extreme of falsity
and ingratitude? To her, as to him, there had come one of those moments
in life when the soul must dare to act on its own warrant, not only
without external law to appeal to, but in the face of a law which is not
unarmed with Divine lightnings--lightnings that may yet fall if the
warrant has been false." The whole teaching of the book is summed up in
the Epilogue. In the conversation between Romola and Tito's illegitimate
son Lillo, Lillo says, "I should like to be something that would make
me a great man, and very happy besides--something that would not hinder
me from having a good deal of pleasure."

"That is not easy, my Lillo. It is only a poor sort of happiness that
could ever come by caring very much about our own narrow pleasures. We
can only have the highest happiness, such as goes along with being a
great man, by having wide thoughts, and much feeling for the rest of the
world as well as ourselves; and this sort of happiness often brings so
much pain with it, that we can only tell it from pain by its being what
we would choose before everything else, because our souls see it is
good. There are so many things wrong and difficult in the world, that no
man can be great--he can hardly keep himself from wickedness--unless he
gives up thinking much about pleasure or rewards, and gets strength to
endure what is hard and painful. My father had the greatness that
belongs to integrity; he chose poverty and obscurity rather than
falsehood. And there was Fra Girolamo--you know why I keep to-morrow
sacred; he had the greatness which belongs to a life spent in struggling
against powerful wrong, and in trying to raise men to the highest deeds
they are capable of. And so, my Lillo, if you mean to act nobly and
seek to know the best things God has put within reach of men, you must
learn to fix your mind on that end, and not on what will happen to you
because of it. And remember, if you were to choose something lower, and
make it the rule of your life to seek your own pleasure, and escape from
what is disagreeable, calamity might come just the same; and it would be
calamity falling on a base mind, which is the one form of sorrow that
has no balm in it, and that may well make a man say, 'It would have been
better for me if I had never been born.'"

The trouble with Epicureanism is its assumption that the self is a
bundle of natural appetites and passions, and that the end of life is
their gratification. Experience shows, as in the case of Tito, that such
a policy consistently pursued, brings not pleasure but pain--pain first
of all to others, and then pain to the individual through their
contempt, indignation, and vengeance. The truest pleasure must come
through the development within one of generous emotions, kind
sympathies, and large social interests. The man must be made over before
the pleasures of the new man can be rightly sought and successfully
found. This making over of man is no consistent part of the logical
Epicurean programme, and consequently pure Epicureanism is sure to land
one in the narrowness, selfishness, and heartlessness of a Tito Melema,
and to bring upon one essentially the same condemnation and disaster.

Still, not in criticism or unkindness would we take leave of the serene
and genial Epicurus. We may frankly recognise his fundamental
limitations, and yet gratefully accept the good counsel he has to give.
Parasite as it is,--a thing that can only live by sucking its life out
of ideals and principles higher and hardier than itself, it is yet a
graceful and ornamental parasite, which will beautify and shield the
hard outlines of our more strenuous principles. There are dreary wastes
in all our lives, into which we can profitably turn those streams of
simple pleasure he commends. There are points of undue strain and
tension where Epicurean prudence would bid us forego the slight fancied
gain to save the ruinous expense to health and happiness. Let us fill up
these gaps with hearty indulgence of healthy appetite, with vigorous
exercise of dormant powers, with the eager joys of new-learned
recreations. Let us tone down the strain and tension of our anxious,
worried, worn, and weary lives by the rigid elimination of the
superfluous, the strict concentration on the perpetual present, the
resolute banishment from it of all past or future springs of depression
and discouragement. Before we are through we shall see far nobler ideals
than this; but we must not despise the day of small things. Though the
lowest and least of them all, the Epicurean is one of the historical
ideals of life. It has its claims which none of us may with impunity
ignore. To serve him faithfully in the lower spheres of life is a
wholesome preparation for the intelligent and reasonable service of
Stoic, Platonic, Aristotelian, and Christian ideals which rule the
higher realms. He who is false to the humble, homely demands of Epicurus
can never be quite at his best in the grander service of Zeno and Plato,
Aristotle and Jesus.


