III

THE CARDINAL VIRTUES

Righteousness in a state then consists in each class minding its own
business, and performing its specific function for the good of the state
as a whole. Righteousness in the individual is precisely the same thing.
There are three grand departments of each man's life: his appetites, his
spirit, and his reason. Neither of these is good or bad in itself.
Neither of them should be permitted to set up housekeeping on its own
account. Any one of them is bad if it acts for itself alone, regardless
of the interests of the self as a whole. Let us take up these
departments in order, and see wherein the vice and the virtue of each
consists. First the appetites, which in the individual correspond to the
working class in the state.

Let us take eating as a specimen, remembering, however, that everything
we say about the appetite for food is equally true of all the other
elementary appetites, such as those that deal with drink, sex, dress,
property, amusement, and the like. The Epicurean said they are all good
if they do not clash and contradict each other. The Stoic implied that
they are all, if not positively bad, at least so low and unimportant
that the wise man will not pay much attention to them. Plato says they
are all good in their place, and that they are all bad out of their
place. What, then, is their place? It is one of subordination and
service to the self as a whole. Which is the better breakfast: a half
pound of beefsteak, with fried potatoes, an omelette, some griddle cakes
and maple syrup, with a doughnut or two, and a generous piece of mince
pie? or a little fruit and a cereal, a roll, and a couple of eggs?

Intrinsically the first breakfast is, if anything, better than the
second. There is more of it. It offers greater variety. It takes longer
to eat it. It will stay by you longer. If you are at a hotel conducted
on the American plan, you are getting more for your money.

Righteousness, however, is concerned with none of these considerations.
What makes one breakfast better than the other is the way it fits into
one's life as a whole. Which breakfast will enable you to do the best
forenoon's work? Which one will give you acute headache and chronic
dyspepsia? Immediate appetite cannot answer these questions. Reason is
the only one of our three departments that can tell us what is good for
the self as a whole. Now for most people in ordinary circumstances,
reason prescribes the second breakfast, or something like it. The second
breakfast fits into one's permanent plan of life. The work to be done in
the forenoon, the feelings one will have in the afternoon, the general
efficiency which we desire to maintain from day to day and year to year,
all point to the second breakfast as the more adapted to promote the
welfare of the self as a whole throughout the entire life history. If we
eat the first breakfast, appetite rules and reason is thrust into
subjection. The lower has conquered the higher; the part has domineered
the whole. To eat such a breakfast, for ninety-nine men out of every
hundred, would be gluttony. Yet, though eating it is vicious, the fault
is not in the breakfast, not in the hunger for it; but in the fact that
the appetite had its own way, regardless of the permanent interests of
the self as a whole; and that so far forth reason was dethroned, and
appetite set up as ruler in its place. Indeed there are circumstances in
which the first breakfast would be the right one to choose. If one were
on the borders of civilisation, setting out for a long tramp through the
wilderness, where every ounce of food must be carried on his back, and
no more fresh meat and home cooking could be expected for several days,
even reason herself might prescribe the first breakfast as more
beneficial to the whole man than the second. Precisely the same
breakfast which is good in one set of circumstances becomes bad in
another. The raw appetite of hunger is obviously neither good nor bad.
The rule of appetite over reason and the whole self, however, is bad
always, everywhere, and for everybody. It is in this rising up of the
lower part of the self against the higher, and its sacrifice of the self
as a whole to a particular gratification that all vice consists.

On the other hand, the rule of reason over appetite, the gratification
or the restraint of appetite according as the interests of the total
self require, is always and everywhere and for everybody good. This is
the essence of virtue; and the particular form of virtue that results
from this control of the appetites by reason in the interest of the
permanent and total self is temperance--the first and most fundamental
of Plato's cardinal virtues.

The second element of human nature, spirit, must be dealt with in the
same way. By spirit Plato means the fighting element in us, that which
prompts us to defend ourselves, the faculty of indignation, anger, and
vengeance. To make it concrete, let us take a case. Suppose the cook in
our kitchen has times of being careless, cross, saucy, wilful, and
disobedient. The spirit within prompts us to upbraid her, quarrel with
her, and when she grows in turn more insolent and impertinent, to
discharge her. Is such an exercise of spirit a virtuous act? It may be
virtuous, or it may be vicious. In this element, considered in itself,
there is no more virtue or vice than in appetite considered in itself.
It is again a question of how this particular act of this particular
side of our nature stands related to the self as a whole. What does
reason say?

If I send this cook away, shall I be a long while without any; and after
much vexation probably put up with another not half so good? Will my
household be thrown into confusion? Will hospitality be made impossible?
Will the working power of the members of my household be impaired by
lack of well-prepared, promptly served food? In the present state of
this servant problem, all these things and worse are quite likely to
happen. Consequently reason declares in unmistakable terms that the
interests of the self as a whole demand the retention of the cook. But
it galls and frets our spirit to keep this impertinent, disobedient
servant, and hear her irritating words, and see her aggravating
behaviour. Never mind, reason says to the spirited element in us. The
spirit is not put into us in order that it may have a good time all by
itself on its own account. It is put into us to protect and promote the
interests of the self as a whole. You must bear patiently with the
incidental failings of your cook, and return soft answers to her harsh
words; because in that way you will best serve that whole self which
your spirit is given you to defend. In ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred a quarrel with a cook, on such grounds, in present conditions,
would be prejudicial to the interests of the self as a whole. It is the
sacrifice of the whole to the part; which as we saw in the case of
appetite is the essence of all vice. Only in this case the vice would
be, not intemperance, but cowardice, inability to bear a transient,
trifling pain patiently and bravely for the sake of the self as a whole.

Still, there might be aggravated cases in which the sharp reproof, the
quarrel, and the prompt discharge might be the brave and right thing to
do. If one felt it a contribution one was required to make to the whole
servant problem, and after considering all the inconvenience it would
cost, still felt that life as a whole was worth more with this
particular servant out of the house than in it, then precisely the same
act, which ordinarily would be wrong, in this exceptional case would be
right. It is not what you do, but how you do it, that determines whether
an outburst of anger is virtuous or vicious. If the whole self is in it,
if all interests have been fully weighed by the reason, if, in short,
you are all there when you do it, then the act is a virtuous act, and
the special name of this virtue of the spirit is courage or fortitude.
Anger and indignation going off on its own account is always vicious.
Anger and indignation properly controlled by reason in the interest of
the total self is always good. Precisely the same outward act done by
one man in one set of circumstances is bad, and shows the man to be
vicious, cowardly, and weak; while, if done by another man in other
circumstances, it shows him to be strong, brave, and manly. Virtue and
vice are questions of the subordination or insubordination of the lower
to the higher elements of our nature; of the parts of our selves to the
whole. The subordination of appetite to reason has given us the first of
the four virtues. The subordination of spirit to reason has given us
fortitude, the second.

Wisdom, the third of Plato's cardinal virtues, consists in the supremacy
of reason over spirit and appetite; just as temperance and courage
consisted in the subordination of appetite and spirit to reason. Wisdom,
then, is much the same thing as temperance and courage, only in more
positive and comprehensive form. Wisdom is the vision of the good, the
true end of man, for the sake of which the lower elements must be
subordinated. What, then, is the good, according to Plato? The good is
the principle of order, proportion, and harmony that binds the many
parts of an object into the effective unity of an organic whole. The
good of a watch is that perfect working together of all its springs and
wheels and hands, which makes it keep time. The good of a thing is the
thing's proper and distinctive function; and the condition of its
performing its function is the subordination of its parts to the
interest of the whole.

The good of a horse is strength and speed; but this in turn involves the
cooerdination of its parts in graceful, free movement. The good of a
state is the cooeperation of all its citizens, according to their several
capacities, for the happiness and welfare of the whole community. Wisdom
in the statesman is the power to see such an ideal relation of the
citizens to each other, and the means by which it can be attained and
conserved. The good of the individual man, likewise, is the harmonious
working together of all the elements in him, so as to produce a
satisfactory life; and wisdom is the vision of such a truly satisfactory
life, and of the conditions of its attainment. Since man lives in a
world full of natural objects, and of works of art; since he is
surrounded by other men and is a member of a state; and since his
welfare depends on his fulfilling his relations to these objects and
persons, it follows that wisdom to see his own true good will involve a
knowledge of these objects, persons, and institutions around him. Hence
rather more than half the Republic is occupied with the problem of
education; or the training of men in that wisdom which consists in the
knowledge of the good.


