CHAPTER V

THE CHRISTIAN SPIRIT OF LOVE


I

THE TEACHING OF LOVE

Jesus taught His philosophy of life in three ways: the personal, by
example; the artistic, by parable; and the scientific, by propositions.

The first, though most vital and effective of all, is expensive and
wasteful. For in life principles are so embedded in "muddy particulars,"
trivial and sordid details, that they are liable to get lost. The Master
may be a long time with His disciples, and yet not really be known. Even
the disciples themselves, after months of such teaching, like James and
John may not know what manner of spirit they are of. Indeed it may
become expedient for them that the Master go away, that His Spirit may
be more clearly revealed.

The artistic method, too, has drawbacks. For though it gives the
principles a new artificial setting, with carefully selected details to
catch the crowd, yet the crowd catch simply the story. Only the
initiated are instructed; those who do not already know the principles
learn nothing, but "seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not
understand," as Jesus, past master of this art though He was, so often
lamented.

The third or scientific method is dry and prosaic. It observes what
qualities go together, or refuse to go together, in the swift stream of
life; pulls them out of the stream; fixes them in concepts; marks them
by names; and states propositions about them. It may go one short step
farther: it may arrange its propositions in syllogisms, and deduce
general conclusions, or laws. It may take, for instance, as its major
premise, Love is the divine secret of blessedness. Then for its minor
premise it may take some plain observed fact, Humility is essential to
Love. Then the conclusion or law will be, The humble share the divine
life and all the blessings it brings. Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Of course no one but a pedant draws out his teaching in this laboured
logical form. The syllogism is condensed; the major, and perhaps even
the minor, premise is omitted, and often only the conclusion appears.

At its best this method is hard and dry; yet this is the method employed
in such sayings as those handed down in the summary called the Sermon on
the Mount. Perhaps that is why the teaching of the "Sermon," in spite of
its clear-cut form, is much less studied and understood than the
teaching of Jesus' life and parables. To recover this largely lost
teaching one must warm and moisten the cold, dry terms; supply, when
necessary, omitted premises; use some one word rather than many for the
often suppressed middle term; and so draw out the latent logic that
underlies these laws.

The middle term of all this argument is Love. For that old-fashioned
word, in spite of its sentimental associations, much better than its
modern scientific synonyms, such as the socialising of the self,
expresses that outgoing of the self into the lives of others, which,
according to Jesus, is the actual nature of God, the potential nature of
man, the secret of individual blessedness and the promise of social
salvation.

In the two or three cases where the logic of His principle, applied to
our complex modern life, points clearly to a modification of His literal
precepts, as in the management of wealth and the bestowal of charity, I
shall not hesitate to put the logic of the teaching in place of the
letter of the precept, citing the latter afterward for comparison.

A logical commentary like this will be most helpful if it reverses the
order usual in commentaries of mere erudition, and introduces the steps
of the argument before rather than after the passage they seek to make
clear.

In whichever of the three ways it is taught, Love shines by its own
light and speaks with its own authority to all who have eyes to see and
ears to hear.

A person who loves carries with him a generous light-heartedness, a
genial optimism, which show all his friends that he has found some
secret which it is worth their while to learn.

Every well-told parable or fable, every artistically constructed novel
or play, makes us take sides with the large-hearted hero against the
mean, selfish villain.

In the same way Love's formulated laws, showing on what conditions it
depends and to what results it leads, convince every one who has the
experience by which to interpret them (and only to him who hath
experience is interpretation given) that Love is the supreme law of
life, and its requirements the right and reasonable conditions of
individual and social well-being.


II

THE FULFILMENT OF LAW THROUGH LOVE

Jesus was born in a nation which had developed law to the utmost nicety
of detail, and recognised all laws as expressions of the good will of
God seeking the welfare of men. Prolonged experiments in living had
proved certain kinds of conduct disastrous, and the states of mind
corresponding to them, despicable. Law had prohibited this disastrous
conduct, and the prophets had denounced these despicable traits.

Of course latent in the prohibitions of law was the constitution of the
blessed Kingdom that would result if the law were observed; and dimly
foreshadowed in the figurative expressions of the prophets was the
vision of the glorified human society that would emerge when the
despicable traits should be extirpated and the better order introduced.
This negative and latent implication of law Jesus developed into Love as
the positive and explicit principle of life; and this figuratively
foreshadowed prophet's vision He translated into the actual fact of a
community united in Love. He fulfilled the law by putting Love in the
heart, and fulfilled the prophets by establishing a community based on
Love. Jesus taught us to make every human interest we touch as precious
as our own, and to treat all persons with whom we deal as members of
that beneficent system of mutual good-will which is the Kingdom of
Heaven. But the moment we begin to do that, law as law becomes
superfluous; for what the law requires is the very thing we most desire
to do: prophecy as prophecy is fulfilled; for the best man's heart can
dream has come to pass.

In the ideal home, between well-married husband and wife, child and
parent, brother and sister, this sweet law prevails. In choice circles
of intimate friends it is found. Jesus extended this interpretation of
others in terms of ourselves, and of both others and self in terms of
the system of relations in which both self and others inhere, so as to
include all the dealing of official and citizen, teacher and pupil,
dealer and customer, employer and employee, man and man.

Jesus does not judge us by the formal test of whether we have kept or
broken this or that specific commandment, but by the deeper and more
searching requirement that our lives shall detract nothing from and add
something to the glory of God and the welfare of man.

Is the world a happier, holier, better world because we are here in it,
helping on God's good-will for men? If that be the grand, comprehensive
purpose of our lives, honestly cherished, frankly avowed, systematically
cultivated, then, no matter how far below perfection we may fall, that
single purpose, in spite of failure, defeat, and repented sin, pulls us
through. If we have this Spirit of Love in our hearts, and if with
Christ's help we are trying to do something to make it real in our lives
and effective in the world, our eternal salvation is assured. On the
other hand, is there a single point on which we deliberately are working
evil? Is the lot of any poor man harder, or the life of any unhappy
woman more sad and bitter, for aught that we have done or left undone?
Is any good institution the weaker, or any bad custom more prevalent,
for aught that we are deliberately and persistently withholding of help
or contributing of harm? If so, if in any one point we are consciously
and unrepentingly arrayed against God's righteous purpose, and the human
welfare which is dear to God; if there is a single point on which we are
deliberately setting aside His righteous will, and doing intentional
evil to the humblest of His children; then, notwithstanding our high
rank on other matters, our lack of the right purpose, at even a single
point, makes us guilty of the whole; we are unfit for His kingdom.

Jesus' principle of Love, though for clearness and incisiveness often
stated in terms of mere altruism, or regard for others, yet taken in its
total context, in the light of His never absent reference to the
Father's will and the Kingdom of Heaven, is much deeper and broader than
that. It gives each man his place and function in the total beneficent
system which is the coming Kingdom of God, and then treats him not
merely as he may wish to be treated, or we may wish to treat him, but as
his place and function in that system require.

Mere altruism is often weakly kind, making others feebly dependent on
our benefactions instead of sturdily self-supporting; making others
unconsciously egotistic as the result of our superfluous ministrations
or uncritical indulgence; and even fostering a subtle egotism in
ourselves, as the result of the fatal habit of doing the easy, kind
thing rather than the hard, severe thing that is needed to lift them to
their highest attainment. A true mother is never half as sentimentally
altruistic toward her child as a grandmother or an aunt; she does not
hesitate to reprove and correct, when that is what the child needs to
suppress the low and lazy, and rouse the higher and stronger self. The
just administrator discharges the incompetent and exposes the dishonest
employee, not merely because the good of the whole requires it; but
because even for the person discharged or exposed, that is better than
it would be to allow him to drag out an unprofitable and cumbersome life
in tolerated uselessness or countenanced graft.

"Treat both others and yourself as their place and yours in God's coming
Kingdom require;" that is the Golden Rule in its complete form. "All
things, therefore, whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you"
(remembering that both you and they have places and functions in the
Father's Kingdom of Love); "even so do ye also unto them: for this is
the law and the prophets."

This fulfilment of law is a very different thing from selfishly breaking
the law. That such a reformer as Jesus ever took the conservative side
of any question seems at first sight so preposterous that most candid
critics believe that He never said the words attributed to Him about
breaking one of the least of these commandments, or else that He said
them in a lost context which would greatly alter their meaning. That,
however, is not quite sure. For Love at its best is never rudely
iconoclastic. Every good law in its original intent is aimed to lift
men out of their sensuality and selfishness into at least an outward
conformity to the requirements of social well-being. And however
grotesque, fantastic, and superfluous such a law under changed
conditions may become, its original intent will always keep it sacred
and precious, even after its purpose can be accomplished better without
it. To fulfil is not to destroy, or to take delight in destruction.
"Think not that I came to destroy the law or the prophets; I came not to
destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth
shall pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from
the law, till all things be accomplished."

At the same time Love is always changing and superseding laws and
institutions by pressure of adjustment to the changing demands of
individual and social well-being. Laws and institutions are made for
men, rather than men for institutions and laws; and the instant an old
law ceases to serve a new need in the best possible way, Love erects the
better service into a new law or institution, superseding the old. Any
law that fails to promote the physical, mental, social, and spiritual
good of the persons and the community concerned, thereby loses Love's
sanction and becomes obsolete. Law for law's sake, rather than for the
sake of man and society, is the flat denial of Love. To exalt any
tradition, institution, custom, or prohibition above the human and
social good it has ceased to serve, is to sink to the level of the
scribe and Pharisee--the deadliest enemies of Jesus, and all for which
He stood. "For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no
wise enter into the kingdom of heaven."

In Love's eyes all anger, contempt, and quarrelsomeness are as bad as
murder--indeed are incipient murder, stopped short of overt crime
through fear. The look, or word, or deed of unkindness, the thought, or
wish, or hope that evil may befall another, even the attitude of cold
indifference, is murder in the heart. And it is only because we lack the
courage to translate wish into will that in such cases we do not do the
thing which, if done without our responsibility, by accident or nature,
we should rejoice to see accomplished.

From a strange and unexpected source there has come the confirmation of
this New Testament conception of the prevalence, not to say the
universality, of murder. A brilliant but grossly perverse English man of
letters was sentenced to imprisonment a few years ago for the foulest
crime. From the gaol in which he was confined there came a most
realistic description of the last days and final execution within its
walls of a lieutenant in the British army, who was condemned for killing
a woman whom he loved.

The poem has the exaggeration of a perverted and embittered nature; but
beneath the exaggeration there is the original truth, which underlies
Jesus' identification of murder and hate. After describing the last days
of the condemned man, his execution and his burial, the poem concludes
as follows:--

    "In Reading Gaol by Reading town
    There is a pit of shame,
    And in it lies a wretched man
    Eaten by teeth of flame,
    In a burning winding sheet he lies
    And his grave has got no name.

    "And there, till Christ call forth the dead,
    In silence let him lie:
    No need to waste the foolish tear,
    Or heave the windy sigh:
    The man had killed the thing he loved,
    And so he had to die.

    "And all men kill the thing they love,
    By all let this be heard,
    Some do it with a bitter look,
    Some with a flattering word:
    The coward does it with a kiss,
    The brave man with a sword."

Charge up against ourselves as murder the bitter looks, the hateful
words, the unkind thoughts, the selfish actions, which have lessened the
vitality, diminished the joy, wounded the heart, and murdered the
happiness of those whom we ought to love, whom perhaps at times we think
we do love, and who can profess to be guiltless?

The harboured grudge, the unrepented injury, the offence for which we
have not begged pardon, the employer's refusal to "recognise" his
employees or their representatives, and treat with them on fair and
equal terms, the workman's cultivated attitude of hostility to his
employer, are all such flagrant violations of Love that acts of formal
piety or public worship on the part of a person who harbours such
feelings are an affront.

Controversies, lawsuits, industrial or political warfare in mere pride
of opinion, class prejudice, or greed of gain, without first making
every effort to respect the rights and protect the interests of the
other party and so bring about a reconciliation, are all violations of
Love and doom the person who is guilty of them to dwell in the narrow
prison-house of a hard and hateful secularity, where the last farthing
of exacted penalty must be paid, and hate is lord of life. "Ye have
heard that it was said of them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and
whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: but I say unto
you, that every one who is angry with his brother shall be in danger of
the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in
danger of the council; and whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in
danger of the hell of fire. If, therefore, thou art offering thy gift at
the altar and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught against
thee, leave there thy gift before the altar and go thy way, first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Agree with
thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art with him in the way; lest haply
the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to
the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto thee, Thou
shalt by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the last
farthing."

Marriage to the Christian is an infinitely higher and holier estate than
it could have been to any of the earlier schools. It is an opportunity
to share with another person the creative prerogative of God. It brings
opportunity for Love enhanced by the highest of complementary
differences, under circumstances of tenderest intimacy, with the
requirement of lifelong constancy.

From Love's point of view any lack of tender reverence for the person
of another, whether in or out of marriage sinks man to the plane of the
brute. Not that the normal exercise of any appetite or passion is base
or evil in itself. All are holy, pure, divine, when Love through them
assumes the lifelong responsibilities they involve. All that falls short
of such tender reverence and permanent responsibility is lust. Jesus
established chastity on the broad, rational basis of respect for the
dignity of woman and the sanctity of sex. The logic of His teaching on
this point is to place chastity on the eternal rock foundation of
treating another only as Love and a true regard for the other's
permanent welfare will warrant. In other words, Jesus permits no man to
even wish to treat any woman as he would be unwilling another man should
treat his own mother, sister, wife, or daughter. For, from His
standpoint, all women are our sisters, daughters of the most high God.
This standard is searching and severe, no doubt; but it is reasonable
and right. There is not a particle of asceticism about it. And the man
who violates it is not merely departing a little from the beaten path of
approved conventionalities. He is doing a cruel, wanton wrong. He is
doing to another what he would bitterly resent if done to one whom he
held dear. And what right has any man to hold any woman cheap, a mere
means of his selfish gratification, and not an object of his protection,
and reverence, and chivalrous regard? The worst mark of uneliminated
brutality and barbarism which the civilised world is carrying over into
the twentieth century, to curse and blacken and pollute and embitter
human life for a few generations more, is this indifference to the
Spirit of Love, as it applies at this crucial point.

To destroy a wife's health, to purchase a moment's pleasure at the cost
of a woman's lasting degradation, or to participate in practices which
doom a whole class of wretched women to short-lived disease and shame,
and early and dishonoured death (a recent reliable report estimates the
cost of lives from this cause alone in a single city as 5000 a year) is
so gross and wanton a perversion of manhood, that in comparison it would
be better not to be a man at all.

All the devices for gratifying sexual passions without the assumption of
permanent responsibilities, such as seduction, prostitution, and the
keeping of mistresses, Christianity brands as the desecration of God's
holiest temple, the human body, and the wanton wounding of His most
sensitive creation,--woman's heart. The Greeks placed little restriction
on man's passions beyond such as was necessary to maintain sufficient
physical health and mental vigour to perform his duties as a citizen in
peace and in war. If the individual is complete in himself, with no God
above who cares, no Christ who would be grieved, no Spirit of Love to
reproach, no rights of universal brotherhood and sisterhood to be
sensitively respected and chivalrously maintained, then indeed it is
impossible to make out a valid claim for severer control in these
matters than Plato and Aristotle advocate. If there are persons in the
world who are practically slaves, persons who have no claim on our
consideration, then licentiousness and prostitution are logical and
legitimate expressions of human nature and inevitable accompaniments of
human society. Christianity, however, has freed the slave in a deeper
and higher sense than the world has yet realised. Christianity does not
permit any one who calls himself a Christian to leave any man or woman
outside the pale of that consideration which makes this other person's
dignity, and interest, and welfare as precious and sacred to him as his
own. Obviously all loose and temporary sexual connections involve such
degradation, shame, and sorrow to the woman involved, that no one who
holds her character, and happiness, and lasting welfare dear to him can
will for her these woful consequences. One cannot at the same time be a
friend of the kindly, generous, sympathetic Christ and treat a woman in
that way. It is for this reason, not on cold, ascetic grounds, that
Christianity limits sexual relations to the monogamous family; for there
only are the consequences to all concerned such as one can choose for
another whom he really loves. If Christianity, at these and other vital
points, asks man to give up things which Plato and Aristotle permit, it
is not that the Christian is narrower or more ascetic than they; it is
because Christianity has introduced a Love so much higher, and deeper,
and broader than anything of which the profoundest Greeks had dreamed,
that it has made what was permissible to their hard hearts forever
impossible for all the more sensitive souls in whom the Love of Christ
has come to dwell.

"Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shalt not commit adultery; but I
say unto you, that every one that looketh on a woman to lust after her
hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. And if thy right
eye causeth thee to stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for it
is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not
thy whole body be cast into hell. And if thy right hand causeth thee to
stumble, cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for
thee that one of thy members should perish, and not thy whole body go
into hell."

Divorce is a confession of failure in Love's supreme undertaking. No two
Christians, who have caught and kept alive the Spirit of Love in the
married state, ever were or ever will be, ever wished to be or ever can
be, divorced. No one Christian who has the true Christian Spirit of Love
toward husband or wife will ever seek divorce unless it be under such
circumstances of infidelity or brutality, neglect or cruelty, as render
the continuance of the relation a fruitless casting of the pearls of
affection before the swinishness of sensuality. The determination of the
grounds on which divorce shall be granted belongs to the sphere of the
state, and is a problem of social self-protection. The Christian church
makes a serious mistake when it spends its energies in trying to build
up legal barriers against divorce. Its real mission at this point is to
build up in the hearts of its adherents the Spirit of Love which will
make marriage so sweet and sacred that those who once enter it will
find, as all true Christians do find, divorce intolerable between two
Christians; and tolerable even for one Christian only as a last resort
against hopeless and useless degradation. To translate Christ's Spirit
into the life of the family is a much more Christian thing to do than to
attempt to enact this or that somewhat general and enigmatical answer of
His into civil law. It is generally a mistake, a departure from the
Spirit of the Master, when the Christian community as such turns from
its specific task of positive upbuilding of personality to the legal
prohibition of the things that are contrary to the Christian Spirit.
Laws and prohibitions, statutes and penalties against drunkenness,
Sabbath-breaking, theft, murder, gambling, and divorce, we must have.
But those laws and penalties are best devised and enforced by the state,
as the representative of the average sentiment of the community as a
whole, rather than by the distinctively Christian element in the
community, which in the nature of things is very far above the average
sentiment. Undoubtedly the Christian Spirit is the only force strong
enough to save the family from degeneration and dissolution in this
intensely individualistic, independent, materialistic, luxurious age.
But we must rely mainly on the Spirit working within, not on a law
imposed from without; on the healing touch of the gentle Master, not on
the hasty sword of the impetuous Peter.

"It was said also, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a
writing of divorcement; but I say unto you, that every one that putteth
away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, maketh her an
adulteress; and whosoever shall marry her when she is put away
committeth adultery."

Love fulfils at once the law of truth-telling and the law against
swearing; for words spoken in Love need no adventitious support. The
appeal to anything outside one's self, and one's simple statement, is
clear evidence that there is no Love, and therefore no truth within.
Love has no desire to deceive, and hence no fear of being disbelieved.
To back up one's words with an oath is to confess one's own lack of
confidence in what one is saying, and to invite lack of confidence in
others. Anything more than a plain statement of fact or feeling comes
out of an insincere or unloving heart. Of course here, as in the case of
divorce, what is the obvious and only law for the disciple of Jesus may
or may not be wise for the civil authorities to enact into law and
impose upon all. If the state and the courts think an oath helpful, the
sensible Christian usually will conform to public custom and
requirement; even though for him the practice is superfluous and
meaningless.

"Again, ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shalt
not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths; but I
say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by the heaven, for it is the
throne of God; nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet;
nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. Neither shalt
thou swear by thy head, for thou canst not make one hair white or black.
But let your speech be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay; and whatsoever is more than
these is of the evil one."

Love is slow to take offence, and quick to overlook. Selfishness is
sensitive to slights, resentful at wrongs; for it sees others only as
their acts affect us. Love seeks out the whole man behind the harsh word
or bad deed, takes his point of view, and tries to discover some clue to
his concealed better self.

Whether he does well or ill, Love lets us appeal to nothing less than
his best self, and do nothing less than what on the whole is best for
him and for the community to which he and we both belong. Hence, whether
we give or withhold what he specifically asks (and Love enlightened by
modern sociology tells us we usually must withhold from beggars and
tramps what they ask), in either case we shall not consult merely our
personal convenience and impulse, but do what we should wish to have
done to us, for the sake of society and for our own good as members of
society, if we were in his unfortunate plight. "Ye have heard that it
was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto
you, Resist not him that is evil, but whosoever smiteth thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man would go to law
with thee, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And
whosoever shall compel thee to go one mile, go with him twain. Give to
him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not
thou away."

Love is kind to the evil and vicious, and magnanimous to the hostile and
hateful. Kindness in return for favours received or in hope of favours
to come; kindness to those whose conduct and character we admire, is all
very well in its way, but is no sign whatever that he who is kind on
these easy terms is a true child of Love. To share the great Love of God
one must go out freely to all, regardless of return or desert,--be
impartial as sunshine and shower.

When our enemy is plotting to harm us, to break down our good name, to
injure those whom we love, even while we defend ourselves and our dear
ones against his malice and meanness, we must be secretly watching our
chances to do him a good turn, and win him from hatred to Love. Nothing
less than this complete identification with the interests of all the
persons we in any way touch, however bad some of their acts, however
unworthy some of their traits, can make us sharers and receivers, agents
and bestowers of that perfect Love which is at once the nature of God,
the capacity of man, the fulfilment of law, and the condition of social
well-being.

"Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate
thy enemy; but I say unto you, Love your enemies, and pray for them that
persecute you, that ye may be sons of your Father which is in heaven;
for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth rain
on the just and the unjust. For if ye love them that love you, what
reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? And if ye salute
your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the
Gentiles the same? Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect."


