VI

THE BLESSEDNESS OF LOVE

Does virtue bring happiness? is a question every philosophy of life must
meet. Yet before it can be rightly answered it must be rightly put.

For if by virtue you mean something negative, conventional,--not lying,
not cheating, not swearing, not drinking; and if by happiness you mean
something passive, external,--riches, offices, entertainments, and
honours; then virtue and happiness do not necessarily go together in
life, and no philosophy can show that they should.

If a man were to persuade himself that they do go together, and should
seek this sort of happiness by cultivating this sort of virtue, he would
miss true virtue and true happiness. For both virtue and happiness are
positive, active; so interrelated that the happiness must be found in
that furtherance of our common social interests in which the exercise of
virtue consists.

Jesus bids us take an active, devoted interest in the interests of
others and of society. Now whoever shares and serves a wide range of
interests has an interested, and therefore an interesting, life. But the
interesting life is the happy life. Love, whether it has much or little
wealth and station, always has interests and aims; always finds or
makes friends to share them,--in other words, is always happy.

The beatitudes are illustrations of this deep identity between interest
taken and happiness found; statements of the truth that Love going out
to serve and share the interests and aims of others, and blessedness
flowing in to fill the heart thereby enlarged for its reception, are the
outside and inside of the same spiritual experience.

To think little of self is the key to the joy that goes with much
thought for others.

Love is so going out to others as to make them as real as self. But that
is what no man puffed up with self-importance can do. Where self is much
in the foreground others are pushed to the rear. Self-importance and
Love cannot dwell together in the same house of clay. As one goes up in
the scales of the balance the other goes down. To be rich in the shared
lives of others one must be poor in his own self-esteem. The two are in
inverse proportion. Modesty is impossible of direct cultivation. It
isn't safe to talk or even think about it much. As Pascal remarks, "Few
people talk of humility humbly." Like Love it is the manifestation of
something deeper than itself. Unless one is in intimate personal
relations with one whom he reveres as greater, stronger, better than
himself, it is obviously impossible for him to be modest. If he is in
such relations, it is equally impossible for him not to be modest.
Hence, as Love is the inmost quality of the Christian, the inevitable
manifestation to his fellow-men of what the Father is to him, so modesty
is the surest outward sign of this inward grace. Conceit is a public
proclamation of the poverty of one's personal relations. For if this
conceited fellow, this vain woman, really had the honour of the intimate
acquaintance of some one better and greater than their petty, miserable
selves, they could not possibly be the vain, conceited creatures that
they are. Every one who lives in the presence of the great Father, and
walks in the company of His glorious Son, is sure to find modesty and
humility the natural and spontaneous expression of his side of these
great relationships. "Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven."

Our shortcomings frankly confessed prepare us for Love's consolation.

We all fall short of that patient consideration, that courteous
kindliness, which makes the feelings and interests of others as precious
as our own. Some of us fail in one way, some in another. But we all are
unprofitable servants of the Love that would make our lives one with all
the lives that we touch. To forget or deny that we fail is to lose sight
of Love altogether. He who thinks he succeeds thereby shows that he
fails; he who knows and laments that he fails comes as near as man can
to the goal.

Love neither asks nor expects a clean record; else it would have no
disciples. Love fully and freely forgives, at the eleventh hour welcomes
the idler, and offers its fulness of joy to all who, whatever their
repented past may have been, make service and kindness to others their
eager present concern. For no sin frankly confessed, no wrong deed
sincerely repented, no loss squarely met, no bereavement bravely
endured, can shut out from Love's consolation those who serve with the
best there is in them the persons who still need their aid. "Blessed are
they that mourn; for they shall be comforted."

To meet criticism with kindness, crossness with geniality, insult with
courtesy, and injury with charity is the way to conquer the world.

By nature we are creatures of suggestion. A hateful look, an ugly word,
a spiteful sneer, a cruel blow, make us hateful and ugly and spiteful
and cruel in turn. For the empty heart flashes back in resentment
whatever attitude another's act suggests.

Meekness greets as a friend the just critic, and for unjust and unkind
treatment makes allowance as due to the blindness or hardness or
weakness of the pitiful person who has nothing better to give. Meekness
makes the soft answer that turns away wrath, and treats one who wrongs
us all the more gently. Thus the meekness of Love gives both power to
possess our own souls in patience under all provocation, and power, not
indeed to coerce the bodies of others, but to win the consent of their
souls. "Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth."

Righteousness is something of which we can have no more and no less than
we wish.

He who is good enough is not good at all, and never will be any better.
For righteousness is right relation to others; and so long as there are
things we can do to help others, its infinite task is unfinished. Yet
though the goal ever advances and never comes within reach, aspiration
is achievement; progress is attainment. If we could come to the end of
our journey; if we could see the world's claims on us met, the deeds of
which we are capable done, that moment would mark the death of our
souls. Just because Love grows by loving and serving, and makes ever
greater and greater demands, it prophesies there shall be forever and
ever things to do that will make life worth while. "Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled."

The depth of our sympathy for those below us in secular service and
station measures our worth in the eyes of those spiritually higher than
we.

Love is like a tree; if it is not to be scorched in the blaze of
ambition and withered in the heat of competition, its roots of sympathy
must go down as deep into the soil of the obscure and lowly lives on
whose humble toil we depend as its branches spread into the upper air of
social distinction and station.

Unless we have much sympathy for those who toil on the farm and on the
sea, in the factory and the mine, behind the counter and the desk, in
the kitchen and laundry, what we call courtesy in the drawing room, or
charity on the platform, is hollow mockery and Pharisaic sham. "Blessed
are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy."

In order for Love to shine through them there must be nothing else in
our hearts.

Love demands everything or nothing. It refuses to dwell in quarters or
halves of our souls. The least flaw of pride, greed, or lust is enough
to make them opaque. Greed, lust, pride, hate, so blind our eyes to the
real selves of others that we cannot see or treat them as they really
are; that is, cannot love them. It reduces them to mere means and tools
of our passions and pleasures; and one who so regards persons can never
love either them or any person aright. Only the pure can see Love; for
only the pure can experience that union of one's whole self with the
whole self of others in which Love consists. "Blessed are the pure in
heart; for they shall see God."

Just so sure as we love two or more persons we shall do all in our power
to keep them from hating each other.

We wish everyone to love those whom we love. If anybody hates one we
love, it hurts us as much as it does the one hated, even more than it
would to be hated ourselves. And if anyone whom we love is hating
another, we are even more sorry for him than we are for the person he
hates, and make all haste to deliver him from this most dreadful
condition. The more we love our fellows, the more we hate to see
misunderstanding, ill-will, strife, between them.

Not that the Christian is unwilling or afraid to fight. Where deliberate
wrong is arrayed against the rights of men, where fraud is practised on
the unprotected, where hypocrisy imposes on the credulous, where vice
betrays the innocent, where inefficiency sacrifices precious human
interests, where avarice oppresses the poor, where tyranny tramples on
the weak, there the man who shares the Father's Love for His maltreated
children, the man who walks daily in the companionship of the Christ who
owns all the downtrodden as His brothers, will be the most fearless and
uncompromising foe of every form of injustice and oppression. Property,
reputation, position, time, strength, influence, health, life itself if
need be, will be thrown unreservedly into the fight against vice and
sin. He cannot keep in with the Father and with Christ and not come out
in opposition to everything that wrongs and injures the humblest man,
the lowliest woman, the most defenceless little child.

Fighting, however, is not altogether uncongenial to the descendants of
our brute progenitors. To fight our own battles, and occasionally a few
for our neighbours, comes all too naturally to most of us. Fighting
God's battles on principle is a very different thing. To feel entirely
tranquil in the midst of the combat; to know that we are not alone on
the side of the right; to have the real interests of our opponents at
heart all the time; to be ever ready to forgive them, and to ask their
forgiveness for any excess of zeal we may have shown; to have the peace
of God in our hearts, and no trace of malice, in deed, or word, or
thought, or feeling,--this is not altogether natural, and the man who
does his fighting on that basis gives pretty good assurance of dwelling
in the Christian Spirit. No other adequate provision for maintaining
peace in the midst of effective warfare, and making peace for others as
well as for ourselves the instant the need for war is over, has ever
been devised. The peacemakers of this fearless, earnest, strenuous type
have the unmistakable right to be called the children of God. "Blessed
are the peacemakers; for they shall be called the children of God."

All who love must expect to be hated by the foes of those whom they
love.

Because Jesus loved the common people and sought to deliver them from
their fears and errors, the men who traded on those fears and errors put
Him to an ignominious death. If we love and serve the despised, the
abused, the plundered, those who despise and abuse and plunder them will
do to us the worst they dare. The road of Love is marked at every turn
by a cross. Whoever in business, society, or politics makes as real as
his own the interests and the wrongs of all whom he can reach and touch,
will be disliked, criticised, misrepresented, vilified, condemned. He
will pay Love's price of persecution.

Christian sacrifice closely resembles Greek temperance and courage.
There is, however, this essential distinction. The Christian takes on
not merely the pains and privations which are essential to his personal
welfare, or the welfare of his community or state; he takes on whatever
suffering the Father's Love for all His children calls him to undergo;
gives up whatever indulgences the service of Christ requires him to
dispense with; adopts whatever mingling of hardship and self-denial will
keep him in most effective and sympathetic fellowship with those who
have discovered the same great spiritual secret as himself. Thus, though
to the uninitiated outsider much of his life looks hard and severe, on
the inside it is easy and light; for the companionship with the Father,
with Christ, and with Christian people is so much greater and dearer
than the material and sensuous delights it may incidentally take away,
that on the inside it does not wear the aspect of loss and sacrifice at
all, but rather that of a glory and a gain. Still, since this element
of pleasant things foregone, and hard things endured, is ever present,
and since it has to be judged by people on the outside as well as by
those on the inside of the experience, in recognition of this truth
Christianity has made its symbol before the uninitiated world the cross.
As in the life of the Master, so in the life of every faithful disciple,
the cross must be borne, the perpetual sacrifice must be made, as the
price of Love's presence in a world of selfishness and hate; but the
cross is transfigured into a crown of rejoicing, the sacrifice is
transformed into privilege and pleasure by those precious personal
relationships which are the supreme glory and gladness of the soul, and
which could be maintained on no cheaper terms. The sacrifice that the
Christian makes to get his Father's will, his Master's mission,
accomplished in the world which so sorely needs it, is like the
sacrifice a mother makes for her sick and suffering child,--the dearest
and sweetest experience of life. The cross thus gladly borne, the yoke
of sacrifice thus unostentatiously assumed, is the supreme expression of
the Christian Spirit.

Like all high-cost things, sacrifice for Love's sake carries a high
premium. It admits, as nothing else does, to the inner circle of the
immortal lovers of their fellows, to the intimate fellowship of the
Lord of Love, Jesus Christ.

Joy follows incidentally and inevitably from the maintenance of these
great Christian relationships. A gloomy, depressed, despondent tone and
temper, unless it be demonstrably pathological, is public proclamation
that the deep mines of these Christian relationships, with their
inexhaustible resources, are either undeveloped or unworked. For no man
who looks through sunshine and shower, through food and raiment, through
family and friendship, through society and the moral order of the world,
up into the face of the Giver of them all as his Father; who knows how
to summon to his side the gentle and gracious companionship of Christ,
alike in the pressure of perplexity and in the quiet of solitude; who
knows how to unlock the treasures of Christian literature, to
appropriate the meaning of Christian worship, and to avail himself of
the comfort and support that is always latent in the hearts of his
Christian friends,--no man in whom these vast personal resources are
developed and employed can ever long remain disconsolate.

Even in prosperity, popularity, and outward success it takes
considerable mixture of these deeper elements to keep the tone of life
constantly on the high level of joy. But adversity is the real test.
Then the man without these interior resources gives way, breaks down,
becomes querulous, fretful, irritable, sour. On the other hand, the man
who can make mistakes, and take the criticism they bring, and go on as
cheerfully as if no blunder had been made and no vote of censure had
been passed; the man who can be hated for the good things he tries to
do, and condemned for bad things he never did and never meant to do; the
man who can work hard, and contentedly take poverty for pay; the man who
can serve devotedly people who revile and betray him in return; the man
who can discount in advance the unpopularity, misrepresentation, and
defeat a right course will cost, and then resolutely set about it; the
man who takes persecution and treachery as serenely as other men take
honours and emoluments,--this man, we may be sure, has dug deep an
invested heavily in the field where the priceless Christian treasure
lies concealed.

"Blessed are they that have been persecuted for righteousness' sake; for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall reproach
you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely,
for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward
in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you."


