I

SELECTIONS FROM THE EPICUREAN SCRIPTURES

Epicureanism is so simple a philosophy of life that it scarcely needs
interpretation. In fact, as the following citations show, it was
originally little more than a set of directions for living "the simple
life," with pleasure as the simplifying principle. The more subtle
teaching of the other philosophies will require to be introduced by
explanatory statement, or else accompanied by a running commentary as it
proceeds. The best way to understand Epicureanism, however, is to let
Epicurus and his disciples speak for themselves. Accordingly, as in
religious services the sermon is preceded by reading of the Scriptures
and singing of hymns, we will open our study of the Epicurean philosophy
of life by selections from their scriptures and hymns. First the master,
though unfortunately he is not so good a master of style as many of his
disciples, shall speak. The gist of Epicurus's teaching is contained in
the following passages.

"The end of all our actions is to be free from pain and fear; and when
once we have attained this, all the tempest of the soul is laid, seeing
that the living creature has not to go to find something that is
wanting, or to seek something else by which the good of the soul and of
the body will be fulfilled." "Wherefore we call pleasure the alpha and
omega of a blessed life. Pleasure is our first and kindred good. From it
is the commencement of every choice and every aversion, and to it we
come back, and make feeling the rule by which to judge of every good
thing." "When we say, then, that pleasure is the end and aim, we do not
mean the pleasures of the prodigal, or the pleasures of sensuality, as
we are understood by some who are either ignorant and prejudiced for
other views, or inclined to misinterpret our statements. By pleasure we
mean the absence of pain in the body and trouble in the soul. It is not
an unbroken succession of drinking feasts and of revelry, not the
enjoyments of the fish and other delicacies of a splendid table, which
produce a pleasant life: it is sober reasoning, searching out the
reasons for every choice and avoidance, and banishing those beliefs
through which great tumults take possession of the soul." "Nothing is so
productive of cheerfulness as to abstain from meddling, and not to
engage in difficult undertakings, nor force yourself to do something
beyond your power. For all this involves your nature in tumults." "The
main part of happiness is the disposition which is under our own
control. Service in the field is hard work, and others hold command.
Public speaking abounds in heart-throbs and in anxiety whether you can
carry conviction. Why then pursue an object like this, which is at the
disposal of others?" "Wealth beyond the requirements of nature is no
more benefit to men than water to a vessel which is full. Both alike
overflow. We can look upon another's goods without perturbation and can
enjoy purer pleasure than they, for we are free from their arduous
struggle."

"Thou must also keep in mind that of desires some are natural, and some
are groundless; and that of the natural some are necessary as well as
natural, and some are natural only. And of the necessary desires, some
are necessary if we are to be happy, and some if the body is to remain
unperturbed, and some if we are even to live. By the clear and certain
understanding of these things we learn to make every preference and
aversion, so that the body may have health and the soul tranquillity,
seeing that this is the sum and end of a blessed life." "Cheerful
poverty is an honourable thing." "Great wealth is but poverty when
matched with the law of nature." "If any one thinks his own not to be
most ample, he may become lord of the whole world, and will yet be
wretched." "Fortune but slightly crosses the wise man's path." "If thou
wilt make a man happy, add not unto his riches, but take away from his
desires."

"And since pleasure is our first and native good, for that reason we do
not choose every pleasure whatsoever, but oftentimes pass over many
pleasures when a greater annoyance ensues from them. And oftentimes we
consider pains superior to pleasures, and submit to the pain for a long
time, when it is attended for us with a greater pleasure. All pleasure,
therefore, because of its kinship with our nature, is a good, but it is
not in all cases our choice, even as every pain is an evil, though pain
is not always, and in every case, to be shunned."

"It is, however, by measuring one against another, and by looking at the
conveniences and inconveniences, that all these things must be judged.
Sometimes we treat the good as an evil, and the evil, on the contrary,
as a good; and we regard independence of outward goods as a great good,
not so as in all cases to use little, but so as to be contented with
little, if we have not much, being thoroughly persuaded that they have
the sweetest enjoyment of luxury who stand least in need of it, and that
whatever is natural is easily procured, and only the vain and worthless
hard to win. Plain fare gives as much pleasure as a costly diet, when
once the pain due to want is removed; and bread and water confer the
highest pleasure when they are brought to hungry lips. To habituate
self, therefore, to plain and inexpensive diet gives all that is needed
for health, and enables a man to meet the necessary requirements of life
without shrinking, and it places us in a better frame when we approach
at intervals a costly fare, and renders us fearless of fortune."

"Riches according to nature are of limited extent, and can be easily
procured; but the wealth craved after by vain fancies knows neither end
nor limit. He who has understood the limits of life knows how easy it is
to get all that takes away the pain of want, and all that is required to
make our life perfect at every point. In this way he has no need of
anything which involves a contest." "The beginning and the greatest good
is prudence. Wherefore prudence is a more precious thing even than
philosophy: from it grow all the other virtues, for it teaches that we
cannot lead a life of pleasure which is not also a life of prudence,
honour, and justice; nor lead a life of prudence, honour, and justice,
which is not also a life of pleasure. For the virtues have grown into
one with a pleasant life, and a pleasant life is inseparable from them."

"Of all the things which wisdom procures for the happiness of life as a
whole, by far the greatest is the acquisition of friendship."

"We ought to look round for people to eat and drink with, before we look
for something to eat and drink: to feed without a friend is the life of
a lion and a wolf." "Do everything as if Epicurus had his eye upon you.
Retire into yourself chiefly at that time when you are compelled to be
in a crowd." "We ought to select some good man and keep him ever before
our eyes, so that we may, as it were, live under his eye, and do
everything in his sight." "No one loves another except for his own
interest." "Among the other ills which attend folly is this: it is
always beginning to live." "A foolish life is restless and disagreeable:
it is wholly engrossed with the future." "We are born once: twice we
cannot be born, and for everlasting we must be non-existent. But thou,
who art not master of the morrow, puttest off the right time.
Procrastination is the ruin of life for all; and, therefore, each of us
is hurried and unprepared at death." "Learn betimes to die, or if it
please thee better to pass over to the gods." "He who is least in need
of the morrow will meet the morrow most pleasantly." "Injustice is not
in itself a bad thing: but only in the fear, arising from anxiety on the
part of the wrong-doer, that he will not escape punishment." "A wise man
will not enter political life unless something extraordinary should
occur." "The free man will take his free laugh over those who are fain
to be reckoned in the list with Lycurgus and Solon."

"The first duty of salvation is to preserve our vigour and to guard
against the defiling of our life in consequence of maddening desires."
"Accustom thyself in the belief that death is nothing to us, for good
and evil are only where they are felt, and death is the absence of all
feeling: therefore a right understanding that death is nothing to us
makes enjoyable the mortality of life, not by adding to years an
illimitable time, but by taking away the yearning after immortality. For
in life there can be nothing to fear, to him who has thoroughly
apprehended that there is nothing to cause fear in what time we are not
alive. Foolish, therefore, is the man who says that he fears death, not
because it will pain when it comes, but because it pains in the
prospect. Whatsoever causes no annoyance when it is present causes only
a groundless pain by the expectation thereof. Death, therefore, the most
awful of evils, is nothing to us, seeing that when we are, death is not
yet, and when death comes, then we are not. It is nothing then, either
to the living or the dead, for it is not found with the living, and the
dead exist no longer."

These words of the master, given with no attempt to reconcile their
apparent inconsistencies, convey very fairly the substance of his
teaching, including both its excellences and its deep defects. The
exalted esteem in which his doctrines were held, leading his disciples
to commit them to memory as sacred and verbally inspired; the personal
reverence for his character; and the extravagant expectations as to what
his philosophy was to do for the world, together with a glimpse into the
Epicurean idea of heaven, are well illustrated by the following
sentences at the opening of the third book of Lucretius, addressed to
Epicurus:--

"Thee, who first wast able amid such thick darkness to raise on high so
bright a beacon and shed a light on the true interests of life, thee I
follow, glory of the Greek race, and plant now my footsteps firmly fixed
in thy imprinted marks, not so much from a desire to rival thee as that
from the love I bear thee I yearn to imitate thee. Thou, father, art
discoverer of things, thou furnishest us with fatherly precepts, and
like as bees sip of all things in the flowery lawns, we, O glorious
being, in like manner, feed from out thy pages upon all the golden
maxims, golden I say, most worthy ever of endless life. For soon as thy
philosophy issuing from a godlike intellect has begun with loud voice to
proclaim the nature of things, the terrors of the mind are dispelled,
the walls of the world part asunder, I see things in operation
throughout the whole void: the divinity of the gods is revealed, and
their tranquil abodes which neither winds do shake, nor clouds drench
with rains nor snow congealed by sharp frost harms with hoary fall: an
ever cloudless ether o'ercanopies them, and they laugh with light shed
largely round. Nature too supplies all their wants, and nothing ever
impairs their peace of mind."

Horace is so saturated with Epicureanism that it is hard to select any
one of his odes as more expressive of it than another. His ode on the
"Philosophy of Life" perhaps presents it in as short compass as any. He
asks what he shall pray for? Not crops, and ivory, and gold gained by
laborious and risky enterprise; but healthy, solid contentment with the
simple, universal pleasures near at hand.

    "Why to Apollo's shrine repair
    New hallowed? Why present with prayer
    Libation? Not those crops to gain,
    Which fill Sardinia's teeming plain,

    "Herds from Calabria's sunny fields,
    Nor ivory that India yields,
    Nor gold, nor tracts where Liris glides
    So noiseless down its drowsy sides.

    "Blest owners of Calenian vines,
    Crop them; ye merchants, drain the wines,
    That cargoes brought from Syria buy,
    In cups of gold. For ye, who try

    "The broad Atlantic thrice a year
    And never drown, must sure be dear
    To gods in heaven. Me--small my need--
    Light mallows, olives, chiccory, feed.

    "Give me then health, Apollo; give
    Sound mind; on gotten goods to live
    Contented; and let song engage
    An honoured, not a base, old age."

For a lesson from the new Epicurean testament we cannot do better than
turn to the sensible pages of Herbert Spencer's "Data of Ethics."

"The pursuit of individual happiness within those limits prescribed by
social conditions is the first requisite to the attainment of the
greatest general happiness. To see this it needs but to contrast one
whose self-regard has maintained bodily well-being with one whose
regardlessness of self has brought its natural results; and then to ask
what must be the contrast between two societies formed of two such kinds
of individuals.

"Bounding out of bed after an unbroken sleep, singing or whistling as he
dresses, coming down with beaming face ready to laugh on the smallest
provocation, the healthy man of high powers, conscious of past successes
and, by his energy, quickness, resource, made confident of the future,
enters on the day's business not with repugnance but with gladness; and
from hour to hour experiencing satisfactions from work effectually done,
comes home with an abundant surplus of energy remaining for hours of
relaxation. Far otherwise is it with one who is enfeebled by great
neglect of self. Already deficient, his energies are made more deficient
by constant endeavours to execute tasks that prove beyond his strength,
and by the resulting discouragement. Hours of leisure which, rightly
passed, bring pleasures that raise the tide of life and renew the powers
of work, cannot be utilized: there is not vigour enough for enjoyments
involving action, and lack of spirits prevents passive enjoyments from
being entered upon with zest. In brief, life becomes a burden. Now if,
as must be admitted, in a community composed of individuals like the
first the happiness will be relatively great, while in one composed of
individuals like the last there will be relatively little happiness, or
rather much misery; it must be admitted that conduct causing the one
result is good and conduct causing the other is bad.

"He who carries self-regard far enough to keep himself in good health
and high spirits, in the first place thereby becomes an immediate source
of happiness to those around, and in the second place maintains the
ability to increase their happiness by altruistic actions. But one whose
bodily vigour and mental health are undermined by self-sacrifice carried
too far, in the first place becomes to those around a cause of
depression, and in the second place renders himself incapable, or less
capable, of actively furthering their welfare.

"Full of vivacity, the one is ever welcome. For his wife he has smiles
and jocose speeches; for his children stores of fun and play; for his
friends pleasant talk interspersed with the sallies of wit that come
from buoyancy. Contrariwise, the other is shunned. The irritability
resulting now from ailments, now from failures caused by feebleness,
his family has daily to bear. Lacking adequate energy for joining in
them, he has at best but a tepid interest in the amusements of his
children; and he is called a wet blanket by his friends. Little account
as our ethical reasonings take note of it, yet is the fact obvious that
since happiness and misery are infectious, such regard for self as
conduces to health and high spirits is a benefaction to others, and such
disregard of self as brings on suffering, bodily or mental, is a
malefaction to others.

"The adequately egoistic individual retains those powers which make
altruistic activities possible. The individual who is inadequately
egoistic loses more or less of his ability to be altruistic. The truth
of the one proposition is self-evident; and the truth of the other is
daily forced on us by examples. Note a few of them. Here is a mother
who, brought up in the insane fashion usual among the cultivated, has a
physique not strong enough for suckling her infant, but who, knowing
that its natural food is the best, and anxious for its welfare,
continues to give milk for a longer time than her system will bear.
Eventually the accumulating reaction tells. There comes exhaustion
running, it may be, into illness caused by depletion; occasionally
ending in death, and often entailing chronic weakness. She becomes,
perhaps for a time, perhaps permanently, incapable of carrying on
household affairs; her other children suffer from the loss of maternal
attention; and where the income is small, payments for nurse and doctor
tell injuriously on the whole family. Instance, again, what not
unfrequently happens with the father. Similarly prompted by a high sense
of obligation, and misled by current moral theories into the notion that
self-denial may rightly be carried to any extent, he daily continues his
office work for long hours regardless of hot head and cold feet; and
debars himself from social pleasures, for which he thinks he can afford
neither time nor money. What comes of this entirely unegoistic course?
Eventually a sudden collapse, sleeplessness, inability to work. That
rest which he would not give himself when his sensations prompted he has
now to take in long measure. The extra earnings laid by for the benefit
of his family are quickly swept away by costly journeys in aid of
recovery and by the many expenses which illness entails. Instead of
increased ability to do his duty by his offspring there comes now
inability. Lifelong evils on them replace hoped-for goods. And so is it,
too, with the social effects of inadequate egoism. All grades furnish
examples of the mischiefs, positive and negative, inflicted on society
by excessive neglect of self. Now the case is that of a labourer who,
conscientiously continuing his work under a broiling sun, spite of
violent protests from his feelings, dies of sunstroke; and leaves his
family a burden to the parish. Now the case is that of a clerk whose
eyes permanently fail from overstraining, or who, daily writing for
hours after his fingers are painfully cramped, is attacked with
'scrivener's palsy,' and, unable to write at all, sinks with aged
parents into poverty which friends are called on to mitigate.

"And now the case is that of a man devoted to public ends who,
shattering his health by ceaseless application, fails to achieve all he
might have achieved by a more reasonable apportionment of his time
between labour on behalf of others, and ministration to his own needs."

After this lengthy prose extract, let us turn to the modern Epicurean
poets.

At once the best and the worst rendering of Epicureanism into verse is
Fitzgerald's translation of Omar Khayyam. It is the best because of the
frankness with which it draws out to its logical conclusion, in a
cynical despair of everything nobler than the pleasure of the moment,
the consequences of identifying the self with mere pleasure-seeking. It
is the worst because, instead of presenting Epicureanism mixed with
nobler elements, as Walt Whitman and Stevenson do, it gives us the pure
and undiluted article as a final gospel of life. The fact that it has
proved such a fad during the past few years is striking evidence of the
husky fare on which our modern prodigals can be content to feed.

    "Come fill the Cup, and in the fire of Spring
    Your Winter-garment of repentance fling:
    The bird of Time has but a little way
    To flutter--and the Bird is on the Wing.

    "A Book of Verses underneath the Bough,
    A Jug of Wine, a Loaf of Bread--and Thou
    Beside me singing in the Wilderness--
    Oh, Wilderness were Paradise enow.

    "Ah, my Beloved, fill the Cup that clears
    _To-day_ of past Regrets and future Fears:
    _To-morrow!_--Why, To-morrow I may be
    Myself with Yesterday's Sev'n thousand Years.

    "I sent my soul through the Invisible,
    Some letter of that After-life to spell:
    And by and by my Soul return'd to me,
    And answer'd, "I myself am Heav'n and Hell:

    "Heav'n but the vision of fulfill'd Desire,
    And Hell the Shadow of a Soul on Fire,
    Cast on the Darkness into which Ourselves,
    So late emerged from, shall so soon expire."

From this melancholy attempt to offer us Epicureanism as a complete
account of life, overshadowed as it is by the gloom of the Infinite
which the man who stakes his all on momentary pleasure feels doomed to
forego, it is a relief to turn to men who strike cheerfully and firmly
the Epicurean note; but pass instantly on to blend it with sterner notes
and larger views of life, in which it plays its essential, yet strictly
subordinate part.

Of all the men who thus strike scattered Epicurean notes, without
attempting the impossible task of making a harmonious and satisfactory
tune out of them, our American Pagan, Walt Whitman, is the best example.

    "What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me,
    Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns,
    Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me,
    Not asking the sky to come down to my good will,
    Scattering it freely forever.

    "O the joy of manly self-hood!
    To be servile to none, to defer to none, not to any tyrant known
          or unknown,
    To walk with erect carriage, a step springy and elastic,
    To look with calm gaze or with flashing eye,
    To speak with a full and sonorous voice out of a broad chest,
    To confront with your personality all the other personalities of
          the earth.

    "O while I live to be the ruler of life, not a slave,
    To meet life as a powerful conqueror,
    No fumes, no ennui, no more complaints or scornful criticisms,
    To these proud laws of the air, the water, and the ground, proving
          my interior soul impregnable,
    And nothing exterior shall ever take command of me.

    "For not life's joys alone I sing, repeating--the joy of death!
    The beautiful touch of death, soothing and benumbing a few moments,
          for reasons,
    Myself discharging my excrementitious body to be burn'd, or render'd
          to powder, or buried,
    My real body doubtless left to me for other spheres,
    My voided body nothing more to me, returning to the purifications,
          further offices, eternal uses of the earth.

    "O to have life henceforth a poem of new joys!
    To dance, clap hands, exult, shout, skip, leap, roll on, float on!
    To be a sailor of the world bound for all ports,
    A swift and swelling ship full of rich words, full of joys."

Whitman, with this wild ecstasy, to be sure is an Epicurean and
something more. Indeed, pure Epicureanism, unmixed with better elements,
is rather hard to find in modern literature. One other hymn, by Robert
Louis Stevenson, likewise adds to pure Epicureanism a note of strenuous
intensity in the great task of happiness which was foreign to the more
easy-going form of the ancient doctrine. In Stevenson Epicureanism is
only a flavour to more substantial viands.

THE CELESTIAL SURGEON

    "If I have faltered more or less
    In my great task of happiness;
    If I have moved among my race
    And shown no glorious morning face;
    If beams from happy human eyes
    Have moved me not; if morning skies,
    Books, and my food, and summer rain
    Knocked on my sullen heart in vain:--
    Lord, thy most pointed pleasure take
    And stab my spirit broad awake!
    Or, Lord, if too obdurate I,
    Choose thou, before that spirit die,
    A piercing pain, a killing sin,
    And to my dead heart run them in."

While we are with Stevenson, we may as well conclude our selections from
the Epicurean scriptures in these words from his Christmas Sermon:
"Gentleness and cheerfulness, these come before all morality: they are
the perfect duties. If your morals make you dreary, depend upon it they
are wrong. I do not say, 'give them up,' for they may be all you have;
but conceal them like a vice, lest they should spoil the lives of better
men."


