CHAPTER II

STOIC SELF-CONTROL BY LAW


I

THE PSYCHOLOGICAL LAW OF APPERCEPTION

The shortest way to understand the Stoic principle is through the
psychological doctrine of apperception. According to this now
universally accepted doctrine, the mind is not an empty cabinet into
which ready-made impressions of external things are dumped. The mind is
an active process; and the meaning and value of any sensation presented
from without is determined by the reaction upon it of the ideas and aims
that are dominant within. This doctrine has revolutionised psychology
and pedagogy, and when rightly introduced into the personal life proves
even more revolutionary there. Stoicism works this doctrine for all that
it is worth. Christian Science and kindred popular cults of the present
day are perhaps working it for rather more than it is worth.

Translated into simple everyday terms, this doctrine in its application
to the personal life means that the value of any external fact or
possession or experience depends on the way in which we take it. Take
riches, for example. Stocks and bonds, real estate and mortgages, money
and bank accounts, in themselves do not make a man either rich or poor.
They may enrich or they may impoverish his personality. It is not until
they are taken up into the mind, thought over, related to one's general
scheme of conduct, made the basis of one's purposes and plans, that they
become a factor in the personal life. Obviously the same amount of
money, a hundred thousand dollars, may be worked over into personal life
in a great variety of ways. One man is made proud by it. Another is made
lazy. Another is made hard-hearted. Another is made avaricious for more.
Another is fired with the desire to speculate. Another is filled with
anxiety lest he may lose it. All these are obviously impoverished by the
so-called wealth which they possess. To rich men's wives and children,
whose wealth comes without the strenuous exertion and close human
contact involved in earning it, it generally works their personal
impoverishment in one or more of these fatal ways. For wealth, in an
indolent, self-indulgent, vain, conceited, ostentatious, unsympathetic
mind, takes on the colour of these odious qualities, and becomes a
curse to its possessor; just because he or she is cursed with these evil
propensities already, and the wealth simply adds fuel to the
preexistent, though perhaps latent and smouldering flames.

On the other hand one man is made grateful for the wealth he has been
able to accumulate. Another is made more sympathetic. Another is made
generous. Another is urged into the larger public service his
independent means makes possible. Another is lifted up into a sense of
responsibility for its right use. On the whole the men and women who
earn their money honestly are usually affected in one or more of these
beneficial ways, and their wealth becomes an enrichment of their
personality.

Now it is impossible that this hundred thousand dollars should get into
any man's mind, and become a mental state, without its being mixed with
one or other of these mental, emotional, and volitional accompaniments.
The mental state, in other words, is a compound, of which the external
fact, in this case the hundred thousand dollars, is the least important
ingredient. It is so unimportant a factor that the Stoics pronounced it
indifferent. The tone and temper in which we accept our riches, the ends
to which we devote them, the spirit in which we hold them, the way in
which we spend them, are so vastly more important than the mere fact of
having them, that by comparison, the fact itself seems indifferent. Like
all strong statements, this is doubtless an exaggeration. You cannot
have just the same mental state without riches that you can have with
them. The external fact is a factor, though a relatively small one, in
the composite mental state. The virtues of a rich man are not precisely
the same as the virtues of a poor man. Yet the Stoic paradox is very
much nearer the truth than the statement of the average man, that
external things are the whole, or even the most important part of our
mental states.

The same thing is true of health and sickness. Health often makes one
careless, insensitive, negligent of duty; while sickness often makes one
conscientious, considerate, faithful, and thus more useful and efficient
than his healthy brother. Popularity often puffs up with pride; while
persecution, by humbling, prepares the heart for truer blessedness.
Hence whether an external fact is good or evil, depends on how we take
it, what we make of it, the state of mind and heart and will into which
it enters as a factor; and that in turn depends, the Stoic tells us, on
ourselves, and is under our control Stoicism is fundamentally this
psychological doctrine of apperception, carried over and applied in the
field of the personal life,--the doctrine, namely, that no external
thing alone can affect us for good or evil, until we have woven it into
the texture of our mental life, painted it with the colour of our
dominant mood and temper, and stamped it with the approval of our will.
Thus everything except a slight residuum is through and through mental,
our own product, the expression of what we are and desire to be. The
only difference between Stoicism and Christian Science at this point is
that Stoicism recognises the material element; though it does so only to
minimise it, and pronounce it indifferent. Christian Science denies that
there is any physical fact, or even the raw material out of which to
make one. All is merely mental, says the consistent Christian Scientist
with the toothache. There is no matter there to ache. The Stoic, truer
to the facts, and in not less but more heroic spirit declares: "There is
matter, but it doesn't matter if there is." The toothache can be taken
as a spur to greater fortitude and equanimity than the man whose teeth
are all sound has had opportunity to practically exemplify; and so the
total mental state, toothache-borne-with-fortitude, may be positively
good.

This doctrine that external things never in themselves constitute a
mental state; that they are consequently indifferent; that the
all-important contribution is made by the mind itself; that this
contribution from the mind is what gives the tone and determines the
worth of the total mental state; and that this contribution is
exclusively our own affair and may be brought entirely under our own
control;--this is the first and most fundamental Stoic principle. If we
have grasped this principle, we are prepared to read intelligently and
sympathetically the otherwise startling and paradoxical deliverances of
the Stoic masters.


