II

THE SOCIAL NATURE OF MAN

Before coming to Aristotle's positive doctrine we must consider one
fundamental axiom. Man is by nature a social being. Whatever a man seeks
has a necessary and inevitable reference to the judgment of other men,
and the interest of society as a whole. Strip a man of his relations and
you have no man left. The man who is neither son, brother, husband,
father, citizen, neighbour or workman, is inconceivable. The good which
a man seeks, therefore, will express itself consciously or unconsciously
in terms of other men's approval, and the furtherance of interests which
he inevitably shares with them. The Greek word for private, peculiar to
myself, unrelated to the thought or interest of anybody else, is our
word for idiot. The New Testament uses this word to describe the place
to which Judas went; a place which just suited such a man as he, and was
fit for nobody else. Now a man who tries to be his own scientist, or his
own lawgiver, or his own statesman, or his own business manager, or his
own poet, or his own architect, without reference to the standards and
expectations of his fellow-men, is just an idiot; or, as we say, a
"crank." A wise man may defy these standards. The reformer often must do
so. But if he is really wise, if he is a true reformer, he must reckon
with them; he must understand them; he must appeal to the actual or
possible judgment and interest of his fellows for the confirmation of
what he says and the justification of what he does. This social
reference of all our thoughts and actions, which Aristotle grasped by
intuition, psychology in our day is laboriously and analytically
seeking to confirm. Aristotle lays it down as an axiom, that a man who
does not devote himself to some section of the social and spiritual
world, if such a being were conceivable, would be no man at all. Family,
or friends, or reputation, or country, or God are there in the
background, secretly summoned to justify our every thought and word and
deed.

Because man's nature is social, his end must be social also. It will
prevent misunderstanding later, if we put the question squarely here,
Does the end justify the means? As popularly understood, most
emphatically No. The support of a school is a good end. Does it justify
the raising of money by a lottery? Certainly not. The support of one's
family is a good end. Does it justify drawing a salary for which no
adequate services are rendered? Certainly not.

Yet if we push the question farther, and ask why these particular ends
do not justify these particular means, we discover that it is because
these means employed are destructive of an end vastly higher and greater
than the particular ends they are employed to serve. They break down the
structure and undermine the foundations of the industrial and social
order; an end infinitely more important than the maintenance of any
particular school, or the support of any individual family. Hence these
means are not to be judged by their promotion of certain specific ends,
but by their failure to promote the greatest and best end of all; the
comprehensive welfare of society as a whole, of which all institutions
and families and individuals are but subordinate members.

Throughout our discussion of Aristotle we must understand that the word
"end" always has this large social reference, and includes the highest
social service of which the man is capable. If we attempt to apply to
particular private ends of our own what Aristotle applies to the
universal end at which all men ought to aim, we shall make his teaching
a pretext for the grossest crimes, and reduce it to little more than
sophisticated selfishness. With this understanding of his terms, we may
venture to plunge boldly into his system and state it in its most
paradoxical and startling form.


III

RIGHT AND WRONG DETERMINED BY THE END

We are not either good or bad at the start. Pleasure in itself is
neither good nor bad. Laws in themselves are neither good nor bad. It is
impossible to say with Plato that some faculties are so high that they
always ought to be exercised, and others are so low that as a rule they
ought to be suppressed. The right and wrong of eating and drinking, of
work and play, of sex and society, of property and politics, lie not in
the elemental acts involved. All of these things are right for one man
in one set of circumstances, wrong for another man in another set of
circumstances. We cannot say that a man who takes a vow of poverty is
either a better or a worse man than a multi-millionnaire. We cannot say
that the monk who takes a vow of celibacy is a purer man than one who
does not. For the very fact that one is compelled to take a vow of
poverty or celibacy is a sign that these elemental impulses are not
effectively and satisfactorily related to the normal ends they are
naturally intended to subserve. All attempts to put virginity above
motherhood, to put poverty above riches, to put obscurity above fame
are, from the Aristotelian point of view, essentially immoral. For they
all assume that there can be badness in external things, wrong in
isolated actions, vice in elemental appetites, and sin in natural
passions; whereas Aristotle lays down the fundamental principle that the
only place where either badness or wrong or vice or sin can reside is in
the relation in which these external things and particular actions
stand to the clearly conceived and deliberately cherished end which the
man is seeking to promote. A simpler way of saying the same thing, but a
way so simple and familiar as to be in danger of missing the whole
point, is to say that virtue and vice reside exclusively in the wills of
free agents. That, every one will admit. But will is the pursuit of
ends. A will that seeks no ends is a will that wills nothing; in other
words, no will at all. Whether an act is wrong or right, then, depends
on the whole plan of life of which it is a part; on the relation in
which it stands to one's permanent interests. For these many years I
have defied class after class of college students to bring in a single
example of any elemental appetite or passion which is intrinsically bad;
which in all circumstances and relations is evil. And never yet has any
student brought me one such case. If brandy will tide the weak heart
over the crisis that follows a surgical operation, then that glass of
brandy is just as good and precious as the dear life it saves. The
proposition that sexual love is intrinsically evil, and those who take
vows of celibacy are intrinsically superior, is true only on condition
that racial suicide is the greatest good, and all the sweet ties of
home and family and parenthood and brotherly love are evils which it is
our duty to combat. To deny that wealth is good is only possible to him
who is prepared to go farther and denounce civilisation as a calamity.
He who brands ambition as intrinsically evil must be prepared to herd
with swine, and share contentedly their fare of husks.

The foundation of personality, therefore, is the power to clearly grasp
an imaginary condition of ourselves which is preferable to any practical
alternative; and then translate that potential picture into an
accomplished fact. Whoever lives at a lower level than this constant
translation of pictured potency into energetic reality: whoever, seeing
the picture of the self he wants to be, suffers aught less noble and
less imperative than that to determine his action misses the mark of
personality. Whoever sees the picture, and holds it before his mind so
clearly that all external things which favour it are chosen for its
sake, and all proposed actions which would hinder it are remorselessly
rejected in its holy name and by its mighty power;--he rises to the
level of personality, and his personality is of that clear, strong,
joyous, compelling, conquering, triumphant sort which alone is worthy of
the name.

How much deeper this goes than anything we have had before! A man comes
up for judgment. If Epicurus chances to be seated on the throne, he asks
the candidate, "Have you had a good time?" If he has, he opens the gates
of Paradise; if he has not, he bids him be off to the place of torment
where people who don't know how to enjoy themselves ought to go.

The Stoic asks him whether he has kept all the commandments. If he has,
then he may be promoted to serve the great Commander in other
departments of the cosmic order. If he has broken the least of them, no
matter on what pretext, or under what temptation, he is irrevocably
doomed. Plato asks him how well he has managed to keep under his
appetites and passions. If the man has risen above them, Plato will
promote him to seats nearer the perfect goodness of the gods. If he has
slipped or failed, then he must return for longer probation in the
prison-house of sense.

Aristotle's judgment seat is a very different place. A man comes to him
who has had a very sorry time: who has broken many commandments; who has
yielded time and again to sensuous desires; yet who is a good husband, a
kind father, an honest workman, a loyal citizen, a disinterested
scientist or artist, a lover of his fellows, a worshipper of God's
beauty and beneficence; and in spite of the sad time he has had, in
spite of the laws he has broken, in spite of the appetites which have
proved too strong for him, Aristotle gives him his hand, and bids him go
up higher. For that man stands in genuine relations to some aspects of
the great social end to which he devotes himself. And because some
portion of the real world has been made better by the conception of it
he has cherished, and the fidelity with which he has translated his
conception into fact, therefore a share in the great glory of the
splendid whole belongs of right to him. Good honest work, after an ideal
plan, to the full measure of his powers, with wise selection of
appropriate means, gives each individual his place and rank in the vast
workshop wherein the eternal thoughts of God, revealed to men as their
several ideals, are wrought out into the actuality of the social,
economic, political, aesthetic and spiritual order of the world.

On the other hand, the man of scattered and unfruitful pleasures, the
man of merely clear conscience, pure life, unstained reputation, with
his boast of rites observed, and ceremonies performed, and laws
unbroken, "faultily faultless, icily regular, splendidly null," is the
man above all others whom Aristotle cannot endure.

Do you wish, then, to know precisely where you stand in the scale of
personality? Here is the test. How large a section of this world do you
care for, in such a vital, responsible way, that you are thinking about
its welfare, forming schemes for its improvement, bending your energies
toward its advancement? Do you care for your profession in that way? Do
you care for your family like that? Do you love your country with such
jealous solicitude for its honour and prosperity? Can you honestly say
that your neighbour gets represented in your mind in this imaginative,
sympathetic, helpful way? Do you think of God's great universe as
something in the goodness of which you rejoice, and for the welfare of
which you are earnestly enlisted? Begin down at the bottom, with your
stomach, your pocket-book, your calling list, and go up the scale until
you come to these wider interests, and mark the point where you cease to
think how these things might be better than they are and to work to make
them so, and that point where your imagination and your service stops,
and your indifference and irresponsibility begins, will show you
precisely how you stand on the rank-book of God. The magnitude of the
ends you see and serve is the measure of your personality. Personality
is not an entity we carry around in our spiritual pockets. It is an
energy, which is no whit larger or smaller than the ends it aims at and
the work it does. If you are not doing anything or caring for anybody,
or devoted to any end, you will not be called up at some future time and
formally punished for your negligence. Plato might flatter your
self-importance with that notion, but not Aristotle. Aristotle tells
you, not that your soul will be punished hereafter, but that it is lost
already.

Goodness does not consist in doing or refraining from doing this or that
particular thing. It depends on the whole aim and purpose of the man who
does it, or refrains from doing it. Anything which a good man does as
part of the best plan of life is made thereby a good act. And anything
that a bad man does, as part of a bad plan of life, becomes thereby an
evil act. Precisely the same external act is good for one man and bad
for another. An example or two will make this clear.

Two men seek political office. For one man it is the gate of heaven; to
the other it is the door to hell. One man has established himself in a
business or profession in which he can earn an honest living and support
his family. He has acquired sufficient standing in his business so that
he can turn it over temporarily to his partners or subordinates. He has
solved his own problem; and he has strength, time, energy, capacity,
money, which he can give to solving the problems of the public. Were he
to shirk public office, or evade it, or fail to take all legitimate
means to secure it, he would be a coward, a traitor, a parasite on the
body politic. For there is good work to be done, which he is able to do,
and can afford to do, without unreasonable sacrifice of himself or his
family. Hence public office is for this man the gateway of heaven.

The other man has not mastered any business or profession; he has not
made himself indispensable to any employer or firm; he has no permanent
means of supporting himself and his family. He sees a political office
in which he can get a little more salary for doing a good deal less work
than is possible in his present position. He seeks the office, as a
means of getting his living out of the public. From that day forth he
joins the horde of mere office-seekers, aiming to get out of the public
a living he is too lazy, or too incompetent, or too proud to earn in
private employment. Thus the very same external act, which was the
other man's strait, narrow gateway to heaven, is for this man the broad,
easy descent into hell.

Two women join the same woman's club, and take part in the same
programme. One of them has her heart in her home; has fulfilled all the
sweet charities of daughter, sister, wife, or mother; and in order to
bring back to these loved ones at home wider interests, larger
friendships, and a richer and more varied interest in life, has gone out
into the work and life of the club. No angel in heaven is better
employed than she in the preparation and delivery of her papers and her
attendance on committee meetings and afternoon teas.

The other woman finds home life dull and monotonous. She likes to get
away from her children. She craves excitement, flattery, fame, social
importance. She is restless, irritable, out of sorts, censorious,
complaining at home; animated, gracious, affable, complaisant abroad.
For drudgery and duty she has no strength, taste, or talent; and the
thought of these things are enough to give her dyspepsia, insomnia, and
nervous prostration. But for all sorts of public functions, for the
preparation of reports, and the organisation of new charitable and
philanthropic and social schemes, she has all the energy of a
steam-engine, the power of a dynamo. When this woman joins a new club,
or writes a new paper, or gets a new office, though she does not a
single thing more than her angel sister who sits by her side, she is
playing the part of a devil.

It is not what one does; it is the whole purpose of life consciously or
unconsciously expressed in the doing that measures the worth of the man
or woman who does it. At the family table, at the bench in the shop, at
the desk in the office, in the seats at the theatre, in the ranks of the
army, in the pews of the church, saint and sinner sit side by side; and
often the keenest outward observer cannot detect the slightest
difference in the particular things that they do. The good man is he
who, in each act he does or refrains from doing, is seeking the good of
all the persons who are affected by his action. The bad man is the man
who, whatever he does or refrains from doing, leaves out of account the
interests of some of the people whom his action is sure to affect. Is
there any sphere of human welfare to which you are indifferent? Are
there any people in the world whose interests you deliberately
disregard? Then, no matter how many acts of charity and philanthropy,
and industry and public spirit you perform--acts which would be good if
a good man did them--in spite of them all, you are to that extent an
evil man.

We have, then, clearly in mind Aristotle's first great concept. The end
of life, which he calls happiness, he defines as the identification of
one's self with some large social or intellectual object, and the
devotion of all one's powers to its disinterested service. So far forth
it is Carlyle's gospel of the blessedness of work in a worthy cause.
"Blessed is he who has found his work; let him ask no other blessedness.
He has a work, a life purpose; he has found it, and will follow it. The
only happiness a brave man ever troubled himself with asking much about
was happiness enough to get his work done. Whatsoever of morality and of
intelligence; what of patience, perseverance, faithfulness of method,
insight, ingenuity, energy; in a word, whatsoever of strength the man
had in him will lie written in the work he does. To work: why, it is to
try himself against Nature and her everlasting unerring laws; these will
tell a true verdict as to the man."

When we read Carlyle, we are apt to think such words merely exaggerated
rhetoric. Now Aristotle says the same thing in the cold, calculated
terms of precise philosophy. A man is what he does. He can do nothing
except what he first sees as an unaccomplished idea, and then bends all
his energies to accomplish. In working out his ideas and making them
real, he at the same time works out his own powers, and becomes a living
force, a working will in the world. And since the soul is just this
working will, the man has so much soul, no more, no less, than he
registers in manual or mental work performed. To be able to point to
some sphere of external reality, a bushel of corn, a web of cloth, a
printed page, a healthful tenement, an educated youth, a moral
community, and say that these things would not have been there in the
outward world, if they had not first been in your mind as an idea
controlling your thought and action;--this is to point to the external
and visible counterpart and measure of the invisible and internal energy
which is your life, your soul, your self, your personality.


