VII

THE INTRINSIC SUPERIORITY OF RIGHTEOUSNESS

Plato first constructs the ideal character and shows that it consists in
the righteous rule of the intelligent principle in man over the spirit
and the appetites. A soul thus in harmony with itself, under the rule
of reason, is at once healthy, happy, beautiful, and good. Later,
reversing the process, he shows how the good, beautiful, true, healthy
condition of the soul may be destroyed through the successive steps of
pride, avarice, lawless liberty, ending at last in the tyrannous rule of
some single appetite or passion which has dethroned reason and set
itself up as supreme. The consequence of it all is that "the most
righteous man is also the happiest, and this is he who is the most royal
master of himself; the worst and most unrighteous man is also the most
miserable; this is he who is also the greatest tyrant of himself and the
most complete slave."

The reason why the life of a righteous man is happier than the life of
an unrighteous man is that it has "a greater share in pure existence as
a more real being." "If there be a pleasure in being filled with that
which agrees with nature; that which is more really filled with more
real being will have more real and true joy and pleasure; whereas, that
which participates in less real being will be less truly and surely
satisfied and will participate in a less true and real pleasure. Those,
then, who know not wisdom and virtue, and are always busy with gluttony
and sensuality, never pass into the true upper world; neither are they
truly filled with true being, nor do they taste of true and abiding
pleasure. Like brute animals, with their eyes down and bodies bent to
the earth, or leaning on the dining table, they fatten and feed and
breed, and, in their excessive love of these delights, they kick and
butt at one another with horns and hoofs which are made of iron; they
kill one another by reason of their insatiable lust; for they fill
themselves with that which is not substantial, and the part of
themselves which they fill is also unsubstantial and incontinent." "Thus
when the whole soul follows the philosophical principle, and there is no
division, the several parts, each of them, do their own business and are
righteous, and each of them enjoy their own best and truest pleasures.
But when either of the other principles prevails, it fails in attaining
its own pleasure and compels the others to pursue after a shadow of
pleasure which is not theirs."

Having reached this point Plato introduces a figure, which carries the
whole point of his argument. "Do you now model the form of a
multitudinous, polycephalous beast, having a head of all manner of
beasts, tame and wild, making a second form as of a lion, and a third of
a man; the second smaller than the first, and the third smaller than
the second; then join them and let the three grow into one. Now fashion
the outside into a single image as of a man, so that he who is not able
to look within may believe the beast to be a single human creature. Now
unrighteousness consists in feasting the monster and strengthening the
lion in one in such wise as to weaken and starve the man; while
righteousness consists in so strengthening the man within him that he
may govern the many-headed monster." "Righteousness subjects the beast
to the man, or rather to the god in man, and unrighteousness is that
which subjects the man to the beast."

Finally Plato sums up the discussion by anticipating the question which
Jesus asked four centuries later. "How would a man profit if he receive
gold and silver on the condition that he was to enslave the noblest part
of him to the worst? Who can imagine that a man who sold his son or
daughter into slavery for money, especially if he sold them into the
hands of fierce and evil men, would be the gainer, however much might be
the sum which he received? And will any one say that he is not a
miserable caitiff who sells his own divine being to that which is most
godless and detestable and has no pity? Eriphyle took the necklace as
the price of her husband's life, but he is taking a bribe in order to
compass a worse ruin." He even pushes the question a step further and
asks, "What shall a man be profited by unrighteousness even if his
unrighteousness be undetected? For he who is undetected only gets worse;
whereas he who is detected and punished has the brutal part of his
nature silenced and humanised; the gentler element in him is liberated
and his whole soul is perfected and ennobled by the acquirement of
righteousness and temperance and wisdom. The man of understanding will
concentrate himself on this as the work of life. In the first place he
will honour studies which impress these qualities on his soul and will
disregard others. In the next place he will keep under his body and will
be far from yielding to brutal and irrational pleasures, and he will be
always desirous of preserving the harmony of the body for the sake of
the concord of the soul. He will not allow himself to be dazzled by the
opinion of the world and heap up riches to his own infinite harm. He
will look at the city which is within him, and he will duly regulate his
acquisition and expense, in so far as he is able, and for the same
reason he will accept such honours as he deems likely to make him a
better man. He will look at the nature of the soul, and, from the
consideration of this, he will determine which is the better and which
is the worst life and make his choice, giving the name of evil to the
life which will make his soul more unrighteous, and good to the life
which will make his soul more righteous; for this is the best
choice,--best for this life and after death. Wherefore my counsel is,
that we hold fast to the heavenly way and follow after righteousness and
virtue always, considering that the soul is immortal and able to endure
every sort of good and every sort of evil; then shall we live dear to
one another and the gods, both while remaining here and when, like
conquerors in the games who go round to gather gifts, we receive our
reward."

With this magnificent tribute to the intrinsic superiority of
righteousness over unrighteousness Plato concludes his greatest work.
The question why a man should do right, even if he wore the ring of
Gyges which would exempt him from all external consequences of his
misdeeds, has been answered by a thoroughgoing analysis of the nature of
the soul, and the demonstration that righteousness is that organisation
of the elements of the soul into an active and harmonious unity, wherein
its health and beauty and life and happiness consist. In conclusion let
us borrow from another of Plato's dialogues the prayer which he ascribes
to Socrates,--a brief and simple prayer, yet one which, in the light of
our study of the Republic, I trust we shall recognise as summing up the
spirit of his teaching as a whole. "Beloved Pan, and all ye gods who
haunt this place, give me beauty in the inward soul; and may the outward
and inward man be at one. May I reckon the wise to be the wealthy; and
may I have such a quantity of gold as none but the temperate can carry.
Anything more? That prayer, I think, is enough for me."


