III

THE STOIC REVERENCE FOR UNIVERSAL LAW

The first half of the Stoic doctrine is that we give our world the
colour of our thoughts. The second half of Stoicism is concerned with
what these thoughts of ours shall be. The first half of the doctrine
alone would leave us in crude fantastic Cynicism,--the doctrine out of
which the broader and deeper Stoic teaching took its rise. The Cynic
paints the world in the flaring colours of his undisciplined, individual
caprice. Modern apostles of the essential Stoic principle incline to
paint the world in the roseate hues of a merely optional optimism. They
want to be well, and happy, and serene, and self-satisfied; they think
they are; and thinking makes them so. If Stoicism had been as
superficial as that, as capricious, and temperamental, and
individualistic, it would not have lasted as it has for more than two
thousand years. The Stoic thought had substance, content, objective
reality, as unfortunately most of the current phases of popular
philosophy have not. This objective and universal principle the Stoic
found in law. We must think things, not as we would like to have them,
which is the optimism of the fabled ostrich, with its head in the sand;
not in some vague, general phrases which mean nothing, which is the
optimism of mysticism: but in the hard, rigid terms of universal law.
Everything that happens is part of the one great whole. The law of the
whole determines the nature and worth of the part. Seen from the point
of view of the whole, every part is necessary, and therefore
good,--everything except, as Cleanthes says in his hymn, "what the
wicked do in their foolishness." The typical evils of life can all be
brought under the Stoic formula, under some beneficial law; all, that
is, except sin. That particular form of evil was not satisfactorily
dealt with until the advent of Christianity.

Take evils of accident to begin with. An aged man slips on the ice,
falls, breaks a bone, and is left, like Epictetus, lame for life. The
particular application of the law of gravitation in this case has
unfortunate results for the individual. But the law is good. We should
not know how to get along in the world without this beneficent law.
Shall we repine and complain against the law that holds the stars and
planets in their courses, shapes the mountains, sways the tides, brings
down the rain, and draws the rivers to the sea, turning ten thousand
mill-wheels of industry as it goes rejoicing on its way; shall we
complain against this law because in one instance in a thousand million
it chances to throw down an individual, which happens to be me, and
breaks a bone or two of mine, and leaves me for the brief span of my
remaining pilgrimage with a limping gait? If Epictetus could say to his
cruel master under torture, "You will break my leg if you keep on," and
then when it broke could smilingly add, "I told you so,"--cannot we
endure with fortitude, and even grateful joy, the incidental inflictions
which so beneficent a master as the great law of gravitation in its
magnificent impartiality may see fit to mete out to us?

A current of electricity, seeking its way from sky to earth, finds on
some particular occasion the body of a beloved husband, a dear son, an
honoured father of dependent children, the best conductor between the
air and the earth, and kills the person through whose body it takes its
swift and fatal course. Yet this law has no malevolence in its impartial
heart. On the contrary the beneficent potency of the laws of electricity
is so great that our largest hopes for the improvement of our economic
condition rest on its unexplored resources.

A group of bacteria, ever alert to find matter not already appropriated
and held in place by vital forces stronger than their own, find their
food and breeding place within a human body, and subject our friend or
our child to weeks of fever, and perchance to death. Yet we cannot call
evil the great biological law that each organism shall seek its meat
from God wherever it can find it. Indeed were it not for these
micro-organisms, and their alertness to seize upon and transform into
their own living substance everything morbid and unwholesome, the whole
earth would be nothing but a vast charnel house reeking with the
intolerable stench of the undisintegrated and unburied dead.

The most uncompromising exponent of this second half of the Stoic
doctrine in the modern world is Immanuel Kant. According to him the
whole worth and dignity of life turns not on external fortune, nor even
on good natural endowments, but on our internal reaction, the reverence
of our will for universal law. "Nothing can possibly be conceived in the
world, or even out of it, which can be called good without
qualification, except a Good Will. Intelligence, wit, judgment, and the
other _talents_ of the mind, however they may be named, or courage,
resolution, perseverance, as qualities of temperament, are undoubtedly
good and desirable in many respects; but these gifts of nature may also
become extremely bad and mischievous if the will which is to make use of
them, and which, therefore, constitutes what is called character, is
not good. It is the same with the gifts of fortune. Power, riches,
honour, even health, and the general well-being and contentment with
one's condition which is called happiness, inspire pride and often
presumption, if there is not a good will to correct the influence of
these on the mind."

"Everything in nature works according to laws. Rational beings alone
have the faculty of acting according to the conception of laws, that is,
according to principles; _i.e._ have a will."

"Consequently the only good action is that which is done out of pure
reverence for universal law. This categorical imperative of duty is
expressed as follows: 'Act as if the maxim of thy action were to become
by thy will a Universal Law of Nature.' And since every other rational
being must conduct himself on the same rational principle that holds for
me, I am bound to respect him as I do myself. Hence the second practical
imperative is: 'So act as to treat humanity, whether in thine own person
or in that of any other, in every case as an end, never as means only.'"

In Kant Stoicism reaches its climax. Law and the will are everything:
possessions, even graces are nothing.


