VIII

TRUTH AND ERROR IN PLATONISM

Obviously this Platonic principle is vastly deeper and truer than
anything we have had before. The personality at which both Stoic and
Epicurean aimed was highly abstract,--something to be gained by getting
away from the tangle and complexity of life rather than by conquering
and transforming the conditions of existence into expressions of
ourselves. Epicurus makes a few sallies from his cosey comfortable camp,
to forage for provender. The Stoic draws into the citadel of his own
self-sufficiency; and from this fortified position defies attack. Plato
comes out into the open field, and squarely gives battle to the hosts
of appetite, passion, temptation, and corruption, of which the world
outside, and our hearts inside are full. In this he is true to the moral
experience of the race: and his trumpet-call to the higher departments
of our nature to enter the "great combat of righteousness"; his demand
of instantaneous and absolute surrender which he presents to everything
low and sensual within us, are clear, strong notes which it is good for
every one of us to hear and heed. To him as to Carlyle, "Life is not a
May-game, but a battle and a march, a warfare with principalities and
powers. No idle promenade through fragrant orange-groves and green
flowery spaces waited on by the choral muses and the rosy hours; it is a
stern pilgrimage through the rough, burning sandy solitudes, through
regions of thick-ribbed ice. He walks among men, loves men with
inexpressible soft pity, as they _cannot_ love him; but his soul dwells
in solitude, in the uttermost parts of creation. All Heaven, all
Pandemonium are his escort. The stars, keen glancing, from the
immensities, send tidings to him; the graves, silent with their dead,
from the eternities. Deep calls for him unto deep.

"Thou, O World, how wilt thou secure thyself against this man? None of
thy promotions is necessary for him. His place is with the stars of
Heaven; to thee it may be momentous, to thee it may be life or death; to
him it is indifferent, whether thou place him in the lowest hut, or
forty feet higher at the top of thy stupendous high tower, while here on
Earth. He wants none of thy rewards; behold also he fears none of thy
penalties. Thou canst not hire him by thy guineas; nor by thy gibbets
and law-penalties restrain him. Thou canst not forward him; thou canst
not hinder him. Thy penalties, thy poverties, neglects,
contumelies,--behold all these are good for him. To this man death is
not a bugbear; to this man life is already as earnest and awful, and
beautiful and terrible as death."

This is a note which appeals forcibly to every noble youth. It has been
struck by the Hebrew Prophets and the Christian Apostles: by Savonarola
and Fichte, and a host of heroic souls; but by no one more clearly and
constrainingly than by Plato. It is the note of earnest and aggressive
righteousness; without which no personality can be either sound or
strong. The man who has never heard this summons to go forth and conquer
the evils of the world without and of his own heart within him, in the
name of a righteousness high above both his own attainment and the
attainment of the world about him as the heavens are higher than the
earth, is still in the nursery stage of personal development.

On the other hand, there is danger in the very sharpness of the
antithesis which Platonism makes between the higher and the lower. For
the most part this danger is latent in Plato himself; though even in him
it came out in his tendency to regard family life and private property
as detrimental rather than serviceable to that development of character
on which the larger devotion to the state, and the ideal order, must
ultimately rest.

In Neoplatonism, in the many forms of mysticism, in certain aspects of
Christian asceticism, and notably in the numerous phases of what calls
itself "New Thought" to-day, what was for the most part latent in Plato,
becomes frankly explicit. In general it is a loosening of the ties that
hold us to drudgery and homely duty; a weakening of the bonds that bind
us to the men and women by our side, in order to gaze more serenely on
the ineffable beyond the clouds. This developed Platonism admits that we
must live after a fashion in this very imperfect world; but says our
real conversation all the time must be in heaven. Individual people are
but faulty, imperfect copies of the pattern of the perfect good laid up
on high. We must buy and sell, work and play, laugh and cry, love and
hate down here among the shadows; but we must all the time feed our
souls on the good, the true, the beautiful, which these distorted human
shadows only serve to hide. These Platonic lovers of something better
than their husbands or wives, or associates or friends, go through the
world with a serene smile, and an air of other-worldliness which, if we
do not inquire too closely into their domestic life and business
efficiency, we cannot but admire. They undoubtedly exert a
tranquillising influence in their way, especially on those who are so
fortunate as to behold them from a little distance. But they are not the
most comfortable people to live with, as husband or wife, colleague or
business partner. Louisa Alcott had this Platonic type in mind when she
defined a philosopher as a man up in a balloon, with his family and
friends having hold of the ropes, trying to pull him down to earth.

A good deal that passes for religion is this Neoplatonism masquerading
in Christian dress. All such hymns as "The Sweet By and By," "Oh,
Paradise, Oh, Paradise," and the like, which set heaven and eternity in
sharp antithesis against earth and time, are simply Neoplatonism
baptized into Christian phraseology; and the baptism is by sprinkling
rather than immersion.

Thomas a Kempis's "Imitation of Christ," and indeed all the mystical
books of devotion--Tauler, Fenelon, "The Theologia Germanica"--are
saturated with this Platonic or Neoplatonic spirit. "Thou shalt
lamentably fall away, if thou set a value upon any worldly thing." "Let
therefore nothing which thou doest seem to thee great; let nothing be
grand, nothing of value or beauty, nothing worthy of honour save what is
eternal." "Man approacheth so much the nearer unto God, the farther he
departeth from all earthly comfort." These words from the "Imitation of
Christ" sound orthodox enough in our ears. But we ought to understand
once for all that it is Neoplatonic mysticism, not essential
Christianity, that breathes through them.

This type of personality reduces the world to two mutually exclusive
elements, God and self; and permits no reconciliation or mediation
between them. Fenelon puts this dualism in the form of a dilemma. "There
is no middle course; we must refer everything either to God or to self;
if to self, we have no other God than self; if to God, we are then
without selfish interests, and we enter into self-abandonment."
Undoubtedly for evangelistic purposes the sharp antithesis has great
practical advantages. It is an easy way to reach heaven--this of
scorning earth; an easy definition of the infinite to pronounce it the
negation of the finite.

As Carlyle has represented for us the stronger side of Platonism, his
friend Emerson shall serve to illustrate the weakness that lurks half
hidden in all this way of thinking. It is so concealed that we shall
hardly detect it unless we are sharply on the watch for this tendency to
exalt the Infinite at the expense of the finite; the Universal at the
expense of the particular; God at the expense of our neighbour.

    "Higher far into the pure realm,
    Over sun and star,
    Over the flickering Daemon film,
    Thou must mount for love;
    Into vision where all form
    In one only form dissolves;
    Where unlike things are like;
    Where good and ill,
    And joy and moan,
    Melt into one."

"Thus we are put in training for a love which knows not sex, nor person,
nor partiality. We are made to feel that our affections are but tents of
a night. There are moments when the affections rule and absorb the man,
and make his happiness depend on a person or persons. But the warm loves
and fears that swept over us as clouds must lose their finite character,
and blend with God, to attain their own perfection." "Before that heaven
which our presentiments foreshow us, we cannot easily praise any form of
life we have seen or read of. Pressed on our attention, the saints and
demigods whom history worships fatigue and invade. The soul gives
itself, alone, original, and pure, to the Lonely, Original, and Pure,
who on that condition gladly inhabits it." "The higher the style we
demand of friendship, of course the less easy to establish it with flesh
and blood. We walk alone in the world. Friends such as we desire are
dreams and fables. But a sublime hope cheers ever the faithful heart,
that elsewhere, in other regions of the universal power, souls are now
acting, enduring, daring, which can love us and which we can love."

"I do then with my friends as I do with my books. I would have them
where I can find them, but I seldom use them. We must have society on
our own terms, and admit or exclude it on the slightest cause. I cannot
afford to speak much with my friend. Then, though I prize my friends, I
cannot afford to talk with them and study their visions, lest I lose my
own. It would indeed give me a certain household joy to quit this lofty
seeking, this spiritual astronomy or search of stars, and come down to
warm sympathies with you; but then I know well I shall mourn always the
vanishing of my mighty gods." "True love transcends the unworthy object
and dwells and broods on the eternal, and when the poor interposed mask
crumbles, it is not sad, but feels rid of so much earth, and feels its
independency the surer."

Here you have Plato and Thomas a Kempis in the elegant garb of a
heretical transcendentalist. But you get the same dualism of finite and
infinite, perfect and imperfect; unworthy, crumbling earth-mask to be
gotten rid of here on earth, and the stars to be sought out and gazed at
up in heaven.

The combat of the higher against the lower is one in which we must all
engage; and no doubt in order to win we must at times keep the lower
solicitations at arm's-length. If, however, what appeals to us in the
name of the highest counsels any relaxing of definite obligation, any
alienation from the man or woman whom social institutions have placed
closest by our side; any disloyalty to the plain companions and humble
associates whom society or business places in our way; any breaking of
social bonds which generations of self-sacrifice and self-control have
laboriously woven, and centuries of experience have approved as
beneficent; then it is time to abandon Plato, or rather those who have
assumed to wear his mantle, and look for personal guidance to those
greater masters who have transcended the antithesis of higher and lower,
which it was Plato's great mission to make so sharp and clear. The
principle of such a reconciliation we shall find in Aristotle; its
complete accomplishment we shall find in Jesus.




