II

THE EPICUREAN VIEW OF WORK AND PLAY

Pleasure is our great task, "the gist of life, the end of ends." To be
happy ourselves and radiating centres of happiness to choice circles of
congenial friends,--this is the Epicurean ideal. The world is a vast
reservoir of potential pleasures. Our problem is to scoop out for
ourselves and our friends full measure of these pleasures as they go
floating by. We did not make the world. It made itself by a fortuitous
concourse of atoms. It would be foolish for us to try to alter it. Our
only concern is to get out of it all the pleasure we can; without
troubling ourselves to put anything valuable back into it. Since it is
accidental, impersonal, we owe it nothing. We simply owe ourselves as
big a share of pleasure as we can grasp and hold.

This, however, is a task in which it is easy to make mistakes. We need
prudence to avoid cheating ourselves with short-lived pleasures that
cost too much; wisdom to choose the simpler pleasures that cost less and
last longer. Such shrewd calculation of the relative cost and worth of
different pleasures is the sum and substance of the Epicurean
philosophy. He who is shrewd to discern and prompt to snatch the most
pleasure at least cost, as it is offered on the bargain counter of
life,--he is the Epicurean sage.

We might work this out into a great variety of applications: but one or
two spheres must suffice. Eating and drinking, as the most elemental
relations of life, are the ones commonly chosen as applications of the
Epicurean principle. These applications, however, the selections from
Epicurus and Horace have already made clear.

The Epicurean will regulate his diet, not by the immediate, trivial,
short-lived pleasures of taste, though these he will by no means
despise, but mainly by their permanent effects upon health. Wholesome
food, and enough of it, daintily prepared and served, he will do his
best to obtain. But elaborate and ostentatious feasting he will avoid,
as involving too much expense and trouble, and too heavy penalties of
disease and discomfort. He will find out by practical experience the
quantity, quality, and variety of simple food that keeps him in perfect
condition; and no enticements of sweetmeats or stimulants will divert
him from the simplicity in which the most permanent pleasure is found.
To eat cake and candy between meals, to sip tea at all hours, no less
than to drink whiskey to the point of intoxication, are sins against
the simplicity of the true Epicurean regimen.

The Epicurean will not lose an hour of needed sleep nor tolerate such an
abomination as an alarm clock in his house. If he permits himself to be
awakened in the morning, it will be as Thomas B. Reed used to when, as a
student at Bowdoin College, he was obliged to be in chapel at six
o'clock. He had the janitor call him at half-past four, in order that he
might have the luxury of feeling that he had another whole hour in which
to sleep, and then call him again at the last moment which would permit
him to dress in time for chapel.

These things, however, we may for the most part take for granted. We do
not require a philosopher to regulate our diet for us; or to put us to
bed at night, and tuck us in, and hear us say our prayers. Those
elementary lessons were doubtless needed in the childhood of the race.
The selection from Spencer on work and play strikes closer to the
problem of the modern man; and it is at this point that we all sorely
need to go to school to Epicurus. Perhaps we are inclined to look down
on Epicurus's ideal as a low one. Well, if it is a low ideal, it is all
the more disgraceful to fall below it. And most of us do fall below it
every day of our tense and restless lives. Let us test ourselves by this
ideal, and answer honestly the questions it puts to us.

How many of us are slaving all day and late into the night to add
artificial superfluities to the simple necessities? How many of us know
how to stop working when it begins to encroach upon our health; and to
cut off anxiety and worry altogether? How many of us measure the amount
and intensity of our toil by our physical strength; doing what we can do
healthfully, cheerfully, joyously, and leaving the rest undone, instead
of straining up to the highest notch of nervous tension during early
manhood and womanhood, only to break down when the life forces begin to
turn against us? Every man in any position of responsibility and
influence has opportunity to do the work of twenty men. How many of us
in such circumstances choose the one thing we can do best, and leave the
other nineteen for other people to do, or else to remain undone? How
many of us have ever seriously stopped to think where the limit of
healthful effort and endurance lies, unless insomnia or dyspepsia or
nervous prostration have laid their heavy hands upon us and compelled us
to pause? Every breakdown from avoidable causes, every stroke of work
we do after the border-land of exhaustion and nervous strain is crossed,
is a crime against the teaching of Epicurus; and these diseases that
beset our modern business life are the penalties with which nature
visits us in vindication of the wisdom of his teachings. Every day that
we work beyond our strength; every hour that we spend in consequent
exhaustion and depression; every minute that we give over to worrying
about things beyond our immediate control, we either fall below, or else
rise above, Epicurus's level.

If we rise above him, to serve higher ideals, conscious of the sacrifice
we make, and clear about the superior ends we gain thereby, then we may
be forgiven. What some of those higher ideals are we shall have occasion
to consider later. But to work ourselves into depression, disease, and
pain, for no better reason than to get high mark in some rank-book or
other, to gratify somebody's false vanity, to get together a little more
gold than we can spend wisely or our children can inherit without
enervation, to live in a bigger house than our neighbour has or we can
afford to take care of--to work for such ends as these beyond the point
where work is healthy and happy, is to commit a sin which neither
Epicurus nor Nature will forgive. With the people who have risen above
Epicurus, and are deliberately sacrificing to some extent the Epicurean
to one of the higher ideals, as I have said, we have no quarrel; for
them we have only hearty commendation. We do not ask the mother whose
child is dangerously sick, the statesman in a political crisis, the
artist when the conception of his great work comes over him, to heed for
the time being the limits of strength and the conditions of completest
health. All we ask of them is that later on, when the child has
recovered, when the crisis is past, when the picture is painted, they
shall reverently and humbly pay to Epicurus, or to Nature whom he
represents, the penalty for their sin, by a corresponding period of
complete rest and relaxation. We must bear strain at times; and Nature
will forgive us if we do not take it too often. But we must not bunch
our strains. We must not pass from one strain to another, and another,
without periods of relaxation between. We must not let the attitude of
strain become chronic, and develop into a moral tetanus, which keeps us
forever on the rack of exertion from sheer restless inability to sit
down and enjoy ourselves.

What we take from excessive work Epicurus would bid us add to needed
play. Play is an arrangement by which we get artificially, in highly
concentrated form, the pleasure which in ordinary life is diffused over
long periods, and attainable only in attenuated form. Play puts the
great fundamental pleasures of the race at the disposal of the
individual.

Foot-ball, for instance, gives the student of to-day the essential joy
in combat of his barbarian ancestors, with the modern field-marshal's
delight in subtle tragedy thrown in. Base-ball gives the intense zest
that comes of speed, accuracy, and cunning exercised in emergencies.
Golf, in milder form, gives us the pleasure that comes of accuracy of
aim and calculation of conditions in good company and in the open air.
Billiards give to the clerk cramped all day over his desk the joy of a
delicate touch which otherwise would be the exclusive property of his
artisan brother. The various games of cards give the mechanic and the
housewife a taste at evening of the eager interests that fill the
banker's and the broker's days. Checkers and chess give to the humblest
in their homes some touch of the pleasures of the general and admiral.
Dancing carries to the limit of orderly expression that delight in the
person and presence of the opposite sex which otherwise would have to be
postponed until youth was able to assume the more serious
responsibilities of permanent relationships. Sailing, tramping, camping
out, hunting, fishing, mountain climbing, are all devices for bringing
into the lives of studious, strenuous, city people the elemental
pleasures which otherwise would be the monopoly of sailors, fishermen,
foresters, and explorers. Swimming, skating, bicycle riding, driving a
horse or an automobile, all give the keen joy that comes of the mastery
of graceful and forceful motion.

The theatre, which embodies so distinctively the peculiar essence of
play that its performances have appropriated the name, takes us in a
couple of hours through the epitomised experience of many persons
extending over many years in circumstances far removed from our
individual lives. Poetry, novels, biographies, histories, painting,
music, and all the forms of art perform for us this same function. They
take us out of our local and temporal situation, and let us live in
other days and other lands, in other customs and costumes; and so
enormously widen the world of experience we imaginatively make our own.
Besides in all the forms of play and art the ends are made artificially
simple, the means are made supernaturally accessible; so that instead of
toiling for years in doubt of results as in actual work, we experience
in play, and witness in artistic representation, the whole process of
selecting materials and moulding them to a successful issue in a few
minutes, or a few hours at most. All this reacts upon our power to
prosecute with confidence the remoter ends, and marshal the more
obdurate means of real work. It expands and limbers our capacity to
subordinate means to ends and find delight in the process as well as in
the outcome. Hence a man who goes a year without a considerable period
given over to play, or a week without at least one or two solid periods
of it, or lets many days go by without any play whatever, is selling his
birthright of personality for a mess of pottage. Psychology and pedagogy
are recognising the important function of play in the development of
personality as never before. Professor Baldwin, in his "Social and
Ethical Interpretations," sums up the functions of play in these words:
"In the education of the individual for his life-work in a network of
social relationships play is a most important form of organic
exercise,--a most important method of realisation of the social
instincts; gives flexibility of mind and body with self-control; gives
constant opportunity for imitative learning and invention, and is the
experimental verification of the benefits and pleasures of united
action."


