VII

ARISTOTELIAN FRIENDSHIP

We are now prepared to see why Aristotle regards friendship as the crown
and consummation of a virtuous life. No one has praised friendship more
highly, or written of it more profoundly than he.

Friendship he defines as "unanimity on questions of the public advantage
and on all that touches life." This unanimity, however, is very
different from agreement in opinion. It is seeing things from the same
point of view; or, more accurately, it is the appreciation of each
other's interests and aims. The whole tendency of Aristotle thus far has
been to develop individuality; to make each man different from every
other man. Conventional people are all alike. But the people who have
cherished ends of their own, and who make all their choices with
reference to these inwardly cherished ends, become highly
differentiated. The more individual your life becomes, the fewer people
there are who can understand you. The man who has ends of his own is
bound to be unintelligible to the man who has no such ends, and is
merely drifting with the crowd. Now friendship is the bringing together
of these intensely individual, highly differentiated persons on a basis
of mutual sympathy and common understanding. Friendship is the
recognition and respect of individuality in others by persons who are
highly individualised themselves. That is why Aristotle says true
friendship is possible only between the good; between people, that is,
who are in earnest about ends that are large and generous and
public-spirited enough to permit of being shared. "The bad," he says,
"desire the company of others, but avoid their own. And because they
avoid their own company, there is no real basis for union of aims and
interests with their fellows." "Having nothing lovable about them, they
have no friendly feelings toward themselves. If such a condition is
consummately miserable, the moral is to shun vice, and strive after
virtue with all one's might. For in this way we shall at once have
friendly feelings toward ourselves and become the friends of others. A
good man stands in the same relation to his friend as to himself, seeing
that his friend is a second self." "The conclusion, therefore, is that
if a man is to be happy, he will require good friends."

Friendship has as many planes as human life and human association. The
men with whom we play golf and tennis, billiards and whist, are friends
on the lowest plane--that of common pleasures. Our professional and
business associates are friends upon a little higher plane--that of the
interests we share. The men who have the same social customs and
intellectual tastes; the men with whom we read our favourite authors,
and talk over our favourite topics, are friends upon a still higher
plane--that of identity of aesthetic and intellectual pursuits. The
highest plane, the best friends, are those with whom we consciously
share the spiritual purpose of our lives. This highest friendship is as
precious as it is rare. With such friends we drop at once into a
matter-of-course intimacy and communion. Nothing is held back, nothing
is concealed; our aims are expressed with the assurance of sympathy;
even our shortcomings are confessed with the certainty that they will be
forgiven. Such friendship lasts as long as the virtue which is its
common bond. Jealousy cannot come in to break it up. Absolute sincerity,
absolute loyalty,--these are the high terms on which such friendship
must be held. A person may have many such friends on one condition: that
he shall not talk to any one friend about what his friendship permits
him to know of another friend. Each such relation must be complete
within itself; and hermetically sealed, so far as permitting any one
else to come inside the sacred circle of its mutual confidence. In such
friendship, differences, as of age, sex, station in life, divide not,
but rather enhance, the sweetness and tenderness of the relationship. In
Aristotle's words: "The friendship of the good, and of those who have
the same virtues, is perfect friendship. Such friendship, therefore,
endures so long as each retains his character, and virtue is a lasting
thing."


VIII

CRITICISM AND SUMMARY OF ARISTOTLE'S TEACHING

If finally we ask what are the limitations of Aristotle, we find none
save the limitations of the age and city in which he lived. He lived in
a city-state where thirty thousand full male citizens, with some seventy
thousand women and children dependent upon them, were supported by the
labour of some hundred thousand slaves. The rights of man as such,
whether native or alien, male or female, free or slave, had not yet been
affirmed. That crowning proclamation of universal emancipation was
reserved for Christianity three centuries and a half later. Without
this Christian element no principle of personality is complete. Not
until the city-state of Plato and Aristotle is widened to include the
humblest man, the lowliest woman, the most defenceless little child,
does their doctrine become final and universal. Yet with this single
limitation of its range, the form of Aristotle's teaching is complete
and ultimate. Deeper, saner, stronger, wiser statement of the principles
of personality the world has never heard.

His teaching may be summed up in the following:--

TEN ARISTOTELIAN COMMANDMENTS

Thou shalt devote thy utmost powers to some section of our common social
welfare.

Thou shalt hold this end above all lesser goods, such as pleasure,
money, honour.

Thou shalt hold the instruments essential to the service of this end
second only to the end itself.

Thou shalt ponder and revere the universal laws that bind ends and means
together in the ordered universe.

Thou shalt master and obey the specific laws that govern the relation of
means to thy chosen end.

Thou shalt use just so much of the materials and tools of life as the
service of thy end requires.

Thou shalt exclude from thy life all that exceeds or falls below this
mean, reckless of pleasure lost.

Thou shalt endure whatever hardship and privation the maintenance of
this mean in the service of thy end requires, heedless of pain involved.

Thou shalt remain steadfast in this service until habit shall have made
it a second nature, and custom shall have transformed it into joy.

Thou shalt find and hold a few like-minded friends, to share with thee
this lifelong devotion to that common social welfare which is the task
and goal of man.




