II

SELECTIONS FROM THE STOIC SCRIPTURES

First let us listen to Epictetus, the slave, the Stoic of the cottage as
he has been called:--

"Everything has two handles: one by which it may be borne, another by
which it cannot. If your brother acts unjustly, do not lay hold on the
affair by the handle of his injustice, for by that it cannot be borne;
but rather by the opposite, that he is your brother, that he was brought
up with you, and thus you will lay hold on it as it is to be borne."
Here the handle is a homely but effective figure for the mass of mental
association into which the external fact of a brother who acts unjustly
is introduced before he actually enters our mental state, and determines
how we shall feel and act.

"If a person had delivered up your body to some passer-by, you would
certainly be angry. And do you feel no shame in delivering up your mind
to any reviler, to be disconcerted and confounded?" The reviling does
not become a determining factor in my own mental state unless I choose
to let it. If I feel humiliated and stung by it, it is because I am weak
and foolish enough to stake my estimate of myself, and my consequent
happiness, upon what somebody who does not know me says about me, rather
than on what I, who know myself better than anybody else, actually
think. A boy at Phillips Andover Academy once drew this distinction very
adroitly for another boy. There had been a free fight among the boys
causing a great deal of disturbance, and Principal Bancroft had traced
the beginning of it to an insulting remark on the part of the boy in
question. Dr. Bancroft accused him of beginning the trouble. "No, sir,"
said the boy, "I did not begin it. The other fellow began it." "Well,"
said Principal Bancroft, "you tell me precisely what took place, and I
will decide who began it." "Oh," replied the boy, "I simply called him a
'darned' fool, and he took offence." Now if the other boy had been a
Stoic, he would not have taken offence, and the first boy might have
called him a fool with impunity. Imputing Stoicism to that extent to
other people, however, is very dangerous business. Stoicism is a
doctrine to be strictly applied to ourselves, but never imputed to other
people, least of all to the people we wish to abuse and revile.

Epictetus again states his doctrine most explicitly on the subject of
terrors. "Men are disturbed not by things, but by the view which they
take of things. Thus death is nothing terrible else it would have
appeared so to Socrates. But the terror consists in our notion of death,
that it is terrible. When, therefore, we are hindered, or disturbed, or
grieved, let us never impute it to others, but to ourselves; that is, to
our views."

Again he makes a sharp distinction between what is in our power,--that
is, what we think about things; and what are not in our power,--that is
external facts. "There are things which are within our power, and there
are things which are beyond our power. Within our power are opinion,
aim, desire, aversion, and, in one word, whatever affairs are our own.
Beyond our power are body, property, reputation, office, and, in one
word, whatever are not properly our own affairs."

"Now the things within our power are by nature free, unrestricted,
unhindered; but those beyond our power are weak, dependent, restricted,
alien. Remember, then, that if you attribute freedom to things by nature
dependent, and seek for your own that which is really controlled by
others, you will be hindered, you will lament, you will be disturbed,
you will find fault both with gods and men. But if you take for your own
only that which is your own, and view what belongs to others just as it
really is, then no one will ever compel you, no one will restrict you;
you will find fault with no one, you will accuse no one, you will do
nothing against your will; no one will hurt you, you will not have an
enemy, nor will you suffer any harm."

All this is simply carrying out the principle that we need not concern
ourselves about purely external things, for those things pure and simple
can never get into our minds, or affect us one way or the other. The
only things that enter into us are things as we think about them, facts
as we feel about them, forces as we react upon them, and these thoughts,
feelings, and reactions are our own affairs; and if we do not think
serenely, feel tranquilly, and act freely with reference to them, it is
not the fault of external things, but of ourselves.

In his discourse on tranquillity Epictetus gives us the same counsel.
"Consider, you who are about to undergo trial, what you wish to
preserve, and in what to succeed. For if you wish to preserve a mind in
harmony with nature, you are entirely safe; everything goes well; you
have no trouble on your hands. While you wish to preserve that freedom
which belongs to you, and are contented with that, for what have you
longer to be anxious? For who is the master of things like these? Who
can take them away? If you wish to be a man of modesty and fidelity, who
shall prevent you? If you wish not to be restrained or compelled, who
shall compel you to desires contrary to your principles? to aversions
contrary to your opinion? The judge, perhaps, will pass a sentence
against you which he thinks formidable; but can he likewise make you
receive it with shrinking? Since, then, desire and aversion are in your
power, for what have you to be anxious?"

Epictetus bids us meet difficulties in the same way. "Difficulties are
things that show what men are. For the future, in case of any
difficulty, remember that God, like a gymnastic trainer, has pitted you
against a rough antagonist. For what end? That you may be an Olympic
conqueror; and this cannot be without toil. No man, in my opinion, has a
more profitable difficulty on his hands than you have, provided you but
use it as an athletic champion uses his antagonist."

Epictetus does not shrink from the logic of his teaching in its
application to the sorrows of others, though here it is tempered by a
concession to the weakness of ordinary mortals. "When you see a person
weeping in sorrow, either when a child goes abroad, or when he is dead,
or when the man has lost his property, take care that the appearance do
not hurry you away with it as if he were suffering in external things.
But straightway make a distinction in your mind, and be in readiness to
say, it is not that which has happened that afflicts this man, for it
does not afflict another, but it is the opinion about this thing which
afflicts the man. So far as words, then, do not be unwilling to show him
sympathy, and even if it happens so, to lament with him. But take care
that you do not lament internally also." At this point, if not before,
we feel that Stoicism is doing violence to the nobler feelings of our
nature, and are prepared to break with it. Stoicism is too hard and cold
and individualistic to teach us our duty, or even to leave us free to
act out our best inclinations, toward our neighbour. We may be as
Stoical as we please in our own troubles and afflictions; but let us
beware how we carry over its icy distinctions into our interpretation of
our neighbour's suffering.

I have drawn most of my illustrations from Epictetus, because this
resignation comes with rather better grace from a poor, lame man, who
has been a slave, and who lives on the barest necessities of life, than
from the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, and the wealthy courtier Seneca. Yet
the most distinctive utterances of these men teach the same lesson.
Seneca attributes it to his pilot in the famous prayer, "Oh, Neptune,
you may save me if you will; you may sink me if you will; but whatever
happens, I shall keep my rudder true." Marcus Aurelius says: "Let the
part of thy soul which leads and governs be undisturbed by the movements
in the flesh, whether of pleasure or pain; and let it not unite itself
with them, but let it circumscribe itself, and limit those effects to
their parts." "Let it make no difference to thee whether thou art cold
or warm, if thou art doing thy duty, and whether dying or doing
something else. For it is one of the acts of life,--this act by which we
die; it is sufficient then in this act also to do well what we have in
hand." "External things touch not the soul, not in the least degree."
"Remember on every occasion which leads thee to vexation to apply this
principle: that this is not a misfortune, but to bear it nobly is good
fortune."

The most recent prophet of Stoicism is Maurice Maeterlinck. In "Wisdom
and Destiny," he says:--

"The event itself is pure water that flows from the pitcher of fate, and
seldom has it either savour or perfume or colour. But even as the soul
may be wherein it seeks shelter, so will the event become joyous or sad,
become tender or hateful, become deadly or quick with life. To those
round about us there happen incessant and countless adventures, whereof
every one, it would seem, contains a germ of heroism; but the adventure
passes away, and heroic deed there is none. But when Jesus Christ met
the Samaritan, met a few children, an adulterous woman, then did
humanity rise three times in succession to the level of God."

"It might almost be said that there happens to men only that they
desire. It is true that on certain external events our influence is of
the feeblest, but we have all-powerful action on that which these events
shall become in ourselves--in other words, on their spiritual part. The
life of most men will be saddened or lightened by the thing that may
chance to befall them,--in the men whom I speak of, whatever may happen
is lit up by their inward life. If you have been deceived, it is not the
deception that matters, but the forgiveness whereto it gave birth in
your soul, and the loftiness, wisdom, completeness of this
forgiveness,--by these shall your eyes see more clearly than if all men
had ever been faithful. But if, by this act of deceit, there have come
not more simpleness, loftier faith, wider range to your love, then have
you been deceived in vain, and may truly say nothing has happened."

"Let us always remember that nothing befalls us that is not of the
nature of ourselves. There comes no adventure but wears to our soul the
shape of our everyday thoughts; and deeds of heroism are but offered to
those who, for many long years, have been heroes in obscurity and
silence. And whether you climb up the mountain or go down the hill to
the valley, whether you journey to the end of the world or merely walk
round your house, none but yourself shall you meet on the highway of
fate. If Judas go forth to-night, it is toward Judas his steps will
tend, nor will chance for betrayal be lacking; but let Socrates open his
door,--he shall find Socrates asleep on the threshold before him, and
there will be occasion for wisdom. We become that which we discover in
the sorrows and joys that befall us; and the least expected caprices of
fate soon mould themselves to our thought. It is in our past that
Destiny finds all her weapons, her vestments, her jewels. A sorrow your
soul has changed into sweetness, to indulgence or patient smiles, is a
sorrow that shall never return without spiritual ornament; and a fault
or defect you have looked in the face can harm you no more. All that has
thus been transformed can belong no more to the hostile powers. Real
fatality exists only in certain external disasters--as disease,
accident, the sudden death of those we love; but inner fatality there is
none. Wisdom has will power sufficient to rectify all that does not deal
death to the body; it will even at times invade the narrow domain of
external fatality. Even when the deed has been done, the misfortune has
happened, it still rests with ourselves to deny her the least influence
on that which shall come to pass in our soul. She may strike at the
heart that is eager for good, but still is she helpless to keep back the
light that shall stream to this heart from the error acknowledged, the
pain undergone. It is not in her power to prevent the soul from
transforming each single affliction into thoughts, into feelings, and
treasure she dare not profane. Be her empire never so great over all
things external, she always must halt when she finds on the threshold a
silent guardian of the inner life. For even as triumph of dictators and
consuls could be celebrated only in Rome, so can the true triumph of
Fate take place nowhere save in our soul."

It would be easy to cite passage after passage in which the great
masters of Stoicism ring the changes on this idea, that the external
thing, whether it be good or evil, cannot get into the fortified citadel
of my mind, and therefore cannot touch me. Before it can touch me it
must first be incorporated into my mind. In the very act of
incorporation it undergoes a transformation, which in the perverse man
may change the best external things into poison and bitterness; and in
the sage is able to convert the worst of external facts into virtue,
glory, and honour. Out of indifferent external matter, thinking makes
the world in which we live; and if it is not a good world, the fault is,
not with the indifferent external matters,--such as, to take Epictetus's
enumeration of them, "wealth, health, life, death, pleasure, and pain,
which lie between the virtues and the vices,"--but in our weak and
erroneous thinking.


