VIII

THE DEFECTS OF STOICISM

Why we cannot rest in Stoicism as our final guide to life, the mere
statement of their doctrine must have made clear to every one; and in
calling attention to its limitations I shall only be saying for the
reader what he has been saying to himself all through the chapter. It
may be well enough to treat things as indifferent, and work them over
into such mental combinations as best serve our rational interests. To
treat persons in that way, however, to make them mere pawns in the game
which reason plays, is heartless, monstrous. The affections are as
essential to man as his reason. It is a poor substitute for the warm,
sweet, tender ties that bind together husband and wife, parent and
child, friend and friend,--this freezing of people together through
their common relation to the universal law. I suppose that is why, in
all the history of Stoicism, though college girls usually have a period
of flirting with the Stoic melancholy of Matthew Arnold, no woman was
ever known to be a consistent and steadfast Stoic. Indeed a Stoic woman
is a contradiction in terms. One might as well talk of a warm iceberg,
or soft granite, or sweet vinegar. Stoicism is something of which men,
unmarried or badly married men at that, have an absolute monopoly.

Again if its disregard of particulars and individuals is cold and hard,
its attempted substitute of abstract, vague universality is a bit
absurd. Sometimes the lighter mood of caricature best brings out the
weaknesses that are concealed in grave systems when taken too seriously.
Mr. W. S. Gilbert has put the dash of absurdity there is in the Stoic
doctrines so convincingly that his lines may serve the purpose of
illustrating the inherent weakness of the Stoic position better than
more formal criticism. They are addressed

TO THE TERRESTRIAL GLOBE

    "Roll on, thou ball, roll on;
    Through pathless realms of space
                                  Roll on.
    What though I'm in a sorry case?
    What though I cannot pay my bills?
    What though I suffer toothache's ills?
    What though I swallow countless pills?
                           Never you mind!
                                  Roll on.

    "Roll on, thou ball, roll on;
    Through seas of inky air
                                  Roll on.
    It's true I've got no shirts to wear;
    It's true my butcher's bills are due;
    It's true my prospects all look blue--
    But don't let that unsettle you--
                           Never you mind!
                                  Roll on.
              (It rolls on.)"

The incompleteness of the Stoic position is precisely this tendency to
slight and ignore the external conditions out of which life is made.
Its God is fate. Instead of a living, loving will, manifest in the
struggle with present conditions, Stoicism sees only an impersonal law,
rigid, fixed, fatal, unalterable, unimprovable, uncompanionable. Man's
only freedom lies in unconditional surrender to what was long ago
decreed. Of glad and original cooeperation with its beneficent designs,
thus helping to make the world happier and better than it could have
been had not the universal will found and chosen just this individual
me, to work freely for its improvement, Stoicism knows nothing. Its
satisfaction is staked on a dead law to be obeyed, not a live will to be
loved. Its ideal is a monotonous identity of law-abiding agents who
differ from each other chiefly in the names by which they chance to be
designated. It has no place for the development of rich and varied
individuality in each through intense, passionate devotion to other
individuals as widely different as age, sex, training, and temperament
can make them. Before we find the perfect guidance of life we must look
beyond the Stoic as well as the Epicurean, to Plato, to Aristotle, and,
above all, to Jesus.




CHAPTER III

THE PLATONIC SUBORDINATION OF LOWER TO HIGHER


I

THE NATURE OF VIRTUE

Epicureanism tells us how to gain pleasure; Stoicism tells us how to
bear pain. But life is not so simple as these systems assume. It is not
merely the problem of getting all the pleasure we can; nor of taking
pain in such wise that it does not hurt. It is a question of the worth
of the things in which we find our pleasure, and the relative values of
the things we suffer for. Plato squarely attacks that larger problem. He
says that the Epicurean is like a musician who tunes his violin as much
as he can without breaking the strings. The wise musician, on the
contrary, recognises that the tuning is merely incidental to the music;
and that when you have tuned it up to a certain point, it is worse than
useless to go on tuning it any more. Just as the tuning is for the sake
of the music, and when you have reached a point where the instrument
gives perfect music, you must stop the tuning and begin to play; so when
you have brought any particular pleasure, say that of eating, up to a
certain point, you must stop eating, and begin to live the life for the
sake of which you eat. To the Stoic Plato gives a similar answer. The
Stoic, he says, is like a physician who gives his patient all the
medicine he can, and prides himself on being a better physician than
others because he gives his patients bigger doses, and more of them. The
wise physician gives medicine up to a certain point, and then stops.
That point is determined by the health, which the medicine is given to
promote. Precisely so, it is foolish to bear all the pain we can, and
boast ourselves of our ability to swallow big doses of tribulation and
pronounce it good. The wise man will bear pain up to a certain point;
and when he reaches that limit, he will stop. What is the point? Where
is the limit? Virtue is the point up to which the bearing of pain is
good, the limit beyond which the bearing of pain becomes an evil.
Virtue, then, is the supreme good, and makes everything that furthers
it, whether pleasurable or painful, good. Virtue makes everything that
hinders it, whether pleasurable or painful, bad. What, then, is virtue?
In what does this priceless pearl consist? We have our two analogies.
Virtue is to pleasure what the music is to the tuning of the instrument.
Just as the perfection of the music proves the excellence of the tuning,
so the perfection of virtue justifies the particular pleasures we enjoy.
Virtue stands related to the endurance of pain, as health stands related
to the taking of medicine. The perfection of health proves that, however
distasteful the medicine may be, it is nevertheless good; and any
imperfection of health that may result from either too much or too
little medicine shows that in the quantity taken the medicine was bad
for us. Precisely so pain is good for us up to the point where virtue
requires it. Below or above that point, pain becomes an evil.

Plato spared no pains to disentangle the question of virtue from its
complications with rewards and penalties, pleasures and pains. As the
virtue of a violin is not in its carving or polish, but in the music it
produces; as the virtue of medicine is not in its sweetness or its
absence of bitterness, so the virtue of man has primarily nothing to do
with rewards and penalties, pleasures or pains. In our study of virtue,
he says, we must strip it naked of all rewards, honours, and emoluments;
indeed we must go farther and even dress it up in the outer habiliments
of vice; we must make the virtuous man poor, persecuted, forsaken,
unpopular, distrusted, reviled, and condemned. Then we may be able to
see what there is in virtue which, in every conceivable circumstance,
makes it superior to vice. He makes one of his characters in the
Republic complain that: "No one has ever adequately described either in
verse or prose the true essential nature of either righteousness or
unrighteousness immanent in the soul, and invisible to any human or
divine eye; or shown that of all the things of a man's soul which he has
within him, righteousness is the greatest good, and unrighteousness the
greatest evil. Therefore I say, not only prove to us that righteousness
is better than unrighteousness, but show what either of them do to the
possessors of them, which makes the one to be good and the other evil,
whether seen or unseen by gods and men." Accordingly he attributes to
the unrighteous man skill to win a reputation for righteousness, even
while acting most unrighteously. He clothes him with power and glory,
and fame, and family, and influence; fills his life with delights;
surrounds him with friends; cushions him in ease and security. Over
against this man who is really unrighteous, but has all the advantages
that come from being supposed to be righteous, he sets the man who is
really righteous, and clothes him with all the disabilities which come
from being supposed to be unrighteous. "Let him be scourged and racked;
let him have his eyes burnt out, and finally, after suffering every kind
of evil, let him be impaled." Then, says Plato, when both have reached
the uttermost extreme, the one of righteousness treated shamefully and
cruelly, the other of unrighteousness treated honourably and
obsequiously, let judgment be given which of them is the happier of the
two. Translating the language of the "Gorgias" and the "Republic" into
modern equivalents: Who would we rather be, a man who by successful
manipulation of dishonest financial schemes had come to be a
millionnaire, the mayor of his city, the pillar of the church, the
ornament of the best society, the Senator from his state, or the
Ambassador of his country at a European Court; or a man who in
consequence of his integrity had won the enmity of evil men in power,
and been sent in disgrace to State prison; a man whom no one would speak
to; whom his best friends had deserted, whose own children were being
brought up to reproach him? Which of the two men would we rather be? And
we must not introduce any consideration of reversals hereafter.
Supposing that death ends all, and that there is no God to reverse the
decisions of men; suppose these two men were to die as they lived,
without hope of resurrection; which of the two would we rather be for
the next forty years of our lives, assuming that after that there is
nothing?

Plato in a myth puts the case even more strongly than this. Gyges, a
shepherd and servant of the king of Lydia, found a gold ring which had
the remarkable property of making its wearer visible when he turned the
collet one way, and invisible when he turned it the other way. Being
astonished at this, he made several trials of the ring, always with the
same result; when he turned the collet inwards he became invisible, when
outwards he reappeared. Perceiving this he immediately contrived to be
chosen messenger to the court, where he no sooner arrived than he
seduced the queen, and with her help conspired against the king and slew
him, and took the kingdom. Plato asks us what we should do if we had
such a ring. We could do anything we pleased and no one would be the
wiser. We could become invisible, out of the reach of external
consequences, the instant our deed was done. Would we, with such a ring
on our finger, stand fast in righteousness? Could we trust ourselves to
wear that ring night and day? Would we feel safe if we knew that our
next-door neighbour, even our most intimate friend, had such a ring, and
could do just what he pleased to us, and yet never get caught? Can we
tell why a man with such a ring on his finger should not do any unjust,
unkind, impure, or dishonourable deed?


