IV

PLATO'S SCHEME OF EDUCATION

Education, therefore, in Plato's ideal Republic, was a lifelong affair,
and from first to last practical. For the guardians, the men who were to
be rulers or, as we should say, leaders of their fellows, he prescribed
the following course: From early childhood until the age of
seventeen,--that is, through our elementary and high school periods,--he
would give chief attention to what he calls music; that is, to
literature, music, and the plastic arts, with popular descriptive
science, or, as we call it nowadays, nature study. This, with elementary
mathematics and gymnastics as incidental, constituted the curriculum for
the first ten or twelve years. The chief stress through all these years
he lays on good literature,--good both in substance and in form; for
children at this age are intensely imitative. Plato practically
anticipated the latest results of child study, which tell us that the
child builds up the whole substance of his conception of himself out of
materials borrowed from others and incorporated in himself by imitative
reproduction; and then in turn interprets and understands others only in
so far as he can eject this borrowed material into other persons. Hence
Plato says it is of supreme importance that the children shall learn to
admire and love good literature. That teachers should be able to teach
the children to read and write and cipher and draw he would take for
granted. The prime qualification, however, would be the ability to so
interpret the best literature as to make the children admire and imitate
and incorporate the noble qualities this literature embodies. Into the
literature thus inspiringly taught in the school, only that which
praised noble deeds in noble language should be admitted. Plato's
description of good literature for schools will bear repeating: "Any
deeds of endurance which are acted or told by famous men, these the
children ought to see and hear. If they imitate at all, they should
imitate the temperate, holy, free, courageous, and the like; but they
should not depict or be able to imitate any kind of illiberality or
other baseness, lest from imitation they come to be what they imitate.
Did you never observe how imitations, beginning in early youth, at last
sink into the constitution and become a second nature of body, voice,
and mind?" "Of the harmonies I know nothing, but I want to have one
warlike, which will sound the word or note which a brave man utters in
the hour of danger and stern resolve, or when his cause is failing and
he is going to wounds or death or is overtaken by some other evil, and
at every such crisis meets fortune with calmness and endurance; and
another which may be used by him in times of peace and freedom of
action, when there is no pressure of necessity--expressive of entreaty,
or persuasion, or prayer to God, or instruction of man, or again of
willingness to listen to persuasion or entreaty or advice; and which
represents him when he has accomplished his aim, not carried away by
success, but acting moderately and wisely, and acquiescing in the
event. These two harmonies I ask you to leave: the strain of necessity
and the strain of freedom, the strain of courage, and the strain of
temperance. We would not have our guardians grow up amid images of moral
deformity, as in some noxious pasture, and there browse and feed upon
many a baneful herb and flower day by day, little by little, until they
silently gather a festering mass of corruption in their own souls. Let
our artists rather be those who are gifted to discern the true nature of
beauty and grace; then will our youth dwell in a land of health, amid
fair sights and sounds; and beauty, the effluence of fair works, will
meet the sense like a breeze, and insensibly draw the soul, even in
childhood, into harmony with the beauty of reason. Rhythm and harmony
find their way into the secret places of the soul, on which they
mightily fasten, bearing grace in their movements, and making the soul
graceful of him who is rightly educated, or ungraceful if ill educated;
and also because he who has received this true education of the inner
being will most shrewdly perceive omissions or faults in art or nature,
and with a true taste, while he praises and rejoices over and receives
into his soul the good, and becomes noble and good, he will justly
blame and hate the bad, now in the days of his youth, even before he is
able to know the reason of the thing; and when reason comes, he will
recognise and salute her as a friend with whom his education has made
him long familiar."

Thus, according to Plato, the important thing for a youth to secure by
the time he is seventeen is the admiration of noble deeds, and noble
words, and noble character. The love of good literature is the backbone
of this elementary education. Manual training and nature study, as a
means to the appreciation of beautiful works of art and beautiful
objects in nature, he would also approve. On the whole Plato is an
advocate of those very reforms which are now being introduced into the
elementary and secondary schools in the name of the New Education. What
one loves is of more importance than what one knows; what one wants to
do, and is interested in trying to do, is of more consequence at this
stage than what one has done. Early education should be an introduction
to the true, the beautiful, and the good in the form of great men, brave
deeds, beautiful objects, and beneficent laws. The development of taste
is more than the acquisition of information; the inspiration of
literature, history, art, and descriptive science is far more valuable
than drill beyond the essentials in grammar, geography, and arithmetic.

Plato's programme for the years from seventeen to twenty, three of our
four college years, is even more startling and heretical; and quite in
line with certain tendencies in our own day. He would set apart the
three years from seventeen to twenty for gymnastic exercises, including
in such exercises, however, military drill. Plato appreciated both the
advantage and disadvantage of intense athletic exercises. "The period,
whether of two or three years, which passes in this sort of training is
useless for any other purpose,--for sleep and exercise are unpropitious
to learning; and the trial is one of the most important tests to which
they are subjected."

At the age of twenty he would select the most promising youths and give
them a ten years' course in severe study of science. This systematic
study corresponds to the graduate and professional period in modern
education, only he extends it over ten years, where we confine it to
three or four. Again at thirty there is another selection of those who
are most steadfast in their learning and most faithful in their military
and public duties, and these are given a five years' course in dialectic
or philosophy. They are trained to see the relation of the special
sciences to each other and how each department of truth is related to
the whole. At the age of thirty-five they must be appointed to military
and other offices. "In this way they will get their experience of life,
and there will be an opportunity to try whether, when they are drawn all
manner of ways by temptation, they will stand firm or stir at all." And
when they have reached the age of fifty, after fifteen years of this
laboratory work in actual public service, holding subordinate offices
and learning to discriminate good and evil, not as we find them done up
in packages and labelled in the study, but as they are interwoven in the
complicated texture of real life, "those who still survive and have
distinguished themselves in every deed and in all knowledge, come at
last to their graduation; the time has now arrived at which they must
raise the eye of the soul to the universal light which lightens all
things and behold the absolute good; for that is the pattern according
to which they are to order the state and the lives of individuals and
the remainder of their own lives also, making philosophy their chief
pursuit; but when their turn comes, also toiling at politics and ruling
for the public good."

The wisdom which comes of this prolonged and elaborate education is the
third of Plato's four cardinal virtues. In the state it is the ruling
principle, and its agents are the philosophers. As Plato says in a
famous passage: "Until then philosophers are kings, or the kings and
princes of this world have the spirit and power of philosophy, and
political greatness and wisdom meet in one, and those commoner natures
who follow either to the exclusion of the other are compelled to stand
aside, cities will never cease from ill,--no, nor the human race, as I
believe,--and then only will this our state have a possibility of life
and behold the light of day." Precisely so, no individual will attain
his true estate until this philosophic principle, which sees the good,
through training has been so developed that it can bring both appetite
and spirit into subjection to it, as a charioteer controls his
headstrong horses.


