VI

THE RELIGIOUS ASPECT OF STOICISM

The Stoics had a genuine religion. The Epicureans, too, had their gods,
but they never took them very seriously. In a world made up of atoms
accidentally grouped in transient relations, of which countless
accidental groupings I happen to be one, there is no room for a real
religious relationship. Consequently the Epicurean, though he amused
himself with poetic pictures of gods who led lives of undisturbed
serenity, unconcerned about the affairs of men, had no consciousness of
a great spiritual whole of which he was a part, or of an Infinite Person
to whom he was personally related.

To the Stoic, on the contrary, the round world is part of a single
universe, which holds all its parts in the grasp and guidance of one
universal law, determining each particular event. By making that law of
the universe his own, the individual man at once worships the
all-controlling Providence, and achieves his own freedom. For the law to
which he yields is at once the law of the whole universe, and the law of
his own nature as a part of the universe. "We are born subjects,"
exclaims the Stoic, "but to obey God is perfect liberty." "Everything,"
says Marcus Aurelius, "harmonises with me which is harmonious to thee, O
universe. Nothing for me is too early or too late, which is in due time
for thee."

A characteristic prayer and meditation and hymn will show us, far better
than description, what this Stoic religion meant to those who devoutly
held it. Epictetus gives us this prayer of the dying Cynic: "I stretch
out my hands to God and say: The means which I have received from thee
for seeing thy administration of the world and following it I have not
neglected: I have not dishonoured thee by my acts: see how I have used
my perceptions: have I ever blamed thee? have I been discontented with
anything that happens or wished it to be otherwise? Have I wished to
transgress the relations of things? That thou hast given me life, I
thank thee for what thou hast given: so long as I have used the things
which are thine I am content; take them back and place them wherever
thou mayest choose; for thine were all things,--thou gavest them to me.
Is it not enough to depart in this state of mind, and what life is
better and more becoming than that of a man who is in this state of
mind, and what end is more happy?"

He also offers us this meditation on the inevitable losses of life, by
which he consoles himself with the thought that all he has is a loan
from God, which these seeming losses but restore to their rightful
owner, who had lent them to us for a while.

"Never say about anything, I have lost it; but say, I have restored it.
Is your child dead? It has been restored. Is your wife dead? She has
been restored. Has your estate been taken from you? Has not this been
also restored? 'But he who has taken it from me is a bad man.' But what
is it to you by whose hands the giver demanded it back? So long as he
may allow you, take care of it as a thing which belongs to another, as
travellers do with their inn."

The grandest expression of the Stoic religion, however, is found in the
hymn of Cleanthes. Elsewhere there is too evident a disposition to
condescend to use God's aid in keeping up the Stoic temper; with little
of outgoing adoration for the greatness and glory which are in God
himself. But in this grand hymn we have genuine reverence, devotion,
worship, praise, self-surrender,--in short, that confession of the glory
of the Infinite by the conscious weakness of the finite in which the
heart of true religion everywhere consists. Nowhere outside of the
Hebrew and Christian Scriptures has adoration breathed itself in more
exalted and fervent strains. The hymn is addressed to Zeus, as the
Stoics freely used the names of the popular gods to express their own
deeper meanings.

HYMN TO ZEUS

"Thee it is lawful for all mortals to address. For we are Thy offspring,
and alone of living creatures possess a voice which is the image of
reason. Therefore I will forever sing Thee and celebrate Thy power. All
this universe rolling round the earth obeys Thee, and follows willingly
at Thy command. Such a minister hast Thou in Thy invincible hands, the
two-edged, flaming, vivid thunderbolt. O King, most High, nothing is
done without Thee, neither in heaven or on earth, nor in the sea, except
what the wicked do in their foolishness. Thou makest order out of
disorder, and what is worthless becomes precious in Thy sight; for Thou
hast fitted together good and evil into one, and hast established one
law that exists forever. But the wicked fly from Thy law, unhappy ones,
and though they desire to possess what is good, yet they see not,
neither do they hear the universal law of God. If they would follow it
with understanding, they might have a good life. But they go astray,
each after his own devices,--some vainly striving after reputation,
others turning aside after gain excessively, others after riotous living
and wantonness. Nay, but, O Zeus, Giver of all things, who dwellest in
dark clouds and rulest over the thunder, deliver men from their
foolishness. Scatter it from their souls, and grant them to obtain
wisdom, for by wisdom Thou dost rightly govern all things; that being
honoured we may repay Thee with honour, singing Thy works without
ceasing, as it is right for us to do. For there is no greater thing than
this, either for mortal men or for the gods, to sing rightly the
universal law."

Modern literature of the nobler sort has many a Stoic note; and we ought
to be able to recognise it in its modern as well as in its ancient
dress. The very best brief expression of the Stoic creed is found in
Henley's Lines to R. T. H. B.:--

    "Out of the night that covers me,
    Black as the Pit from pole to pole,
    I thank whatever gods may be
    For my unconquerable soul.

    "In the fell clutch of circumstance
    I have not winced nor cried aloud.
    Under the bludgeonings of chance
    My head is bloody, but unbowed.

    "Beyond this place of wrath and tears
    Looms but the Horror of the shade,
    And yet the menace of the years
    Finds, and shall find me unafraid.

    "It matters not how strait the gate,
    How charged with punishments the scroll,
    I am the master of my fate:
    I am the captain of my soul."

The chief modern type of Stoicism, however, is Matthew Arnold. His great
remedy for the ills of which life is so full is stated in the concluding
lines of "The Youth of Man":--

    "While the locks are yet brown on thy head,
    While the soul still looks through thine eyes,
    While the heart still pours
    The mantling blood to thy cheek,
    Sink, O youth, in thy soul!
    Yearn to the greatness of Nature;
    Rally the good in the depths of thyself!"


