VI

THE CONFESSIONS OF AN EPICUREAN HERETIC

A heretic is a man who, while professing to hold the tenets of the sect
to which he adheres, and sincerely believing that he is in substantial
agreement with his more orthodox brethren, yet in his desire to be
honest and reasonable, so modifies these tenets as to empty them of all
that is distinctive of the sect in question, and thus unintentionally
gives aid and comfort to its enemies. Every vigorous and vital school of
thought soon or late develops this species of _enfant terrible_. Like
the Christian church, the Epicurean school has been blessed with
numerous progeny of this disturbing sort. The one among them all who
most stoutly professes the fundamental principles of Epicureanism, and
then proceeds to admit pretty much everything its opponents advance
against it, is John Stuart Mill. His "Utilitarianism" is a fort manned
with the most approved idealistic guns, yet with the Epicurean flag
floating bravely over the whole. He "holds that actions are right in
proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to
produce the reverse of happiness. By happiness is intended pleasure and
the absence of pain; by unhappiness, pain and the privation of pleasure.
Pleasure and freedom from pain are the only things desirable as ends;
and all desirable things are desirable either for the pleasure inherent
in themselves, or as means to the promotion of pleasure and the
prevention of pain." A more square and uncompromising statement of
Epicureanism than this it would be impossible to make.

Having thus squarely identified himself with the Epicurean school, Mr.
Mill proceeds to add to this doctrine in turn the doctrines of each one
of the four schools which we are to consider later. First he introduces
a distinction in the kind of pleasure, "assigning to the pleasures of
the intellect, of the feelings and imagination, and of the moral
sentiments, a much higher value as pleasures than to those of mere
sensation." When asked what he means by difference of quality in
pleasures, or what makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely
as a pleasure, except its being greater in amount, although he tells us
there is but one possible answer, he gives us two or three. First he
appeals to the verdict of competent judges. "Of two pleasures, if there
be one to which all or almost all who have experience of both give a
decided preference, irrespective of any feeling of moral obligation to
prefer it, that is the more desirable pleasure. If one of the two is, by
those who are competently acquainted with both, placed so far above the
other that they prefer it, even though knowing it to be attended with a
greater amount of discontent, and would not resign it for any quantity
of the other pleasure which their nature is capable of, we are justified
in ascribing to the preferred enjoyment a superiority in quality, so
far outweighing quantity as to render it, in comparison, of small
account."

This appeal to competent judges, or, in other words, to authority,
involves no philosophical principle at all unless we may call the
doctrine of papal infallibility, to which this appeal of Mill is
essentially akin, a principle. If these judges are competent, there must
be a reason for the preference they give. In the next paragraph Mill
tells us what that principle is; but in doing so introduces the
principle of the subordination of lower to higher faculties, which we
shall see later is the distinguishing principle of Plato. On this point
Mill is as clear as Plato himself. "Now it is an unquestionable fact
that those who are equally acquainted with, and equally capable of
appreciating and enjoying both, do give a most marked preference to the
manner of existence which employs their higher faculties. Few human
creatures would consent to be changed into any of the lower animals, for
a promise of the fullest allowance of a beast's pleasures; no
intelligent human being would consent to be a fool, no instructed person
would be an ignoramus, no person of feeling and conscience would be
selfish and base, even though they should be persuaded that the fool,
the dunce, or the rascal is better satisfied with his lot than they are
with theirs. They would not resign what they possess more than he, for
the most complete satisfaction of all the desires which they have in
common with him. If they ever fancy they would, it is only in cases of
unhappiness so extreme, that to escape from it they would exchange their
lot for almost any other, however undesirable in their own eyes. A being
of higher faculties requires more to make him happy, is capable probably
of more acute suffering, and is certainly accessible to it at more
points, than one of an inferior type; but in spite of these liabilities,
he can never really wish to sink into what he feels to be a lower grade
of existence." This appeal to quality rather than quantity of pleasure
puts Mill, in spite of himself, squarely on Platonic ground and abandons
consistent Epicureanism. An illustration will make this clear. A man
professes that money is his supreme end, the only thing he cares for in
the world; he tells us that whatever he does is done for money, and
whenever he refrains from doing anything it is to avoid losing money. So
far he puts his conduct on a consistently mercenary basis. Suppose,
however, that in the next sentence he tells us that he prizes certain
kinds of money. If we ask him what is the basis of the distinction, he
replies that he prizes money honestly earned and despises money
dishonestly acquired. Should we not at once recognise, that in spite of
his original declaration, he is not the consistently mercenary being he
professed himself to be? The fact that he prefers honest to dishonest
money shows that honesty, not money, is his real principle; and, in
spite of his original profession, this distinction lifts him out of the
class of mercenary money lovers into the class of men whose real
principle is not money but honesty. Precisely so Mill's confession that
he cares for the height and dignity of the faculties employed rather
than the quantity of pleasure gained lifts him out of the Epicurean
school to which he professes adherence and makes him an idealist.

When asked for an explanation of his preference of higher to lower, Mill
at once shifts to Stoic ground in the following sentences: "We may give
what explanation we please of this unwillingness; we may attribute it to
pride, a name which is given indiscriminately to some of the most and to
some of the least estimable feelings of which mankind are capable; we
may refer it to the love of liberty and personal independence, an
appeal to which was with the Stoics one of the most effective means for
the inculcation of it; to the love of power, or to the love of
excitement, both of which do really enter into and contribute to it; but
its most appropriate appellation is a sense of dignity, which all human
beings possess in one form or another, and in some, though by no means
in exact, proportion to their highest faculties, and which is so
essential a part of the happiness of those in whom it is strong, that
nothing which conflicts with it could be, otherwise than momentarily, an
object of desire to them. Whoever supposes that this preference takes
place at a sacrifice of happiness--that the superior being, in anything
like equal circumstances, is not happier than the inferior--confounds
the two very different ideas of happiness and content. It is
indisputable that the being whose capacities of enjoyment are low has
the greatest chance of having them fully satisfied; and a highly endowed
being will always feel that any happiness which we can look for, as the
world is constituted, is imperfect. But he can learn to bear its
imperfections if they are at all bearable; and they will not make him
envy the being who is indeed unconscious of the imperfections, but only
because he feels not at all the good which those imperfections qualify.
It is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied;
better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the
fool, or the pig, is of a different opinion, it is because they only
know their own side of the question. The other party to the comparison
knows both sides."

When pressed for a sanction of motive Mill appeals to the Aristotelian
principle that the individual can only realise his conception of himself
through union with his fellows in society: to the social nature of man
and his inability to find himself in any smaller sphere, or through
devotion to any lesser end. "This firm foundation is that of the social
feelings of mankind; the desire to be in unity with our
fellow-creatures, which is already a powerful principle in human nature,
and happily one of those which tend to become stronger, even without
express inculcation, from the influences of advancing civilisation. The
social state is at once so natural, so necessary, and so habitual to
man, that, except in some unusual circumstances or by an effort of
voluntary abstraction, he never conceives himself otherwise than as a
member of a body; and this association is riveted more and more, as
mankind are farther removed from the state of savage independence. Any
condition, therefore, which is essential to a state of society, becomes
more and more an inseparable part of every person's conception of the
state of things which he is born into, and which is the destiny of a
human being. In this way people grow up unable to conceive as possible
to them a state of total disregard of other people's interests. They are
under a necessity of conceiving themselves as at least abstaining from
all the grosser injuries, and (if only for their own protection) living
in a state of constant protest against them. They are also familiar with
the fact of cooeperating with others, and proposing to themselves a
collective, not an individual, interest, as the aim (at least for the
time being) of their actions. So long as they are cooeperating, their
ends are identified with those of others; there is at least a temporary
feeling that the interests of others are their own interests. Not only
does all strengthening of social ties, and all healthy growth of
society, give to each individual a stronger personal interest in
practically consulting the welfare of others; it also leads him to
identify his feelings more and more with their good, or at least with an
ever greater degree of practical consideration for it. He comes, as
though instinctively, to be conscious of himself as a being who of
course pays regard to others. The good of others becomes to him a thing
naturally and necessarily to be attended to. This mode of conceiving
ourselves and human life, as civilisation goes on, is felt to be more
and more natural. Every step in political improvement renders it more so
by removing the sources of opposition of interest, and levelling those
inequalities of legal privilege between individuals or classes, owing to
which there are large portions of mankind whose happiness it is still
practicable to disregard. In an improving state of the human mind, the
influences are constantly on the increase, which tend to generate in
each individual a feeling of unity with all the rest; which feeling, if
perfect, would make him never think of, or desire, any beneficial
condition for himself, in the benefits of which they are not included.
The deeply rooted conception which every individual even now has of
himself as a social being tends to make him feel it one of his natural
wants that there should be harmony between his feelings and aims and
those of his fellow-creatures. It does not present itself to their minds
as a superstition of education, or a law despotically imposed by the
power of society, but as an attribute which it would not be well for
them to be without."

Lastly Mill introduces the Christian ideal. "As between his own
happiness and that of others, utilitarianism requires him to be as
strictly impartial as a disinterested and benevolent spectator. In the
golden rule of Jesus of Nazareth, we read the complete spirit of the
ethics of utility. To do as one would be done by, and to love one's
neighbour as one's self, constitute the ideal perfection of utilitarian
morality." In his attempt to prove the Christian obligation on an
Epicurean basis the inconsistency between his Epicurean principle and
his Christian preaching and practice becomes evident. Master of logic as
Mill was, an author of a standard text-book on the subject, yet so
desperate was the plight in which his attempt to stretch Epicureanism to
Christian dimensions placed him, that he was compelled to resort to the
following fallacy of composition, the fallaciousness of which every
student of logic recognises at a glance. "Happiness is a good; each
person's happiness is a good to that person, and the general happiness,
therefore, a good to the aggregate of all persons." As Carlyle has
pointed out, this is equivalent to saying, since each pig wants all the
swill in the trough for itself, a litter of pigs in the aggregate will
desire each member of the litter to have its share of the whole,--a
fallacy which a single experience in feeding pigs will sufficiently
refute. It requires something deeper and higher than Epicurean
principles to lift men to a plane where Christian altruism is the
natural and inevitable conduct which Mill rightly says it ought to be.

These confessions of an Epicurean heretic, wrung from a man who had been
rigidly trained by a stern father in Epicurean principles, yet whose
surpassing candour compelled him to make these admissions, so fatal to
the system, so ennobling to the man and to the doctrine he proclaimed,
serve as an admirable preparation for the succeeding chapters, where
these same principles, which Mill introduces as supplements, and
modifications, and amendments to Epicureanism, will be presented as the
foundation-stones of larger and deeper views of life. Mill starts with a
jack-knife which he publicly proclaims to be in every part of the handle
and in every blade through and through Epicurean; then gets a new handle
from the Stoics; borrows one blade from Plato, and another from
Aristotle; unconsciously steals the biggest blade of all from
Christianity; makes one of the best knives to be found on the moral
market: yet still, in loyalty to early parental training, insists on
calling the finished product by the same name as that with which he
started out. The result is a splendid knife to cut with; but a
difficult one to classify. Our quest for the principles of personality
will not bring us anything much better, for practical purposes, than the
lofty teaching of Mill's "Utilitarianism," and its companion in
inconsistency, Herbert Spencer's "Principles of Ethics." All our five
principles are present in these so-called hedonistic treatises. But it
is a great theoretical advantage, and ultimately carries with it
considerable practical gain, to give credit where credit is due, and to
call things by their right names. Thanks to the candour of these
heretics, though the names we encounter hereafter will be new, we shall
greet most of the principles we discover under these new names as old
friends to whom the Epicurean heretics gave us our first introduction.




