IV

THE DEFECTS OF EPICUREANISM

Thus far we have pointed out certain valuable elements of truth which
Epicureanism contains. Only incidentally have we encountered certain
deep defects. Epicurus's "free laugh" at those who attempt to fulfil
their political duties, his quiet ignoring of all interests that lie
outside his little circle, or reach beyond the grave, his naive remark
about the intrinsic harmlessness of wrong-doing, provided only the
wrong-doer could escape the fear of being caught, must have made us
aware that there are heights of nobleness, depths of devotion, lengths
of endurance, breadths of sympathy altogether foreign to this
easy-going, pleasure-seeking view of life. Justice requires us to dwell
more explicitly on these Epicurean shortcomings. Much that has been
charged against the school in the form of swinish sensuality is the
grossest slander. Still there are defects in this view of life which are
both logically deducible from its premises, and practically visible in
the lives of its consistent disciples.

The fundamental defect of Epicureanism is its false definition of
personality. According to Epicurus the person is merely a bundle of
appetites and passions; and the gratification of these is made
synonymous with the satisfaction of himself. But gratifications are
short; while appetites are long. The result is that which Schopenhauer
has so conclusively pointed out. During the long periods when desire
burns unsatisfied, the balance of pleasure is against us. In the
comparatively brief and rare intervals when passions are in process of
gratification, the balance can never be more than even. Therefore our
account with the world at the end of any period, whether a week or a
year or a lifetime, is bound to stand as follows: credit, a few rare,
brief moments--moments, too, which have long since vanished into
nothingness--when appetites and passions were in process of
satisfaction. Debit, the vast majority of moments, amounting in the
aggregate to almost the total period considered, when appetites and
passions were clamouring for a satisfaction that was not forthcoming.
The obvious conclusion from the frequent examination of the Epicurean
account-book is that which Schopenhauer so triumphantly
demonstrates,--pessimism. The sooner we cease doing business on those
terms, the less will be the balance of pain, or unsatisfied desire,
against us. To be entirely frank, the devotees of Omar Khayyam would
have to confess that it is this note of pessimism, despair, and
self-pity, at the sorry contrast of the vast unattainable and the petty
attained, which is the secret of his unquestionably fascinating lines.
Here the blase amusement-seeker finds consolation in the fact that a
host of other people are also yielding to the temptation to bury the
unwelcome consciousness of a self they cannot satisfy in wine, or any
other momentary sensuous titillation that will conceal the sense of
their spiritual failure--a failure, however, which they are glad to be
assured is shared by so many that the sense of it has been dignified by
the name of a philosophy and sung by a poet.

Pleasure cannot be sought directly with success; for pleasure comes
indirectly as the effect of causes far higher and deeper and wider than
any that are recognised in the Epicurean philosophy. Pleasure comes
unsought to those who lose themselves in large intellectual, artistic,
social, and spiritual interests. But such noble losing of self without
thought of gain is explicitly excluded from the consistent Epicurean
creed.

In the picture of the Epicurean life already drawn, while domestic and
political life have been presupposed as a background, nothing has been
said about the sacrifice which one is called upon to make in the support
and defence of a pure home and a free country. That was expressly
excluded by Epicurus. Whatever attractiveness there was in the picture
of the Epicurean life previously presented was largely due to this
background of presupposition that this happy life was lived in a
well-ordered and stable family, and in a free and just municipal and
national life. In fact it is only as a parasite on these great
domestic, social, and political institutions which it does nothing to
create or maintain, and much to weaken and destroy, that Epicureanism is
even a tolerable account of life. If we now paint our picture of the
Epicurean man and woman with this background of domestic and civic life
withdrawn, the ugliness and meanness of this parasitic Epicureanism will
stare us in the face; and while we ought not to forget the valuable
lessons it has to teach us, we shall shrink from the completed picture
as a thing of deformity and degradation.

Who then is the consistent Epicurean man? He is the club man, who lives
in easy luxury and fares sumptuously every day. Everything is done for
him. Servants wait on him. He serves nobody, and is responsible for no
one's welfare. He has a congenial set of cronies, loosely attached to be
sure; and constantly changing, as matrimony, financial reverses,
business engagements, professional responsibilities call one or another
of his circle away to a more strenuous life. He is a good fellow,
genial, free-handed with his set, indifferent to all who are outside. He
generally hires some woman to serve for a few months as the instrument
of his passions; only to cast her off to be hired by another and
another until in due time she dies, he cares not when or how.

As business men these Epicureans are apt to be easy-going, and therefore
failures. As debtors, they are the hardest people in the world from whom
to collect a bill. As creditors or landlords they are the most merciless
in their exactions. Their devotion to the state is generally confined to
betting on the elections; the returns of which they watch with the same
interest as the results of a horse-race. Their religion is confined to
poking fun at the people who are foolish enough to be going to church
while they are at their Sunday morning breakfast.

We all know these Epicureans; we do business with them; we meet them
socially; we treat them decently; but it is to be hoped that underneath
the smooth exterior we all detect their selfish heartlessness. They have
taken a doctrine, which, as applied to the good things which are made to
minister to our appetites is sound and true, and have perverted it into
a moral monstrosity by daring to treat human hearts and social
institutions as mere things, mere instruments of their selfish
pleasures.

Epicurean women, likewise, abound in every wealthy community. They
spend the winter in Florida, New York, or Washington; dividing the rest
of the year between the sea-shore, the mountains, and the lakes, with
occasional visits to what they call their homes. They must have the best
of everything, and assume no responsibility beyond running up bills for
their husbands to pay, or to remain unpaid. Their special paradise is
foreign travel, and no pension or hotel along the beaten highways of
Europe is without its quota of these precious daughters of Epicurus.
They flit hither and thither where least ennui and most diversion
allures. Two or three years of this irresponsible existence is
sufficient to disqualify them for usefulness either in Europe or
America, either here or hereafter. When they return, if they ever do, to
their native town or city, the drudgery of housekeeping has become
intolerable, the responsibilities of social life unendurable, and their
poor husbands are glad enough when the restless fit seizes them again
and they can be packed off to Egypt, or Russia, or whatever remote
corner of the earth remains for their idle hands and restless feet,
their empty minds and hollow hearts, to invade with their unearned gold.

There is no guarantee that the Epicurean will be the chaste husband of
one wife, or a faithful mother, or a good provider for the family, or a
devoted citizen of the republic, or a strenuous servant of art or
science, or a heroic martyr in the cause of progress and reform. If all
men were Epicureans, the world would speedily retrograde into the
barbarism and animalism whence it has slowly and painfully emerged. The
great interests of the family, the state, society, and civilisation are
not accurately reflected in the feelings of the individual; and if the
individual has no guide but feeling, he will prove a traitor to such of
these higher interests as may have the misfortune to be intrusted to his
pleasure-loving, self-indulgent, unheroic hands.

There are hard things to do and to endure; and if we are to meet them
bravely, we shall have to call the Stoic to our aid. There are sordid
and trivial things to put up with, or to rise above, and there we may
need at times the Platonist and the mystic to show us the eternal
reality underneath the temporal appearance. There are problems of
conduct to be solved; conflicting claims to be adjusted; and for this
the Aristotelian sense of proportion must be developed in our souls.
Finally there are other persons to be considered, and one great Personal
Spirit living and working in the world; and for our proper attitude
toward these persons, human and divine, we must look to the Christian
principle. To meet these higher relationships with no better equipment
than Epicureanism offers, would be as foolish as to try to run barefoot
across a continent, or swim naked across the sea. Naked, barefoot
Epicureanism has its place on the sandy beaches and in the sheltered
coves of life; but has no business on the mountain tops or in the depths
of human experience.

It will not make a man an efficient workman, or a thorough scholar, or a
brave soldier, or a public-spirited citizen. It spoils completely every
woman whom it gets hold of, unless at the same time she has firm hold on
something better; unless she has a husband and children whom she loves,
or work in which she delights for its own sake, or friends and interests
dearer than life itself. Epicureanism will not lift either man or woman
far toward heaven, or save them in the hour when the pains of hell get
hold of them. No home can be reared on it. The divorce court is the
logical outcome of every marriage between a man and a woman who are both
Epicureans. For it is the very essence of Epicureanism to treat others
as means; while no marriage is tolerable unless at least one of the two
parties is large and unselfish enough to treat the other as an end. No
Epicurean state or city could endure longer than it would take for the
men who are in politics for their pockets to plunder the people who are
out of politics for the same reason. An Epicurean heaven, a place where
eternally each should get his fill of pleasure at the expense of
everybody else, would be insufferably insipid, incomparably unendurable.
It is fortunate for the fame of Epicurus and the permanence of his
philosophy that he evaded the necessity of thinking out the conditions
of immortal blessedness by his specious dilemma in which he thought to
prove that death ends all. As a temporary parasite upon a political and
moral order already established, Epicureanism might thrive and flourish;
but as a principle on which to rest a decent society here or a hope of
heaven hereafter, Epicureanism is utterly lacking. If there were nothing
better than Epicureanism in store for us through the long eternities, we
all might well pray to be excused, as Epicurus happily believed we
should be. For any ultimate delight in life must be rooted in something
deeper than self-centred pleasure: it must love persons and seek ends
for their own sake; and find its joy, not in the satisfaction of the man
as he is, but in the development of that which his thought and love
enable him to become.


