III

THE EPICUREAN PRICE OF HAPPINESS

Whoever contracts his work and expands his play, on Epicurean
principles, will of course have common sense enough to cut off hurry and
worry altogether. Both are sheer waste and wantonness,--the most foolish
and wicked things in the whole list of forbidden sins. The Epicurean
will live his life in care-tight, worry-proof compartments; working with
all his might while he works; and then cutting it off short; never
letting the cares of work intrude on the precious precincts of
well-earned leisure, or permitting the strain of remembered or
anticipated toil to mar the hours sacred to rest and recreation. Some
things are bound to go wrong in every life. That is our misfortune. But
there is no need of brooding over them in gratuitous grief after they
have gone, or dreading them in gloomy anticipation before they come. If
either in anticipation or in retrospect these evils are permitted to
darken the hours when they are physically absent, that is not our
misfortune; it is our folly and our fault.

We hear a great deal in these days about mind cures, and rest cures, and
faith cures, and cures by hypnotism, and cures by patent medicines. If
anybody needs these cures, of course he is welcome to them; though there
is much to be said for the stalwart conservative who refused proffered
aid of this sort with the remark that he would rather die in the hands
of a skilful physician than be cured by a quack. Strict obedience to the
plain, homely doctrine of Epicurus would prevent ninety-nine one
hundredths of the physical and mental ailments which these various
systems of healing profess to cure. In almost every such case work, or
the square of work which is hurry, or the cube of work which is worry,
carried beyond the sane limits which Epicurus prescribes, is at the root
of trouble. Where it is not work and worry, it is their passive
counterparts, grief nursed long after its occasion has gone by, or fear
harboured long before its appropriate object has arrived. Cut these off
and all the use you will have for either healers or physicians will be
on such comparatively rare occasions as birth, death, contagious
diseases, and unavoidable accident. You will not be the chronic patient
of any doctor regular or irregular; or the consumer of any medicine,
patented or prescribed.

Neither useless regrets for the past nor profitless forebodings for the
future should ever cast their shadows over the present, which taken in
itself is always endurable, and may generally be made positively happy.
Memory should be purged of all its unpleasantness before its pictures
are permitted to appear before the footlights of reflection; and the
searchlight of expectation should always be turned toward the pleasures
that are still in store for us. Past and future are mainly in our power,
so far as the quality of things we remember and anticipate are
concerned. And even the brief and fleeting present is mainly filled by
reminiscence and anticipation, so that it too is largely what we please
to make it.

    "The world is so full of a number of things,
    I'm sure we should all be as happy as kings."

If any one of us is not happy all the time, except at the rare instants
when toothache, or the news of a friend's illness or death, or a bad
turn in our investments takes us by surprise--if happiness is not the
dominant tone of our ordinary life, it is simply because we do not want
it, in that thoughtful, enterprising, insistent way in which the
scholar wants knowledge, or the business man wants money, or the
politician wants votes. Whoever is willing to pay the price in prudent
planning of his daily pleasures, in relentless exclusion of the
enterprises and indulgences that cost more pain than they can return in
pleasure; whoever will cut out remorselessly the things in his past life
on which he cannot dwell with pleasure, and lop off the considerations
which give rise to dread; whoever is willing to pay this Epicurean price
for happiness can have it just as soon and just as often as he pays down
the cash of a faithful and consistent application of these principles.
If any man goes about the world in a chronic unhappiness, it is
ninety-nine per cent the fault, not of his circumstances, but of
himself. There is not a reader of this book whose circumstances are so
black that another person, in those same circumstances, would not find a
way to be supremely and dominantly, if not exclusively and continuously,
happy. There is not a reader of this book so rich, so blessed with
family and friends, so occupied and diverted, but that another person in
those same circumstances would be miserable himself, and a source of
misery to everybody with whom he came in contact. Epicurus is right,
that happiness is up at auction all the time, and sold in lots to suit
the purchaser whenever he bids high enough. And the price is not
exorbitant: prudence to plan for the simple pleasures that can be had
for the asking; resolution to cut off the pleasures that come too high;
determination to amputate our reflections the instant they develop
morbid symptoms, and to take an anti-toxine against fret and worry, the
moment we feel the approach of their contagious atmosphere;
concentration, to live in a self-chosen present from which profitless
regret and unprofitable anxieties, projected from the past or borrowed
from the future, are absolutely banished.

It is high time to treat melancholy, depression, gloom, fretfulness,
unhappiness, not merely as diseases, but as the inexcusable follies, the
intolerable vices, the unpardonable sins which a sane and wholesome
Epicureanism pronounces them to be.

The Epicurean principle, then, forbids us to go whining, whimpering, and
weeping through this glorious and otherwise cheery world, making
ourselves a burden and nuisance to our friends; and tells us frankly
that if we are so much as tempted to such melancholy living, it is
because we are too improvident, too slothful, too stupid to cast out
these devils, which a little plain fare, hard work, outdoor exercise,
vigorous play, and unworried rest would exorcise forever. It bids us put
in place of these banished sighs and groans and tears, the laughter,
song, and shout that "spin the great wheel of earth about." We may sum
it all up in the picture of a worthy Epicurean's day.

After a night of sleep too sound to harbour an unpleasant dream, he
greets the hour of rising with a shout and bound, plunges into the bath,
meets with gusto the shock it gives, and rejoices in the glow of
exhilaration a vigorous rubbing brings; greets the household "with
morning face and morning heart," eager to share with the family the
meal, the news, the outlook on the day, resolved like Pippa to "waste no
wavelet of his twelve-hours' treasure"; then, whether work calls him
forth immediately or not, takes a few minutes of brisk walking and deep
breathing in the open air until he feels the great forces of earth, air,
and sunshine pulsing in his veins; then greets the work of kitchen or
factory, office or field, schoolroom or counter, bench or desk with an
inward cheer, as something to put forth his surplus energy upon; and
through the swift, precious forenoon hours delights in the mastery over
difficulty his stored-up power imparts; takes the noon-day meal gayly
and leisurely with congenial people; through the early afternoon hours
does the lighter portion of the day's work if he must; gets out for an
hour or two in the open air if he may, with horse, or wheel, or
automobile, or boat, or racket, or golf clubs, or skates, or rod, or
gun, or at least a friend and two stout walking shoes; comes to the
evening meal in the family circle widened to include a few welcome
guests, or at the home of some hospitable host, in garments from which
all trace of stain or hint of strain has been removed, to share the best
things market and purse afford, served in such wise as to prolong the
opportunity for the interchange of wit and banter, cursory discussion
and kindly compliment; spends the evening in quiet reading or public
entertainment, games with his children or visiting with friends; and
then returns again to sleep with such a sense of gratitude for the dear
joys of the day as sends an echo of "All's well" down through even the
shadowy substance of his unconscious dreams. Surely there are some
features of this Epicurean day which we, in our bustling, restless,
overelaborated lives, might introduce with great profit to ourselves,
and great advantage to the people with whom we are intimately thrown. A
series of such days, varied by even happier holidays and Sundays, broken
once or twice a year at least by considerable vacations, added together,
will make a life which Epicurus says a man may live with satisfaction,
and after which he may pass away content.

If there be no other life, let us by all means make the most of this.
And if, both here and hereafter, there be a larger life than that
perceivable by sense,--as, on deeper grounds than the Epicurean
psychology recognises, most of us believe there is,--this healthy,
hearty, wholesome determination to live intensely and exclusively in the
present is a much more sincere and effective way to develop it than the
foolish attempt of a false other-worldliness to anticipate or discount
the future, by a half-hearted, far-away affectation of superiority to
the simple homely pleasures of to-day.


