III

THE COUNTERFEITS OF LOVE

Just because Love is so costly, it has a host of counterfeits. These
counterfeits are chiefly devices for gaining the rewards and honours of
Love, without the effort and sacrifice of loving. One of the most
obvious rewards of Love is being thought kind, generous, good. But this
can be secured, apparently, by professing religion, joining the church,
repeating the creed, giving money to the poor, subscribing large sums to
good causes,--all of which are much cheaper and easier than being kind,
and true, and faithful, and considerate in the home, on the farm, in the
factory, in the store. Yet Jesus tells us that unless we have Love in
the close and intimate relations of our domestic, economic, social, and
political life, all symbols of its presence elsewhere, all "services"
directed otherwise, become intolerable nuisances, whose places would be
better filled, and whose work better done, if they were once well out of
the way and decently buried. All this, however, is not to deny, but by
contrast to affirm, the great indispensable uses of symbols, officers,
and institutions that are genuinely and effectively devoted to the
cultivation and propagation of Love.

The pure gold of the Spirit is most conveniently and effectually
circulated when mixed with the alloy of rites, ceremonies, creeds,
officers, and organisations. Though no essential part of the pure
Gospel, yet these forms and observances, these bishops and clergy, these
covenants and confessions, are as practically useful for the maintenance
and spread of the Christian Spirit as courts and constitutions,
governors and judges, are for the orderly conduct of the state. Their
authority is founded on their practical utility. When their utility
ceases, when they come to obscure rather than reveal the Spirit they are
intended to express, then schism and reformation serve the same
beneficent purpose in the church that declarations of independence and
revolution have so often achieved in the state. That form of church
government is best which in any given age and society works best; and
this may well be concentrated personal authority in one set of
circumstances, and democratic representative administration in another.
Each has its advantages and its disadvantages.

Modes of worship rest on the same practical basis. Spontaneous prayer or
elaborate ritual, much or little participation by the people, long or
short sermons, prayer-meetings or no prayer-meetings,--all are to be
determined by the test of practical experience. It is absurd to profess
to draw hard and fast rules about these matters from the precept or
practice of Jesus and His Apostles, or the early church fathers, working
as they did under conditions so widely different from our own. Probably
centralised authority and elaborate ritual are most effective when
bishops and priests can be found who will not abuse their power for
their own aggrandisement. Until then, more democratic forms of worship
and of government are doubtless more expedient. The friendly competition
of the two systems side by side helps to keep sacerdotalism modest and
make independency effective.

Creeds likewise have their practical usefulness, especially in times of
theological ferment and transition, serving the purposes of party
platforms in a political campaign. But it is the grossest perversion of
their function to make assent to them obligatory on all who wish to
enjoy the most intimate Christian fellowship, or to test Christian
character by their formulas. One might as well refuse citizenship to
every person who could not assent to every word in some party platform
or other. The creed is an intellectual formulation of the results of
Christian experience, interpreting the Christian revelation; and it
will vary from age to age with ripening experience, and maturer views of
the content of the revelation. No creed was altogether false at the time
of its formulation. No creed in Christendom is such as every intelligent
Christian can honestly assent to. The attempt to make creed subscription
a test of church membership, or even a condition of ministerial
standing, is sure to confuse intellectual and spiritual things to the
serious disadvantage of both. The most sensitively honest men will more
and more decline to enter the service of the church, until subscription
to antiquated formulas, long since become incredible to the majority of
well-trained scholars, ceases to be required either literally or "for
substance of doctrine." It is sufficient that each candidate for the
ministry be asked to make his own statement, either in his own words or
in the words of any creed he finds acceptable, leaving it for his
brethren to decide whether or not such intellectual statement is
consistent with that spiritual service which is to be his chief concern.
Unless Christianity, in the persons of its leaders as well as of its
laity, can breathe as free an intellectual atmosphere as that of Stoic
or Epicurean, Plato or Aristotle, it will at this point prove itself
their inferior. Infinitely superior as it is in every other respect, it
is a burning shame that its timid and conservative modern adherents
should endeavour, at this point of absolute intellectual openness and
integrity, to place it at a disadvantage with the least noble of its
ancient competitors. The pure Spirit of Love will win the devotion of
all honest hearts and candid minds. But the insistence on these
antiquated formulas is sure to repel an increasing number of the most
thoughtful and enlightened from organised Christian fellowship. The only
serious reason for preferring the independent to the hierarchical forms
of church organisation at the present time is the tendency of the latter
to keep up these forms of intellectual imposition and imposture. Until
the church as a whole shall rise to the standards of intellectual
honesty now universally prevalent in the world of secular science, the
mission of the independent protest will remain but partially fulfilled.
"Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the salt have lost its savour,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to
be cast out and trodden under foot of men."

Any thought of the reputation or respectability or honour a right act
will bring, just because it puts something else in place of Love,
destroys the rightness of the act and the righteousness of the doer.
Righteousness will always remain a dry, dreary, forbidding, impossible
thing until we welcome right as the service of those whom we love, and
the promotion of interests we share with them; and shrink from wrong as
what harms them and defeats our common ends. Without Love, righteousness
either dries up into a cold, hard asceticism, or evaporates into a
hollow, formal respectability; and in one way or the other misses the
spontaneity and expansion of soul which is Love's crown and joy. "Take
heed that ye do not your righteousness before men, to be seen of them:
else ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven."

Love is too intent on its objects to be aware of itself or call
attention to its own operations. The air of doing a favour takes all the
Love out of an act; for Love gives so simply and quietly that it seems
to ask rather than bestow the favour. In this way both giver and
receiver together share Love's distinctive reward of two lives bound
together as one in the common Love of the Father.

"When therefore thou doest alms, sound not a trumpet before thee, as the
hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have
glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have received their reward.
But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand doeth, that thine alms may be in secret; and thy Father which seeth
in secret shall recompense thee."

Professed Love, if unfruitful or pernicious, is false. If we make no one
happier; help no one over hard places; bind no wounds; comfort no
sorrows; serve no just cause; do no good work; still worse, if we make
any one's lot harder; add to his burden or sorrow; corrupt public
officials; break down beneficent institutions; plunder the poor, even if
within technical legal forms; drive the weak to the wall; and connive in
the perversion of justice,--then the absence of good fruits, or the
presence of bad ones, is proof positive that we have never seen or known
Love, that our profession of Love is a lie, our proper place is with
Love's foes, and our destiny with the doers of evil.

"Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves. By their fruits ye shall know them. Do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree
bringeth forth good fruit; but the corrupt tree bringeth forth evil
fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Therefore by their fruits ye
shall know them. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my
Father which is in heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord,
did we not prophesy by thy name, and by thy name cast out devils, and by
thy name do many mighty works? And then will I profess unto them, I
never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity."

Neither eloquent speech nor elegant writing, neither ornate ceremonial
nor orthodox symbol, nor anything short of actual toil to serve human
need and help human joy can translate Love into life. Though the most
beautiful idea in the world, the mere idea of Love is of no more value
than any other mere idea. If it fails of expression in hard, costly
deeds, its ritualistic or verbal profession is a sham. In Love's
service, so far as things done are concerned, there is no high or low,
first or last. To preach sermons and conduct religious services, to
teach science in the university, or make laws in Congress, is no better
and no worse than to make shoes in the shoeshop or cook food in the
kitchen. All work done in Love counts, stands, endures. All work done in
vanity and self-seeking, all work shirked with pretence of religion, or
excuse of wealth, or pride of social station, leaves the soul hard,
hollow, unreal, and fails to stand Love's searching test.

"Every one therefore which heareth these words of mine, and doeth them,
shall be likened unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock; and
the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon the rock. And
every one that heareth these words of mine, and doeth them not, shall be
likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand; and the
rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and smote upon
that house, and it fell; and great was the fall thereof."


