V

RIGHTEOUSNESS THE COMPREHENSIVE VIRTUE

We now have three of the cardinal virtues: temperance, the subjection of
appetite to reason; fortitude, the control of the spirit by reason; and
wisdom, won through education, the assertion of the dictates of reason
over the clamour of both appetite and spirit. But where, amid all this,
Plato asks, is righteousness? In reply he remarks, "that when we first
began our inquiry, ages ago, there lay righteousness rolling at our
feet, and we, fools that we were, failed to see her, like people who go
about looking for what they have in their hands. Righteousness is the
comprehensive aspect of the three virtues already considered in detail.
It is the ultimate cause and condition of the existence of all of them.
Righteousness in a state consists in each citizen doing the thing to
which his nature is most perfectly adapted: in minding one's own
business, in other words, with a view to the good of the whole.
Righteousness in an individual, then, consists in having each part of
one's nature devoted to its specific function: in having the appetites
obey, in having the spirit steadfast in difficulty and danger, and in
having the reason rule supreme. Thus righteousness, that subordination
and coordination of all the parts of the soul in the service of the soul
as a whole, includes each of the other three virtues and comprehends
them all in the unity of the soul's organic life.

"For the righteous man does not permit the several elements within him
to meddle with one another, but he sets in order his own inner life, and
is his own master, and at peace with himself; when he has bound
together the three principles within him, and is no longer many, but has
become one entirely temperate and perfectly adjusted nature, then he
will begin to act, if he has to act, whether in a matter of property, or
in the treatment of the body, or in some affairs of politics or of
private business; in all which cases he will think and call just and
good action, that which preserves and cooeperates with this condition,
and the knowledge which presides over this wisdom."

Unrighteousness, on the other hand, is the exact opposite of this. "Then
assuming the threefold division of the soul, must not unrighteousness be
a kind of quarrel between these three--a meddlesomeness and
interference, a rising up of a part of the soul against the whole soul,
an assertion of unlawful authority, which is made by a rebellious
subject against a true prince, of whom he is the natural vassal--this is
the sort of thing; the confusion and error of these parts or elements in
unrighteousness and intemperance, cowardice, and ignorance, and in
general all vice." In other words, righteousness and unrighteousness
"are like disease and health; being in the soul just what disease and
health are in the body." "Then virtue is the health and beauty and
well-being of the soul, vice is the disease and weakness and deformity
of the soul." From this point of view our old question of the
comparative advantage of righteousness and unrighteousness answers
itself. Indeed, the question whether it is more profitable to be
righteous and do righteously and practice virtue, whether seen or unseen
of gods and men, or to be unrighteous and act unrighteously if only
unpunished, becomes, Plato says, ridiculous. "If when the bodily
constitution is gone, life is no longer endurable, though pampered with
every sort of meats and drinks, and having all wealth and all power,
shall we be told that life is worth having when the very essence of the
vital principle is undermined and corrupted, even though a man be
allowed to do whatever he pleases, if at the same time he is forbidden
to escape from vice and unrighteousness, or attain righteousness and
virtue, seeing that we now know the true nature of each?"

Righteousness, according to Plato, is the condition of the soul's health
and life. To part with righteousness for any external advantage is to
commit the supreme folly of selling our own souls. Righteousness is the
organising principle of the soul; unrighteousness is the disorganising
principle. Health and life rest on organisation. Disorganisation and
vice are synonymous with disease and death. Therefore, all seeming gains
that one may win in the paths of unrighteousness really involve the
greatest possible loss.

We have now seen what righteousness is, whether in a state or in an
individual. It is the health, harmony, beauty, excellence of the whole
state or the whole man, secured by having each member attend strictly to
its own distinctive work, with a view to the good of the whole state or
the whole man. Thus defined it is something so obviously desirable and
essential, that nothing else is worthy to be compared with it. Whoever
parts with it even in exchange for the greatest outward honours,
emoluments, comforts, or pleasures, is bound to get the worst of the
bargain. Yet men do part with it; states do part with it. And the eighth
and ninth books of the Republic are devoted to a description of the four
stages of degeneration through which states and individuals pass on the
downward road from righteousness and virtue to unrighteousness and vice.
The breaking up of a thing often reveals its nature as effectually as
the putting it together; and as we have traced the four virtues by which
either the state or the soul is constructed, it will throw added light
upon the problem to trace in conclusion the four stages through which
men and states go down to destruction.


VI

THE STAGES OF DEGENERATION

The first step down is where, instead of the good, men seek personal
honour and distinction. At first the deterioration, whether in state or
individual, is hardly noticeable. An ambitious statesman, on the whole,
will advocate, if he is shrewd and far-sighted, much the same measures
as the statesman who is intent on the welfare of the state. For he knows
that by promoting the public welfare he will most effectively gain the
reputation and distinction he desires. Yet there is a marked difference
in the attitude of mind, and in the long run that difference will
express itself in action. When it comes to a close and hard decision,
where the real interest of the state lies in one direction, and the
waves of popular enthusiasm are running in an opposite direction, the
man who cares for the real welfare of the state will stand fast, while
the man who cares supremely for honour and distinction will be more
likely to give way. Besides, contention and strife will arise, since the
ambitious man is more anxious to do something himself than he is to have
the best thing done by some one else. Hence the state where the
statesmen love power, office, and honour will be less well off than the
state where they are disinterestedly devoted to the public good.

Just so the man who is supremely covetous of power and honour will be
weaker than the man who loves the good and follows the guidance of
reason as supreme, in both these respects. He will be prone to follow
the clamour of the multitude when he knows it is not the voice of
reason; and he will try to have his own way, even when he knows that the
way of another man is better than his. As Plato says, "He gives up the
kingdom that is within him to the middle principle of contentiousness
and passion, and becomes proud and ambitious." Here, then, are the two
tests by which each man may judge for himself whether he is a degenerate
of the first grade or not. First: Will you do what reason shows you to
be right every time, at all costs, no matter if all the honours and
emoluments are attached to doing something a shade or two off from this
absolutely right and reasonable course? Second: Would you rather have
what is best done by somebody else, and let him have the credit of it,
rather than get all the credit yourself by doing something not quite so
good? The man of pride and ambition can never be quite disinterested in
his service of the good, although incidentally most of the things he
does will be good things. As Plato puts it, "He is not single-minded
toward virtue, having lost his best guardian." He has neglected "the one
thing that can preserve a man's goodness through his life--reason
blended with music."

It is a short and easy step, in state and individual, from the love of
honour down to the love of money as the guiding principle of life. The
appetitive side of life is always present, even in the most upright of
men. It may be asleep, but it is never dead. And when there is nothing
more deep and vital than the love of honour to hold it in restraint, it
is sure to wake up and prowl about. Rivalry for honour soon reveals the
fact that directly or indirectly honour and office can be bought. Then
comes the state of things where only rich men can get office, or can
afford to hold it if it comes to them. That in the state is what Plato
calls an oligarchy. The deterioration of a state under this condition is
very rapid, for, as he says, "When riches and virtue are placed together
in the scales of the balance, the one always rises as the other falls.
And so at last, instead of loving contention and glory, men become
lovers of trade and of money, and they honour and reverence the rich man
and make a ruler of him, and dishonour the poor man." The evils of this
oligarchical rule, he says, are illustrated by considering the nature of
the qualification for office and influence. "Just think what would
happen if the pilots were to be chosen according to their property, and
a poor man refused permission to steer, even though he were the better
pilot?" The other defect is "the inevitable division; such a state is
not one but two states, the one of poor men, the other of rich men, who
are living on the same spot and ever conspiring against one another."

The avaricious man is like the state which is governed by rich men. "Is
not this man likely to seat the concupiscent and covetous elements on
the vacant throne? And when he has made the reasoning and passionate
faculties sit on the ground obediently on either side, and taught them
to know their place, he compels the one to think only of the method by
which lesser sums may be converted into larger ones, and schools the
other into the worship and admiration of riches and rich men. Of all
conversions there is none so speedy or so sure as when the ambitious
youth changes into the avaricious one."

Nowhere is Plato more keen or more fair than in his judgment of the
money-maker. He says that he will generally do the right thing; he will
be eminently respectable; he will not sink to very low or disreputable
courses. All his goodness, however, will be of a forced, constrained,
artificial, and at bottom unreal character. He will be good because he
has to, in order to maintain that standing in the community on which his
wealth depends. In Plato's own words: "He coerces his bad passions by an
effort of virtue; not that he convinces them of evil, or exerts over
them the gentle influence of reason, but he acts upon them by necessity
and fear, and because he trembles for his possessions. This sort of man
will be at war with himself: he will be two men, not one; but, in
general, his better desires will be found to prevail over his inferior
ones. For these reasons such an one will be more decent than many are;
yet the true virtue of a unanimous and harmonious soul will be far out
of his reach."

The next step down for the state is what Plato calls democracy. Of the
democracy of intelligence and self-control diffused throughout the body
of self-respecting citizens Plato had formed and could form no
conception. By democracy he meant the state of things where each man
does that which is right in his own eyes. "In the first place the
citizens are free. The city is full of freedom and frankness--there a
man may do as he likes. They have a complete assortment of
constitutions; and if a man has a mind to establish a state, he must go
to a democracy as he would go to a bazaar, where they sell them, and
pick out one that suits him. Democracy is a most accommodating and
charming form of government, full of variety and diversity, and (this,
perhaps, is the keenest of all Plato's keen thrusts) _dispensing
equality to equals and unequals alike_."

The man corresponding to democracy in the state, is the man whose life
is given over to the undiscriminating enjoyment of all sorts of
pleasures. "In this way the young man passes out of his original nature
which was trained in the school of necessity, into the freedom and
libertinism of useless and unnecessary pleasures, putting the government
of himself into the hands of the one of his pleasures that offers and
wins the turn; and when he has had enough of that, then into the hands
of another, and is very impartial in his encouragement of them all.
Neither does he receive or admit into the fortress any true word of
advice; if any one says to him that some pleasures are the satisfactions
of good and noble desires, and others of evil desires, and that he
ought to use and honour some and curtail and reduce others--whenever
this is repeated to him he shakes his head and says that they are all
alike, and that one is as honourable as another. He lives through the
day, indulging the appetite of the hour; and sometimes he is lapped in
drink and strains of the flute; then he is for total abstinence, and
tries to get thin; then again, he is at gymnastics; sometimes idling and
neglecting everything, then once more living the life of a philosopher;
often he is at politics, and starts to his feet and says and does
anything that may turn up; and, if he is emulous of any one who is a
warrior, off he is in that direction, or of men of business, once more
in that. His life has neither order nor law; and this is the way of
him,--this he terms joy and freedom and happiness. There is liberty,
equality, and fraternity enough in him."

The life of chance desire, unregulated by any subordinating principle,
then, is the third stage of the descent and degradation of the soul.

In the state democracy speedily and inevitably passes over into tyranny.
All appetite is insatiable. In a state where each citizen does what he
pleases "all things are just ready to burst with liberty; excess of
liberty, whether in states or individuals, seems only to pass into
excess of slavery. Then tyranny naturally arises out of democracy." He
then proceeds, with prophetic pen, to trace the evolution of the modern
political boss. First there develops a class of drones who get their
living as professional politicians. Second, "there is the richest class,
which, in a nation of traders, is generally the most orderly; they are
the most squeezable persons and yield the largest amount of honey to the
drones; this is called the wealthy class, and the drones feed upon them.
There is also a third class, consisting of working-men who are not
politicians and have little to live upon; these, when assembled, are the
largest and most powerful class in a democracy; but then, the multitude
is seldom willing to meet unless they get a little honey. Their leaders
take the estates of the rich and give to the people as much of them as
they can consistently with keeping the greater part themselves. The
people have always some one as a champion whom they raise into
greatness. This is the very root from which a tyrant (that is, as we
should say, a boss) comes. When he first appears above ground, he is a
protector. At first, in the early days of his power, he smiles upon
every one and salutes every one; he, to be called a tyrant who is making
promises in public and also in private, and wanting to be kind and good
to every one! Thus liberty, getting out of all order and reason, passes
into the harshest and bitterest form of slavery." The worst form of
government, according to Plato, is that which we know too well to-day in
our great cities: the government of the professional politician who
maintains himself by buying the votes of the poor with the money he has
squeezed out of the rich. All pretence of administering the government
in the interest of the community is frankly abandoned. The boss, or
tyrant, as Plato calls him, frankly and unblushingly avows that he is in
politics for what he can get out of it.

The true statesman, the philosopher king, in Plato's phrase, sees and
serves the public good. Such a government Plato calls an aristocracy, or
the government of the best for the good of all. First below that comes
timocracy, or the government of those who are ambitious for power and
place. Next comes oligarchy, the government of the rich for the
protection of the interests of the moneyed class. Next below that, and
as a logical consequence, comes populism, which is our word for what
Plato calls democracy; a government which aims to satisfy the immediate
wants of everybody, regardless of moral, legal, or constitutional
restraints. Last, and lowest of all, comes the rule of the professional
politician who has thrown all pretence of regard for the public good,
all consideration of honour, all loyalty to the rich and genuine
sympathy for the poor to the winds, and is simply manipulating the forms
of government, getting and distributing offices, collecting assessments
and distributing bribes, all in the interests of his own private pocket.
Between disinterested service of the public good and such unblushing
pursuit of private gain, Plato says that there is no stopping place.
Logically Plato is right; historically, too, he was right at the time
when he was writing. Modern democracy, however, is a very different
thing from the populistic democracy with which Plato was familiar and
which our large cities know too well. A democracy, resting on
intelligence and public spirit, diffused through rich and poor alike,
was beyond Plato's profoundest dreams. That great experiment the
American people, with their public-school system, and their principle of
the equality of all before the law, are now trying on a gigantic scale.

Corresponding to the tyrannical state comes the tyrannical man. "The
wild beast in our nature gets the upper hand and the man becomes
drunken, lustful, passionate, the best elements in him are enslaved;
and there is a small ruling part which is also the worst and the
maddest. He has the soul of the slave, and the tyrannical soul must
always be poor and insatiable. He is by far the most miserable of all
men." "He who is the real tyrant, whatever men may think, is the real
servant and is obliged to practice the greatest adulation and servility
and be the flatterer of mankind; he has desires which he is truly unable
to satisfy, and has more wants than any one, and is truly poor if you
know how to inspect the soul of him. All his life long he is beset with
fear and is full of convulsions and distractions. Even as the state
which he resembles, he grows worse from having power; he becomes of
necessity more jealous, more faithless, more unjust, more impious; he
entertains and nurtures every evil sentiment, and the consequence is
that he is supremely miserable and thus he makes everybody else equally
miserable."


