CHAPTER XXIX. BENEATH THE SACRIFICIAL STONE.

Contrary to the expectations of Ixtli escape by way of the War God's
temple was barred throughout the remainder of that eventful night.
Tlacopa, the head priest, together with a number of his acolytes,
varying as to force, yet ever too powerful for any two men to force a
passage contrary to the will of their leader, remained on duty each and
every hour. And hence it came to pass that those early hours found
our fugitives still beneath the temple, worn through loss of sleep
and stress of anxiety, yet firmly resolved not to permit that intended
outrage without at least striking one fair blow for the Children of the
Sun.

Slowly enough the time passed, yet it could hardly be called monotonous.
Whenever wearied of their darksome waiting, the young men would steal
again into the hollow image of Huitzil', there to utilise the cunningly
arranged peepholes, now looking out upon the priests, or listening to
catch such words as fell from the lips of those nearest the stone of
sacrifice.

In this manner Ixtli contrived to pick up quite a little fund of
information, mainly through the confidences reposed in a certain
favoured few of the brotherhood by the chief paba. And this, in turn,
filtered through his lips after the chums once again retreated to the
lower regions for both safety and comfort.

And then Bruno learned how the adventurous young Aztec, far less
superstitious than the vast majority of his people, thanks to the kindly
teaching of Victo, Child of Quetzal', had in his explorations discovered
so many secrets of the temple and priesthood, secrets which he now had
no scruple in communicating to another of a different race.

Ixtli told how, on various occasions, he had lurked behind the scenes
while the miraculous “oracle” was delivering fiat or prophecy, and then
he told his white brother how Tlacopa meant to completely confound the
Children of the Sun when once brought before the gods.

“He tell slave what say. Slave come dis way. Hide in War God. Wait for
time, den tell Tlacopa's words!”

A most infernal scheme, yet the danger of which Bruno could readily
recognise, together with the serious difficulty of refuting any such
supernatural evidence.

“Surely your people will not suffer a few dirty curs to do such horrible
wrong to ladies like--Why, Ixtli, even the gods you fellows bow the knee
to in worship, ought to rise up in their defence!”

But Ixtli merely sighed, then spoke in sad tones, explaining how he
alone had been taken wholly into the confidence of the Sun Children.
Even the captain of their guards knew Victo and Glady as but descendants
of the great Fair God whom the audacious trickery of a rival sent far
away from the land of his favoured people, to find an abiding-place in
the sun itself.

“He good brave. He die for dem,--easy! But he not know all. He think
drop from sun, to lead people back to light. If think not so, dat make
face turn black; dat make mad come--great big!”

As was ever the case when his feeling seemed deeply stirred, Ixtli found
it difficult to fully or fairly explain his sentiments; but Bruno caught
sufficient of his meaning to give a fair guess at the rest.

He found a ray of hope in the belief that Aztotl at least would defend
the Children of the Sun, and Ixtli predicted with apparent confidence
that the members of the body-guard would stand firm under the Red
Heron's leadership.

Keeping thus upon the alert throughout the remainder of that night, the
young men were able to take prompt action when the crisis drew nigh.

Ixtli caught the first inkling of what was coming, and hastily sent
Bruno away from the peepholes, dropping a word in his ear as they both
prepared for clean work.

Through a secret entrance, shaped amidst the drapery which surrounded
the pedestal of the mighty Huitzil', a slave of the temple crept to play
the part of echo to Tlacopa's evil will; and scarcely had he secured
what was to be a place of waiting and watching than the attack was made
from out the darkness.

Ixtli flung his tunic over the slave's head, twisting both ends tightly
about his throat, effectually smothering all attempt at crying aloud for
aid, while Bruno clasped arms about his middle, holding hands powerless
to strike or to draw weapon.

A brief struggle, which produced scarcely any noise, certainly not
sufficient to reach the ears of priest or helper, then the trembling,
unnerved slave was bundled down that narrow passage, to be dumped in a
remote corner, and there effectually bound and gagged by the young men.

All this was performed without hitch or mishap, and then, nerved
to fighting pitch, Ixtli and Bruno went back beneath the stone of
sacrifice, resolved to play their part to the end in manful fashion.

There was no further fear of intrusion, for, of course, Tlacopa would
never think of endangering his own evil scheme by risking an exposure
such as would follow discovery of his slave-oracle. As Ixtli truly
said, such discovery would end in the paba's being slain by his befooled
people.

Their patience was sorely tried, even then, though a goodly portion of
the blame belonged to their fears for the Sun Children, rather than to
the actual length of waiting. But then, amidst the solemn invocations
led by the high priest, the body-guard marched into the Hall of
Sacrifice, and Bruno caught his breath sharply as he beheld--Gladys! Not
her mother, just then. For the first minute, only,--Gladys!

Then came the bitter denunciation by Tlacopa, followed by the coldly
dignified words of Victo, after which the innocent lamb yielded up
its life in order that the future might be predicted through the still
quivering heart.

With a fiercely exultant cry Tlacopa hurled the vital organ towards the
accused, it striking the mother upon an arm, then glancing further to
leave an ugly smear upon the daughter's shoulder ere falling among the
eager multitude, who fought and struggled to secure at least a morsel of
the hideous thing.

“Behold! the gods hath marked their own!” cried the high priest, his
harsh tones fairly filling the Hall of Sacrifice. “They are guilty of
all crimes laid at their door. They merit death, a thousandfold. The
Mother of Gods hath spoken!”

“To whom but thou, Tlacopa?” sternly cried the captain of the guards, as
he stood firm in spite of the ominous sounds which were rising from the
rear, as well as from either side.

“She hath spoken unto me, as her worthy representative on earth.”

“And there are those who say much religion hath turned thy brain, good
Tlacopa,” retorted Aztotl, holding his temper fairly well under control,
yet with blazing eyes and stiffening sinews. “Are thy ears alone to
receive such important communications as--”

“Silence, thou scoffer!” fiercely cried the high priest, lifting
quivering hands on high as though about to call down the thunders of
an outraged deity upon that impious head. “She who hath spoken once may
deign to speak again. Harken,--hear the oracle!”

Doubtless this was cue for the slave of the temple to repeat the words
placed within its mouth, but that slave was literally unable to speak
a word for himself, let alone others. Yet,--the oracle was not wholly
silenced!

“Talk out, or I will!” fiercely muttered Bruno, giving Ixtli a violent
punch in the side, “talk out for the Sun Children!”

The young Aztec needed no further prompting, loving Victo and Glady as
he did, hating and despising the high priest. And in shrill, clear tones
came the wondrous oracle:

“Tlacopa lies! Tlacopa is an evil dog! The Mother of the Gods loves and
will defend her friends, the Children of the great and good Quetzal'.”

How much more Ixtli might have said, had he been granted further grace,
will never be known. Tlacopa shrank away from the speaking statue as
from a living death, but then he rallied, savagely thundering:

“'Tis a lying oracle! 'Tis an evil impostor who has--An omen! A true
omen, my children! The evil ones hath been branded for the knife! Seize
them! To the sacrifice!”

That vicious cry was swiftly taken up, but the body-guard closed in
around the menaced women, presenting arms to all that maddened horde,
while their captain sternly warned all good people to fall aside and
make way for the Children of the Sun.

Then that secret entrance was flung wide, permitting two excited young
men to issue, Tlacopa reeling aside from a blow dealt him by Bruno's
clenched fist, as that worthy hastened to join forces with the
body-guard.



