CHAPTER XIX. THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN GOD.

No difficulty whatever was experienced in reaching that retreat, and
milder prisoner never knew a guard than Ixtli proved himself to be,
silently yielding to each impulse lent his arm by Waldo, smiling when,
as sometimes happened, he was brought more nearly face to face with that
armed rear-guard.

Nor were the Gillespie brothers worried by sound, sign, or token of more
serious trouble from others of that strangely surviving race. And it
was not long after reaching the rendezvous from which the professor had
sailed in the early dawn, that the youngsters agreed the echoes of
their Winchesters could not have reached the ears of the Lost City
inhabitants.

“That's plenty good luck for one soup-bunch,” quoth Waldo, yet adding a
dubious shake of the head as he gazed upon their bronzed companion. “And
if it wasn't for this gentleman in masquerade costume--”

“Ixtli friend. Ixtli feel like heart-brother,” came in low, mellow
accents from those smiling lips.

There certainly was naught of guile or of evil craft to be read in
either eyes or visage, just then; but the brothers could not feel
entirely at ease, even yet. How many times had warriors of his colour
played a cunning part, only to end all by blow of tomahawk, thrust of
knife, or bolt from the bended bow?

At a barely perceptible sign from Bruno, his brother drew apart, leaving
their “white elephant” by himself, yet none the less under a vigilant
guard.

“He seems all right, in his way,” muttered the elder Gillespie, “but how
far ought we to trust him, after what we promised uncle Phaeton?”

“Not quite as far as we can see him, anyway. Still, a fellow can't
find the stomach to bowl him over like a hare,--without a weenty bit of
excuse, at least.”

“That's it! If he'd try to bolt, or would even jump on one of us, it
would come far more easy. Look at him smile, now! And I hate to think of
clapping such a bright-seeming lad in bonds!”

“Time enough for all that when he shows us cause,” quickly decided
Waldo, with a vigorous nod of his curly pow. “Pity if a couple of us
can't keep him out of mischief without going that far. And we want to
pump the kid dry before uncle Phaeton gets back; understand?”

Bruno gave a slight start at these words, but his eye-glow and
face-flush bore witness that the idea thus suggested had not been
unthought of in his own case.

“Then you really think--”

“That there's more ways than one of skinning a cat,” oracularly observed
Waldo. “Without showing it too mighty plainly, one or the other of us
can always be ready and prepared to dump the laddy-buck, in case he
tries to come any of his didoes. And, at the same time, we can be
hugging up to him just as sweetly as though we knew he was on the dead
level. Understand?”

Possibly the programme might have been a little more elegantly
expressed, but Waldo, as a rule, cared more for substance than form, and
his speech possessed one merit, that of perspicuity.

Having reached this fair understanding, the brothers dropped their
aside, and moved nearer the young Aztec.

Ixtli gazed keenly into first one face, then the other, plainly enough
endeavouring to read the truth as might be expressed therein, as related
to himself. What he saw must have proved fairly satisfactory, since he
gave another bright smile, then spoke in really musical tones:

“Good,--brother, now! That more good, too!”

In spite of the suspicions, which seem inborn where people of the
red race are concerned, both Bruno and Waldo felt more and more drawn
towards this remarkable specimen of a still more remarkable tribe; and
not many more minutes had sped by ere the younger couple were chatting
together in amicable fashion, although finding some little difficulty in
Ixtli's rather limited vocabulary.

Not a little to his elder brother's impatience, Waldo apparently took
a deeper interest in the recent adventure than in the subject which
claimed his own busiest thoughts, but he hardly cared to crowd the
youngster, lest he make matters even worse.

Aided by the sort of freemasonry which naturally exists between lads
of an adventurous nature, Waldo readily succeeded in picking up
considerable information from the Aztec, even before broaching that
all-important matter.

Ixtli was the only son of a famed warrior and chieftain of the Aztecan
clans, by name Aztotl, or the Red Heron. He, in common with so many
of his people, had witnessed the approach and abrupt departure of the
strange bird in the air, and had hastened forth in quest of the monster.

He failed to see aught more of the strange creature, but, disliking to
return home without something to show for the trip, remained out over
night, then chanced to fairly stumble into the way of a mighty grizzly.

There were a few moments during which he might possibly have escaped
through headlong flight, but he was too proud for that, and but for the
timely arrival and prompt action on the part of his white brothers would
almost certainly have paid the penalty with his life.

Then followed more thanks and broken expressions of gratitude, all of
which Waldo magnanimously waved aside as wholly unnecessary.

“Don't work up a sweat for a little thing like that, old man. Of course
we saw you were an Injun and--ahem! I mean, how in time did you happen
to catch hold of our lingo so mighty pat, laddy-buck?”

“My brother means to ask who taught you to speak as we do, Ixtli?”
 amended Bruno, catching at the wished-for opportunity now it offered.

“And who was that nice little gal with the yellow hair? Is she--what did
you call her? Gladys--And the rest of it Edgecombe?”

Waldo was eager enough now that the ice was fairly broken, but his
very volubility served to complicate matters rather than to hasten the
desired information.

Ixtli apparently thought in English pretty much as he spoke it,--slowly,
and with care. When hurried, his brain and tongue naturally fell back
upon his native language.

Sounds issued through his lips, but, despite all their animation, these
proved to be but empty sounds to the eager brothers. And, divining the
truth, Bruno checked his brother, himself acting as questioner, pretty
soon striking the right chord, after which Ixtli fared very well.

Still, thanks to his difficulty in finding the right words with which to
express his full meaning, it took both time and patience for even Bruno
to learn all he desired; and even if such a course would be desirable,
lack of space forbids giving a literal record of questions and answers,
since the general result of that cross-examination may be put so much
more compactly before the generous reader.

The first point made clear was that the young Aztec owed his imperfect
knowledge of the English language to certain Children of the Sun, whom
he named as if christened Victo and Glady. With this as starting-point,
the rest formed a mere question of time and perseverance.

Growing in animation as he proceeded, Ixtli told of the coming to their
city of those glorious children; riding upon the wings of an awful
storm, yet issuing unharmed, unawed, bright of face, as the mighty orb
the sons of Anahuac worshipped.

He told how an envious few held to the contrary: that these fair-skins
had come as evil emissaries from the still more evil Mictlanteuctli,
mighty Lord of Death-land, who had laden them with pestilence and
brain-sorrow and eye-darkness, with orders to devastate this, the last
fair city of the ancient race.

With low, sternly suppressed tones, the young warrior went on to tell of
what followed: of the wicked attempt made by those malcontents to punish
the bearers of death and misery; then, his voice rising and growing more
clear, he told how, from a clearing-sky, there came a single shaft flung
by the mighty hand of the great god, Quetzalcoatl, before which the
impious dog went down in everlasting death.

“Struck by lightning, eh?” interpreted Waldo, who seemed born without
the influence of poetry. “Served him mighty right, too!”

Bowing submissively, although it could be seen he scarcely comprehended
just what those blunt words were meant to convey, Ixtli spoke on,
seemingly with perfect willingness, so long as the adored “Sun Children”
 formed the subject-matter.

From his laboured statement, Bruno gathered that the sudden death of one
who had dared to lift an armed hand against the woman so mysteriously
placed there in their very midst awed all opposition to the general
belief in the divine origin of mother and child; and ere long Victo
was installed as a sort of high priestess of the temple more especially
devoted to the Sun God.

That was long ago, and when Ixtli was but a child. As he grew older,
and his father, Red Heron, was appointed as chief of guards to the Sun
Children, Victo took more notice of the lad, and ended in teaching him
both the English tongue and its Christian creed, so far as lay in his
power to comprehend.

Then came less pleasing information concerning the Children of the Sun,
which went far to prove that the death of one evil-minded dog had
not entirely purged the Lost City, and it was with harsher tones and
frowning brows that Ixtli spoke of the head priest, or paba, Tlacopa the
evil-minded, who had built up a powerful and dangerous sentiment against
both Victo and Glady, even going so far as to declare before the holy
stone of sacrifice that the Mother of Gods demanded these falsely titled
Children of the Sun.

“The fair-faced God must come soon, or too late!” sighed the Aztec,
bowing his head in joined palms the better to conceal his evident grief.
“He has promised to come, but hurry! They die--they die!”

This was hardly an acceptable stopping-point, but questioning was of
little avail just then. Satisfied of so much, the brothers drew apart
a short distance, yet keeping where they could guard their more or less
dangerous charge, conversing in low tones over the information so far
gleaned from the Aztec's talk.

“Well, we'll hold a tight grip on him, anyway, until uncle Phaeton gets
back,” finally decided Waldo, speaking for his brother as well.



