CHAPTER XXVI. DOWN AMONG THE DEAD.

Ixtli spoke with a degree of earnestness which left no room for doubt,
even if the young man's own keen sense of hearing had not given warning
but an instant later.

Ominous sounds came from the entrance, which had served them but so
brief a time gone by, and Bruno knew that, even if they had escaped
being seen while thus attempting to win such a gruesome refuge, the
possibility of their having elected just such a line of flight had
occurred to some of the redskins.

Gillespie heard the heavy doors open, then clang to again. He was fairly
confident that some of the Aztecs had entered, although as yet the utter
darkness hindered further recognition.

“What next, Ixtli?” he whispered, lips almost touching the face of his
young guide, as they stood close together in the mirk. “They can't take
me alive! Is it fight, or--”

“No fight yet,” gently breathed the Aztec in turn. “Dey look, dat not
make sure find. Dey try see; we try not see all time. Dey come, we
go,--like dis!”

Catching a hand within his own clasp, Ixtli led Bruno away in that utter
darkness, seemingly well acquainted with the lay of the ground, although
it quickly became evident that there must be more than one direct
passage. Bruno felt convinced that there were other chambers turning at
right angles to their present course, though it might have bothered the
young man to give entirely satisfactory reasons for such belief.

Ixtli did not flee fast nor far, in that first spurt, pausing shortly
to turn face towards the rear, a low, musical chuckle coming through his
lips.

“Dey come look, got no eyes for see in dark,” he explained, barely loud
enough for Bruno to catch his meaning. “We play fool dem all; dat be
fun; heap fun all time over!”

Ixtli was scarcely as precise of speech while under the influence of
excitement as when he had ample time in which to pick and choose his
words; but there was little room for mistaking his meaning, which, after
all, is fairly sufficient.

But this time the young brave was in error, for only a few moments later
both fugitives caught sight of a dim light in hurried motion far towards
the entrance to these underground crypts. That warned them of added
peril, and Ixtli's chuckle died abruptly away.

“They'll fetch us now,” grimly muttered Bruno, shaking his fairly
athletic shoulders and fingering the knife at his belt as though making
preparations for an inevitable struggle. “All right. They may kill, but
I'll furnish some red paint for my tombstone, anyway!”

It may be doubted whether Ixtli fully appreciated this conclusion, yet
he divined something of what was spoken, and made swift response:

“No kill yet. Dey look, we hide. Mebbe not find. Mebbe play fool all
over--yes!”

“Where can we hide that lights won't ferret us out, though? If a fellow
might only have the same advantage; here in this darkness I'm not worth
a sick kitten!”

Just a bit disgustedly came the words, but Bruno was not giving over
in weak despair. No matter how vast the odds might show against him, he
would put up a gallant fight as long as he could lift his hand or strike
a blow.

Still, he was by no means anxious for the crisis to arrive. He would far
rather run than fight, under existing circumstances; but whither, and
how?

Ixtli took it upon himself to solve the perplexing enigma, in a whisper
bidding his white brother follow with as little sound as might be, once
more hurrying away through the gloomy blackness, which was by no means
rendered more agreeable to Bruno by that fleeting glimpse of the dead
men's bones.

There was little room left for doubting the truth. Their presence in the
death-cells surely was more than suspected, judging from the actions
of yonder redskins, who flashed the light over and into each angle and
corner, each niche and jog, where a human being might possibly seek
concealment.

They were not so many in number, but still a larger force than could
well be met with success by two youths, even granting that Ixtli would
turn lethal weapons against his own people, which Bruno felt was by no
means a settled fact.

For some little time the young men kept without that limited circle of
light, watching each movement made by the searchers, and at the same
time taking care that none of the little party stole a dangerous march
upon them by hastening in advance of the lights.

Ixtli apparently enjoyed the affair, much as a child might a successful
game of I-spy, for he emitted occasional chuckles, and let fall soft
whispers which, if caught by other ears, certainly would not have deeply
benefited the fugitives when captured.

Thanks to that slow progress, rendered thus by the care and minuteness
of the search, Bruno began to marvel at the extent of the catacombs, and
almost involuntarily calculate how many centuries it must have taken to
accumulate such enormous quantities of remains. For, thanks to yonder
prying light, he could see how high those grim relics of perishing
mortality were piled up in tiers, with here and there upright skeletons
in position of greater prominence.

Perhaps Gillespie might have been better able to appreciate Ixtli's
amusement had he even an inkling as to how this game of hide-and-go-seek
was fated to end. That an end must come, eventually, was a foregone
conclusion. And then?

He ventured to ask Ixtli how they were to escape detection when they
could retreat no farther, but before an answer could be fairly shaped,
that end seemed actually upon them.

Without sound or warning of any sort, another bright light showed at a
considerable distance in the opposite direction, and, as Bruno stared
that way, he made out several armed warriors who appeared to be engaged
in that same occupation: searching that city of the dead for the living!

Thus caught between two fires, there seemed only one course to pursue,
and, with the courage of his fathers, Bruno spoke in low, grim tones to
his young guide:

“No use for you to join in the mix, Ixtli. I'll do the best I know how,
but if I can't make the riffle, if I go down for good and all, I ask you
to convey the news to my friends. You will?”

But Ixtli was not at the end of his resources, and gripping a wrist, he
urged Bruno towards yonder second light, speaking hastily as they moved
along towards the edge of that wide passage. “No fight, yet. Best
hide; mebbe no find; dat best try first. Den Ixtli fight like white
brother,--fast!”

There was time for scant speech, for just then the two parties seemed,
for the first time, to catch sight of each other, and while the brave
bearing the rude lantern still maintained his slow movements, searching
well as he came, the other Indians came in advance, giving the fugitives
barely time in which to crouch down under temporary cover.

The moment these enemies had passed them by, Ixtli urged Bruno on, then,
in swift whispers, instructed him how to perfect his hiding, even
aiding the young paleface into one of the upright crypts, back of a grim
skeleton, the mouldering blankets assisting in covering the one of flesh
and blood.

After like fashion, the Aztec sought cover on the opposite side of the
passage. None too quickly, either; for now the single searcher drew
dangerously nigh, peering into every practicable hiding-place on either
side, before moving onward.

Little by little he drew closer, while the other band of searchers
apparently turned off into a side passage, or large chamber, since
nothing could be seen or heard of them by the fugitives.

In all probability, Ixtli's bold ruse would have proved a complete
success, for the Aztec warrior showed no suspicion as he drew nearer;
but it was not to be thus.

Fairly holding his breath, lest he disturb some of the dry bones
immediately in front of himself, Bruno waited and hoped, only to feel
his blood chill, and his heart fail him, as a sickening horror crept
over his brain; nor was that the only creeping thing,--worse luck!

Past all room for doubting, his entrance into that crypt had disturbed
the repose of a snake of some description; for now he could feel the
loathsome reptile crawling slowly up his back, turning the skin beneath
to scorching ice in its horrid passage.

One horrible nightmare minute that lasted, then the serpent paused upon
his shoulder and biceps, touching his cheek with nose, then drawing back
its ugly head to give an ominous hiss.

Human flesh and blood could endure no more, and Bruno flung the snake
violently off, striking forcibly against that mass of dry bones as he
did so. With a rattling clatter, the skeleton lost its frail coherence
and tumbled outward, leaving Bruno fairly exposed within the niche.

With a cry the Aztec warrior turned in that direction, but ere he could
fetch his light to bear upon the right spot, Ixtli sprung forth to the
rescue, hooting like a frightened owl, as he dashed the light to earth,
and, at the same time, deftly tripping the Indian headlong.

Swift as thought itself he followed up the advantage thus won, smiting
the fallen brave heavily upon the crown with a clubbed thighbone,
depriving him of sensibility for the time being at least. And then
snatching up the still burning light, he called, in guarded tones, to
his white friend:

“Come, brother, play hunt, now! Fast--not stop here; dat bad for you see
by dem so soon. Dat good you go--like dis way!”

Scarcely realising just what fresh ruse the Aztec had in mind, but far
from recovered from that horrible fear of death from poisonous fangs,
Gillespie submitted, Ixtli hurrying him away, turning off into what
appeared to be a side passage, less spacious than that to which they had
until then confined their retreat.

The young Aztec hastily explained his present scheme, which was to play
the role of searchers as well; and scarcely had he made that project
known, than another difficult test was offered their courage.



