CHAPTER XXII. A DARING UNDERTAKING.

Still, that point was of too vital importance to justify hasty decision,
and the professor did not make his surrender complete until the shades
of another night were beginning to gather over the land.

Meantime, partly for the purpose of keeping the youngsters employed and
thus out of the way of less harmless things, the professor suggested
that the huge grizzly be flayed. If the proposed scheme should really be
undertaken, that mighty pelt, if uncomfortable to convey, would serve as
a fair excuse for the young brave's as yet unexplained absence from the
Lost City.

As a matter of course, Cooper Edgecombe felt intense anxiety through
all, but he contrived to keep fair mastery over his emotions, readily
admitting that he himself could do naught towards visiting the Lost
City.

“I know that my loved ones are yonder. I would joyfully suffer ten
thousand deaths by torture for the chance to speak one word to--to them.
And yet I know any such attempt would prove fatal to us all. The mere
sight of--I would go crazy with joy!”

There is no necessity for repeating the various arguments used, pro and
con, before the final agreement was reached. Enough has already been put
upon record, and the result must suffice: Professor Featherwit yielded
the vital point, and, having once fairly expressed his fears and doubts,
flung his whole heart into perfecting the disguise which was now counted
upon to carry Bruno safely into and out of yonder city.

He was carefully trigged out in the warlike uniform secured by Cooper
Edgecombe at the cost of a human life, and, with fresh stain applied
to his face and hands, the slight moustache he wore was not dangerously
perceptible.

“'Twould take a strong light and mighty keen eyes to see it at all, and
even if a body should happen to notice it, he'd reckon 'twas a bit of
smut, or the like,” generously declared Waldo.

Under less trying circumstances, Bruno might have answered in kind, but
now he merely smiled at the jester, then turned again to receive the
earnest cautions let fall for his benefit by the professor.

Above all else, he was to steer clear of fighting, and, without he saw
a fair chance of winning speech with the white women, he was to keep in
such hiding as Ixtli might furnish, trusting the young Aztec to post the
Children of the Sun as to what was in the wind.

Tremulous, almost incapable of coherent speech, so intense was his
agitation, Cooper Edgecombe sent many messages to his loved ones,
begging for one word in return. And if nothing less would serve--

His voice choked, and only his feverishly burning eyes could say the
rest.

It was well past sunset ere the youngsters set forth from the
rendezvous, accompanied a short distance by both Waldo and the
professor; but the parting came in good time. It would be worse than
folly to add to the existent perils that of possible discovery by some
prowling Aztec who might work serious injury to them one and all.

That great bear-hide proved a tax upon their strength, even though the
bullet-riddled head-piece had been carefully cut off and buried, lest
those queer holes tell a risky tale on close examination; but Ixtli, as
well as Bruno, was upborne by an exaltation such as neither had known
before this hour.

There was nothing worse than the natural obstacles in the way to be
overcome, and, knowing every square yard of ground so thoroughly, Ixtli
chose the most practicable route to that hill-encircled town.

The stony pass was followed to the lower level, and the young
adventurers had drawn fairly near the first buildings ere encountering a
living being; and then ample time was given them for meeting the danger.

A low-voiced call sounded upon the night air, and Ixtli responded in
much the same tone. Bruno, of course, was utterly in the dark as to
what was being said, but he still held perfect faith in his copper-hued
guide, and left all to the son of Aztotl.

The Aztec brave appeared to be explaining his unusually protracted
absence, for he proudly displayed the great grizzly pelt, then exhibited
the spear-head from which protruded the tooth-marked wood.

Like one who was already familiar with the details, Bruno slowly lounged
forward a pace or two, then in silence awaited the pleasure of his
companion on that night jaunt.

Ixtli was not many minutes in shaking off the Indian, and, almost
staggering beneath his shaggy burden, moved away as though in haste to
rejoin his family circle.

Fortunately for the venture, the Aztecans appeared to believe in the
maxim of going to bed early, for there were very few individuals astir
at that hour, young though the evening still was. And by the clear
moonlight which fell athwart the valley, it was no difficult task to
catch sight before being seen, where eyes so busy as those of the two
young men were concerned.

Only once were they forced to make a brief detour in order to escape
meeting another redskin, and then a guarded whisper from the lips of
the Aztec warned Bruno that they were almost at the teocalli wherein the
Children of the Sun made their home and abiding-place.

Leaving the grizzly pelt at a corner, for the time being, Ixtli led his
white friend up and into the Temple of the Sun, pressing a hand by way
of added caution.

Although he had declared that an armed guard was kept night and day over
the Sun Children, and that he hoped to pass Bruno as well as himself
without any serious difficulty, since he had long been a favoured
visitor, and ever welcomed by Victo and Glady, the temple was seemingly
without such protection upon the present occasion.

Ixtli expressed great surprise when this fact became evident, and he
showed uneasiness as to the welfare of his beloved patroness and kindly
teacher.

Surely something evil was impending! His father, Aztotl, was chieftain
of the guards, and wholly devoted to the Sun Children, ready at all
times to risk life in their behalf. Now, if the usual guards were
lacking, surely it portended evil,--treachery, no doubt, at the bottom
of which the paba and the 'Tzin almost certainly lurked.

All this Ixtli contrived to convey to Bruno, who fairly well shared that
anxiety, but who was more for going ahead with a bold rush, to learn the
worst as quickly as might be.

Still, unfamiliar with the construction of the temple as he was, Bruno
felt helpless without his guide, and so timed his progress by that of
Ixtli, right hand tightly gripping the handle of his “hand-wood,” or
maquahuitl, resolved to give a good account of either of those rascally
varlets in case trouble lay ahead.

The unwonted desolation which appeared to reign on all sides was plainly
troubling the Aztec brave, and he seemed to suspect a cunning ambuscade,
judging from his slow advance, pausing at nearly every step to bend ear
in keen listening.

Still, nothing was actually seen or heard until after the young men
reached the upper elevation, upon a portion of which the Sun Children
had been first sighted by the air-voyagers.

Here the first sound of human voices was heard, and Bruno stopped short
in obedience to the almost fierce grip which Ixtli closed upon his
nearest arm, listening for a brief space, then breathing, lowly:

“We see, first. Dat good! Him see first, dat bad! Eye, ear, two both.
You know, brother?”

“You mean that we are to listen and play spy, first, Ixtli?” asked
Bruno, scarcely catching the real meaning of those hurried words.

“Yes. Dat best. Come; step like snow falls, brother.”

“Who is it, first?”

“Victo, she one. Odder man, not know sure, but think Huatzin. He bad;
all bad! Kill him, some day. Dat good; plenty good all over!”

This grim vow appeared to do the Aztec good from a mental point of view,
and then he led his white friend silently towards the covered part of
the teocalli, from whence those sounds emanated.

Curtains of thick stuff served to shut in the light and to partly
smother the sound of voices, but Ixtli cautiously formed a couple of
peepholes of which they quickly made good use.

A portion of the sacred fire was burning upon its special altar, while a
large lamp, formed of baked clay, was suspended from the roof, shedding
a fair light around, as well as perfuming the enclosure quite agreeably.

Almost directly beneath this hanging-lamp stood the two Children of
the Sun, one tall, stately, almost queenly of stature, and now looking
unusually impressive, as she seemed to act as shield for her daughter,
slighter, more yielding, but ah, how lovely of face and comely of
person!

Even then Bruno could not help realising those facts, although his
ears were tingling sharply with the harsh accents falling from a far
different pair of lips, those of a tall, muscular warrior whose form was
gorgeously arrayed in featherwork and cunning weaving, rich-hued dyes
having been called to aid the other arts as well.

If this was actually the Prince Hua, then he was a most brutal sample of
Aztecan aristocracy, and at first sight Gillespie felt a fierce hatred
for the harsh-toned chieftain.

As a matter of course, Bruno was unable to comprehend just what was
being said, thanks to his complete ignorance of the language employed;
but he felt morally certain that ugly threats were passing through those
thin lips, and even so soon his hands began to itch and his blood to
glow, both urging him to the rescue.

Swiftly fell the reply made by Victo, and her words must have stung the
prince to the quick, since he uttered a savage cry, drawing back an arm
as though to smite that proudly beautiful face with his hard-clenched
fist.

That proved to be the cap-sheaf, for Bruno could stand no more. He
dashed aside the heavy curtain as he leaped forward, giving a stern cry
as he came, swinging the war club over his shoulder to strike with all
vengeance at the startled and recoiling Aztecan.

Only the young man's unfamiliarity with the weapon preserved Prince Hua
from certain death. As it was, he reeled, to fall in a nerveless heap
upon the floor, while, with a startled cry, another Aztec broke away in
flight.



