CHAPTER XX. THE PROFESSOR AND THE AZTEC.

Fortunately for all concerned, there proved to be no serious difficulty
attached to that same holding. So far as outward semblance went,
Ixtli was very well content with both present quarters and present
companionship.

He likewise enjoyed the supper that, aided by a small fire kindled in
a depression so low that the light could by no means attract any
unfriendly eye, Bruno prepared for them all. And just prior to taking
his first taste, the young warrior bowed his head to murmur a few
sentences which, past all doubt, had first come to his mind through the
wonderful Victo: a simple little blessing, which certainly did not add
to the dislike or uneasiness with which the brothers regarded their
guest.

“He's white, even if he is red!” confidentially declared Waldo, at his
first opportunity. “More danger of our spoiling him than his doing us
dirt; and that's an honest fact for a quarter, old man!”

Bruno felt pretty much the same, yet his added years gave him greater
discretion, and, in spite of that growing liking, he kept a fairly keen
watch and ward over the Aztec.

After supper there came further questioning and answers, Waldo as a
rule playing inquisitor, eager to learn more anent the strange existence
which these people must live, so completely hemmed in from all the rest
of the world as they surely were in yonder valley.

Without at all betraying the exile, Gillespie spoke of the lake and its
mighty whirlpool, then learned that the Indians really made semi-annual
trips thither for the purpose of laying in a supply of dried fish for
the winter's consumption.

As the night waned, preparations were made for sleeping, although it was
agreed between the brothers that one or the other should stand guard in
regular order.

“Not that I really believe the fellow would play us dirt, even with
every chance laid open,” Waldo admitted. “Still, it's what uncle Phaeton
would advise, and we can't well do less than follow his will, Bruno.”

“Since we broke it so completely by tackling the grizzly,” with a brief
laugh.

“That's all right, too. Of course we'd ought to've skulked away like a
couple of egg-sucking curs, but we didn't, and I'm mightily glad of
it, too. For Ixtli--what a name that is to go to bed with every night,
though!--for Ixtli is just about as white as they make 'em, nowadays;
you hear me blow my bazoo?”

And so the long night wore its length along, the brothers taking turns
at keeping watch and ward, but the Aztec slumbering peacefully through
all, looking the least dangerous of all possible captives. And after
this light even the cautious Bruno began to regard him ere the first
stroke of coming dawn could be seen above the eastern hills.

Not being positive just where the air-ship would put in an appearance,
since Professor Featherwit had, perforce, left that question open, to be
decided by circumstances over which he might have no control, each guard
in turn devoted considerable attention to the upper regions, hoping to
glimpse the aerostat, and holding matches in readiness to raise a flare
by way of alighting signal. But it was not until the early dawn that
Bruno caught sight of the air-ship, just skimming the tree-tops, the
better to escape observation by any Indian lookout.

After that the rest came easily enough. A couple of blazing matches held
aloft proved sufficient cue to the professor, and soon thereafter the
flying-machine was safely brought to land, so gently that the slumbers
of the young Aztec were undisturbed.

Bruno gave a hasty word of warning and explanation combined, even
before he extended a welcoming hand towards Mr. Edgecombe, who certainly
appeared all the better for his encounter with people of his own race.

Professor Featherwit took a keen, eager look at the slumbering redskin,
then drew silently back, to whisper in Bruno's ear:

“Guard well your tongue, lad. I have told him nothing, as yet, and we
must consult together before breaking the news. For now we have had no
rest, so I believe we would better lie down for an hour or two.”

Mr. Edgecombe appeared to be perfectly willing to do this, and soon the
wearied men were wrapped in blankets and sleeping peacefully.

Long before their lids unclosed, Bruno had an appetising meal in
readiness, although the others had broken fast long before, and Ixtli,
his hands tightly clasped behind his back, as a child is wont to resist
temptation, was inspecting the air-ship in awed silence.

Taking advantage of this preoccupation, Bruno quickly yet clearly
explained to his uncle all that had happened, showing that by playing a
more prudent part the young warrior must inevitably have perished.

Then, making sure Cooper Edgecombe was not near enough to catch his
words, Bruno told in brief the information gleaned from Ixtli concerning
the Children of the Sun, whom he and Waldo more than suspected must be
the long-lost wife and daughter of the exiled aeronaut.

As might have been expected, Professor Featherwit was deeply stirred by
all this, fidgeting nervously while keeping alert ears, with difficulty
smothering the ejaculations which fought for exit through his lips.

After satisfying his craving for food, the professor led the young Aztec
apart from the rest of the party, speaking kindly and sympathetically
until he had won a fair share of liking for his own, then broaching the
subject of the Sun Children.

After this it was by no means a difficult matter to get at the seat of
trouble, and little by little Featherwit satisfied himself that Ixtli
would do all, dare all, for the sake of benefiting the woman and maiden
who had treated him so kindly.

At a covert sign from the professor, Bruno came to join in the talk,
and his sympathy made the young Aztec even more communicative. And Ixtli
spoke more at length concerning Tlacopa, the paba, and another enemy
whom the Children of the Sun had nearly equal cause to fear, one
Huatzin, or Prince Hua, chiefest among the mighty warriors of the
Aztecan clans.

This evil prince had for years past sought Victo for his bride, while
his son, Iocetl, tried in vain to win the heart-smiles of the fair
Glady, Victo's daughter. And, through revenge for having their suit
frowned upon, these wicked knaves had joined hands with the priest in
trying to drag the Sun Children down from their lofty pedestal.

It did not take long questioning, or shrewd, to convince the professor
that in Ixtli they could count upon a true and daring supporter in
case they should conclude to interfere in behalf of his patroness and
teacher, adored Victo.

The professor led the way over to the air-ship, there producing the
clothing and arms once worn by another Aztec warrior, which he had
carefully stowed away in the locker, loath to lose sight of such
valuable relics; truly unique, as he assured himself at the moment.

Bruno gave a little exclamation at sight of the articles, then in eager
tones he made known the daring idea which then flashed across his busy
brain.

“We ought to make sure before taking action, uncle Phaeton. Then why not
let me don these clothes and steal down into the valley, under cover of
darkness, to see the ladies and--”

“No, no, my lad,” quickly interrupted the professor, gripping an arm
as though fearful of an instant runaway. “That would be too risky; that
would be almost suicidal! And--no use talking,” with an obstinate shake
of his head, as Bruno attempted to edge in an expostulation. “I will
never give my consent; never!”

“Or hardly ever,” supplied Waldo, coming that way like one who feels the
proprieties have been more than sufficiently outraged. “Give some other
person a chance to wag his chin a bit, can't ye, gentlemen? Not that _I_
care to chatter merely for sake of hearing my own voice; but--eh?”

“We were considering whether or no 'twould be advisable to take a walk
over to the observatory,” coolly explained the professor. “Of course, if
you would rather remain here to watch the aerostat--”

“Let Bruno do that, uncle. He grew thoroughly disgusted with what he saw
over yonder, yesterday,” placidly observed the youngster.

“Waldo, you villain!”

“Well, didn't you vow and declare that you could recognise grace
and beauty and all other varieties of attractiveness only in--dark
brunettes, old man?”

Professor Featherwit hastily interposed, lest words be let fall through
which Mr. Edgecombe might catch a premature idea of the possible
surprise held in store; and shortly afterwards the start was made for
the snug covert from whence the Lost City had been viewed on prior
occasions.

Naturally their route led them directly past the scene of the bear
fight, where the huge carcass lay as yet undisturbed, and calling forth
sundry words of wonder and even admiration, through its very ponderosity
and now harmless ferocity.

Professor Featherwit deemed it his duty to gravely reprove his wards
for their rash conduct, yet something in his twinkling eyes and in the
kindly touch of his bony hand told a far different tale. His anger took
the shape of pride and of heart-love.

In due course of time the lookout was won, and without delay the savant
turned his field-glass upon the temple which appeared to appertain to
the so-called Sun Children; but, not a little to his chagrin, the azotea
was utterly devoid of human life.

But that disappointment was of brief existence, for, almost as though
his action was the signal for which they had been waiting, mother and
daughter came slowly into view, arm in arm, clad in robes of snowy
white, with their luxuriant locks flowing loose as upon former
occasions.

Both lads--three of them, to be more exact--gave low exclamations
of eager interest as those shapes came in sight, while even Cooper
Edgecombe gazed with growing interest upon the scene, wholly
unsuspecting though he was as yet.

A slight nod from the professor warned the brothers to stand ready
in case of need, then he offered the exile the glass, begging him to
inspect yonder fair women upon the teocalli.

The glass was levelled and held firmly for a half minute, then the exile
gave a choking cry, gasping, ere he fell as one smitten by death:

“Merciful heavens! My wife--my child!”



