CHAPTER XXVIII. BROUGHT BEFORE THE GODS.

Once again Aztotl, the Red Heron, was bowing humbly before the Children
of the Sun God, but now there was stern grief impressed upon his visage,
rather than pure devotion, such as one might feel at the feet of a
divinity.

And the face of Victo was unusually pale, her lips tightly compressed to
keep them from trembling too visibly, while her arm clasped Gladys with
almost fierce love in its warm strength.

Aztotl glanced upwards for a moment, then slowly spoke:

“Such are the commands laid upon thy captain of guards, Daughter of
Quetzal', the Fair God. He hath been commanded to fetch Victo and Glady
to the teocalli, there to be--no!” with an outbreak of fierce rebellion,
drawing his superb figure erect, and gripping javelin until the springy
ash quivered, as though suddenly winning life for itself. “The gods lie!
They are speaking falsely, or--or the paba lies, when trying to thus
interpret the oracle!”

Gladys shrunk away, but her mother stood firm, seeming to gain in
coolness and nerve what this ardent servant was losing.

“It must be thus, my good friend,” she spoke, in low, even tones. “The
word hath come to a soldier, and obedience is his first duty.”

“Not when obedience means leading to sacrifice--”

“That may never come, good Aztotl. We have committed no sin, in deed or
in thought. The Mother of Gods will not lay claim to an innocent victim.
Or, even then, the right shall triumph! Tlacopa is powerful, but hath
Victo no influence? Lord Hua may throw HIS influence to the wrong side,
but hath truth no answer?”

“If not truth, then death!” sternly vowed the captain of the body-guard.
“If Tonatiuh fails to punish the enemies of his daughter, then this
right arm shall hurl the false prince down to Mictlanteuctli, grim lord
of the under-world!”

“What is it all about, mother?” murmured Gladys, clinging in sore
affright to the side of her Amazonian relative. “Surely the people will
not--surely we need not go forth to--”

A mother's kiss closed those quivering lips, and then, with far more
assurance than she really could find in her heart, Victoria bade her
child fear nothing; that all would come aright in a brief while.

Little by little, the maiden's terrors were calmed, and then she took
position by her parent's side with a greater display of nerve than might
have been anticipated.

Through all, Aztotl waited, fiercely silent, held from open rebellion
only by the influence of the woman whose very life was now menaced. And
as the Sun Children stood before him, in readiness to comply with the
commands issued by those in high authority, the Red Heron broke bonds.

“Say but one word, Daughter of Quetzal', and all this shall never come
to pass! Give me but permission to--”

“What wouldst thou do, good Aztotl?”

“Surround the Sun Children with their loyal body-guard and defend them,
while one brave might strike blow, or hold shield in front of their
sacred charge,” slowly yet fiercely declared the captain, eyes telling
how dearly he longed to receive that permission.

But Victo shook her head in slow negation. She was still cool of brain
enough to realise how fatal such course would be in the end. If one
deadly blow should be dealt, the end could be but one,--annihilation to
both defended and defenders.

Then, too, she recalled the wondrous tidings brought the evening before
by Ixtli and his comrade. Friends were seeking to rescue them, and if
only time might be won--it must be played for, then!

And so, his petition finally denied, with no other course left open to
take, the Red Heron summoned his picked band and, with the Sun Children
in their midst, left the temple, crossed the plain, and slowly marched
into the War God's teocalli.

In awed silence a vast number of Aztecs followed that little procession,
silent as they, yet clearly anticipating events of far more than
ordinary importance. And thus the foredoomed women were taken before the
great stone of sacrifice, whereupon lay a snow-white lamb, bound past
the possibility of struggling.

Close beside the prepared sacrifice stood the head priest, Tlacopa,
robed for the awesome ceremony, sacrificial knife in hand, temples
crowned as customs dictated, eyes blazing as vividly as they might if
backed by living fire.

Not far distant stood Huatzin, head bandaged and face none the better
looking for his floundering fall when his sash gave way the evening
before. And as he caught the passing gaze of the woman whom he had
so basely persecuted, a repulsive smile showed itself, the grin of a
veritable fiend in human guise.

Sternly cold, and outwardly unmoved, the captain of guards performed
his sworn duty, then in grim silence awaited the end. And in like manner
each man of that carefully selected band rested upon his arms.

A brief pause, during which the utter silence grew actually oppressive,
then the head priest lifted a hand as though commanding full attention
before he should speak.

Then, in tones which were by no means loud, yet which were modulated
so as to fill that expanse most perfectly, Tlacopa recited the grave
accusations brought against the false children of the mighty Sun God.

To their evil influence he attributed the comparative failure of crops
which had now cursed their fair people throughout the past years. Unto
them, he claimed, belonged the evil credit of many untimely deaths
which had covered so many proud heads with the ashes of mourning and of
despair. To their door might be traced all of misfortune with which the
favourite children of the mighty gods had been so sorely afflicted.

In proud silence Victo listened to this deliberate arraignment, not
deigning to interpose denial, or offer plea in self-defence, until the
paba was clearly at an end. And even then she gazed upon Tlacopa with
eyes of scorn, and lips which curled with contempt.

A low murmur from the eager crowd told how anxious they were to hear
more, and, taking her cue from that, Victo made a graceful motion with
her white hand, following it by words that sounded rarely sweet in their
deep mellowness, after the harsh, dry notes of the paba.

“Who dares to bring such base charges against the Daughters of Quetzal'?
Who are our accusers, head priest?”

Did Tlacopa shrink from that queenly presence? If so, 'twas but another
cunning device intended to pave the way to complete success; to catch
the fickle fancy of his audience by rendering his retort all the more
effective.

“Who dares accuse us of wrong-doing?” again demanded the Amazonian
mother, speaking for her child as well, around whose waist her left arm
was clinging as a needed support.

“The Mother of all the gods!” forcibly replied the priest, now casting
aside all presence of timidity, and gazing into that proud face
with eyes which were filled with fire of hatred and jealousy. “The
all-powerful Centeotl hath made known the awful truth through the lips
of the infallible oracle, my children! She hath declared that no
smiles shall be turned towards the children of Anahuac so long as false
prophets disgrace this great city! She hath demanded the sacrifice--”

“Who can bear witness to any such demand?” sternly interposed the
captain of the body-guard, unable to listen longer in silence.

Tlacopa flashed an evil look his way, but from the audience issued
another murmur, rising louder until it took upon itself the shape of
words, demanding indubitable proof that the oracle had indeed spoken
thus. And, no longer daring to rely upon his own authority, Tlacopa
turned to the sacrificial stone whereupon lay the helpless lamb, bowing
knee and lifting face as he volubly repeated the customary invocation;
just then it appeared far more nearly an incantation.

Having thus complied with all the requirements of his office, the paba
first kissed his blade of sacrifice, then seized the lamb and turned
it upon its back, one hand holding it helpless while with the other he
ripped the poor beast wide from throat to tail, then, making a swift
cross-slash, laid bare the cavity and exposed the quivering heart.

Dropping his knife, Tlacopa grasped this vital organ, fiercely tearing
it away, drawing back where all might see as he lifted the heart on high
for inspection.

One brief look appeared to satisfy his needs, for he gave a fierce shout
as he hurled the bleeding heart towards the accused, then cried:

“An omen! An omen! The Mother of the Gods claims her victims!”



