CHAPTER XV. ASTOUNDING, YET TRUE.

The professor gave a great start at this almost reluctant suggestion,
shrinking back with a look which fell not far short of being horrified.
But then he rallied, forcing a laugh before speaking.

“No, no, Bruno. All conditions are lacking to form the mirage of the
desert. And, too; everything was so distinct and clearly outlined that
one could--”

“Fairly feel those blessed bow-arrows tickling a fellow in the short
ribs,” vigorously declared the younger Gillespie. “Not but that--I say,
uncle Phaeton?”

“What is it now, Waldo?”

“Reckon they're like any other people? Got boys and--and girls among
'em, I wonder?”

“I daresay, yes, why not?” answered Featherwit, scarcely realising
what words were being shaped by his lips, while Bruno broke into a
brief-lived laugh, more at that half-sheepish expression than at the
query itself.

“Both boys and girls galore, I expect, Kid; but you needn't borrow
trouble on either score. You can outrun the lads, while as for the
fairer sex,--well, they'll take precious good care to keep well beyond
your reach,--especially if you wear such another fascinating grin as--”

“Oh, you go to thunder, Bruno Gillespie!”

Through all this interchange the air-ship was maintaining a wide sweep,
drawing nearer the forest beneath, if only to keep hidden from the eyes
of the strange people in yonder deep valley. Yet the gaze of Phaeton
Featherwit as a rule kept turned towards that particular point, his eyes
on fire, his lips twitching, his whole demeanour that of one who feels a
discovery of tremendous importance lies just before him.

“Are we going to land, uncle Phaeton?” queried Bruno, taking note of
that preoccupation, which might easily prove dangerous under existing
circumstances.

That question served to recall the professor to more material points,
and, after a keen, sweeping look around, he nodded assent.

“Yes, as soon as I can discover or secure a fair chance. I wish to see
more--I must secure a fairer view of the--of yonder place.”

“Will it not be too dangerous, though? Not for us, especially, uncle,
but for the aerostat? Even if these be not the people you imagine--”

“They are past all doubt a remnant of the ancient Aztecs. Yonder lies
the true Lost City, and we are--oh, try to comprehend all that statement
means, my lads! Picture to yourselves what boundless fame and unlimited
credit awaits our report to the outer world! The benighted world! The
besotted world! The--the--”

“While we'll form the upsotted world, or a portion of it, without
something is done,--and that in a howling hurry, too!” fairly spluttered
Waldo, as the again neglected air-ship sped swiftly towards a more
elevated portion of that earth, part of the tall hill-crest which acted
as nature's barricade to yonder by nature depressed valley.

“Time enough, lad, time enough, since we are going to land,” coolly
assured the professor, deftly manipulating the steering-gear and still
curying around those tree-crowned hills. “If we are really hunted after,
'twill naturally be in the quarter of our vanishment, while by alighting
around yonder, nearly at right angles with our initial approach, we will
have naught to fear from the--the Aztecan clans!”

Clearly the professor had settled in his own mind just what lay before
them, and nothing short of the Lost City of the Aztecs would come
anywhere near satisfying that exalted ideal. And, taking all points into
full consideration, was there anything so very absurd in his method of
reasoning, or of drawing a deduction?

Still, that exaltation did not prevent uncle Phaeton from taking
all essential precautions, and it was only when an especially secure
landing-place was sighted that he really attempted to touch the earth.

Fully one-half of that wide circuit had been made, and as nothing could
be detected to give birth to fears for either self or air-ship, the
aeronauts skilfully landed their vessel with only the slightest of
jars. It was a well-screened location, where naught could be seen of the
flying-machine until close at hand, yet so arranged as to make a hasty
flight a very easy matter should the occasion ever arise.

Not until the landing was effected and all made secure, did Professor
Featherwit speak again. Then it was with gravely earnest speech which
suitably affected his nephews.

“Above all things, my dear lads, bear ever in mind this one fact,--we
are not here to fight. We do not come as conquerors, weapons in hand,
hearts filled with lust of blood. To the contrary, we are on a peaceful
mission, hoping to learn, trusting to enlighten, with malice towards
none, but honest love for all those who may wear the human shape, be
they of our own colour or--or--otherwise.”

“That's what's the matter with Hannah's cat!” cheerfully chipped in the
irrepressible Waldo. “I say, uncle Phaeton, is it just a lie-low here
until yonder fellows grow tired of looking for what they can't find,
then a flight on our part; or will we--”

“Have we voyaged so far and seen so much, to rest content with so very
little?” exclaimed the professor, hardly as precise of speech as
under ordinary conditions. “No, no, my lads! Yonder lies the greatest
discovery of the nineteenth century, and we are--Get a hustle on, boys!
The day is waning, and with so much to see, to study, to--Come, I say!”

In spite of his initial attempt to impress his nephews with a due sense
of the heavy responsibilities which rested upon them, Phaeton Featherwit
was far more excited than either one of the brothers. Doubtless he more
nearly appreciated the importance of this wondrous discovery, provided
his now firm belief was correct,--that yonder stood a solid, substantial
city, erected by the hands of a people whom common consent had agreed
were long since wiped out of existence.

The story told by Cooper Edgecombe, backed up by the articles taken from
the person of the warrior whom he had slain in self-defence, certainly
had its weight; while the brief and imperfect glimpse which he had won
of yonder valley helped to bear out that astounding belief. And yet, how
could it be true?

Really believing, yet forced by more sober reason to doubt, the poor
professor was literally “in a sweat” long ere another view could be won
of the depressed valley, although the landing of the air-ship was so
well chosen as to make that trip of the briefest duration consistent
with prudence.

The natural obstacles were considerable, however, and as they picked
their way along, the brothers for the first time began to gain a fairly
accurate idea of what was meant by the term, a virgin forest.

To all seeming, the human foot had never ventured here, nor were any
marks or spoor of wild beasts perceptible on either side.

Although the aerostat had landed not far below the crest of those hills,
the adventurers had to climb higher, before winning the coveted view,
partly because the most practicable route led down into and along a
winding gulch, where the footing was far less treacherous than upon the
higher ground, cumbered, as that was, with the leaf-mould of centuries.

Still, half an hour's steady labour brought the little squad to the
coveted point, and once again Professor Featherwit was almost literally
stricken speechless,--for there, far below their present location,
spread out in level expanse, lay the secret valley with all its marvels.

Far more extensive than it had appeared by that initial glimpse, the
valley itself seemed composed of fertile soil, yet, by aid of the river
which cut through, near its centre, irrigating ditches conveyed water to
every acre, thus ensuring bounteous crops of grain and of fruit as well.

Numerous buildings stood in irregular array, for the most part of no
great height, nor with many pretensions towards architectural beauty or
grace of outline; but in the centre of the valley upreared its head a
massive structure, pyramidal in shape, consisting of five comparatively
narrow terraces, connected one with another only at each of the four
corners, where stood a wide-stepped flight of stones.

“Behold!” huskily gasped the professor, intensely excited, yet still
able to control the field-glass through which he was eagerly scanning
yonder marvels. “The temple of the gods! And, yonder, the temple of
sacrifice, unless my memory is--and look! The people are--they wear
just such garb as--Oh, marvellous! Amazing! Astounding! Incredible--yet
true!”

Although their uncle could thus take in the various details to better
advantage, still the intervening distance was not so great as to
entirely debar the brothers from finding no little to interest them, as
was readily proven by their various exclamations.

“Just look at the people, will ye, now? Flopping around like they hadn't
any bigger business than to--Reckon they're looking for us to come back,
Bruno?”

“Or watching for the monster bird of prey, rather,” suggested the elder
Gillespie. “Of course they couldn't distinguish our faces, and our
bodies were fairly well hidden. And, even more, of course, they must be
totally ignorant of all such things as flying-machines and the like.”

“Poor, ignorant devils!” sympathetically sighed the youngster. “Well,
we'll have to do a little missionary work in this quarter, before taking
our departure, eh, uncle Phaeton?”

With a start, Featherwit descended out of the clouds in which he had
been lost ever since winning a fair view of the secret city; and
now, rallying his wits and fairly aglow with eager interest in this
marvellous discovery, he began pointing out the various objects of
special importance, naming them with glib assurance, then reminding the
boys how wonderfully similar all was to what had existed in Old Mexico
before the conquest.

Bruno listened with greater interest than his brother could summon at
will. For one thing, he had long been a lover of the genial Prescott,
and, now that his memory was freshened in part, was able to closely
follow the course of that little lecture, noting each strong point made
by the professor in bolstering up his delightful theory.

That monologue, however, was abruptly broken in upon by Waldo, who gave
an eager exclamation, as he reached forth a pointing finger:

“Look! There's a white woman yonder,--two of 'em, in fact!”



