CHAPTER XXVII. PENETRATING GRIM SECRETS.

Bruno caught an imperfect view of moving figures at no great distance
ahead, but ere he could fairly decide just what they might be, his
red-skinned guide swiftly whispered:

“More come look. You don't say. Ixtli fool 'em--easy!”

Making not the slightest attempt to avoid the issue, the young Aztec
stepped a little in advance of Gillespie, thus casting him into partial
eclipse, speaking briskly, as he met the two Indians, only one of whom
bore a light:

“It is trouble for nothing, brothers. There is no sign here. If he saw
aught, 'twas in a dream, I think. And now--hark!”

Even there in the subterranean recesses something of the wildly excited
uproar which followed Waldo's rash attempt to go a-fishing after his
fellow men, and the sighting of that awful air-demon by the Indians,
could be heard, and, without divining its actual import, Ixtli adroitly
turned it to his own advantage.

“They have found the strange dog without!” he cried, sharply. “Come, my
brothers, else we will be too late for--hasten, all!”

But only one-half of the present group obeyed, the two Indians dashing
at full speed towards the main entrance to the city of the dead, leaving
Bruno behind, wholly unsuspected, and Ixtli chuckling gleefully over the
favourable change in the situation.

“Dey go--we come. Dis way, brother,” the Aztec spoke, moving in the
opposite direction, followed willingly enough by the now pretty well
bewildered paleface.

“Whither are we going?” Bruno felt impelled to ask, after a few
moments more of blind obedience. “How are we going to get out? And my
friends,--they must have been alarmed by that great drum!”

Ixtli made response by touch rather than in words, and, giving his
companion barely time sufficient to read aright that look of warning, he
extinguished the light, leaving themselves in complete darkness.

Naturally anticipating fresh danger, Bruno strained his ears to catch
at least an inkling of its precise nature ere the trouble could fairly
close in; but only silence surrounded them,--silence, and an almost
palpable gloom.

“Not cat,” assured Ixtli, in a soft-toned whisper, as he divined the
expectations entertained by his comrade in peril. “Nobody come, now. All
gone see what noise 'bout, yonder. You, me, all right. Best mek no big
talk, dough. Come--see!”

Apparently the young Aztec found it no easy matter to elect words which
should fairly convey his desired meaning, and, abruptly giving over the
effort, he moved on, one hand lightly closed upon Bruno's wrist to guard
against possible separation in that utter darkness.

Nothing further was said until Ixtli again came to a halt, Gillespie
giving a low exclamation as he felt what appeared to be a blank wall
before them. Was this no thoroughfare? Were they blocked in, to perish
of starvation, unless earlier discovered by the red-skinned searchers?

Far from agreeable thoughts, yet such swiftly flashed across the young
man's brain, lending an echo of harshness to his voice as he spoke.

“Where are we now, Ixtli? How are we going to get out of this? If you
have led me into a trap--”

Finger-tips lightly brushed his lips, then the Aztec explained as well
he was able, thanks to his limited vocabulary.

Escape from the catacomb by the same route they had taken in seeking
refuge there was entirely out of the question. Even though the redskins
might have abandoned the search in that precise quarter for the time
being, thanks to the sudden alarm which had broken forth in the valley,
almost certainly there would be an armed guard so stationed as to
intercept any or all persons who might so attempt to emerge.

This much Bruno gathered, then took his turn at the verbal oars.

“But we can't stay here, man, dear. Nothing to eat or to drink, and my
friends worrying over us, outside. We've got to get out; I have, at any
rate. The only question is, just how, and where?”

“Dere one way go,” Ixtli made reply, even his lowered tones betraying
more than ordinary impressiveness, Bruno fancied. “Mebbe easy, mebbe
hard. Find dat, when try. We go dis way. Best be still, dough!”

Bruno was ready enough to promise all that, just so action was being
taken, his uneasiness being by far too deep for rest or repose. More on
account of his uncle and his brother, though, than for his own safety.
He had not yet lost hope of extrication from the perils which surely
surrounded them, not quite abandoned hope of rescuing the Children of
the Sun as well.

Turning abruptly to the left, Ixtli led the way into what appeared
(through the senses of touch and hearing) to be a narrow, winding
tunnel, which presently took an upward incline, then broadened into a
chamber of greater or lesser dimensions; the faint echoes told Gillespie
there was an enlargement of some description, but the utter darkness
veiled all else.

Barely had the two adventurous youths come to a pause, than dull,
uncertain sounds came from almost directly above their heads; and, after
listening for a brief space, Ixtli disappointedly breathed a fear that
they would have to wait for the time being.

“Why? What's going on up yonder? And where are we, anyway?”

Beneath the great teocalli, Ixtli made answer in his disjointed way
of speaking. There the evil-minded paba, Tlacopa, reigned supreme. And
there, almost directly above their heads, stood the sacrificial stone,
upon whose flat surface the Sun Children would be doomed to suffer the
last penalty, provided Tlacopa won his wicked will.

Bruno thrilled to his centre with fierce indignation as he, little by
little, gathered this information. Perish by such hideous methods? Give
up her fair young life--

For, rather queerly, considering that Ixtli spoke of both Victo and
Glady, he now had thought of--could see but that one lovely face and
shrinking figure,--face and form of the daughter alone.

Discovery might have come all too soon, but for Ixtli's slipping a palm
over those indignant lips and thus smothering the outbreak which the
young man could not avoid; then, recalled to ordinary prudence, Bruno
talked and listened by turns.

Ixtli contrived to make his white brother understand just how they were
situated at the time: in a secret channel of communication with the
great war temple, through which sanctuary he had hoped to lead his
friend, thence to escape from the valley itself, if a favourable chance
should offer. Now their way was barred, and they could only wait.
Unless--would Bruno keep close guard over his tongue?

Yes. Anything, rather than remain wholly idle, like this.

Adding a few minor cautions, Ixtli took Gillespie by a wrist, and stole
noiselessly forward, climbing upward, over and into a contrivance which
Bruno vainly sought to recognise by the sense of touch, but giving a
thrill of amazement when his guide paused long enough to whisper in his
nearest ear:

“Dis war-god body. Stand up in teocalli, look on kill-stone. Wait; you
see, hear, all dat, now!”

Thanks to the close association of that night, with all its attendant
perils, Bruno was growing fairly skilful in interpreting the broken
sentences of his copper-hued chum, and he now knew they were moving
about within the hollow image of the Aztecan war-god, Huitzilopochtli,
while--

He caught sight of several small apertures, through which yellow light
came dimly, and, almost without thinking, applied his eyes to the one
most convenient, peering forth upon the broad sacrificial stone, with
its foul, blood-stained surface, the little channels intended to drain
off the superfluous hemorrhage, together with the gloomy, repulsive
surroundings. And, too, a most abominable stench appeared to rise from
the altar of death, and Bruno shrunk back with a shiver of disgust.

“No talk loud!” softly breathed Ixtli, gripping an arm with force. “Dey
kill, if find now. Look, dat one Tlacopa; big priest, you call. DEM help
paba fool all people; so!”

Although his meaning was not fully apparent, Bruno caught renewed
interest, and once more peered forth upon the scene, weird and
impressive enough, even from a Christian point of view.

Headed by Tlacopa, a ceremony of some description was taking place,
lesser priests and other acolytes performing their various parts, the
incantations rising now loudly, now sinking to a hollow monotone, the
whole affair being none the less absorbing when Bruno remembered that,
perhaps, it might have some connection with the vile plots against the
Sun Children, if not endangering life itself.

Gillespie likewise took note of various other graven images; among them
one of the not less hideous war-goddess, Teoyaomiqui, or “divine war
death,” fitting consort for the mighty “humming-bird” himself.

Meanwhile, Ixtli, who appeared to look upon the whole affair as a more
or less jolly good jest at the expense of his superstitious people, took
occasion to give his white brother a few pointers, letting him see how
easy it was for false oracles to be manufactured to order; how certain
the lightest wishes of the head priest were to find speedy fulfilment at
all times.

While thus divulging part of the mysteries of the temple, that ceremony
reached a finale, and the little crowd slowly melted away, leaving but
Tlacopa and a select few of his trusted henchman. And Ixtli certainly
caught enough of their talk to alter his manner most materially.

“Come, quick!” he fiercely whispered in Bruno's ear, gripping an arm,
and fairly forcing the young man to accompany his retreat.

Not another word was spoken before the lower level was reached, and then
Gillespie broke the ice, asking what was the matter.

Dark though it was all around them, Bruno could tell by sense of touch
that his guide was powerfully agitated, and, though Ixtli clearly
hesitated before imparting the asked-for information, persistence won
the point; and then--

Imperfectly though that discovery was set forth, Gillespie contrived
to gather this much: Tlacopa decreed that the Sun Children should be
brought to trial, if not to actual execution, when the morning sun
arose!

“Never!” fiercely vowed Bruno, all on fire, as he recalled that more
than fair face. “Never,--while I live and draw breath!”



