CHAPTER VI—A LEAF FROM CHRISTINA’S PSALM-BOOK


Archie was sedulous at church.  Sunday after Sunday he sat down and stood
up with that small company, heard the voice of Mr. Torrance leaping like
an ill-played clarionet from key to key, and had an opportunity to study
his moth-eaten gown and the black thread mittens that he joined together
in prayer, and lifted up with a reverent solemnity in the act of
benediction.  Hermiston pew was a little square box, dwarfish in
proportion with the kirk itself, and enclosing a table not much bigger
than a footstool.  There sat Archie, an apparent prince, the only
undeniable gentleman and the only great heritor in the parish, taking his
ease in the only pew, for no other in the kirk had doors.  Thence he
might command an undisturbed view of that congregation of solid plaided
men, strapping wives and daughters, oppressed children, and uneasy
sheep-dogs.  It was strange how Archie missed the look of race; except
the dogs, with their refined foxy faces and inimitably curling tails,
there was no one present with the least claim to gentility.  The
Cauldstaneslap party was scarcely an exception; Dandie perhaps, as he
amused himself making verses through the interminable burden of the
service, stood out a little by the glow in his eye and a certain superior
animation of face and alertness of body; but even Dandie slouched like a
rustic.  The rest of the congregation, like so many sheep, oppressed him
with a sense of hob-nailed routine, day following day—of physical labour
in the open air, oatmeal porridge, peas bannock the somnolent fireside in
the evening, and the night-long nasal slumbers in a box-bed.  Yet he knew
many of them to be shrewd and humorous, men of character, notable women,
making a bustle in the world and radiating an influence from their
low-browed doors.  He knew besides they were like other men; below the
crust of custom, rapture found a way; he had heard them beat the timbrel
before Bacchus—had heard them shout and carouse over their whisky-toddy;
and not the most Dutch-bottomed and severe faces among them all, not even
the solemn elders themselves, but were capable of singular gambols at the
voice of love.  Men drawing near to an end of life’s adventurous
journey—maids thrilling with fear and curiosity on the threshold of
entrance—women who had borne and perhaps buried children, who could
remember the clinging of the small dead hands and the patter of the
little feet now silent—he marvelled that among all those faces there
should be no face of expectation, none that was mobile, none into which
the rhythm and poetry of life had entered.  “O for a live face,” he
thought; and at times he had a memory of Lady Flora; and at times he
would study the living gallery before him with despair, and would see
himself go on to waste his days in that joyless pastoral place, and death
come to him, and his grave be dug under the rowans, and the Spirit of the
Earth laugh out in a thunder-peal at the huge fiasco.

On this particular Sunday, there was no doubt but that the spring had
come at last.  It was warm, with a latent shiver in the air that made the
warmth only the more welcome.  The shallows of the stream glittered and
tinkled among bunches of primrose.  Vagrant scents of the earth arrested
Archie by the way with moments of ethereal intoxication.  The grey
Quakerish dale was still only awakened in places and patches from the
sobriety of its winter colouring; and he wondered at its beauty; an
essential beauty of the old earth it seemed to him, not resident in
particulars but breathing to him from the whole.  He surprised himself by
a sudden impulse to write poetry—he did so sometimes, loose, galloping
octo-syllabics in the vein of Scott—and when he had taken his place on a
boulder, near some fairy falls and shaded by a whip of a tree that was
already radiant with new leaves, it still more surprised him that he
should have nothing to write.  His heart perhaps beat in time to some
vast indwelling rhythm of the universe.  By the time he came to a corner
of the valley and could see the kirk, he had so lingered by the way that
the first psalm was finishing.  The nasal psalmody, full of turns and
trills and graceless graces, seemed the essential voice of the kirk
itself upraised in thanksgiving, “Everything’s alive,” he said; and again
cries it aloud, “thank God, everything’s alive!”  He lingered yet a while
in the kirk-yard.  A tuft of primroses was blooming hard by the leg of an
old black table tombstone, and he stopped to contemplate the random
apologue.  They stood forth on the cold earth with a trenchancy of
contrast; and he was struck with a sense of incompleteness in the day,
the season, and the beauty that surrounded him—the chill there was in the
warmth, the gross black clods about the opening primroses, the damp
earthy smell that was everywhere intermingled with the scents.  The voice
of the aged Torrance within rose in an ecstasy.  And he wondered if
Torrance also felt in his old bones the joyous influence of the spring
morning; Torrance, or the shadow of what once was Torrance, that must
come so soon to lie outside here in the sun and rain with all his
rheumatisms, while a new minister stood in his room and thundered from
his own familiar pulpit?  The pity of it, and something of the chill of
the grave, shook him for a moment as he made haste to enter.

He went up the aisle reverently, and took his place in the pew with
lowered eyes, for he feared he had already offended the kind old
gentleman in the pulpit, and was sedulous to offend no further.  He could
not follow the prayer, not even the heads of it.  Brightnesses of azure,
clouds of fragrance, a tinkle of falling water and singing birds, rose
like exhalations from some deeper, aboriginal memory, that was not his,
but belonged to the flesh on his bones.  His body remembered; and it
seemed to him that his body was in no way gross, but ethereal and
perishable like a strain of music; and he felt for it an exquisite
tenderness as for a child, an innocent, full of beautiful instincts and
destined to an early death.  And he felt for old Torrance—of the many
supplications, of the few days—a pity that was near to tears.  The prayer
ended.  Right over him was a tablet in the wall, the only ornament in the
roughly masoned chapel—for it was no more; the tablet commemorated, I was
about to say the virtues, but rather the existence of a former Rutherford
of Hermiston; and Archie, under that trophy of his long descent and local
greatness, leaned back in the pew and contemplated vacancy with the
shadow of a smile between playful and sad, that became him strangely.
Dandie’s sister, sitting by the side of Clem in her new Glasgow finery,
chose that moment to observe the young laird.  Aware of the stir of his
entrance, the little formalist had kept her eyes fastened and her face
prettily composed during the prayer.  It was not hypocrisy, there was no
one further from a hypocrite.  The girl had been taught to behave: to
look up, to look down, to look unconscious, to look seriously impressed
in church, and in every conjuncture to look her best.  That was the game
of female life, and she played it frankly.  Archie was the one person in
church who was of interest, who was somebody new, reputed eccentric,
known to be young, and a laird, and still unseen by Christina.  Small
wonder that, as she stood there in her attitude of pretty decency, her
mind should run upon him!  If he spared a glance in her direction, he
should know she was a well-behaved young lady who had been to Glasgow.
In reason he must admire her clothes, and it was possible that he should
think her pretty.  At that her heart beat the least thing in the world;
and she proceeded, by way of a corrective, to call up and dismiss a
series of fancied pictures of the young man who should now, by rights, be
looking at her.  She settled on the plainest of them,—a pink short young
man with a dish face and no figure, at whose admiration she could afford
to smile; but for all that, the consciousness of his gaze (which was
really fixed on Torrance and his mittens) kept her in something of a
flutter till the word Amen.  Even then, she was far too well-bred to
gratify her curiosity with any impatience.  She resumed her seat
languidly—this was a Glasgow touch—she composed her dress, rearranged her
nosegay of primroses, looked first in front, then behind upon the other
side, and at last allowed her eyes to move, without hurry, in the
direction of the Hermiston pew.  For a moment, they were riveted.  Next
she had plucked her gaze home again like a tame bird who should have
meditated flight.  Possibilities crowded on her; she hung over the future
and grew dizzy; the image of this young man, slim, graceful, dark, with
the inscrutable half-smile, attracted and repelled her like a chasm.  “I
wonder, will I have met my fate?” she thought, and her heart swelled.

Torrance was got some way into his first exposition, positing a deep
layer of texts as he went along, laying the foundations of his discourse,
which was to deal with a nice point in divinity, before Archie suffered
his eyes to wander.  They fell first of all on Clem, looking
insupportably prosperous, and patronising Torrance with the favour of a
modified attention, as of one who was used to better things in Glasgow.
Though he had never before set eyes on him, Archie had no difficulty in
identifying him, and no hesitation in pronouncing him vulgar, the worst
of the family.  Clem was leaning lazily forward when Archie first saw
him.  Presently he leaned nonchalantly back; and that deadly instrument,
the maiden, was suddenly unmasked in profile.  Though not quite in the
front of the fashion (had anybody cared!), certain artful Glasgow
mantua-makers, and her own inherent taste, had arrayed her to great
advantage.  Her accoutrement was, indeed, a cause of heart-burning, and
almost of scandal, in that infinitesimal kirk company.  Mrs. Hob had said
her say at Cauldstaneslap.  “Daft-like!” she had pronounced it.  “A
jaiket that’ll no meet!  Whaur’s the sense of a jaiket that’ll no button
upon you, if it should come to be weet?  What do ye ca’ thir things?
Demmy brokens, d’ye say?  They’ll be brokens wi’ a vengeance or ye can
win back!  Weel, I have nae thing to do wi’ it—it’s no good taste.”
Clem, whose purse had thus metamorphosed his sister, and who was not
insensible to the advertisement, had come to the rescue with a “Hoot,
woman!  What do you ken of good taste that has never been to the ceety?”
And Hob, looking on the girl with pleased smiles, as she timidly
displayed her finery in the midst of the dark kitchen, had thus ended the
dispute: “The cutty looks weel,” he had said, “and it’s no very like
rain.  Wear them the day, hizzie; but it’s no a thing to make a practice
o’.”  In the breasts of her rivals, coming to the kirk very conscious of
white under-linen, and their faces splendid with much soap, the sight of
the toilet had raised a storm of varying emotion, from the mere unenvious
admiration that was expressed in a long-drawn “Eh!” to the angrier
feeling that found vent in an emphatic “Set her up!”  Her frock was of
straw-coloured jaconet muslin, cut low at the bosom and short at the
ankle, so as to display her _demi-broquins_ of Regency violet, crossing
with many straps upon a yellow cobweb stocking.  According to the pretty
fashion in which our grandmothers did not hesitate to appear, and our
great-aunts went forth armed for the pursuit and capture of our
great-uncles, the dress was drawn up so as to mould the contour of both
breasts, and in the nook between, a cairngorm brooch maintained it.
Here, too, surely in a very enviable position, trembled the nosegay of
primroses.  She wore on her shoulders—or rather on her back and not her
shoulders, which it scarcely passed—a French coat of sarsenet, tied in
front with Margate braces, and of the same colour with her violet shoes.
About her face clustered a disorder of dark ringlets, a little garland of
yellow French roses surmounted her brow, and the whole was crowned by a
village hat of chipped straw.  Amongst all the rosy and all the weathered
faces that surrounded her in church, she glowed like an open flower—girl
and raiment, and the cairngorm that caught the daylight and returned it
in a fiery flash, and the threads of bronze and gold that played in her
hair.

Archie was attracted by the bright thing like a child.  He looked at her
again and yet again, and their looks crossed.  The lip was lifted from
her little teeth.  He saw the red blood work vividly under her tawny
skin.  Her eye, which was great as a stag’s, struck and held his gaze.
He knew who she must be—Kirstie, she of the harsh diminutive, his
housekeeper’s niece, the sister of the rustic prophet, Gib—and he found
in her the answer to his wishes.

Christina felt the shock of their encountering glances, and seemed to
rise, clothed in smiles, into a region of the vague and bright.  But the
gratification was not more exquisite than it was brief.  She looked away
abruptly, and immediately began to blame herself for that abruptness.
She knew what she should have done, too late—turned slowly with her nose
in the air.  And meantime his look was not removed, but continued to play
upon her like a battery of cannon constantly aimed, and now seemed to
isolate her alone with him, and now seemed to uplift her, as on a
pillory, before the congregation.  For Archie continued to drink her in
with his eyes, even as a wayfarer comes to a well-head on a mountain, and
stoops his face, and drinks with thirst unassuageable.  In the cleft of
her little breasts the fiery eye of the topaz and the pale florets of
primrose fascinated him.  He saw the breasts heave, and the flowers shake
with the heaving, and marvelled what should so much discompose the girl.
And Christina was conscious of his gaze—saw it, perhaps, with the dainty
plaything of an ear that peeped among her ringlets; she was conscious of
changing colour, conscious of her unsteady breath.  Like a creature
tracked, run down, surrounded, she sought in a dozen ways to give herself
a countenance.  She used her handkerchief—it was a really fine one—then
she desisted in a panic: “He would only think I was too warm.”  She took
to reading in the metrical psalms, and then remembered it was
sermon-time.  Last she put a “sugar-bool” in her mouth, and the next
moment repented of the step.  It was such a homely-like thing!  Mr.
Archie would never be eating sweeties in kirk; and, with a palpable
effort, she swallowed it whole, and her colour flamed high.  At this
signal of distress Archie awoke to a sense of his ill-behaviour.  What
had he been doing?  He had been exquisitely rude in church to the niece
of his housekeeper; he had stared like a lackey and a libertine at a
beautiful and modest girl.  It was possible, it was even likely, he would
be presented to her after service in the kirk-yard, and then how was he
to look?  And there was no excuse.  He had marked the tokens of her
shame, of her increasing indignation, and he was such a fool that he had
not understood them.  Shame bowed him down, and he looked resolutely at
Mr. Torrance; who little supposed, good, worthy man, as he continued to
expound justification by faith, what was his true business: to play the
part of derivative to a pair of children at the old game of falling in
love.

Christina was greatly relieved at first.  It seemed to her that she was
clothed again.  She looked back on what had passed.  All would have been
right if she had not blushed, a silly fool!  There was nothing to blush
at, if she _had_ taken a sugar-bool.  Mrs. MacTaggart, the elder’s wife
in St. Enoch’s, took them often.  And if he had looked at her, what was
more natural than that a young gentleman should look at the best-dressed
girl in church?  And at the same time, she knew far otherwise, she knew
there was nothing casual or ordinary in the look, and valued herself on
its memory like a decoration.  Well, it was a blessing he had found
something else to look at!  And presently she began to have other
thoughts.  It was necessary, she fancied, that she should put herself
right by a repetition of the incident, better managed.  If the wish was
father to the thought, she did not know or she would not recognise it.
It was simply as a manœuvre of propriety, as something called for to
lessen the significance of what had gone before, that she should a second
time meet his eyes, and this time without blushing.  And at the memory of
the blush, she blushed again, and became one general blush burning from
head to foot.  Was ever anything so indelicate, so forward, done by a
girl before?  And here she was, making an exhibition of herself before
the congregation about nothing!  She stole a glance upon her neighbours,
and behold! they were steadily indifferent, and Clem had gone to sleep.
And still the one idea was becoming more and more potent with her, that
in common prudence she must look again before the service ended.
Something of the same sort was going forward in the mind of Archie, as he
struggled with the load of penitence.  So it chanced that, in the flutter
of the moment when the last psalm was given out, and Torrance was reading
the verse, and the leaves of every psalm-book in church were rustling
under busy fingers, two stealthy glances were sent out like antennæ among
the pews and on the indifferent and absorbed occupants, and drew timidly
nearer to the straight line between Archie and Christina.  They met, they
lingered together for the least fraction of time, and that was enough.  A
charge as of electricity passed through Christina, and behold! the leaf
of her psalm-book was torn across.

Archie was outside by the gate of the graveyard, conversing with Hob and
the minister and shaking hands all round with the scattering
congregation, when Clem and Christina were brought up to be presented.
The laird took off his hat and bowed to her with grace and respect.
Christina made her Glasgow curtsey to the laird, and went on again up the
road for Hermiston and Cauldstaneslap, walking fast, breathing hurriedly
with a heightened colour, and in this strange frame of mind, that when
she was alone she seemed in high happiness, and when any one addressed
her she resented it like a contradiction.  A part of the way she had the
company of some neighbour girls and a loutish young man; never had they
seemed so insipid, never had she made herself so disagreeable.  But these
struck aside to their various destinations or were out-walked and left
behind; and when she had driven off with sharp words the proffered convoy
of some of her nephews and nieces, she was free to go on alone up
Hermiston brae, walking on air, dwelling intoxicated among clouds of
happiness.  Near to the summit she heard steps behind her, a man’s steps,
light and very rapid.  She knew the foot at once and walked the faster.
“If it’s me he’s wanting, he can run for it,” she thought, smiling.

Archie overtook her like a man whose mind was made up.

“Miss Kirstie,” he began.

“Miss Christina, if you please, Mr. Weir,” she interrupted.  “I canna
bear the contraction.”

“You forget it has a friendly sound for me.  Your aunt is an old friend
of mine, and a very good one.  I hope we shall see much of you at
Hermiston?”

“My aunt and my sister-in-law doesna agree very well.  Not that I have
much ado with it.  But still when I’m stopping in the house, if I was to
be visiting my aunt, it would not look considerate-like.”

“I am sorry,” said Archie.

“I thank you kindly, Mr. Weir,” she said.  “I whiles think myself it’s a
great peety.”

“Ah, I am sure your voice would always be for peace!” he cried.

“I wouldna be too sure of that,” she said.  “I have my days like other
folk, I suppose.”

“Do you know, in our old kirk, among our good old grey dames, you made an
effect like sunshine.”

“Ah, but that would be my Glasgow clothes!”

“I did not think I was so much under the influence of pretty frocks.”

She smiled with a half look at him.  “There’s more than you!” she said.
“But you see I’m only Cinderella.  I’ll have to put all these things by
in my trunk; next Sunday I’ll be as grey as the rest.  They’re Glasgow
clothes, you see, and it would never do to make a practice of it.  It
would seem terrible conspicuous.”

By that they were come to the place where their ways severed.  The old
grey moors were all about them; in the midst a few sheep wandered; and
they could see on the one hand the straggling caravan scaling the braes
in front of them for Cauldstaneslap, and on the other, the contingent
from Hermiston bending off and beginning to disappear by detachments into
the policy gate.  It was in these circumstances that they turned to say
farewell, and deliberately exchanged a glance as they shook hands.  All
passed as it should, genteelly; and in Christina’s mind, as she mounted
the first steep ascent for Cauldstaneslap, a gratifying sense of triumph
prevailed over the recollection of minor lapses and mistakes.  She had
kilted her gown, as she did usually at that rugged pass; but when she
spied Archie still standing and gazing after her, the skirts came down
again as if by enchantment.  Here was a piece of nicety for that upland
parish, where the matrons marched with their coats kilted in the rain,
and the lasses walked barefoot to kirk through the dust of summer, and
went bravely down by the burn-side, and sat on stones to make a public
toilet before entering!  It was perhaps an air wafted from Glasgow; or
perhaps it marked a stage of that dizziness of gratified vanity, in which
the instinctive act passed unperceived.  He was looking after!  She
unloaded her bosom of a prodigious sigh that was all pleasure, and betook
herself to run.  When she had overtaken the stragglers of her family, she
caught up the niece whom she had so recently repulsed, and kissed and
slapped her, and drove her away again, and ran after her with pretty
cries and laughter.  Perhaps she thought the laird might still be
looking!  But it chanced the little scene came under the view of eyes
less favourable; for she overtook Mrs. Hob marching with Clem and Dand.

“You’re shürely fey, lass!” quoth Dandie.

“Think shame to yersel’, miss!” said the strident Mrs. Hob.  “Is this the
gait to guide yersel’ on the way hame frae kirk?  You’re shiirely no
sponsible the day!  And anyway I would mind my guid claes.”

“Hoot!” said Christina, and went on before them head in air, treading the
rough track with the tread of a wild doe.

She was in love with herself, her destiny, the air of the hills, the
benediction of the sun.  All the way home, she continued under the
intoxication of these sky-scraping spirits.  At table she could talk
freely of young Hermiston; gave her opinion of him off-hand and with a
loud voice, that he was a handsome young gentleman, real well mannered
and sensible-like, but it was a pity he looked doleful.  Only—the moment
after—a memory of his eyes in church embarrassed her.  But for this
inconsiderable check, all through meal-time she had a good appetite, and
she kept them laughing at table, until Gib (who had returned before them
from Crossmichael and his separative worship) reproved the whole of them
for their levity.

Singing “in to herself” as she went, her mind still in the turmoil of a
glad confusion, she rose and tripped upstairs to a little loft, lighted
by four panes in the gable, where she slept with one of her nieces.  The
niece, who followed her, presuming on “Auntie’s” high spirits, was
flounced out of the apartment with small ceremony, and retired, smarting
and half tearful, to bury her woes in the byre among the hay.  Still
humming, Christina divested herself of her finery, and put her treasures
one by one in her great green trunk.  The last of these was the
psalm-book; it was a fine piece, the gift of Mistress Clem, in distinct
old-faced type, on paper that had begun to grow foxy in the warehouse—not
by service—and she was used to wrap it in a handkerchief every Sunday
after its period of service was over, and bury it end-wise at the head of
her trunk.  As she now took it in hand the book fell open where the leaf
was torn, and she stood and gazed upon that evidence of her bygone
discomposure.  There returned again the vision of the two brown eyes
staring at her, intent and bright, out of that dark corner of the kirk.
The whole appearance and attitude, the smile, the suggested gesture of
young Hermiston came before her in a flash at the sight of the torn page.
“I was surely fey!” she said, echoing the words of Dandie, and at the
suggested doom her high spirits deserted her.  She flung herself prone
upon the bed, and lay there, holding the psalm-book in her hands for
hours, for the more part in a mere stupor of unconsenting pleasure and
unreasoning fear.  The fear was superstitious; there came up again and
again in her memory Dandie’s ill-omened words, and a hundred grisly and
black tales out of the immediate neighbourhood read her a commentary on
their force.  The pleasure was never realised.  You might say the joints
of her body thought and remembered, and were gladdened, but her essential
self, in the immediate theatre of consciousness, talked feverishly of
something else, like a nervous person at a fire.  The image that she most
complacently dwelt on was that of Miss Christina in her character of the
Fair Lass of Cauldstaneslap, carrying all before her in the
straw-coloured frock, the violet mantle, and the yellow cobweb stockings.
Archie’s image, on the other hand, when it presented itself was never
welcomed—far less welcomed with any ardour, and it was exposed at times
to merciless criticism.  In the long vague dialogues she held in her
mind, often with imaginary, often with unrealised interlocutors, Archie,
if he were referred to at all came in for savage handling.  He was
described as “looking like a stork,” “staring like a caulf,” “a face like
a ghaist’s.”  “Do you call that manners?” she said; or, “I soon put him
in his place.”  “‘_Miss Christina_, _if you please_, _Mr. Weir_!’ says I,
and just flyped up my skirt tails.”  With gabble like this she would
entertain herself long whiles together, and then her eye would perhaps
fall on the torn leaf, and the eyes of Archie would appear again from the
darkness of the wall, and the voluble words deserted her, and she would
lie still and stupid, and think upon nothing with devotion, and be
sometimes raised by a quiet sigh.  Had a doctor of medicine come into
that loft, he would have diagnosed a healthy, well-developed, eminently
vivacious lass lying on her face in a fit of the sulks; not one who had
just contracted, or was just contracting, a mortal sickness of the mind
which should yet carry her towards death and despair.  Had it been a
doctor of psychology, he might have been pardoned for divining in the
girl a passion of childish vanity, self-love _in excelsis_, and no more.
It is to be understood that I have been painting chaos and describing the
inarticulate.  Every lineament that appears is too precise, almost every
word used too strong.  Take a finger-post in the mountains on a day of
rolling mists; I have but copied the names that appear upon the pointers,
the names of definite and famous cities far distant, and now perhaps
basking in sunshine; but Christina remained all these hours, as it were,
at the foot of the post itself, not moving, and enveloped in mutable and
blinding wreaths of haze.

The day was growing late and the sunbeams long and level, when she sat
suddenly up, and wrapped in its handkerchief and put by that psalm-book
which had already played a part so decisive in the first chapter of her
love-story.  In the absence of the mesmerist’s eye, we are told nowadays
that the head of a bright nail may fill his place, if it be steadfastly
regarded.  So that torn page had riveted her attention on what might else
have been but little, and perhaps soon forgotten; while the ominous words
of Dandie—heard, not heeded, and still remembered—had lent to her
thoughts, or rather to her mood, a cast of solemnity, and that idea of
Fate—a pagan Fate, uncontrolled by any Christian deity, obscure, lawless,
and august—moving indissuadably in the affairs of Christian men.  Thus
even that phenomenon of love at first sight, which is so rare and seems
so simple and violent, like a disruption of life’s tissue, may be
decomposed into a sequence of accidents happily concurring.

She put on a grey frock and a pink kerchief, looked at herself a moment
with approval in the small square of glass that served her for a toilet
mirror, and went softly downstairs through the sleeping house that
resounded with the sound of afternoon snoring.  Just outside the door,
Dandie was sitting with a book in his hand, not reading, only honouring
the Sabbath by a sacred vacancy of mind.  She came near him and stood
still.

“I’m for off up the muirs, Dandie,” she said.

There was something unusually soft in her tones that made him look up.
She was pale, her eyes dark and bright; no trace remained of the levity
of the morning.

“Ay, lass?  Ye’ll have yer ups and downs like me, I’m thinkin’,” he
observed.

“What for do ye say that?” she asked.

“O, for naething,” says Dand.  “Only I think ye’re mair like me than the
lave of them.  Ye’ve mair of the poetic temper, tho’ Guid kens little
enough of the poetic taalent.  It’s an ill gift at the best.  Look at
yoursel’.  At denner you were all sunshine and flowers and laughter, and
now you’re like the star of evening on a lake.”

She drank in this hackneyed compliment like wine, and it glowed in her
veins.

“But I’m saying, Dand”—she came nearer him—“I’m for the muirs.  I must
have a braith of air.  If Clem was to be speiring for me, try and quaiet
him, will ye no?”

“What way?” said Dandie.  “I ken but the ae way, and that’s leein’.  I’ll
say ye had a sair heid, if ye like.”

“But I havena,” she objected.

“I daursay no,” he returned.  “I said I would say ye had; and if ye like
to nay-say me when ye come back, it’ll no mateerially maitter, for my
chara’ter’s clean gane a’ready past reca’.”

“O, Dand, are ye a lecar?” she asked, lingering.

“Folks say sae,” replied the bard.

“Wha says sae?” she pursued.

“Them that should ken the best,” he responded.  “The lassies, for ane.”

“But, Dand, you would never lee to me?” she asked.

“I’ll leave that for your pairt of it, ye girzie,” said he.  “Ye’ll lee
to me fast eneuch, when ye hae gotten a jo.  I’m tellin’ ye and it’s
true; when you have a jo, Miss Kirstie, it’ll be for guid and ill.  I
ken: I was made that way mysel’, but the deil was in my luck!  Here, gang
awa wi’ ye to your muirs, and let me be; I’m in an hour of inspiraution,
ye upsetting tawpie!”

But she clung to her brother’s neighbourhood, she knew not why.

“Will ye no gie’s a kiss, Dand?” she said.  “I aye likit ye fine.”

He kissed her and considered her a moment; he found something strange in
her.  But he was a libertine through and through, nourished equal
contempt and suspicion of all womankind, and paid his way among them
habitually with idle compliments.

“Gae wa’ wi’ ye!” said he.  “Ye’re a dentie baby, and be content wi’
that!”

That was Dandie’s way; a kiss and a comfit to Jenny—a bawbee and my
blessing to Jill—and goodnight to the whole clan of ye, my dears! When
anything approached the serious, it became a matter for men, he both
thought and said.  Women, when they did not absorb, were only children to
be shoo’d away.  Merely in his character of connoisseur, however, Dandie
glanced carelessly after his sister as she crossed the meadow.  “The
brat’s no that bad!” he thought with surprise, for though he had just
been paying her compliments, he had not really looked at her.  “Hey!
what’s yon?”  For the grey dress was cut with short sleeves and skirts,
and displayed her trim strong legs clad in pink stockings of the same
shade as the kerchief she wore round her shoulders, and that shimmered as
she went.  This was not her way in undress; he knew her ways and the ways
of the whole sex in the country-side, no one better; when they did not go
barefoot, they wore stout “rig and furrow” woollen hose of an invisible
blue mostly, when they were not black outright; and Dandie, at sight of
this daintiness, put two and two together.  It was a silk handkerchief,
then they would be silken hose; they matched—then the whole outfit was a
present of Clem’s, a costly present, and not something to be worn through
bog and briar, or on a late afternoon of Sunday.  He whistled.  “My denty
May, either your heid’s fair turned, or there’s some ongoings!” he
observed, and dismissed the subject.

She went slowly at first, but ever straighter and faster for the
Cauldstaneslap, a pass among the hills to which the farm owed its name.
The Slap opened like a doorway between two rounded hillocks; and through
this ran the short cut to Hermiston.  Immediately on the other side it
went down through the Deil’s Hags, a considerable marshy hollow of the
hill tops, full of springs, and crouching junipers, and pools where the
black peat-water slumbered.  There was no view from here.  A man might
have sat upon the Praying Weaver’s stone a half century, and seen none
but the Cauldstaneslap children twice in the twenty-four hours on their
way to the school and back again, an occasional shepherd, the irruption
of a clan of sheep, or the birds who haunted about the springs, drinking
and shrilly piping.  So, when she had once passed the Slap, Kirstie was
received into seclusion.  She looked back a last time at the farm.  It
still lay deserted except for the figure of Dandie, who was now seen to
be scribbling in his lap, the hour of expected inspiration having come to
him at last.  Thence she passed rapidly through the morass, and came to
the farther end of it, where a sluggish burn discharges, and the path for
Hermiston accompanies it on the beginning of its downward path.  From
this corner a wide view was opened to her of the whole stretch of braes
upon the other side, still sallow and in places rusty with the winter,
with the path marked boldly, here and there by the burn-side a tuft of
birches, and—two miles off as the crow flies—from its enclosures and
young plantations, the windows of Hermiston glittering in the western
sun.

Here she sat down and waited, and looked for a long time at these
far-away bright panes of glass.  It amused her to have so extended a
view, she thought.  It amused her to see the house of Hermiston—to see
“folk”; and there was an indistinguishable human unit, perhaps the
gardener, visibly sauntering on the gravel paths.

By the time the sun was down and all the easterly braes lay plunged in
clear shadow, she was aware of another figure coming up the path at a
most unequal rate of approach, now half running, now pausing and seeming
to hesitate.  She watched him at first with a total suspension of
thought.  She held her thought as a person holds his breathing.  Then she
consented to recognise him.  “He’ll no be coming here, he canna be; it’s
no possible.”  And there began to grow upon her a subdued choking
suspense.  He _was_ coming; his hesitations had quite ceased, his step
grew firm and swift; no doubt remained; and the question loomed up before
her instant: what was she to do?  It was all very well to say that her
brother was a laird himself: it was all very well to speak of casual
intermarriages and to count cousinship, like Auntie Kirstie.  The
difference in their social station was trenchant; propriety, prudence,
all that she had ever learned, all that she knew, bade her flee.  But on
the other hand the cup of life now offered to her was too enchanting.
For one moment, she saw the question clearly, and definitely made her
choice.  She stood up and showed herself an instant in the gap relieved
upon the sky line; and the next, fled trembling and sat down glowing with
excitement on the Weaver’s stone.  She shut her eyes, seeking, praying
for composure.  Her hand shook in her lap, and her mind was full of
incongruous and futile speeches.  What was there to make a work about?
She could take care of herself, she supposed!  There was no harm in
seeing the laird.  It was the best thing that could happen.  She would
mark a proper distance to him once and for all.  Gradually the wheels of
her nature ceased to go round so madly, and she sat in passive
expectation, a quiet, solitary figure in the midst of the grey moss.  I
have said she was no hypocrite, but here I am at fault.  She never
admitted to herself that she had come up the hill to look for Archie.
And perhaps after all she did not know, perhaps came as a stone falls.
For the steps of love in the young, and especially in girls, are
instinctive and unconscious.

In the meantime Archie was drawing rapidly near, and he at least was
consciously seeking her neighbourhood.  The afternoon had turned to ashes
in his mouth; the memory of the girl had kept him from reading and drawn
him as with cords; and at last, as the cool of the evening began to come
on, he had taken his hat and set forth, with a smothered ejaculation, by
the moor path to Cauldstaneslap.  He had no hope to find her; he took the
off chance without expectation of result and to relieve his uneasiness.
The greater was his surprise, as he surmounted the slope and came into
the hollow of the Deil’s Hags, to see there, like an answer to his
wishes, the little womanly figure in the grey dress and the pink kerchief
sitting little, and low, and lost, and acutely solitary, in these
desolate surroundings and on the weather-beaten stone of the dead weaver.
Those things that still smacked of winter were all rusty about her, and
those things that already relished of the spring had put forth the tender
and lively colours of the season.  Even in the unchanging face of the
death-stone, changes were to be remarked; and in the channeled lettering,
the moss began to renew itself in jewels of green.  By an afterthought
that was a stroke of art, she had turned up over her head the back of the
kerchief; so that it now framed becomingly her vivacious and yet pensive
face.  Her feet were gathered under her on the one side, and she leaned
on her bare arm, which showed out strong and round, tapered to a slim
wrist, and shimmered in the fading light.

Young Hermiston was struck with a certain chill.  He was reminded that he
now dealt in serious matters of life and death.  This was a grown woman
he was approaching, endowed with her mysterious potencies and
attractions, the treasury of the continued race, and he was neither
better nor worse than the average of his sex and age.  He had a certain
delicacy which had preserved him hitherto unspotted, and which (had
either of them guessed it) made him a more dangerous companion when his
heart should be really stirred.  His throat was dry as he came near; but
the appealing sweetness of her smile stood between them like a guardian
angel.

For she turned to him and smiled, though without rising.  There was a
shade in this cavalier greeting that neither of them perceived; neither
he, who simply thought it gracious and charming as herself; nor yet she,
who did not observe (quick as she was) the difference between rising to
meet the laird, and remaining seated to receive the expected admirer.

“Are ye stepping west, Hermiston?” said she, giving him his territorial
name after the fashion of the country-side.

“I was,” said he, a little hoarsely, “but I think I will be about the end
of my stroll now.  Are you like me, Miss Christina?  The house would not
hold me.  I came here seeking air.”

He took his seat at the other end of the tombstone and studied her,
wondering what was she.  There was infinite import in the question alike
for her and him.

“Ay,” she said.  “I couldna bear the roof either.  It’s a habit of mine
to come up here about the gloaming when it’s quaiet and caller.”

“It was a habit of my mother’s also,” he said gravely.  The recollection
half startled him as he expressed it.  He looked around.  “I have scarce
been here since.  It’s peaceful,” he said, with a long breath.

“It’s no like Glasgow,” she replied.  “A weary place, yon Glasgow!  But
what a day have I had for my homecoming, and what a bonny evening!”

“Indeed, it was a wonderful day,” said Archie.  “I think I will remember
it years and years until I come to die.  On days like this—I do not know
if you feel as I do—but everything appears so brief, and fragile, and
exquisite, that I am afraid to touch life.  We are here for so short a
time; and all the old people before us—Rutherfords of Hermiston, Elliotts
of the Cauldstaneslap—that were here but a while since riding about and
keeping up a great noise in this quiet corner—making love too, and
marrying—why, where are they now?  It’s deadly commonplace, but, after
all, the commonplaces are the great poetic truths.”

He was sounding her, semi-consciously, to see if she could understand
him; to learn if she were only an animal the colour of flowers, or had a
soul in her to keep her sweet.  She, on her part, her means well in hand,
watched, womanlike, for any opportunity to shine, to abound in his
humour, whatever that might be.  The dramatic artist, that lies dormant
or only half awake in most human beings, had in her sprung to his feet in
a divine fury, and chance had served her well.  She looked upon him with
a subdued twilight look that became the hour of the day and the train of
thought; earnestness shone through her like stars in the purple west; and
from the great but controlled upheaval of her whole nature there passed
into her voice, and rang in her lightest words, a thrill of emotion.

“Have you mind of Dand’s song?” she answered.  “I think he’ll have been
trying to say what you have been thinking.”

“No, I never heard it,” he said.  “Repeat it to me, can you?”

“It’s nothing wanting the tune,” said Kirstie.

“Then sing it me,” said he.

“On the Lord’s Day?  That would never do, Mr. Weir!”

“I am afraid I am not so strict a keeper of the Sabbath, and there is no
one in this place to hear us, unless the poor old ancient under the
stone.”

“No that I’m thinking that really,” she said.  “By my way of thinking,
it’s just as serious as a psalm.  Will I sooth it to ye, then?”

“If you please,” said he, and, drawing near to her on the tombstone,
prepared to listen.

She sat up as if to sing.  “I’ll only can sooth it to ye,” she explained.
“I wouldna like to sing out loud on the Sabbath.  I think the birds would
carry news of it to Gilbert,” and she smiled.  “It’s about the Elliotts,”
she continued, “and I think there’s few bonnier bits in the book-poets,
though Dand has never got printed yet.”

And she began, in the low, clear tones of her half voice, now sinking
almost to a whisper, now rising to a particular note which was her best,
and which Archie learned to wait for with growing emotion:—

    “O they rade in the rain, in the days that are gane,
       In the rain and the wind and the lave,
    They shoutit in the ha’ and they routit on the hill,
       But they’re a’ quaitit noo in the grave.
    Auld, auld Elliotts, clay-cauld Elliotts, dour, bauld Elliotte of
    auld!”

All the time she sang she looked steadfastly before her, her knees
straight, her hands upon her knee, her head cast back and up.  The
expression was admirable throughout, for had she not learned it from the
lips and under the criticism of the author?  When it was done, she turned
upon Archie a face softly bright, and eyes gently suffused and shining in
the twilight, and his heart rose and went out to her with boundless pity
and sympathy.  His question was answered.  She was a human being tuned to
a sense of the tragedy of life; there were pathos and music and a great
heart in the girl.

He arose instinctively, she also; for she saw she had gained a point, and
scored the impression deeper, and she had wit enough left to flee upon a
victory.  They were but commonplaces that remained to be exchanged, but
the low, moved voices in which they passed made them sacred in the
memory.  In the falling greyness of the evening he watched her figure
winding through the morass, saw it turn a last time and wave a hand, and
then pass through the Slap; and it seemed to him as if something went
along with her out of the deepest of his heart.  And something surely had
come, and come to dwell there.  He had retained from childhood a picture,
now half obliterated by the passage of time and the multitude of fresh
impressions, of his mother telling him, with the fluttered earnestness of
her voice, and often with dropping tears, the tale of the “Praying
Weaver,” on the very scene of his brief tragedy and long repose.  And now
there was a companion piece; and he beheld, and he should behold for
ever, Christina perched on the same tomb, in the grey colours of the
evening, gracious, dainty, perfect as a flower, and she also singing—

    “Of old, unhappy far off things,
    And battles long ago,”

of their common ancestors now dead, of their rude wars composed, their
weapons buried with them, and of these strange changelings, their
descendants, who lingered a little in their places, and would soon be
gone also, and perhaps sung of by others at the gloaming hour.  By one of
the unconscious arts of tenderness the two women were enshrined together
in his memory.  Tears, in that hour of sensibility, came into his eyes
indifferently at the thought of either; and the girl, from being
something merely bright and shapely, was caught up into the zone of
things serious as life and death and his dead mother.  So that in all
ways and on either side, Fate played his game artfully with this poor
pair of children.  The generations were prepared, the pangs were made
ready, before the curtain rose on the dark drama.

In the same moment of time that she disappeared from Archie, there opened
before Kirstie’s eyes the cup-like hollow in which the farm lay.  She
saw, some five hundred feet below her, the house making itself bright
with candles, and this was a broad hint to her to hurry.  For they were
only kindled on a Sabbath night with a view to that family worship which
rounded in the incomparable tedium of the day and brought on the
relaxation of supper.  Already she knew that Robert must be within-sides
at the head of the table, “waling the portions”; for it was Robert in his
quality of family priest and judge, not the gifted Gilbert, who
officiated.  She made good time accordingly down the steep ascent, and
came up to the door panting as the three younger brothers, all roused at
last from slumber, stood together in the cool and the dark of the evening
with a fry of nephews and nieces about them, chatting and awaiting the
expected signal.  She stood back; she had no mind to direct attention to
her late arrival or to her labouring breath.

“Kirstie, ye have shaved it this time, my lass?” said Clem.  “Whaur were
ye?”

“O, just taking a dander by mysel’,” said Kirstie.

And the talk continued on the subject of the American War, without
further reference to the truant who stood by them in the covert of the
dusk, thrilling with happiness and the sense of guilt.

The signal was given, and the brothers began to go in one after another,
amid the jostle and throng of Hob’s children.

Only Dandie, waiting till the last, caught Kirstie by the arm.  “When did
ye begin to dander in pink hosen, Mistress Elliott?” he whispered slyly.

She looked down; she was one blush.  “I maun have forgotten to change
them,” said she; and went into prayers in her turn with a troubled mind,
between anxiety as to whether Dand should have observed her yellow
stockings at church, and should thus detect her in a palpable falsehood,
and shame that she had already made good his prophecy.  She remembered
the words of it, how it was to be when she had gotten a jo, and that that
would be for good and evil.  “Will I have gotten my jo now?” she thought
with a secret rapture.

And all through prayers, where it was her principal business to conceal
the pink stockings from the eyes of the indifferent Mrs. Hob—and all
through supper, as she made a feint of eating and sat at the table
radiant and constrained—and again when she had left them and come into
her chamber, and was alone with her sleeping niece, and could at last lay
aside the armour of society—the same words sounded within her, the same
profound note of happiness, of a world all changed and renewed, of a day
that had been passed in Paradise, and of a night that was to be heaven
opened.  All night she seemed to be conveyed smoothly upon a shallow
stream of sleep and waking, and through the bowers of Beulah; all night
she cherished to her heart that exquisite hope; and if, towards morning,
she forgot it a while in a more profound unconsciousness, it was to catch
again the rainbow thought with her first moment of awaking.




