CHAPTER V—WINTER ON THE MOORS


I. At Hermiston


The road to Hermiston runs for a great part of the way up the valley of a
stream, a favourite with anglers and with midges, full of falls and
pools, and shaded by willows and natural woods of birch.  Here and there,
but at great distances, a byway branches off, and a gaunt farmhouse may
be descried above in a fold of the hill; but the more part of the time,
the road would be quite empty of passage and the hills of habitation.
Hermiston parish is one of the least populous in Scotland; and, by the
time you came that length, you would scarce be surprised at the
inimitable smallness of the kirk, a dwarfish, ancient place seated for
fifty, and standing in a green by the burn-side among two-score
gravestones.  The manse close by, although no more than a cottage, is
surrounded by the brightness of a flower-garden and the straw roofs of
bees; and the whole colony, kirk and manse, garden and graveyard, finds
harbourage in a grove of rowans, and is all the year round in a great
silence broken only by the drone of the bees, the tinkle of the burn, and
the bell on Sundays.  A mile beyond the kirk the road leaves the valley
by a precipitous ascent, and brings you a little after to the place of
Hermiston, where it comes to an end in the back-yard before the
coach-house.  All beyond and about is the great field, of the hills; the
plover, the curlew, and the lark cry there; the wind blows as it blows in
a ship’s rigging, hard and cold and pure; and the hill-tops huddle one
behind another like a herd of cattle into the sunset.

The house was sixty years old, unsightly, comfortable; a farmyard and a
kitchen-garden on the left, with a fruit wall where little hard green
pears came to their maturity about the end of October.

The policy (as who should say the park) was of some extent, but very ill
reclaimed; heather and moorfowl had crossed the boundary wall and spread
and roosted within; and it would have tasked a landscape gardener to say
where policy ended and unpolicied nature began.  My lord had been led by
the influence of Mr. Sheriff Scott into a considerable design of
planting; many acres were accordingly set out with fir, and the little
feathery besoms gave a false scale and lent a strange air of a toy-shop
to the moors.  A great, rooty sweetness of bogs was in the air, and at
all seasons an infinite melancholy piping of hill birds.  Standing so
high and with so little shelter, it was a cold, exposed house, splashed
by showers, drenched by continuous rains that made the gutters to spout,
beaten upon and buffeted by all the winds of heaven; and the prospect
would be often black with tempest, and often white with the snows of
winter.  But the house was wind and weather proof, the hearths were kept
bright, and the rooms pleasant with live fires of peat; and Archie might
sit of an evening and hear the squalls bugle on the moorland, and watch
the fire prosper in the earthy fuel, and the smoke winding up the
chimney, and drink deep of the pleasures of shelter.

Solitary as the place was, Archie did not want neighbours.  Every night,
if he chose, he might go down to the manse and share a “brewst” of toddy
with the minister—a hare-brained ancient gentleman, long and light and
still active, though his knees were loosened with age, and his voice
broke continually in childish trebles—and his lady wife, a heavy, comely
dame, without a word to say for herself beyond good-even and good-day.
Harum-scarum, clodpole young lairds of the neighbourhood paid him the
compliment of a visit.  Young Hay of Romanes rode down to call, on his
crop-eared pony; young Pringle of Drumanno came up on his bony grey.  Hay
remained on the hospitable field, and must be carried to bed; Pringle got
somehow to his saddle about 3 A.M., and (as Archie stood with the lamp on
the upper doorstep) lurched, uttered a senseless view-holloa, and
vanished out of the small circle of illumination like a wraith.  Yet a
minute or two longer the clatter of his break-neck flight was audible,
then it was cut off by the intervening steepness of the hill; and again,
a great while after, the renewed beating of phantom horse-hoofs, far in
the valley of the Hermiston, showed that the horse at least, if not his
rider, was still on the homeward way.

There was a Tuesday club at the “Cross-keys” in Crossmichael, where the
young bloods of the country-side congregated and drank deep on a
percentage of the expense, so that he was left gainer who should have
drunk the most.  Archie had no great mind to this diversion, but he took
it like a duty laid upon him, went with a decent regularity, did his
manfullest with the liquor, held up his head in the local jests, and got
home again and was able to put up his horse, to the admiration of Kirstie
and the lass that helped her.  He dined at Driffel, supped at Windielaws.
He went to the new year’s ball at Huntsfield and was made welcome, and
thereafter rode to hounds with my Lord Muirfell, upon whose name, as that
of a legitimate Lord of Parliament, in a work so full of Lords of
Session, my pen should pause reverently.  Yet the same fate attended him
here as in Edinburgh.  The habit of solitude tends to perpetuate itself,
and an austerity of which he was quite unconscious, and a pride which
seemed arrogance, and perhaps was chiefly shyness, discouraged and
offended his new companions.  Hay did not return more than twice, Pringle
never at all, and there came a time when Archie even desisted from the
Tuesday Club, and became in all things—what he had had the name of almost
from the first—the Recluse of Hermiston.  High-nosed Miss Pringle of
Drumanno and high-stepping Miss Marshall of the Mains were understood to
have had a difference of opinion about him the day after the ball—he was
none the wiser, he could not suppose himself to be remarked by these
entrancing ladies.  At the ball itself my Lord Muirfell’s daughter, the
Lady Flora, spoke to him twice, and the second time with a touch of
appeal, so that her colour rose and her voice trembled a little in his
ear, like a passing grace in music.  He stepped back with a heart on
fire, coldly and not ungracefully excused himself, and a little after
watched her dancing with young Drumanno of the empty laugh, and was
harrowed at the sight, and raged to himself that this was a world in
which it was given to Drumanno to please, and to himself only to stand
aside and envy.  He seemed excluded, as of right, from the favour of such
society—seemed to extinguish mirth wherever he came, and was quick to
feel the wound, and desist, and retire into solitude.  If he had but
understood the figure he presented, and the impression he made on these
bright eyes and tender hearts; if he had but guessed that the Recluse of
Hermiston, young, graceful, well spoken, but always cold, stirred the
maidens of the county with the charm of Byronism when Byronism was new,
it may be questioned whether his destiny might not even yet have been
modified.  It may be questioned, and I think it should be doubted.  It
was in his horoscope to be parsimonious of pain to himself, or of the
chance of pain, even to the avoidance of any opportunity of pleasure; to
have a Roman sense of duty, an instinctive aristocracy of manners and
taste; to be the son of Adam Weir and Jean Rutherford.



2. Kirstie


Kirstie was now over fifty, and might have sat to a sculptor.  Long of
limb, and still light of foot, deep-breasted, robust-loined, her golden
hair not yet mingled with any trace of silver, the years had but caressed
and embellished her.  By the lines of a rich and vigorous maternity, she
seemed destined to be the bride of heroes and the mother of their
children; and behold, by the iniquity of fate, she had passed through her
youth alone, and drew near to the confines of age, a childless woman.
The tender ambitions that she had received at birth had been, by time and
disappointment, diverted into a certain barren zeal of industry and fury
of interference.  She carried her thwarted ardours into housework, she
washed floors with her empty heart.  If she could not win the love of one
with love, she must dominate all by her temper.  Hasty, wordy, and
wrathful, she had a drawn quarrel with most of her neighbours, and with
the others not much more than armed neutrality.  The grieve’s wife had
been “sneisty”; the sister of the gardener who kept house for him had
shown herself “upsitten”; and she wrote to Lord Hermiston about once a
year demanding the discharge of the offenders, and justifying the demand
by much wealth of detail.  For it must not be supposed that the quarrel
rested with the wife and did not take in the husband also—or with the
gardener’s sister, and did not speedily include the gardener himself.  As
the upshot of all this petty quarrelling and intemperate speech, she was
practically excluded (like a lightkeeper on his tower) from the comforts
of human association; except with her own indoor drudge, who, being but a
lassie and entirely at her mercy, must submit to the shifty weather of
“the mistress’s” moods without complaint, and be willing to take buffets
or caresses according to the temper of the hour.  To Kirstie, thus
situate and in the Indian summer of her heart, which was slow to submit
to age, the gods sent this equivocal good thing of Archie’s presence.
She had known him in the cradle and paddled him when he misbehaved; and
yet, as she had not so much as set eyes on him since he was eleven and
had his last serious illness, the tall, slender, refined, and rather
melancholy young gentleman of twenty came upon her with the shock of a
new acquaintance.  He was “Young Hermiston,” “the laird himsel’”: he had
an air of distinctive superiority, a cold straight glance of his black
eyes, that abashed the woman’s tantrums in the beginning, and therefore
the possibility of any quarrel was excluded.  He was new, and therefore
immediately aroused her curiosity; he was reticent, and kept it awake.
And lastly he was dark and she fair, and he was male and she female, the
everlasting fountains of interest.

Her feeling partook of the loyalty of a clanswoman, the hero-worship of a
maiden aunt, and the idolatry due to a god.  No matter what he had asked
of her, ridiculous or tragic, she would have done it and joyed to do it.
Her passion, for it was nothing less, entirely filled her.  It was a rich
physical pleasure to make his bed or light his lamp for him when he was
absent, to pull off his wet boots or wait on him at dinner when he
returned.  A young man who should have so doted on the idea, moral and
physical, of any woman, might be properly described as being in love,
head and heels, and would have behaved himself accordingly.  But
Kirstie—though her heart leaped at his coming footsteps—though, when he
patted her shoulder, her face brightened for the day—had not a hope or
thought beyond the present moment and its perpetuation to the end of
time.  Till the end of time she would have had nothing altered, but still
continue delightedly to serve her idol, and be repaid (say twice in the
month) with a clap on the shoulder.

I have said her heart leaped—it is the accepted phrase.  But rather, when
she was alone in any chamber of the house, and heard his foot passing on
the corridors, something in her bosom rose slowly until her breath was
suspended, and as slowly fell again with a deep sigh, when the steps had
passed and she was disappointed of her eyes’ desire.  This perpetual
hunger and thirst of his presence kept her all day on the alert.  When he
went forth at morning, she would stand and follow him with admiring
looks.  As it grew late and drew to the time of his return, she would
steal forth to a corner of the policy wall and be seen standing there
sometimes by the hour together, gazing with shaded eyes, waiting the
exquisite and barren pleasure of his view a mile off on the mountains.
When at night she had trimmed and gathered the fire, turned down his bed,
and laid out his night-gear—when there was no more to be done for the
king’s pleasure, but to remember him fervently in her usually very tepid
prayers, and go to bed brooding upon his perfections, his future career,
and what she should give him the next day for dinner—there still remained
before her one more opportunity; she was still to take in the tray and
say good-night.  Sometimes Archie would glance up from his book with a
preoccupied nod and a perfunctory salutation which was in truth a
dismissal; sometimes—and by degrees more often—the volume would be laid
aside, he would meet her coming with a look of relief; and the
conversation would be engaged, last out the supper, and be prolonged till
the small hours by the waning fire.  It was no wonder that Archie was
fond of company after his solitary days; and Kirstie, upon her side,
exerted all the arts of her vigorous nature to ensnare his attention.
She would keep back some piece of news during dinner to be fired off with
the entrance of the supper tray, and form as it were the _lever de
rideau_ of the evening’s entertainment.  Once he had heard her tongue
wag, she made sure of the result.  From one subject to another she moved
by insidious transitions, fearing the least silence, fearing almost to
give him time for an answer lest it should slip into a hint of
separation.  Like so many people of her class, she was a brave narrator;
her place was on the hearth-rug and she made it a rostrum, mimeing her
stories as she told them, fitting them with vital detail, spinning them
out with endless “quo’ he’s” and “quo’ she’s,” her voice sinking into a
whisper over the supernatural or the horrific; until she would suddenly
spring up in affected surprise, and pointing to the clock, “Mercy, Mr.
Archie!” she would say, “whatten a time o’ night is this of it!  God
forgive me for a daft wife!”  So it befell, by good management, that she
was not only the first to begin these nocturnal conversations, but
invariably the first to break them off; so she managed to retire and not
to be dismissed.



3. A Border Family


Such an unequal intimacy has never been uncommon in Scotland, where the
clan spirit survives; where the servant tends to spend her life in the
same service, a helpmeet at first, then a tyrant, and at last a
pensioner; where, besides, she is not necessarily destitute of the pride
of birth, but is, perhaps, like Kirstie, a connection of her master’s,
and at least knows the legend of her own family, and may count kinship
with some illustrious dead.  For that is the mark of the Scot of all
classes: that he stands in an attitude towards the past unthinkable to
Englishmen, and remembers and cherishes the memory of his forebears, good
or bad; and there burns alive in him a sense of identity with the dead
even to the twentieth generation.  No more characteristic instance could
be found than in the family of Kirstie Elliott.  They were all, and
Kirstie the first of all, ready and eager to pour forth the particulars
of their genealogy, embellished with every detail that memory had handed
down or fancy fabricated; and, behold! from every ramification of that
tree there dangled a halter.  The Elliotts themselves have had a
chequered history; but these Elliotts deduced, besides, from three of the
most unfortunate of the border clans—the Nicksons, the Ellwalds, and the
Crozers.  One ancestor after another might be seen appearing a moment out
of the rain and the hill mist upon his furtive business, speeding home,
perhaps, with a paltry booty of lame horses and lean kine, or squealing
and dealing death in some moorland feud of the ferrets and the wild cats.
One after another closed his obscure adventures in mid-air, triced up to
the arm of the royal gibbet or the Baron’s dule-tree.  For the rusty
blunderbuss of Scots criminal justice, which usually hurt nobody but
jurymen, became a weapon of precision for the Nicksons, the Ellwalds, and
the Crozers.  The exhilaration of their exploits seemed to haunt the
memories of their descendants alone, and the shame to be forgotten.
Pride glowed in their bosoms to publish their relationship to “Andrew
Ellwald of the Laverockstanes, called ‘Unchancy Dand,’ who was justifeed
wi’ seeven mair of the same name at Jeddart in the days of King James the
Sax.”  In all this tissue of crime and misfortune, the Elliotts of
Cauldstaneslap had one boast which must appear legitimate: the males were
gallows-birds, born outlaws, petty thieves, and deadly brawlers; but,
according to the same tradition, the females were all chaste and
faithful.  The power of ancestry on the character is not limited to the
inheritance of cells.  If I buy ancestors by the gross from the
benevolence of Lyon King of Arms, my grandson (if he is Scottish) will
feel a quickening emulation of their deeds.  The men of the Elliotts were
proud, lawless, violent as of right, cherishing and prolonging a
tradition.  In like manner with the women.  And the woman, essentially
passionate and reckless, who crouched on the rug, in the shine of the
peat fire, telling these tales, had cherished through life a wild
integrity of virtue.

Her father Gilbert had been deeply pious, a savage disciplinarian in the
antique style, and withal a notorious smuggler.  “I mind when I was a
bairn getting mony a skelp and being shoo’d to bed like pou’try,” she
would say.  “That would be when the lads and their bit kegs were on the
road.  We’ve had the riffraff of two-three counties in our kitchen,
mony’s the time, betwix’ the twelve and the three; and their lanterns
would be standing in the forecourt, ay, a score o’ them at once.  But
there was nae ungodly talk permitted at Cauldstaneslap.  My faither was a
consistent man in walk and conversation; just let slip an aith, and there
was the door to ye!  He had that zeal for the Lord, it was a fair wonder
to hear him pray, but the family has aye had a gift that way.” This
father was twice married, once to a dark woman of the old Ellwald stock,
by whom he had Gilbert, presently of Cauldstaneslap; and, secondly, to
the mother of Kirstie.  “He was an auld man when he married her, a fell
auld man wi’ a muckle voice—you could hear him rowting from the top o’
the Kye-skairs,” she said; “but for her, it appears she was a perfit
wonder.  It was gentle blood she had, Mr. Archie, for it was your ain.
The country-side gaed gyte about her and her gowden hair.  Mines is no to
be mentioned wi’ it, and there’s few weemen has mair hair than what I
have, or yet a bonnier colour.  Often would I tell my dear Miss
Jeannie—that was your mother, dear, she was cruel ta’en up about her
hair, it was unco’ tender, ye see—‘Houts, Miss Jeannie,’ I would say,
‘just fling your washes and your French dentifrishes in the back o’ the
fire, for that’s the place for them; and awa’ down to a burn side, and
wash yersel’ in cauld hill water, and dry your bonny hair in the caller
wind o’ the muirs, the way that my mother aye washed hers, and that I
have aye made it a practice to have wishen mines—just you do what I tell
ye, my dear, and ye’ll give me news of it!  Ye’ll have hair, and routh of
hair, a pigtail as thick’s my arm,’ I said, ‘and the bonniest colour like
the clear gowden guineas, so as the lads in kirk’ll no can keep their
eyes off it!’  Weel, it lasted out her time, puir thing!  I cuttit a lock
of it upon her corp that was lying there sae cauld.  I’ll show it ye some
of thir days if ye’re good.  But, as I was sayin’, my mither—”

On the death of the father there remained golden-haired Kirstie, who took
service with her distant kinsfolk, the Rutherfords, and black-a-vised
Gilbert, twenty years older, who farmed the Cauldstaneslap, married, and
begot four sons between 1773 and 1784, and a daughter, like a postscript,
in ’97, the year of Camperdown and Cape St. Vincent.  It seemed it was a
tradition in the family to wind up with a belated girl.  In 1804, at the
age of sixty, Gilbert met an end that might be called heroic.  He was due
home from market any time from eight at night till five in the morning,
and in any condition from the quarrelsome to the speechless, for he
maintained to that age the goodly customs of the Scots farmer.  It was
known on this occasion that he had a good bit of money to bring home; the
word had gone round loosely.  The laird had shown his guineas, and if
anybody had but noticed it, there was an ill-looking, vagabond crew, the
scum of Edinburgh, that drew out of the market long ere it was dusk and
took the hill-road by Hermiston, where it was not to be believed that
they had lawful business.  One of the country-side, one Dickieson, they
took with them to be their guide, and dear he paid for it!  Of a sudden
in the ford of the Broken Dykes, this vermin clan fell on the laird, six
to one, and him three parts asleep, having drunk hard.  But it is ill to
catch an Elliott.  For a while, in the night and the black water that was
deep as to his saddle-girths, he wrought with his staff like a smith at
his stithy, and great was the sound of oaths and blows.  With that the
ambuscade was burst, and he rode for home with a pistol-ball in him,
three knife wounds, the loss of his front teeth, a broken rib and bridle,
and a dying horse.  That was a race with death that the laird rode!  In
the mirk night, with his broken bridle and his head swimming, he dug his
spurs to the rowels in the horse’s side, and the horse, that was even
worse off than himself, the poor creature! screamed out loud like a
person as he went, so that the hills echoed with it, and the folks at
Cauldstaneslap got to their feet about the table and looked at each other
with white faces.  The horse fell dead at the yard gate, the laird won
the length of the house and fell there on the threshold.  To the son that
raised him he gave the bag of money.  “Hae,” said he.  All the way up the
thieves had seemed to him to be at his heels, but now the hallucination
left him—he saw them again in the place of the ambuscade—and the thirst
of vengeance seized on his dying mind.  Raising himself and pointing with
an imperious finger into the black night from which he had come, he
uttered the single command, “Brocken Dykes,” and fainted.  He had never
been loved, but he had been feared in honour.  At that sight, at that
word, gasped out at them from a toothless and bleeding mouth, the old
Elliott spirit awoke with a shout in the four sons.  “Wanting the hat,”
continues my author, Kirstie, whom I but haltingly follow, for she told
this tale like one inspired, “wanting guns, for there wasna twa grains o’
pouder in the house, wi’ nae mair weepons than their sticks into their
hands, the fower o’ them took the road.  Only Hob, and that was the
eldest, hunkered at the doorsill where the blood had rin, fyled his hand
wi’ it—and haddit it up to Heeven in the way o’ the auld Border aith.
‘Hell shall have her ain again this nicht!’ he raired, and rode forth
upon his earrand.”  It was three miles to Broken Dykes, down hill, and a
sore road.  Kirstie has seen men from Edinburgh dismounting there in
plain day to lead their horses.  But the four brothers rode it as if Auld
Hornie were behind and Heaven in front.  Come to the ford, and there was
Dickieson.  By all tales, he was not dead, but breathed and reared upon
his elbow, and cried out to them for help.  It was at a graceless face
that he asked mercy.  As soon as Hob saw, by the glint of the lantern,
the eyes shining and the whiteness of the teeth in the man’s face, “Damn
you!” says he; “ye hae your teeth, hae ye?” and rode his horse to and fro
upon that human remnant.  Beyond that, Dandie must dismount with the
lantern to be their guide; he was the youngest son, scarce twenty at the
time.  “A’ nicht long they gaed in the wet heath and jennipers, and whaur
they gaed they neither knew nor cared, but just followed the bluid stains
and the footprints o’ their faither’s murderers.  And a’ nicht Dandie had
his nose to the grund like a tyke, and the ithers followed and spak’
naething, neither black nor white.  There was nae noise to be heard, but
just the sough of the swalled burns, and Hob, the dour yin, risping his
teeth as he gaed.” With the first glint of the morning they saw they were
on the drove road, and at that the four stopped and had a dram to their
breakfasts, for they knew that Dand must have guided them right, and the
rogues could be but little ahead, hot foot for Edinburgh by the way of
the Pentland Hills.  By eight o’clock they had word of them—a shepherd
had seen four men “uncoly mishandled” go by in the last hour.  “That’s
yin a piece,” says Clem, and swung his cudgel.  “Five o’ them!” says Hob.
“God’s death, but the faither was a man!  And him drunk!”  And then there
befell them what my author termed “a sair misbegowk,” for they were
overtaken by a posse of mounted neighbours come to aid in the pursuit.
Four sour faces looked on the reinforcement.  “The Deil’s broughten you!”
said Clem, and they rode thenceforward in the rear of the party with
hanging heads.  Before ten they had found and secured the rogues, and by
three of the afternoon, as they rode up the Vennel with their prisoners,
they were aware of a concourse of people bearing in their midst something
that dripped.  “For the boady of the saxt,” pursued Kirstie, “wi’ his
head smashed like a hazelnit, had been a’ that nicht in the chairge o’
Hermiston Water, and it dunting it on the stanes, and grunding it on the
shallows, and flinging the deid thing heels-ower-hurdie at the Fa’s o’
Spango; and in the first o’ the day, Tweed had got a hold o’ him and
carried him off like a wind, for it was uncoly swalled, and raced wi’
him, bobbing under brae-sides, and was long playing with the creature in
the drumlie lynns under the castle, and at the hinder end of all cuist
him up on the starling of Crossmichael brig.  Sae there they were
a’thegither at last (for Dickieson had been brought in on a cart long
syne), and folk could see what mainner o’man my brither had been that had
held his head again sax and saved the siller, and him drunk!”  Thus died
of honourable injuries and in the savour of fame Gilbert Elliott of the
Cauldstaneslap; but his sons had scarce less glory out of the business.
Their savage haste, the skill with which Dand had found and followed the
trail, the barbarity to the wounded Dickieson (which was like an open
secret in the county), and the doom which it was currently supposed they
had intended for the others, struck and stirred popular imagination.
Some century earlier the last of the minstrels might have fashioned the
last of the ballads out of that Homeric fight and chase; but the spirit
was dead, or had been reincarnated already in Mr. Sheriff Scott, and the
degenerate moorsmen must be content to tell the tale in prose, and to
make of the “Four Black Brothers” a unit after the fashion of the “Twelve
Apostles” or the “Three Musketeers.”

Robert, Gilbert, Clement, and Andrew—in the proper Border diminutives,
Hob, Gib, Clem, and Dand Elliott—these ballad heroes, had much in common;
in particular, their high sense of the family and the family honour; but
they went diverse ways, and prospered and failed in different businesses.
According to Kirstie, “they had a’ bees in their bonnets but Hob.”  Hob
the laird was, indeed, essentially a decent man.  An elder of the Kirk,
nobody had heard an oath upon his lips, save perhaps thrice or so at the
sheep-washing, since the chase of his father’s murderers.  The figure he
had shown on that eventful night disappeared as if swallowed by a trap.
He who had ecstatically dipped his hand in the red blood, he who had
ridden down Dickieson, became, from that moment on, a stiff and rather
graceless model of the rustic proprieties; cannily profiting by the high
war prices, and yearly stowing away a little nest-egg in the bank against
calamity; approved of and sometimes consulted by the greater lairds for
the massive and placid sense of what he said, when he could be induced to
say anything; and particularly valued by the minister, Mr. Torrance, as a
right-hand man in the parish, and a model to parents.  The
transfiguration had been for the moment only; some Barbarossa, some old
Adam of our ancestors, sleeps in all of us till the fit circumstance
shall call it into action; and, for as sober as he now seemed, Hob had
given once for all the measure of the devil that haunted him.  He was
married, and, by reason of the effulgence of that legendary night, was
adored by his wife.  He had a mob of little lusty, barefoot children who
marched in a caravan the long miles to school, the stages of whose
pilgrimage were marked by acts of spoliation and mischief, and who were
qualified in the country-side as “fair pests.”  But in the house, if
“faither was in,” they were quiet as mice.  In short, Hob moved through
life in a great peace—the reward of any one who shall have killed his
man, with any formidable and figurative circumstance, in the midst of a
country gagged and swaddled with civilisation.

It was a current remark that the Elliotts were “guid and bad, like
sanguishes”; and certainly there was a curious distinction, the men of
business coming alternately with the dreamers.  The second brother, Gib,
was a weaver by trade, had gone out early into the world to Edinburgh,
and come home again with his wings singed.  There was an exaltation in
his nature which had led him to embrace with enthusiasm the principles of
the French Revolution, and had ended by bringing him under the hawse of
my Lord Hermiston in that furious onslaught of his upon the Liberals,
which sent Muir and Palmer into exile and dashed the party into chaff.
It was whispered that my lord, in his great scorn for the movement, and
prevailed upon a little by a sense of neighbourliness, had given Gib a
hint.  Meeting him one day in the Potterrow, my lord had stopped in front
of him: “Gib, ye eediot,” he had said, “what’s this I hear of you?
Poalitics, poalitics, poalitics, weaver’s poalitics, is the way of it, I
hear.  If ye arena a’thegither dozened with cediocy, ye’ll gang your ways
back to Cauldstaneslap, and ca’ your loom, and ca’ your loom, man!” And
Gilbert had taken him at the word and returned, with an expedition almost
to be called flight, to the house of his father.  The clearest of his
inheritance was that family gift of prayer of which Kirstie had boasted;
and the baffled politician now turned his attention to religious
matters—or, as others said, to heresy and schism.  Every Sunday morning
he was in Crossmichael, where he had gathered together, one by one, a
sect of about a dozen persons, who called themselves “God’s Remnant of
the True Faithful,” or, for short, “God’s Remnant.” To the profane, they
were known as “Gib’s Deils.”  Bailie Sweedie, a noted humorist in the
town, vowed that the proceedings always opened to the tune of “The Deil
Fly Away with the Exciseman,” and that the sacrament was dispensed in the
form of hot whisky-toddy; both wicked hits at the evangelist, who had
been suspected of smuggling in his youth, and had been overtaken (as the
phrase went) on the streets of Crossmichael one Fair day.  It was known
that every Sunday they prayed for a blessing on the arms of Bonaparte.
For this “God’s Remnant,” as they were “skailing” from the cottage that
did duty for a temple, had been repeatedly stoned by the bairns, and Gib
himself hooted by a squadron of Border volunteers in which his own
brother, Dand, rode in a uniform and with a drawn sword.  The “Remnant”
were believed, besides, to be “antinomian in principle,” which might
otherwise have been a serious charge, but the way public opinion then
blew it was quite swallowed up and forgotten in the scandal about
Bonaparte.  For the rest, Gilbert had set up his loom in an outhouse at
Cauldstaneslap, where he laboured assiduously six days of the week.  His
brothers, appalled by his political opinions, and willing to avoid
dissension in the household, spoke but little to him; he less to them,
remaining absorbed in the study of the Bible and almost constant prayer.
The gaunt weaver was dry-nurse at Cauldstaneslap, and the bairns loved
him dearly.  Except when he was carrying an infant in his arms, he was
rarely seen to smile—as, indeed, there were few smilers in that family.
When his sister-in-law rallied him, and proposed that he should get a
wife and bairns of his own, since he was so fond of them, “I have no
clearness of mind upon that point,” he would reply.  If nobody called him
in to dinner, he stayed out.  Mrs. Hob, a hard, unsympathetic woman, once
tried the experiment.  He went without food all day, but at dusk, as the
light began to fail him, he came into the house of his own accord,
looking puzzled.  “I’ve had a great gale of prayer upon my speerit,” said
he.  “I canna mind sae muckle’s what I had for denner.” The creed of
God’s Remnant was justified in the life of its founder.  “And yet I dinna
ken,” said Kirstie.  “He’s maybe no more stockfish than his neeghbours!
He rode wi’ the rest o’ them, and had a good stamach to the work, by a’
that I hear!  God’s Remnant!  The deil’s clavers!  There wasna muckle
Christianity in the way Hob guided Johnny Dickieson, at the least of it;
but Guid kens!  Is he a Christian even?  He might be a Mahommedan or a
Deevil or a Fire-worshipper, for what I ken.”

The third brother had his name on a door-plate, no less, in the city of
Glasgow, “Mr. Clement Elliott,” as long as your arm.  In his case, that
spirit of innovation which had shown itself timidly in the case of Hob by
the admission of new manures, and which had run to waste with Gilbert in
subversive politics and heretical religions, bore useful fruit in many
ingenious mechanical improvements.  In boyhood, from his addiction to
strange devices of sticks and string, he had been counted the most
eccentric of the family.  But that was all by now; and he was a partner
of his firm, and looked to die a bailie.  He too had married, and was
rearing a plentiful family in the smoke and din of Glasgow; he was
wealthy, and could have bought out his brother, the cock-laird, six times
over, it was whispered; and when he slipped away to Cauldstaneslap for a
well-earned holiday, which he did as often as he was able, he astonished
the neighbours with his broadcloth, his beaver hat, and the ample plies
of his neckcloth.  Though an eminently solid man at bottom, after the
pattern of Hob, he had contracted a certain Glasgow briskness and
_aplomb_ which set him off.  All the other Elliotts were as lean as a
rake, but Clement was laying on fat, and he panted sorely when he must
get into his boots.  Dand said, chuckling: “Ay, Clem has the elements of
a corporation.”  “A provost and corporation,” returned Clem.  And his
readiness was much admired.

The fourth brother, Dand, was a shepherd to his trade, and by starts,
when he could bring his mind to it, excelled in the business.  Nobody
could train a dog like Dandie; nobody, through the peril of great storms
in the winter time, could do more gallantly.  But if his dexterity were
exquisite, his diligence was but fitful; and he served his brother for
bed and board, and a trifle of pocket-money when he asked for it.  He
loved money well enough, knew very well how to spend it, and could make a
shrewd bargain when he liked.  But he preferred a vague knowledge that he
was well to windward to any counted coins in the pocket; he felt himself
richer so.  Hob would expostulate: “I’m an amature herd.”  Dand would
reply, “I’ll keep your sheep to you when I’m so minded, but I’ll keep my
liberty too.  Thir’s no man can coandescend on what I’m worth.” Clein
would expound to him the miraculous results of compound interest, and
recommend investments.  “Ay, man?” Dand would say; “and do you think, if
I took Hob’s siller, that I wouldna drink it or wear it on the lassies?
And, anyway, my kingdom is no of this world.  Either I’m a poet or else
I’m nothing.”  Clem would remind him of old age.  “I’ll die young, like,
Robbie Burns,” he would say stoutly.  No question but he had a certain
accomplishment in minor verse.  His “Hermiston Burn,” with its pretty
refrain—

    “I love to gang thinking whaur ye gang linking,
             Hermiston burn, in the howe;”

his “Auld, auld Elliotts, clay-cauld Elliotts, dour, bauld Elliotts of
auld,” and his really fascinating piece about the Praying Weaver’s Stone,
had gained him in the neighbourhood the reputation, still possible in
Scotland, of a local bard; and, though not printed himself, he was
recognised by others who were and who had become famous.  Walter Scott
owed to Dandie the text of the “Raid of Wearie” in the _Minstrelsy_; and
made him welcome at his house, and appreciated his talents, such as they
were, with all his usual generosity.  The Ettrick Shepherd was his sworn
crony; they would meet, drink to excess, roar out their lyrics in each
other’s faces, and quarrel and make it up again till bedtime.  And
besides these recognitions, almost to be called official, Dandie was made
welcome for the sake of his gift through the farmhouses of several
contiguous dales, and was thus exposed to manifold temptations which he
rather sought than fled.  He had figured on the stool of repentance, for
once fulfilling to the letter the tradition of his hero and model.  His
humorous verses to Mr. Torrance on that occasion—“Kenspeckle here my lane
I stand”—unfortunately too indelicate for further citation, ran through
the country like a fiery cross—they were recited, quoted, paraphrased,
and laughed over as far away as Dumfries on the one hand and Dunbar on
the other.

These four brothers were united by a close bond, the bond of that mutual
admiration—or rather mutual hero-worship—which is so strong among the
members of secluded families who have much ability and little culture.
Even the extremes admired each other.  Hob, who had as much poetry as the
tongs, professed to find pleasure in Dand’s verses; Clem, who had no more
religion than Claverhouse, nourished a heartfelt, at least an
open-mouthed, admiration of Gib’s prayers; and Dandie followed with
relish the rise of Clem’s fortunes.  Indulgence followed hard on the
heels of admiration.  The laird, Clem, and Dand, who were Tories and
patriots of the hottest quality, excused to themselves, with a certain
bashfulness, the radical and revolutionary heresies of Gib.  By another
division of the family, the laird, Clem, and Gib, who were men exactly
virtuous, swallowed the dose of Dand’s irregularities as a kind of clog
or drawback in the mysterious providence of God affixed to bards, and
distinctly probative of poetical genius.  To appreciate the simplicity of
their mutual admiration it was necessary to hear Clem, arrived upon one
of his visits, and dealing in a spirit of continuous irony with the
affairs and personalities of that great city of Glasgow where he lived
and transacted business.  The various personages, ministers of the
church, municipal officers, mercantile big-wigs, whom he had occasion to
introduce, were all alike denigrated, all served but as reflectors to
cast back a flattering side-light on the house of Cauldstaneslap.  The
Provost, for whom Clem by exception entertained a measure of respect, he
would liken to Hob.  “He minds me o’ the laird there,” he would say.  “He
has some of Hob’s grand, whunstane sense, and the same way with him of
steiking his mouth when he’s no very pleased.”  And Hob, all unconscious,
would draw down his upper lip and produce, as if for comparison, the
formidable grimace referred to.  The unsatisfactory incumbent of St.
Enoch’s Kirk was thus briefly dismissed: “If he had but twa fingers o’
Gib’s, he would waken them up.”  And Gib, honest man! would look down and
secretly smile.  Clem was a spy whom they had sent out into the world of
men.  He had come back with the good news that there was nobody to
compare with the Four Black Brothers, no position that they would not
adorn, no official that it would not be well they should replace, no
interest of mankind, secular or spiritual, which would not immediately
bloom under their supervision.  The excuse of their folly is in two
words: scarce the breadth of a hair divided them from the peasantry.  The
measure of their sense is this: that these symposia of rustic vanity were
kept entirely within the family, like some secret ancestral practice.  To
the world their serious faces were never deformed by the suspicion of any
simper of self-contentment.  Yet it was known.  “They hae a guid pride o’
themsel’s!” was the word in the country-side.

Lastly, in a Border story, there should be added their “two-names.”  Hob
was The Laird.  “Roy ne puis, prince ne daigne”; he was the laird of
Cauldstaneslap—say fifty acres—_ipsissimus_.  Clement was Mr. Elliott, as
upon his door-plate, the earlier Dafty having been discarded as no longer
applicable, and indeed only a reminder of misjudgment and the imbecility
of the public; and the youngest, in honour of his perpetual wanderings,
was known by the sobriquet of Randy Dand.

It will be understood that not all this information was communicated by
the aunt, who had too much of the family failing herself to appreciate it
thoroughly in others.  But as time went on, Archie began to observe an
omission in the family chronicle.

“Is there not a girl too?” he asked.

“Ay: Kirstie.  She was named for me, or my grandmother at least—it’s the
same thing,” returned the aunt, and went on again about Dand, whom she
secretly preferred by reason of his gallantries.

“But what is your niece like?” said Archie at the next opportunity.

“Her?  As black’s your hat!  But I dinna suppose she would maybe be what
you would ca’ _ill-looked_ a’thegither.  Na, she’s a kind of a handsome
jaud—a kind o’ gipsy,” said the aunt, who had two sets of scales for men
and women—or perhaps it would be more fair to say that she had three, and
the third and the most loaded was for girls.

“How comes it that I never see her in church?” said Archie.

“’Deed, and I believe she’s in Glesgie with Clem and his wife.  A heap
good she’s like to get of it!  I dinna say for men folk, but where weemen
folk are born, there let them bide.  Glory to God, I was never far’er
from here than Crossmichael.”

In the meanwhile it began to strike Archie as strange, that while she
thus sang the praises of her kinsfolk, and manifestly relished their
virtues and (I may say) their vices like a thing creditable to herself,
there should appear not the least sign of cordiality between the house of
Hermiston and that of Cauldstaneslap.  Going to church of a Sunday, as
the lady housekeeper stepped with her skirts kilted, three tucks of her
white petticoat showing below, and her best India shawl upon her back (if
the day were fine) in a pattern of radiant dyes, she would sometimes
overtake her relatives preceding her more leisurely in the same
direction.  Gib of course was absent: by skreigh of day he had been gone
to Crossmichael and his fellow-heretics; but the rest of the family would
be seen marching in open order: Hob and Dand, stiff-necked,
straight-backed six-footers, with severe dark faces, and their plaids
about their shoulders; the convoy of children scattering (in a state of
high polish) on the wayside, and every now and again collected by the
shrill summons of the mother; and the mother herself, by a suggestive
circumstance which might have afforded matter of thought to a more
experienced observer than Archie, wrapped in a shawl nearly identical
with Kirstie’s, but a thought more gaudy and conspicuously newer.  At the
sight, Kirstie grew more tall—Kirstie showed her classical profile, nose
in air and nostril spread, the pure blood came in her cheek evenly in a
delicate living pink.

“A braw day to ye, Mistress Elliott,” said she, and hostility and
gentility were nicely mingled in her tones.  “A fine day, mem,” the
laird’s wife would reply with a miraculous curtsey, spreading the while
her plumage—setting off, in other words, and with arts unknown to the
mere man, the pattern of her India shawl.  Behind her, the whole
Cauldstaneslap contingent marched in closer order, and with an
indescribable air of being in the presence of the foe; and while Dandie
saluted his aunt with a certain familiarity as of one who was well in
court, Hob marched on in awful immobility.  There appeared upon the face
of this attitude in the family the consequences of some dreadful feud.
Presumably the two women had been principals in the original encounter,
and the laird had probably been drawn into the quarrel by the ears, too
late to be included in the present skin-deep reconciliation.

“Kirstie,” said Archie one day, “what is this you have against your
family?”

“I dinna complean,” said Kirstie, with a flush.  “I say naething.”

“I see you do not—not even good-day to your own nephew,” said he.

“I hae naething to be ashamed of,” said she.  “I can say the Lord’s
prayer with a good grace.  If Hob was ill, or in preeson or poverty, I
would see to him blithely.  But for curtchying and complimenting and
colloguing, thank ye kindly!”

Archie had a bit of a smile: he leaned back in his chair.  “I think you
and Mrs. Robert are not very good friends,” says he slyly, “when you have
your India shawls on?”

She looked upon him in silence, with a sparkling eye but an
indecipherable expression; and that was all that Archie was ever destined
to learn of the battle of the India shawls.

“Do none of them ever come here to see you?” he inquired.

“Mr. Archie,” said she, “I hope that I ken my place better.  It would be
a queer thing, I think, if I was to clamjamfry up your faither’s
house—that I should say it!—wi’ a dirty, black-a-vised clan, no ane o’
them it was worth while to mar soap upon but just mysel’!  Na, they’re
all damnifeed wi’ the black Ellwalds.  I have nae patience wi’ black
folk.” Then, with a sudden consciousness of the case of Archie, “No that
it maitters for men sae muckle,” she made haste to add, “but there’s
naebody can deny that it’s unwomanly.  Long hair is the ornament o’ woman
ony way; we’ve good warrandise for that—it’s in the Bible—and wha can
doubt that the Apostle had some gowden-haired lassie in his mind—Apostle
and all, for what was he but just a man like yersel’?”




