CHAPTER IX—AT THE WEAVER’S STONE


It was late in the afternoon when Archie drew near by the hill path to
the Praying Weaver’s stone.  The Hags were in shadow.  But still, through
the gate of the Slap, the sun shot a last arrow, which sped far and
straight across the surface of the moss, here and there touching and
shining on a tussock, and lighted at length on the gravestone and the
small figure awaiting him there.  The emptiness and solitude of the great
moors seemed to be concentrated there, and Kirstie pointed out by that
figure of sunshine for the only inhabitant.  His first sight of her was
thus excruciatingly sad, like a glimpse of a world from which all light,
comfort, and society were on the point of vanishing.  And the next
moment, when she had turned her face to him and the quick smile had
enlightened it, the whole face of nature smiled upon him in her smile of
welcome.  Archie’s slow pace was quickened; his legs hasted to her though
his heart was hanging back.  The girl, upon her side, drew herself
together slowly and stood up, expectant; she was all languor, her face
was gone white; her arms ached for him, her soul was on tip-toes.  But he
deceived her, pausing a few steps away, not less white than herself, and
holding up his hand with a gesture of denial.

“No, Christina, not to-day,” he said.  “To-day I have to talk to you
seriously.  Sit ye down, please, there where you were.  Please!” he
repeated.

The revulsion of feeling in Christina’s heart was violent.  To have
longed and waited these weary hours for him, rehearsing her
endearments—to have seen him at last come—to have been ready there,
breathless, wholly passive, his to do what he would with—and suddenly to
have found herself confronted with a grey-faced, harsh schoolmaster—it
was too rude a shock.  She could have wept, but pride withheld her.  She
sat down on the stone, from which she had arisen, part with the instinct
of obedience, part as though she had been thrust there.  What was this?
Why was she rejected?  Had she ceased to please?  She stood here offering
her wares, and he would none of them!  And yet they were all his!  His to
take and keep, not his to refuse though!  In her quick petulant nature, a
moment ago on fire with hope, thwarted love and wounded vanity wrought.
The schoolmaster that there is in all men, to the despair of all girls
and most women, was now completely in possession of Archie.  He had
passed a night of sermons, a day of reflection; he had come wound up to
do his duty; and the set mouth, which in him only betrayed the effort of
his will, to her seemed the expression of an averted heart.  It was the
same with his constrained voice and embarrassed utterance; and if so—if
it was all over—the pang of the thought took away from her the power of
thinking.

He stood before her some way off.  “Kirstie, there’s been too much of
this.  We’ve seen too much of each other.”  She looked up quickly and her
eyes contracted.  “There’s no good ever comes of these secret meetings.
They’re not frank, not honest truly, and I ought to have seen it.  People
have begun to talk; and it’s not right of me.  Do you see?”

“I see somebody will have been talking to ye,” she said sullenly.

“They have, more than one of them,” replied Archie.

“And whae were they?” she cried.  “And what kind o’ love do ye ca’ that,
that’s ready to gang round like a whirligig at folk talking?  Do ye think
they havena talked to me?”

“Have they indeed?” said Archie, with a quick breath.  “That is what I
feared.  Who were they?  Who has dared—?”

Archie was on the point of losing his temper.

As a matter of fact, not any one had talked to Christina on the matter;
and she strenuously repeated her own first question in a panic of
self-defence.

“Ah, well! what does it matter?” he said.  “They were good folk that
wished well to us, and the great affair is that there are people talking.
My dear girl, we have to be wise.  We must not wreck our lives at the
outset.  They may be long and happy yet, and we must see to it, Kirstie,
like God’s rational creatures and not like fool children.  There is one
thing we must see to before all.  You’re worth waiting for, Kirstie!
worth waiting for a generation; it would be enough reward.”—And here he
remembered the schoolmaster again, and very unwisely took to following
wisdom.  “The first thing that we must see to, is that there shall be no
scandal about for my father’s sake.  That would ruin all; do ye no see
that?”

Kirstie was a little pleased, there had been some show of warmth of
sentiment in what Archie had said last.  But the dull irritation still
persisted in her bosom; with the aboriginal instinct, having suffered
herself, she wished to make Archie suffer.

And besides, there had come out the word she had always feared to hear
from his lips, the name of his father.  It is not to be supposed that,
during so many days with a love avowed between them, some reference had
not been made to their conjoint future.  It had in fact been often
touched upon, and from the first had been the sore point.  Kirstie had
wilfully closed the eye of thought; she would not argue even with
herself; gallant, desperate little heart, she had accepted the command of
that supreme attraction like the call of fate and marched blindfold on
her doom.  But Archie, with his masculine sense of responsibility, must
reason; he must dwell on some future good, when the present good was all
in all to Kirstie; he must talk—and talk lamely, as necessity drove
him—of what was to be.  Again and again he had touched on marriage; again
and again been driven back into indistinctness by a memory of Lord
Hermiston.  And Kirstie had been swift to understand and quick to choke
down and smother the understanding; swift to leap up in flame at a
mention of that hope, which spoke volumes to her vanity and her love,
that she might one day be Mrs. Weir of Hermiston; swift, also, to
recognise in his stumbling or throttled utterance the death-knell of
these expectations, and constant, poor girl! in her large-minded madness,
to go on and to reck nothing of the future.  But these unfinished
references, these blinks in which his heart spoke, and his memory and
reason rose up to silence it before the words were well uttered, gave her
unqualifiable agony.  She was raised up and dashed down again bleeding.
The recurrence of the subject forced her, for however short a time, to
open her eyes on what she did not wish to see; and it had invariably
ended in another disappointment.  So now again, at the mere wind of its
coming, at the mere mention of his father’s name—who might seem indeed to
have accompanied them in their whole moorland courtship, an awful figure
in a wig with an ironical and bitter smile, present to guilty
consciousness—she fled from it head down.

“Ye havena told me yet,” she said, “who was it spoke?”

“Your aunt for one,” said Archie.

“Auntie Kirstie?” she cried.  “And what do I care for my Auntie Kirstie?”

“She cares a great deal for her niece,” replied Archie, in kind reproof.

“Troth, and it’s the first I’ve heard of it,” retorted the girl.

“The question here is not who it is, but what they say, what they have
noticed,” pursued the lucid schoolmaster.  “That is what we have to think
of in self-defence.”

“Auntie Kirstie, indeed!  A bitter, thrawn auld maid that’s fomented
trouble in the country before I was born, and will be doing it still, I
daur say, when I’m deid!  It’s in her nature; it’s as natural for her as
it’s for a sheep to eat.”

“Pardon me, Kirstie, she was not the only one,” interposed Archie.  “I
had two warnings, two sermons, last night, both most kind and
considerate.  Had you been there, I promise you you would have grat, my
dear!  And they opened my eyes.  I saw we were going a wrong way.”

“Who was the other one?” Kirstie demanded.

By this time Archie was in the condition of a hunted beast.  He had come,
braced and resolute; he was to trace out a line of conduct for the pair
of them in a few cold, convincing sentences; he had now been there some
time, and he was still staggering round the outworks and undergoing what
he felt to be a savage cross-examination.

“Mr. Frank!” she cried.  “What nex’, I would like to ken?”

“He spoke most kindly and truly.”

“What like did he say?”

“I am not going to tell you; you have nothing to do with that,” cried
Archie, startled to find he had admitted so much.

“O, I have naething to do with it!” she repeated, springing to her feet.
“A’body at Hermiston’s free to pass their opinions upon me, but I have
naething to do wi’ it!  Was this at prayers like?  Did ye ca’ the grieve
into the consultation?  Little wonder if a’body’s talking, when ye make
a’body yer confidants!  But as you say, Mr. Weir,—most kindly, most
considerately, most truly, I’m sure,—I have naething to do with it.  And
I think I’ll better be going.  I’ll be wishing you good evening, Mr.
Weir.”  And she made him a stately curtsey, shaking as she did so from
head to foot, with the barren ecstasy of temper.

Poor Archie stood dumbfounded.  She had moved some steps away from him
before he recovered the gift of articulate speech.

“Kirstie!” he cried.  “O, Kirstie woman!”

There was in his voice a ring of appeal, a clang of mere astonishment
that showed the schoolmaster was vanquished.

She turned round on him.  “What do ye Kirstie me for?” she retorted.
“What have ye to do wi’ me!  Gang to your ain freends and deave them!”

He could only repeat the appealing “Kirstie!”

“Kirstie, indeed!” cried the girl, her eyes blazing in her white face.
“My name is Miss Christina Elliott, I would have ye to ken, and I daur ye
to ca’ me out of it.  If I canna get love, I’ll have respect, Mr. Weir.
I’m come of decent people, and I’ll have respect.  What have I done that
ye should lightly me?  What have I done?  What have I done? O, what have
I done?” and her voice rose upon the third repetition.  “I thocht—I
thocht—I thocht I was sae happy!” and the first sob broke from her like
the paroxysm of some mortal sickness.

Archie ran to her.  He took the poor child in his arms, and she nestled
to his breast as to a mother’s, and clasped him in hands that were strong
like vices.  He felt her whole body shaken by the throes of distress, and
had pity upon her beyond speech.  Pity, and at the same time a bewildered
fear of this explosive engine in his arms, whose works he did not
understand, and yet had been tampering with.  There arose from before him
the curtains of boyhood, and he saw for the first time the ambiguous face
of woman as she is.  In vain he looked back over the interview; he saw
not where he had offended.  It seemed unprovoked, a wilful convulsion of
brute nature. . . .




EDITORIAL NOTE


With the words last printed, “a wilful convulsion of brute nature,” the
romance of _Weir of Hermiston_ breaks off.  They were dictated, I
believe, on the very morning of the writer’s sudden seizure and death.
_Weir of Hermiston_ thus remains in the work of Stevenson what _Edwin
Droid_ is in the work of Dickens or _Denis Duval_ in that of Thackeray:
or rather it remains relatively more, for if each of those fragments
holds an honourable place among its author’s writings, among Stevenson’s
the fragment of _Weir_ holds certainly the highest.

Readers may be divided in opinion on the question whether they would or
they would not wish to hear more of the intended course of the story and
destinies of the characters.  To some, silence may seem best, and that
the mind should be left to its own conjectures as to the sequel, with the
help of such indications as the text affords.  I confess that this is the
view which has my sympathy.  But since others, and those almost certainly
a majority, are anxious to be told all they can, and since editors and
publishers join in the request, I can scarce do otherwise than comply.
The intended argument, then, so far as it was known at the time of the
writer’s death to his step-daughter and devoted amanuensis, Mrs. Strong,
was nearly as follows:—

Archie persists in his good resolution of avoiding further conduct
compromising to young Kirstie’s good name.  Taking advantage of the
situation thus created, and of the girl’s unhappiness and wounded vanity,
Frank Innes pursues his purpose of seduction; and Kirstie, though still
caring for Archie in her heart, allows herself to become Frank’s victim.
Old Kirstie is the first to perceive something amiss with her, and
believing Archie to be the culprit, accuses him, thus making him aware
for the first time that mischief has happened.  He does not at once deny
the charge, but seeks out and questions young Kirstie, who confesses the
truth to him; and he, still loving her, promises to protect and defend
her in her trouble.  He then has an interview with Frank Innes on the
moor, which ends in a quarrel, and in Archie killing Frank beside the
Weaver’s Stone.  Meanwhile the Four Black Brothers, having become aware
of their sister’s betrayal, are bent on vengeance against Archie as her
supposed seducer.  They are about to close in upon him with this purpose
when he is arrested by the officers of the law for the murder of Frank.
He is tried before his own father, the Lord Justice-Clerk, found guilty,
and condemned to death.  Meanwhile the elder Kirstie, having discovered
from the girl how matters really stand, informs her nephews of the truth;
and they, in a great revulsion of feeling in Archie’s favour, determine
on an action after the ancient manner of their house.  They gather a
following, and after a great fight break the prison where Archie lies
confined, and rescue him.  He and young Kirstie thereafter escape to
America.  But the ordeal of taking part in the trial of his own son has
been too much for the Lord Justice-Clerk, who dies of the shock.  “I do
not know,” adds the amanuensis, “what becomes of old Kirstie, but that
character grew and strengthened so in the writing that I am sure he had
some dramatic destiny for her.”

The plan of every imaginative work is subject, of course, to change under
the artist’s hand as he carries it out; and not merely the character of
the elder Kirstie, but other elements of the design no less, might well
have deviated from the lines originally traced.  It seems certain,
however, that the next stage in the relations of Archie and the younger
Kirstie would have been as above foreshadowed; and this conception of the
lover’s unconventional chivalry and unshaken devotion to his mistress
after her fault is very characteristic of the writer’s mind.  The
vengeance to be taken on the seducer beside the Weaver’s Stone is
prepared for in the first words of the Introduction; while the situation
and fate of the judge, confronting like a Brutus, but unable to survive,
the duty of sending his own son to the gallows, seem clearly to have been
destined to furnish the climax and essential tragedy of the tale.

How this last circumstance was to have been brought about, within the
limits of legal usage and possibility, seems hard to conjecture; but it
was a point to which the author had evidently given careful
consideration.  Mrs. Strong says simply that the Lord Justice-Clerk, like
an old Roman, condemns his son to death; but I am assured on the best
legal authority of Scotland that no judge, however powerful either by
character or office, could have insisted on presiding at the trial of a
near kinsman of his own.  The Lord Justice-Clerk was head of the criminal
justiciary of the country; he might have insisted on his right of being
present on the bench when his son was tried: but he would never have been
allowed to preside or to pass sentence.  Now in a letter of Stevenson’s
to Mr. Baxter, of October 1892, I find him asking for materials in terms
which seem to indicate that he knew this quite well:—“I wish Pitcairn’s
‘Criminal Trials,’ _quam primum_.  Also an absolutely correct text of the
Scots judiciary oath.  Also, in case Pitcairn does not come down late
enough, I wish as full a report as possible of a Scots murder trial
between 1790–1820.  Understand the _fullest possible_.  Is there any book
which would guide me to the following facts?  The Justice-Clerk tries
some people capitally on circuit.  Certain evidence cropping up, the
charge is transferred to the Justice-Clerk’s own son.  Of course in the
next trial the Justice-Clerk is excluded, and the case is called before
the Lord Justice-General.  Where would this trial have to be?  I fear in
Edinburgh, which would not suit my view.  Could it be again at the
circuit town?”  The point was referred to a quondam fellow-member with
Stevenson of the Edinburgh Speculative Society, Mr. Graham Murray, the
present Solicitor-General for Scotland; whose reply was to the effect
that there would be no difficulty in making the new trial take place at
the circuit town; that it would have to be held there in spring or
autumn, before two Lords of Justiciary; and that the Lord Justice-General
would have nothing to do with it, this title being at the date in
question only a nominal one held by a layman (which is no longer the
case).  On this Stevenson writes, “Graham Murray’s note _re_ the venue
was highly satisfactory, and did me all the good in the world.”  The
terms of his inquiry seem to imply that he intended other persons, before
Archie, to have fallen first under suspicion of the murder; and
also—doubtless in order to make the rescue by the Black Brothers
possible—that he wanted Archie to be imprisoned not in Edinburgh but in
the circuit town.  But they do not show how he meant to get over the main
difficulty, which at the same time he fully recognises.  Can it have been
that Lord Hermiston’s part was to have been limited to presiding at the
_first_ trial, where the evidence incriminating Archie was unexpectedly
brought forward, and to directing that the law should take its course?

Whether the final escape and union of Archie and Christina would have
proved equally essential to the plot may perhaps to some readers seem
questionable.  They may rather feel that a tragic destiny is foreshadowed
from the beginning for all concerned, and is inherent in the very
conditions of the tale.  But on this point, and other matters of general
criticism connected with it, I find an interesting discussion by the
author himself in his correspondence.  Writing to Mr. J. M. Barrie, under
date November 1, 1892, and criticising that author’s famous story of _The
Little Minister_, Stevenson says:—

“Your descriptions of your dealings with Lord Rintoul are frightfully
unconscientious. . . .  The _Little Minister_ ought to have ended badly;
we all know it _did_, and we are infinitely grateful to you for the grace
and good feeling with which you have lied about it.  If you had told the
truth, I for one could never have forgiven you.  As you had conceived and
written the earlier parts, the truth about the end, though indisputably
true to fact, would have been a lie, or what is worse, a discord, in art.
If you are going to make a book end badly, it must end badly from the
beginning.  Now, your book began to end well.  You let yourself fall in
love with, and fondle, and smile at your puppets.  Once you had done
that, your honour was committed—at the cost of truth to life you were
bound to save them.  It is the blot on _Richard Feverel_ for instance,
that it begins to end well; and then tricks you and ends ill.  But in
this case, there is worse behind, for the ill ending does not inherently
issue from the plot—the story had, in fact, ended well after the great
last interview between Richard and Lucy—and the blind, illogical bullet
which smashes all has no more to do between the boards than a fly has to
do with a room into whose open window it comes buzzing.  It might have so
happened; it needed not; and unless needs must, we have no right to pain
our readers.  I have had a heavy case of conscience of the same kind
about my Braxfield story.  Braxfield—only his name is Hermiston—has a son
who is condemned to death; plainly there is a fine tempting fitness about
this—and I meant he was to hang.  But on considering my minor characters,
I saw there were five people who would—in a sense, who must—break prison
and attempt his rescue.  They are capable hardy folks too, who might very
well succeed.  Why should they not then?  Why should not young Hermiston
escape clear out of the country? and be happy, if he could, with his—but
soft!  I will not betray my secret nor my heroine. . . .”

To pass, now, from the question how the story would have ended to the
question how it originated and grew in the writer’s mind.  The character
of the hero, Weir of Hermiston, is avowedly suggested by the historical
personality of Robert Macqueen, Lord Braxfield.  This famous judge has
been for generations the subject of a hundred Edinburgh tales and
anecdotes.  Readers of Stevenson’s essay on the Raeburn exhibition, in
_Virginibus Puerisque_, will remember how he is fascinated by Raeburn’s
portrait of Braxfield, even as Lockhart had been fascinated by a
different portrait of the same worthy sixty years before (see _Peter’s
Letters to his Kinsfolk_); nor did his interest in the character diminish
in later life.  Again, the case of a judge involved by the exigencies of
his office in a strong conflict between public duty and private interest
or affection, was one which had always attracted and exercised
Stevenson’s imagination.  In the days when he and Mr. Henley were
collaborating with a view to the stage, Mr. Henley once proposed a plot
founded on the story of Mr. Justice Harbottle in Sheridan Le Fanu’s _In a
Glass Darkly_, in which the wicked judge goes headlong _per fas et nefas_
to his object of getting the husband of his mistress hanged.  Some time
later Stevenson and his wife together wrote a play called _The Hanging
Judge_.  In this, the title character is tempted for the first time in
his life to tamper with the course of justice, in order to shield his
wife from persecution by a former husband who reappears after being
supposed dead.  Bulwer’s novel of _Paul Clifford_, with its final
situation of the worldly-minded judge, Sir William Brandon, learning that
the highwayman whom he is in the act of sentencing is his own son, and
dying of the knowledge, was also well known to Stevenson, and no doubt
counted for something in the suggestion of the present story.

Once more, the difficulties often attending the relation of father and
son in actual life had pressed heavily on Stevenson’s mind and conscience
from the days of his youth, when in obeying the law of his own nature he
had been constrained to disappoint, distress, and for a time to be much
misunderstood by, a father whom he justly loved and admired with all his
heart.  Difficulties of this kind he had already handled in a lighter
vein once or twice in fiction—as for instance in the _Story of a Lie_ and
in _The Wrecker_—before he grappled with them in the acute and tragic
phase in which they occur in the present story.

These three elements, then, the interest of the historical personality of
Lord Braxfield, the problems and emotions arising from a violent conflict
between duty and nature in a judge, and the difficulties due to
incompatibility and misunderstanding between father and son, lie at the
foundations of the present story.  To touch on minor matters, it is
perhaps worth notice, as Mr. Henley reminds me, that the name of Weir had
from of old a special significance for Stevenson’s imagination, from the
traditional fame in Edinburgh of Major Weir, burned as a warlock,
together with his sister, under circumstances of peculiar atrocity.
Another name, that of the episodical personage of Mr. Torrance the
minister, is borrowed direct from life, as indeed are the whole figure
and its surroundings—kirkyard, kirk, and manse—down even to the black
thread mittens: witness the following passage from a letter of the early
seventies:—“I’ve been to church and am not depressed—a great step.  It
was at that beautiful church” [of Glencorse in the Pentlands, three miles
from his father’s country house at Swanston].  “It is a little cruciform
place, with a steep slate roof.  The small kirkyard is full of old
grave-stones; one of a Frenchman from Dunkerque, I suppose he died
prisoner in the military prison hard by.  And one, the most pathetic
memorial I ever saw: a poor school-slate, in a wooden frame, with the
inscription cut into it evidently by the father’s own hand.  In church,
old Mr. Torrance preached, over eighty and a relic of times forgotten,
with his black thread gloves and mild old face.”  A side hint for a
particular trait in the character of Mrs. Weir we can trace in some
family traditions concerning the writer’s own grandmother, who is
reported to have valued piety much more than efficiency in her domestic
servants.  The other women characters seem, so far at least as I know, to
have been pure creation, and especially that new and admirable
incarnation of the eternal feminine in the elder Kirstie.  The little
that he says about her himself is in a letter written a few days before
his death to Mr. Gosse.  The allusions are to the various moods and
attitudes of people in regard to middle age, and are suggested by Mr.
Gosse’s volume of poems, _In Russet and Silver_.  “It seems rather
funny,” he writes, “that this matter should come up just now, as I am at
present engaged in treating a severe case of middle age in one of my
stories, _The Justice-Clerk_.  The case is that of a woman, and I think I
am doing her justice.  You will be interested, I believe, to see the
difference in our treatments.  _Secreta Vitæ_ [the title of one of Mr.
Gosse’s poems] comes nearer to the case of my poor Kirstie.”  From the
wonderful midnight scene between her and Archie, we may judge what we
have lost in those later scenes where she was to have taxed him with the
fault that was not his—to have presently learned his innocence from the
lips of his supposed victim—to have then vindicated him to her kinsmen
and fired them to the action of his rescue.  The scene of the
prison-breaking here planned by Stevenson would have gained interest (as
will already have occurred to readers) from comparison with the two
famous precedents in Scott, the Porteous mob and the breaking of
Portanferry jail.

The best account of Stevenson’s methods of imaginative work is in the
following sentences from a letter of his own to Mr. W. Craibe Angus of
Glasgow:—“I am still ‘a slow study,’ and sit for a long while silent on
my eggs.  Unconscious thought, there is the only method: macerate your
subject, let it boil slow, then take the lid off and look in—and there
your stuff is—good or bad.”  The several elements above noted having been
left to work for many years in his mind, it was in the autumn of 1892
that he was moved to “take the lid off and look in,”—under the influence,
it would seem, of a special and overmastering wave of that feeling for
the romance of Scottish scenery and character which was at all times so
strong in him, and which his exile did so much to intensify.  I quote
again from his letter to Mr. Barrie on November 1st in that year:—“It is
a singular thing that I should live here in the South Seas under
conditions so new and so striking, and yet my imagination so continually
inhabit the cold old huddle of grey hills from which we come.  I have
finished _David Balfour_, I have another book on the stocks, _The Young
Chevalier_, which is to be part in France and part in Scotland, and to
deal with Prince Charlie about the year 1749; and now what have I done
but begun a third, which is to be all moorland together, and is to have
for a centre-piece a figure that I think you will appreciate—that of the
immortal Braxfield.  Braxfield himself is my grand premier—or since you
are so much involved in the British drama, let me say my heavy lead.”
Writing to me at the same date he makes the same announcement more
briefly, with a list of the characters and an indication of the scene and
date of the story.  To Mr. Baxter he writes a month later, “I have a
novel on the stocks to be called _The Justice-Clerk_.  It is pretty
Scotch; the grand premier is taken from Braxfield (O, by the by, send me
Cockburn’s _Memorials_), and some of the story is, well, queer.  The
heroine is seduced by one man, and finally disappears with the other man
who shot him. . . .  Mind you, I expect _The Justice-Clerk_ to be my
masterpiece.  My Braxfield is already a thing of beauty and a joy for
ever, and so far as he has gone, far my best character.”  From the last
extract it appears that he had already at this date drafted some of the
earlier chapters of the book.  He also about the same time composed the
dedication to his wife, who found it pinned to her bed-curtains one
morning on awaking.  It was always his habit to keep several books in
progress at the same time, turning from one to another as the fancy took
him, and finding relief in the change of labour; and for many months
after the date of this letter, first illness,—then a voyage to
Auckland,—then work on the _Ebb-Tide_, on a new tale called _St. Ives_,
which was begun during an attack of influenza, and on his projected book
of family history,—prevented his making any continuous progress with
_Weir_.  In August 1893 he says he has been recasting the beginning.  A
year later, still only the first four or five chapters had been drafted.
Then, in the last weeks of his life, he attacked the task again, in a
sudden heat of inspiration, and worked at it ardently and without
interruption until the end came.  No wonder if during these weeks he was
sometimes aware of a tension of the spirit difficult to sustain.  “How
can I keep this pitch?” he is reported to have said after finishing one
of the chapters; and all the world knows how that frail organism in fact
betrayed him in mid effort.  The greatness of the loss to his country’s
letters can for the first time be fully measured from the foregoing
pages.

There remains one more point to be mentioned, as to the speech and
manners of the Hanging Judge himself.  That these are not a whit
exaggerated, in comparison with what is recorded of his historic
prototype, Lord Braxfield, is certain.  The _locus classicus_ in regard
to this personage is in Lord Cockburn’s _Memorials of his Time_.  “Strong
built and dark, with rough eyebrows, powerful eyes, threatening lips, and
a low growling voice, he was like a formidable blacksmith.  His accent
and dialect were exaggerated Scotch; his language, like his thoughts,
short, strong, and conclusive.  Illiterate and without any taste for any
refined enjoyment, strength of understanding, which gave him power
without cultivation, only encouraged him to a more contemptuous disdain
of all natures less coarse than his own.  It may be doubted if he was
ever so much in his element as when tauntingly repelling the last
despairing claim of a wretched culprit, and sending him to Botany Bay or
the gallows with an insulting jest.  Yet this was not from cruelty, for
which he was too strong and too jovial, but from cherished coarseness.”
Readers, nevertheless, who are at all acquainted with the social history
of Scotland will hardly have failed to make the observation that
Braxfield’s is an extreme case of eighteenth-century manners, as he
himself was an eighteenth-century personage (he died in 1799, in his
seventy-eighth year); and that for the date in which the story is cast
(1814) such manners are somewhat of an anachronism.  During the
generation contemporary with the French Revolution and the Napoleonic
wars—or to put it another way, the generation that elapsed between the
days when Scott roamed the country as a High School and University
student and those when he settled in the fulness of fame and prosperity
at Abbotsford,—or again (the allusions will appeal to readers of the
admirable Galt) during the interval between the first and the last
provostry of Bailie Pawkie in the borough of Gudetown, or between the
earlier and the final ministrations of Mr. Balwhidder in the parish of
Dalmailing,—during this period a great softening had taken place in
Scottish manners generally, and in those of the Bar and Bench not least.
“Since the death of Lord Justice-Clerk Macqueen of Braxfield,” says
Lockhart, writing about 1817, “the whole exterior of judicial deportment
has been quite altered.”  A similar criticism may probably hold good on
the picture of border life contained in the chapter concerning the Four
Black Brothers of Cauldstaneslap, namely, that it rather suggests the
ways of an earlier generation; nor have I any clue to the reasons which
led Stevenson to choose this particular date, in the year preceding
Waterloo, for a story which, in regard to some of its features at least,
might seem more naturally placed some twenty-five or thirty years before.

If the reader seeks, further, to know whether the scenery of Hermiston
can be identified with any one special place familiar to the writer’s
early experience, the answer, I think, must be in the negative.  Rather
it is distilled from a number of different haunts and associations among
the moorlands of southern Scotland.  In the dedication and in a letter to
me he indicates the Lammermuirs as the scene of his tragedy.  And Mrs.
Stevenson (his mother) tells me that she thinks he was inspired by
recollections of a visit paid in boyhood to an uncle living at a remote
farmhouse in that district called Overshiels, in the parish of Stow.  But
though he may have thought of the Lammermuirs in the first instance, we
have already found him drawing his description of the kirk and manse from
another haunt of his youth, namely, Glencorse in the Pentlands; while
passages in chapters v. and viii. point explicitly to a third district,
that is, Upper Tweeddale, with the country stretching thence towards the
wells of Clyde.  With this country also holiday rides and excursions from
Peebles had made him familiar as a boy: and this seems certainly the most
natural scene of the story, if only from its proximity to the proper home
of the Elliotts, which of course is in the heart of the Border,
especially Teviotdale and Ettrick.  Some of the geographical names
mentioned are clearly not meant to furnish literal indications.  The
Spango, for instance, is a water running, I believe, not into the Tweed
but into the Nith, and Crossmichael as the name of a town is borrowed
from Galloway.

But it is with the general and essential that the artist deals, and
questions of strict historical perspective or local definition are beside
the mark in considering his work.  Nor will any reader expect, or be
grateful for, comment in this place on matters which are more properly to
the point—on the seizing and penetrating power of the author’s ripened
art as exhibited in the foregoing pages, the wide range of character and
emotion over which he sweeps with so assured a hand, his vital poetry of
vision and magic of presentment.  Surely no son of Scotland has died
leaving with his last breath a worthier tribute to the land he loved.

                                                                     S. C.




GLOSSARY


Ae, one.

Antinomian, one of a sect which holds that under the gospel dispensation
the moral law is not obligatory.

Auld Hornie, the Devil.

Ballant, ballad.

Bauchles, brogues, old shoes.

Bauld, bold.

Bees in their bonnet, eccentricities.

Birling, whirling.

Black-a-vised, dark-complexioned.

Bonnet-laird, small landed proprietor, yeoman.

Bool, ball.

Brae, rising ground.

Brig, bridge.

Buff, play buff on, to make a fool of, to deceive.

Burn, stream.

Butt end, end of a cottage.

Byre, cow-house.

Ca’, drive.

Caller, fresh.

Canna, cannot.

Canny, careful, shrewd.

Cantie, cheerful.

Carline, old woman.

Cauld, cold.

Chalmer, chamber.

Claes, clothes.

Clamjamfry, crowd.

Clavers, idle talk.

Cock-laird.  See Bonnet-laird.

Collieshangie, turmoil.

Crack, to converse.

Cuist, cast.

Cuddy, donkey.

Cutty, jade, also used playfully = brat.

Daft, mad, frolicsome.

Dander, to saunter.

Danders, cinders.

Daurna, dare not.

Deave, to deafen.

Denty, dainty.

Dirdum, vigour.

Disjaskit, worn out, disreputable-looking.

Doer, law agent.

Dour, hard.

Drumlie, dark.

Dunting, knocking.

Dwaibly, infirm, rickety.

Dule-tree, the tree of lamentation, the hanging-tree.

Earrand, errand.

Ettercap, vixen.

Fechting, fighting.

Feck, quantity, portion.

Feckless, feeble, powerless.

Fell, strong and fiery.

Fey, unlike yourself, strange, as if urged on by fate, or as persons are
observed to be in the hour of approaching death or disaster.

Fit, foot.

Flit, to depart.

Flyped, turned up, turned in-side out.

Forbye, in addition to.

Forgather, to fall in with.

Fower, four.

Fushionless, pithless, weak.

Fyle, to soil, to defile.

Fylement, obloquy, defilement.

Gaed, Went.

Gang, to go.

Gey an’, very.

Gigot, leg of mutton.

Girzie, lit. diminutive of Grizel, here a playful nickname.

Glaur, mud.

Glint, glance, sparkle.

Gloaming, twilight.

Glower, to scowl.

Gobbets, small lumps.

Gowden, golden.

Gowsty, gusty.

Grat, wept.

Grieve, land-steward.

Guddle, to catch fish with the hands by groping under the stones or
banks.

Gumption, common sense, judgment.

Guid, good.

Gurley, stormy, surly.

Gyte, beside itself.

Hae, have, take.

Haddit, held.

Hale, whole.

Heels-ower-hurdie, heels over head.

Hinney, honey.

Hirstle, to bustle.

Hizzie, wench.

Howe, hollow.

Howl, hovel.

Hunkered, crouched.

Hypothec, lit. in Scots law the furnishings of a house, and formerly the
produce and stock of a farm hypothecated by law to the landlord as
security for rent; colloquially “the whole structure,” “the whole
concern.”

Idleset, idleness.

Infeftment, a term in Scots law originally synonymous with investiture.

Jaud, jade.

Jeely-piece, a slice of bread and jelly.

Jennipers, juniper.

Jo, sweetheart.

Justifeed, executed, made the victim of justice.

Jyle, jail

Kebbuck, cheese.

Ken, to know.

Kenspeckle, conspicuous.

Kilted, tucked up.

Kyte, belly.

Laigh, low.

Laird, landed proprietor.

Lane, alone.

Lave, rest, remainder.

Linking, tripping.

Lown, lonely, still.

Lynn, cataract.

Lyon King of Arms, the chief of the Court of Heraldry in Scotland.

Macers, offiers of the supreme court. [Cf.  Guy Mannering, last chapter.]

Maun, must.

Menseful, of good manners.

Mirk, dark.

Misbegowk, deception, disappointment.

Mools, mould, earth.

Muckle, much, great, big.

My lane, by myself.

Nowt, black cattle.

Palmering, walking infirmly.

Panel, in Scots law, the accused person in a criminal action, the
prisoner.

Peel, fortified watch-tower.

Plew-stilts, plough-handles.

Policy, ornamental grounds of a country mansion.

Puddock, frog.

Quean, wench.

Rair, to roar.

Riff-raff, rabble.

Risping, grating.

Rout, rowt, to roar, to rant.

Rowth, abundance.

Rudas, haggard old woman.

Runt, an old cow past breeding; opprobriously, an old woman.

Sab, sob.

Sanguishes, sandwiches.

Sasine, in Scots law, the act of giving legal possession of feudal
property, or, colloquially, the deed by which that possession is proved.

Sclamber, to scramble.

Sculduddery, impropriety, grossness.

Session, the Court of Session, the supreme court of Scotland.

Shauchling, shuffling, slipshod.

Shoo, to chase gently.

Siller, money.

Sinsyne, since then.

Skailing, dispersing.

Skelp, slap.

Skirling, screaming.

Skriegh-o’day, daybreak.

Snash, abuse.

Sneisty, supercilious.

Sooth, to hum.

Sough, sound, murmur.

Spec, The Speculative Society, a debating Society connected with
Edingburgh University.

Speir, to ask.

Speldering, sprawling.

Splairge, to splash.

Spunk, spirit, fire.

Steik, to shut.

Stockfish, hard, savourless.

Suger-bool, suger-plum.

Syne, since, then.

Tawpie, a slow foolish slut, also used playfully = monkey.

Telling you, a good thing for you.

Thir, these.

Thrawn, cross-grained.

Toon, town.

Two-names, local soubriquets in addition to patronymic.

Tyke, dog.

Unchancy, unlucky.

Unco, strange, extraordinary, very.

Upsitten, impertinent.

Vennel, alley, lane.  The Vennel, a narrow lane in Edingburgh, running
out of the Grassmarket.

Vivers, victuals.

Wae, sad, unhappy.

Waling, choosing.

Warrandise, warranty.

Waur, worse.

Weird, destiny.

Whammle, to upset.

Whaup, curlew.

Whiles, sometimes.

Windlestae, crested dog’s-tail, grass.

Wund, wind.

Yin, one.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WEIR OF HERMISTON***


******* This file should be named 380-0.txt or 380-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/8/380



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


