The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Ignatian Epistles Entirely Spurious: A Reply to the Right Rev. Dr. Lightfoot
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Ignatian Epistles Entirely Spurious: A Reply to the Right Rev. Dr. Lightfoot

Author: W. D. Killen


        
Release date: September 1, 2005 [eBook #8908]
                Most recently updated: May 8, 2013

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8908

Credits: Text file produced by Freethought Archives
        
        HTML file produced by David Widger






Produced by Freethought Archives







THE IGNATIAN EPISTLES ENTIRELY SPURIOUS.

A Reply to The Right Rev. Dr. Lightfoot, Bishop of Durham.

By W. D. Killen, D.D. Professor of Ecclesiastical History, and Principal
of the Presbyterian Theological Faculty, Ireland.


    "As the account of the martyrdom of Ignatius may be justly
     suspected, so, too, the letters which presuppose the correctness
     of this suspicious legend do not wear at all a stamp of a distinct
     individuality of character, and of a man of these times addressing
     his last words to the Churches."
     --AUGUSTUS NEANDER.


EDINBURGH


1886.




PREFACE.


This little volume is respectfully submitted to the candid consideration
of all who take an interest in theological inquiries, under the
impression that it will throw some additional light on a subject which
has long created much discussion. It has been called forth by the
appearance of a treatise entitled, "_The Apostolic Fathers_, Part II.
S. Ignatius, S. Polycarp. Revised Texts, with Introductions, Notes,
Dissertations, and Translations, by J. B. Lightfoot, D.D., D.C.L., LL.D,
Bishop of Durham." In this voluminous production the Right Reverend
Author has maintained, not only that all the seven letters attributed by
Eusebius to Ignatius are genuine, but also that "no Christian writings
of the second century, and very few writings of antiquity, whether
Christian or pagan, are so well authenticated." These positions,
advocated with the utmost confidence by the learned prelate, are sure to
be received with implicit confidence by a wide circle of readers; and I
have felt impelled here openly to protest against them, inasmuch as I
am satisfied that they cannot be accepted without overturning all the
legitimate landmarks of historical criticism. I freely acknowledge
the eminent services which Dr. Lightfoot has rendered to the Christian
Church by his labours as a Commentator on Scripture, and it is
therefore all the more important that the serious errors of a writer so
distinguished should not be permitted to pass unchallenged. All who love
the faith once delivered to the saints, may be expected to regard
with deference the letters of a martyr who lived on the borders of the
apostolic age; but these Ignatian Epistles betray indications of a very
different original, for they reveal a spirit of which no enlightened
Christian can approve, and promulgate principles which would sanction
the boldest assumptions of ecclesiastical despotism. In a work published
by me many years ago, I have pointed out the marks of their imposture;
and I have since seen no cause to change my views. Regarding all these
letters as forgeries from beginning to end, I have endeavoured, in the
following pages, to expose the fallacy of the arguments by which Dr.
Lightfoot has attempted their vindication.

ASSEMBLY COLLEGE, BELFAST,

July 1886.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.

The critical spirit stimulated by the Reformation--The Ignatian Epistles
as regarded by Calvin, Ussher, Vossius, Daillé, Pearson, Wake, and
Cureton--Dr. Lightfoot as a scholar and a commentator--The valuable
information supplied in his recent work--His estimate of the parties who
have pronounced judgment on the question of the Ignatian Epistles--His
verdict unfair--His introduction of Lucian as a witness in his
favour--The story of Peregrinus--Dr. Lightfoot's cardinal mistake in his
treatment of this question.


