
Transcriber’s notes:

The text of this e-book has mostly been preserved in its original form,
but a number of typographic errors have been corrected silently – they
are listed at the end of the book. Missing or inconsistent punctuation
has been corrected silently in a few places, but inconsistent
hyphenation has not been altered. An index item that lacked a page
reference has been remedied, and an archaic symbol representing the
mathematical ‘factorial’ function has been replaced by the standard
exclamation mark (!). Footnotes have been numbered and positioned below
the relevant paragraphs. The marker for footnote 31 was missing from
the original text and has been arbitrarily placed at the end of the
relevant paragraph.

In this plain text version, italic text is denoted by _underscores_.
Superscripted characters are surrounded by curly brackets preceded by a
caret symbol, e.g. 2^{10}, and subscripted characters are surrounded by
curly brackets preceded by a downward arrow, e.g. ↓{H}.




                       THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY




                      CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
                       London: FETTER LANE, E.C.
                          C. F. CLAY, Manager

                            [Illustration]

                     Edinburgh: 100 PRINCES STREET
                       Berlin: A. ASHER AND CO.
                       Leipzig: F. A. BROCKHAUS
                     New York: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
             Bombay and Calcutta: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.
                   Toronto: J. M. DENT & SONS, LTD.
                  Tokyo: THE MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA


                         _All rights reserved_




                            THE PHILOSOPHY

                                  OF

                                BIOLOGY


                                  BY

                        JAMES JOHNSTONE, D.Sc.


                              Cambridge:
                        at the University Press
                                 1914




INTRODUCTION


It has been suggested that some reference, of an apologetic nature,
to the title of this book may be desirable, so I wish to point out
that it can really be justified. Science, says Driesch, is the
attempt to describe Givenness, and Philosophy is the attempt to
understand it. It is our task, as investigators of nature, to describe
what seems to us to happen there, and the knowledge that we so
attain--that is, our perceptions, thinned out, so to speak, modified
by our mental organisation, related to each other, classified and
remembered--constitutes our Givenness. This is only a description
of what seems to us to be nature. But few of us remain content with
it, and the impulse to go beyond our mere descriptions is at times
an irresistible one. Fettered by our habits of thought, and by the
limitations of sensation, we seem to look out into the dark and to see
only the shadows of things. Then we attempt to turn round in order that
we might discover what it is that casts the shadows, and what it is in
ourselves that gives shape to them. We seek for the Reality that we
feel is behind the shadows. That is Philosophy.

The Physics of a generation earlier than our own thought that it had
discovered Reality in its conception of an Universe consisting of
atoms and molecules in ceaseless motion. What it described were only
motions and transformations, but it understood these motions and
transformations as matter and energy. Yet more subtle minds than
the great physicists of the beginning of the nineteenth century had
already seen that sensation might mislead us. There was something
in us that continually changed--that was our consciousness, and it
was all that we knew. If external things did exist they existed only
because we thought them. But we ourselves exist, for we are not only
a stream of consciousness that continually changes, but there is in
us a personality, or identity, which has remained the same throughout
all the vicissitudes of our consciousness. If the things that exist
for us exist only because we think them, and if we also exist, then we
must exist in the thought of an Absolute Mind that thinks us. Physical
Science, studying only motions and transformations, understood that
there was something that moved and transformed--this was matter and
energy. Mental Science, studying only thought, understood that nature
was only the thought of an Universal Mind. Either conclusion was
equally valid Philosophy (or metaphysics), and neither could be proved
or disproved by the methods of Science. The speculative game is drawn,
said Huxley, let us get to practical work!

Both Physics and Biology did get to work, with the results that we
know. But Physics advanced far beyond the acquirement of the results
that stimulated Biology to formulate our present hypotheses of
evolution and heredity. As its knowledge accumulated, it began to doubt
whether matter and energy, atoms and molecules, mass and inertia--all
those things which it thought at first were so real--were anything else
after all than ways in which our mental organisation dealt with crude
sensations. They might, as Bergson said later on, be the moulds into
which we pour our perceptions. Physics set up a test of Reality, the
law of the conservation of matter and energy. There are existences
which may or may not persist. Visions and phantasms and dreams are
existences _while they last_. They are true for the mind in which
they occur. But they seem to arise out of nothing, and to disappear
into nothing, and physical Science cannot investigate them. They are
existences which are not conserved. On the other hand those images
which we call moving matter and transforming energy can be investigated
by the methods of physics. Molecules change, but something in them,
the atoms, remain constant. Energy becomes transformed, and it may
even seem to cease to exist, but if it disappears, then something is
changed so that the lost energy can be traced in the nature of the
change. Matter and energy are conserved and therefore they are the only
Realities. But the test is obviously one that has an _a priori_ basis,
and we may doubt whether it is a test of Reality.

Thus Physics constructed a dynamical Universe, that is, one which
consisted of atoms which attracted or repelled each other with forces
which were functions of the distances between them. Even now this
conception of a dynamical, Newtonian Universe is a useful one, though
we recognise that it is only symbolism. But it was not a conception
with which Physics could long remain content. How could atoms separated
from each other by empty space act on each other, that is, how could a
thing act where it was not? There must be something between the atoms.
The Universe could not be a discontinuous one, and so Physics invented
an Universe that was _full_. It was an immaterial, homogeneous,
imponderable, continuous Universe. That which existed behind the
appearances of atoms and molecules and energy was the ether of space.
It must be admitted that the conception appears to the layman to
involve only contradictions: heterogeneous, discontinuous, ponderable
atoms are only singularities in a homogeneous, continuous, imponderable
medium, or ether. Yet it is easy to see that this contradiction arises
in our mind only because we had previously thought of the Universe in
terms of matter and energy, and in spite of ourselves we attempt to
think of the new Reality in terms of the old one. In its attempt to
understand all its later results Physics had therefore to invent a new
Philosophy--that of the ether of space.

It is only in our own times that Biology has become sceptical and has
begun to doubt whether its earlier Philosophy is a sound one. That
which it describes--the object-matter of its Science--is not that which
Physics describes. There are two domains of Givenness, the organic
and the inorganic. Biology, leaning on Physics, studied motions and
transformations, just as Physics did, though the motions which it
studied were more complex and the transformations more mysterious. But
borrowing the methods of investigation of Physics it borrowed also
its Philosophy, and so it placed behind its Givenness the Reality
that Physics at first postulated and then abandoned. The organism was
therefore a material system actuated by energy. The notion, it should
be noted, is not a deduction from the results of Biology, but only from
its methods.

Did Physiology, that is, the Physiology of the Schools, ever really
investigate the organism? A muscle-nerve preparation, an excised kidney
through which blood is perfused, an exposed salivary gland which is
stimulated, even a frog deprived of its cerebral hemispheres--these
things are not organisms. They are not permanent centres of action,
autonomous physico-chemical constellations capable of independent
existence, and capable of indefinite growth by dissociation. They
are parts of the organism, which, having received the impulse of
life, an impulse which soon becomes exhausted, exhibit for a time
some of the phenomena of the organism. What Physiology did attain
in such investigations was an analytical description of some of the
activities of the organism. It did not describe life, but rather
the physico-chemical reactions in which life is manifested. The
description, it should be noted, is all-important for the human race
in its effort to acquire mastery over its environment; and there is
no other way in which it may be carried further but by the methods of
physical Science. Givenness is one, though we arbitrarily divide it
into the domains of the organic and the inorganic, and there can be
only one way of describing it. That is the mechanistic method.

Nevertheless all this is only a description, and our Philosophy
must be the attempt to understand our description. The mechanistic
biologist, in the attempt to identify his Philosophy with that of
a former generation of physicists, says that he is describing a
physico-chemical aggregate--an assemblage of molecules of a high degree
of complexity--actuated by energy, and undergoing transformations. But
our scepticism as to the validity of this conclusion is aroused by
reflecting on its origin. If it was borrowed from the Philosophy of a
past Physics, and if the more penetrating analysis of the Physics of
our own time has made a new Philosophy desirable, should not Biology
also revise its understanding of its descriptions? For Biology has
not stood still any more than Physics, and the Physiology of our own
day has become different from that of the times when the mechanistic
Philosophy of life took origin. The embryologists and the naturalists
of our own generation have studied the _whole_ organism in its normal
functioning and behaviour, and have obtained results which cannot
easily be understood as physico-chemical mechanism. Life is not the
activities of the organism, but the integration of the activities
of the organism, just as Reality for Physics is not the atoms and
molecules of gross matter, but the integration of these in the ether of
space.

This, then, is all that we mean by the philosophy of Biology--the
attempt to understand the descriptions of the Science in the light of
its later investigations. Philosophy, in the academic sense, we have
not considered in relation to the subject-matter of our science, though
there is much in the classic systems that is of absorbing interest,
even to the working investigator of the nineteenth century. The
biological education is not, however, such as to predispose one towards
these studies. The reader will recognise that the point of view, and
the methods of treatment, adopted in this book are those suggested by
Driesch and Bergson, even if no references are given. He may, perhaps,
appreciate this limitation; for, influenced by the modern scientific
training, he may be inclined to regard Philosophy as Mark Twain
regarded his Egyptian mummy: if he is to have a corpse it might as well
be a real fresh one.

  J. J.
  LIVERPOOL
  _November 1913_




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

                                                                    PAGE

THE CONCEPTUAL WORLD                                                   1

  _Argument._--The conscious organism is one that acts. Its
  consciousness of an external world is not simply the result of
  the stimuli made by that world on its organs of sense, for it becomes
  fully aware only of those stimuli which result in deliberated bodily
  activity. This awareness of an outer world on which it acts is the
  perception of the organism. Its consciousness is an intensive
  multiplicity. This multiplicity is arbitrarily dissociated, for
  convenience’ sake, by the mental organisation, which confers extension
  and magnitude and succession on those aspects of consciousness
  which it arbitrarily dissociates from each other. Our notion of
  space is an intuitive one and depends on our modes of bodily
  exertion. Our notions of motion and continuity are also intuitive
  ones, and they cannot be represented intellectually, but we can
  approximate to them by the methods of the infinitesimal calculus.
  Mathematical time is only a series of standard events which punctuate
  our duration. Duration is the accumulated existence and
  experience of the organism. We cannot prove intellectually that
  there is a world external to our consciousness, but that this world
  exists is a conviction intuitively held.


CHAPTER II

THE ORGANISM AS A MECHANISM                                           49

  _Argument._--If the organism is a physico-chemical mechanism its
  activities must conform to the two principles of energetics: the law
  of conservation of energy and matter, and the law of entropy-increase.
  They conform strictly to the law of conservation.
  The law of the degradation of energy is true of our experience
  of inorganic nature, but we can show that it cannot be universally
  true. Inorganic processes are irreversible ones, and they proceed
  in one direction only, and in them energy is degraded. Organic
  processes, that is, the processes carried on in the generalised
  organism, are irreversible; or, at least, there is a tendency for
  them to be carried on without necessary dissipation of energy.


CHAPTER III

THE ACTIVITIES OF THE ORGANISM                                        83

  _Argument._--If the organism is investigated by the methods of
  physical and chemical science, nothing but physico-chemical
  activities can be discovered. This is necessarily the case, since
  methods which yield physico-chemical results only are employed.
  The physiologist makes an analysis of the activities of the organism,
  and he reduces these activities to certain categories; although all
  attempts completely to describe the functioning of the organism
  solely in terms of physical and chemical reactions fail. In addition
  to the reactions which make up the functioning of an organ or
  organ-system, there is direction and co-ordination of these reactions.
  The individual physico-chemical reactions which occur in the
  functioning of the organism are integrated, and life is not merely
  these reactions, but also their integration.


CHAPTER IV

THE VITAL IMPETUS                                                    120

  _Argument._--The notion of the organism as a physico-chemical
  mechanism is a deduction from the methods of physiology, and
  not from its results. The notion of vitalism is a natural or
  intuitive one. The historic systems of vitalism assumed the
  existence of a spiritual agency in the organism, or of a form of
  energy which was peculiar to the activities of the organism.
  Modern investigation lends no support to either belief. But the
  study of the organism as a whole, that is, the study of developmental
  processes, or that of the organism acting as a whole, afford a
  logical disproof of pure mechanism. It shows that there cannot
  be a functionality, in the mathematical sense, between the inorganic
  agencies that affect the whole organism and the behaviour or
  functioning of the whole organism. Mechanism is only suggested
  in the study of isolated parts of the organism. We are compelled
  toward the belief that there is an agency operative in the activities
  of the organism which does not operate in purely inorganic becoming.
  This is the Vital Impetus of Bergson, or the Entelechy of
  Driesch.


CHAPTER V

THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE SPECIES                                       162

  _Argument._--The concept of the organic individual is one which
  is arbitrary, and is convenient only for purposes of description.
  Life on the earth is integrally one. Personality is the intuition of
  the conscious organism that it is a centre of action, and that all the
  rest of the universe is relative to it. The individual organism,
  regarded objectively, is an isolated, autonomous constellation,
  capable of indefinite growth by dissociation, differentiation, and
  re-integration. This growth is reproduction. The dissociated
  part reproduces the form and manner of functioning of the individual
  organism from which it has proceeded. The offspring varies
  from the parent organism, but it resembles it much more than it
  varies from it. There are therefore categories of organisms in
  nature the individuals of which resemble each other more than they
  resemble the individuals belonging to other categories: these are
  the elementary species. Hypotheses of heredity are corpuscular
  ones, and are based on the physical analogy of molecules and
  atoms. The concept of the species is a logical one. The organism
  is a phase in an evolutionary or a developmental flux, and the idea
  of the species is attained by arresting this flux.


CHAPTER VI

TRANSFORMISM                                                         208

  _Argument._--A reasoned classification of organisms suggests that
  a process of evolution has taken place. It suggests logical relation-
  ships between organisms, while the results of embryology and
  palæontology suggest chronological relationships. Yet this kinship
  of organisms might only be a logical, and not a material
  one. Evolution may have occurred somewhere, but it might be
  argued that the ideas of species have generated each other in a
  Creative Thought. But transformism may be produced experimentally,
  and so science has adopted a mechanistic hypothesis of
  the nature of the process. Transformism of species depends on
  the occurrence of variations, but these arise spontaneously and
  independently of each other, and they must be co-ordinated.
  This co-ordination of variations cannot be the work of the environ
  ment. Variations are cumulative, and they exhibit direction, and
  this direction is either an accidental one, or it is the expression of
  an impetus or directing agency in the varying organism itself.
  The problem of the cause of variation is only a pseudo-problem.


CHAPTER VII

THE MEANING OF EVOLUTION                                             245

  _Argument._--If we assume the existence of an evolutionary
  process, the results of morphology, embryology, and palæontology
  ought to enable us to trace the directions followed during this
  process. But these results are still so uncertain that they indicate
  only a few main lines of transformism. Phylogenetic trees are
  largely conjectural in matters of detail. Evolution has resulted in
  the establishment of several dominant groups of organisms--the
  metatrophic bacteria, the chlorophyllian organisms, the arthropods,
  and the vertebrates. Each of these groups displays certain
  characters of morphology, energy-transformation, and behaviour;
  and a certain combination of characters is concentrated in each of
  the groups. But there is a community of character in all organisms
  which have arisen during the evolutionary process. The transformation
  of kinetic into potential energy is characteristic of the
  chlorophyllian organisms. The utilisation of potential energy,
  and its conversion into the kinetic energy of regulated bodily
  activity, by means of a sensori-motor system, is characteristic of
  the animal. The bacteria carry to the limit the energy-transformations
  begun in the tissues of the plants and animals. Immobility
  and unconsciousness characterise the plant, mobility and consciousness
  the animal. Animals indicate two types of actions--intelligent
  actions and instinctive actions. Instinctive activity
  involves the habitual exercise of modes of action that have been
  inherited. Intelligent activities involve the exercise of modes of
  action that are not inherited, but which are acquired by the
  animal during its own lifetime, and are the results of perceptions
  which show the animal that its activity is relative to an outer
  environment.


CHAPTER VIII

THE ORGANIC AND THE INORGANIC                                        289

  _Argument._--A strictly mechanistic hypothesis of evolution
  compels us to regard the organic world, and the inorganic environment
  with which it interacts, as a physico-chemical system. All
  the stages of an evolutionary process must therefore be equally
  complex: they are simply phases, or rearrangements, of the
  elements of a transforming system. The physics on which these
  mechanistic hypotheses were based was that of a discontinuous,
  granular, Newtonian universe, that is, one consisting of discrete
  particles, or mass-points, attracting or repelling each other with
  forces which are functions of the distances between them. It was
  a spatially extended system of parts. Therefore at all stages in
  an evolutionary process, or one of individual development, the
  elements of the system constitute an extensive manifoldness, and
  the obligation of mechanistic hypotheses of evolution and development
  to accept this view has shaped modern theories of heredity.
  Life is an intensive manifoldness, but in individual or racial evolu-
  tion   this intensive manifoldness becomes an extensive manifoldness.
  Life is a bundle of tendencies which can co-exist, but which
  cannot all be fully manifested, in the same material constellation,
  therefore these tendencies become dissociated in the evolutionary
  process. In this dissociation there is direction and co-ordination,
  which are the Vital Impetus of Bergson, or the Entelechy of
  Driesch.

  Entelechy is an elemental agency in nature which we are
  compelled to postulate because of the failure of mechanism. It is
  not spirit, nor a form of energy, but the direction and co-ordination
  of energies. There is a sign, or direction of inorganic happening
  which absolutely characterises the processes which are capable of
  analysis by physico-chemical methods of investigation, and the
  result of this direction of inorganic happening is material inertia.
  Yet this direction cannot be universal: it must be evaded somewhere
  in the universe. It is evaded by the organism.

  The problem of the nature of life is only a pseudo-problem.


APPENDIX

MATHEMATICAL AND PHYSICAL NOTIONS                                    342

  Infinity and the notion of the limit. Functionality. Frequency
  distributions and probability. Matter, force, mass, and inertia.
  Energy-transformations. Isothermal and adiabetic transformations.
  The Carnot engine and cycle. Entropy. Inert matter.


INDEX                                                                377




THE PHILOSOPHY OF BIOLOGY




CHAPTER I

THE CONCEPTUAL WORLD


Let us suppose that we are walking along a street in a busy town;
that we are familiar with it, and all the things that are usually to
be seen in it, so that our attention is not likely to be arrested by
anything unusual; and let us further suppose that we are thinking
about something interesting but not intellectually difficult. In
these circumstances all the sights of the town, and all the turmoil
of the traffic fail to impress us, though we are, in a vague sort of
way, conscious of it all. Electric trams approach and recede with a
grinding noise; a taxicab passes and we hear the throb of the engine
and the hooting of the horn, and smell the burnt oil; a hansom comes
down the street and we hear the rhythmic tread of the horse’s feet and
the jingle of the bells; we pass a florist’s shop and become aware
of the colour of the flowers and of their odour; in a café a band
is playing “ragtime.” There are policemen, hawkers, idlers, ladies
with gaily coloured dresses and hats, newsboys, a crowd of people
of many characteristics. It is all a flux of experience of which we
are generally conscious without analysis or attention, and it is a
flux which is never for a moment quite the same, for everything in
it melts and flows into everything else. The noise of the tram-cars
is incessant, but now and then it becomes louder; the music of the
orchestra steals imperceptibly on our ears and as imperceptibly fades
away; the smell of the flowers lingers after we pass the shop, and we
do not notice just when we cease to be conscious of it; the rhythm of
the ragtime continues to irritate after we have ceased to hear the
band--all the sense-impressions that we receive melt and flow over
into each other and constitute our stream of consciousness, and this
changes from moment to moment without gap or discontinuity. It is not
a condition of “pure sensation,” but it is as nearly such as we can
experience in our adult intellectual life.

It is easy to discover that many things must have occurred in the
street which did not affect our full consciousness. We may learn
afterwards that we have passed several friends without recognising
them; we may read in the newspapers about things that happened that
we might have seen, but which we did not see; we may think we know
the street fairly well, but we find that we have difficulty in
recalling the names of three contiguous shops in it; if we happen to
see a photograph which was taken at the time we passed through the
street we are usually surprised to find that there were many things
there that we did not see. Why is it, then, that so much that might
have been perceived by us was not really perceived? We cannot doubt
that everything that came into the visual fields of our eyes must
have affected the terminations of the optic nerves in the retinas;
the complex disturbances of the air in the street must have set our
tympanic membranes in motion; and all the odoriferous particles inhaled
into our nostrils must have stimulated the olfactory mucous membranes.
In all these cases the stimulation of the receptor organs must have
initiated nervous impulses, and these must have been propagated along
the sensory nerves, and must have reached the brain, affecting masses
of nerve cells there. Nothing in physiology seems to indicate that we
can inhibit or repress the activity of the distance sense-receptors,
visual, auditory, and olfactory, with their central connections in
the brain; they must have functioned, and must have been physically
affected by the events that took place outside ourselves, and yet
we were unconscious, in the fullest sense of this term, of all this
activity. Why is it, then, that our perception was so much less
than the actual physical reception of external stimuli that we must
postulate as having occurred? Sherlock Holmes would have said that we
really saw and heard all these things although we did not observe them,
but the full explanation involves a much more careful consideration of
the phenomena of perception than this saying indicates.

There is, of course, no doubt that we did see and hear and smell
all the things that occurred in the street during our aimless
peregrination, that is, all the things which so happened that they
were capable of affecting our organs of sense. This is true if we
mean by seeing and hearing and smelling merely the stimulation of the
nerve-endings of the visual, auditory, and olfactory organs, and the
conduction into the brain of the nervous impulses so set up. But merely
to be stimulated is only a part of the full activity of the brain; the
stimulus transmitted from the receptor organs must result in some kind
of bodily activity if it is to affect our stream of consciousness.
Two main kinds of activity are induced by the stimulation of a
receptor organ and a central ganglion, (1) those which we call reflex
actions, and (2) those actions which we recognise as resulting from
deliberation. We must now consider what are the processes that are
involved in these kinds of neuro-muscular activity.

The term “reflex action” is one that denotes rather a scheme of
sensori-motor activity than anything that actually happens in the
animal body; it is a concept that is useful as a means of analysis of
complex phenomena. In a reflex three things happen, (1) the stimulation
of a receptor organ and of the nerve connecting this with the brain,
(2) the reflection, or shunting, of the nervous impulse so initiated
from the _terminus ad quem_ of the afferent or sensory nerve, to
the _terminus a quo_ of the efferent or motor nerve, and (3) the
stimulation of some effector organ, say a motor organ or muscle, by
the nervous impulse so set up. The simplest case, perhaps, of a reflex
is the rapid closure of the eyelids when something, say a few drops of
water, is flicked into the face. Stated in the way we have stated it
the simple reflex does not exist. In the first place, it is a concept
based on the structural analysis of the complex animal where the body
is differentiated to form tissues--receptor organs, nerves, muscles,
glands, and so on. But a protozoan animal, a _Paramœcium_ for instance,
responds to an external stimulus by some kind of bodily activity, and
yet it is a homogeneous, or nearly homogeneous, piece of protoplasm,
and this simple protoplasm acts at the same time as receptor organ,
conducting tissue or nerve, and effector organ. In the higher animal
certain parts of the integument are differentiated so as to form visual
organs, and the threshold of these for light stimuli is raised while it
is lowered for other kinds of physical stimuli. Similarly other parts
of the integument are modified for the reception of auditory stimuli,
becoming more susceptible for these but less susceptible for other
kinds of stimuli than the adjacent parts of the body. Within the body
itself certain tracts of protoplasm are differentiated so that they
can conduct molecular disturbances set up in the receptor organs in
the integument better than can the general protoplasm; these are the
nerves. Other parts are modified so that they can contract or secrete
the more easily; these are the muscles and glands. The conception
of a reflex action, as it is usually stated in books on physiology,
therefore includes this idea of the differentiation of the tissues, but
all the processes that are included in the typical reflex are processes
which can be carried on by undifferentiated protoplasm.

It is also a schematic description that assumes a simplicity that does
not really exist. As a rule a reflex is initiated by the stimulation
of more than one receptor organ, and the impulses initiated may thus
reach the central nervous system by more than one path. There is no
simple shunting of the afferent impulse from the cell in which it
terminates into another nerve, when it becomes an efferent impulse;
but, instead of this, the impulse may “zigzag” through a maze of paths
in the brain or spinal cord connecting together afferent and efferent
nerves and ganglia. Further, the final part of the reflex, the muscular
contraction, is far from being a simple thing, for usually a series
of muscles are stimulated to contract, each of them at the right time
and with the right amount of force, and every contraction of a muscle
is accompanied by the relaxation of the antagonistic muscle. There are
muscles which open the eyelids and others which close them, and the
cerebral impulse which causes the levators to contract at the same time
causes the depressors to relax.

It is quite necessary to remember that the simple reflex is really
a process of much complexity and may involve many other parts and
structures than those to which we immediately direct our attention. But
leaving aside these qualifications we may usefully consider the general
characters of the reflex, regarding it as a common, automatically
performed, restricted bodily action, involving receptor organ, central
nervous organ, and effector organ. There are certain kinds of external
stimuli that continually affect our organs of sense, and there are
certain kinds of muscular and glandular activity that occur “as a
matter of course,” when these stimuli fall on our organs of sense.
The emanation from onions or the vapour of ammonia causes our eyes to
water; the smell of savoury food causes a flow of saliva; and anything
that approaches the face very rapidly causes us to close the eyes.
Reflexes are, in a way, commonly occurring, purposeful and useful
actions, and their object is the maintenance of a normal condition of
bodily functioning.

We dare hardly say that the simple reflex is an unconsciously performed
action, although we are not conscious, in the fullest sense of the
term, of the reflexes that habitually take place in ourselves. But even
in the decapitated frog, which moves its limbs when a drop of acid is
placed on its back, something, it has been said, akin to consciousness
may flash out and light up the automatic activity of the spinal cord.
We must not think of consciousness as that state of acute mentality
which we experience in the performance of some difficult task, or in
some keenly appreciated pleasure, or in some condition of mental or
bodily distress; it is also that dimly felt condition of normality
that accompanies the satisfactory functioning of the parts of the
bodily organism. But this dim and obscure feeling of the awareness of
our actions is easily inhibited whenever what we call intellectual
activity proceeds.

Much of the stimulation of our receptor organs is of this generally
occurring nature, and we are not aware of it although the stimuli
received are such as to induce useful and purposeful bodily activity.
In walking along the street we automatically avoid the people, and the
other obstacles that we encounter, by means of regulated movements of
the body and limbs, but this is activity that has become so habitual
and easy that we are hardly aware of it, and not at all, perhaps,
of the physical stimuli which induce it. But not only do we receive
stimuli which are reflected into bodily actions without our being
keenly aware of this reception, but we also receive stimuli which do
not become reflected into bodily activity. It is, Bergson suggests, as
if we were to look out into the street through a sheet of glass held
perpendicularly to our line of sight; held in this way we see perfectly
all that happens in front of us, but when we incline the glass at a
certain angle it becomes a perfect reflector and throws back again the
rays of light that it receives. This is, of course, a physical analogy,
and no comparison of material things with psychical processes can go
very far, but in a way it is more than an analogy. In our indolent
absorbed state of mind we do not as a rule see the objects which we
are not compelled to avoid, and which do not, in any way, influence
our immediate condition of bodily activity. The optical images of all
these things are thrown upon our retinas and are, in some way, thrown
or projected upon the central ganglia, but there the series of events
comes to an end, for the images are not reflected out towards the
periphery of the body as muscular actions. We cannot doubt that this is
why we do not perceive all the stimulation of our organs of sense that
we are sure that take place. These stimuli pass through us, as it were,
unless they are reflected out again as actions. In this reflection, or
translation of neutral into muscular activity, perceptions arise.

But even then perception need not arise. It does not, as a rule,
accompany the automatically performed reflex action, because the latter
is the result of intra-cerebral activities that have become so habitual
that they proceed _without friction_. There are innumerable paths in
the brain along which impulses from the receptor organs may pass into
the motor ganglia, but in the habitually performed reflex actions these
paths have been worn smooth, so to speak. The images of objects which
are perceived over and over again by the receptor organs glide easily
through the brain and as easily translate themselves into muscular,
or some other kind of activity. The things that matter in the life of
an animal which lives “according to nature” are cyclically recurrent
events in which, after a time, there is nothing new. Most of them
proceed just as well in the animal deprived of its cerebral hemispheres
by operation as in the intact cerebrate animal. In the performance of
actions of this kind the organism becomes very much of an automaton.

Let something unusual happen in the street while we are walking
through it--a runaway horse, or the fall of an overhead “live”
wire, for instance, something that has seldom or never formed part
of our experience, and something that may have an immediate effect
on us as living organisms. Then perception arises at once because
the stimulation of our organs of sense presents us with something
which is unfamiliar, and yet not so unfamiliar that it does not
recall from memory, or from derived experience, reminiscences of
the images of somewhat similar things, and of the effects of these.
The train of events that now proceeds in our central nervous system
becomes radically different from that which proceeded in our former,
rather aimless, series of actions. The stimuli no longer pass easily
through the “lower” ganglia of the brain, but flash upwards into the
cortical regions, where they become confronted with the possibility of
innumerable alternative paths and connections with all the parts of
the body. They waver, so to speak, before adopting one or other, or
a combination of these paths; there is hesitation, deliberation, and
finally choice of a path, with the result that a series of muscular
organs become inervated and motor actions, of a type more or less
competent to the situation in which we find ourselves, are set up. In
this hesitation and deliberation perception arises. It is when the
animal may act in a certain way as the result of a stimulus which is
not a continually recurrent one, but at the same time may refrain from
acting, or may act in one of several different ways, that perception of
external things and their relations arises.

That is to say, we perceive and think because we act. We do not look
out on the environment in which we are placed in a speculative kind
of way, merely receiving the images of things, and classifying and
remembering them, while all the time we are passive in so far as our
bodily activities are concerned. If the results of modern physiology
teach us anything in an unequivocal way they teach us this--that the
organs of activity, muscles, glands, and so on, and the organs of sense
and communication, are integrally one series of parts, and that apart
from motor activity nervous activity is an aimless kind of thing. It
is because we act that we think and disentangle the images of things
presented to us by our organs of sense, and subject all that is in the
stream of consciousness to conceptual analysis.[1]

[1] All this is, of course, the argument of Bergson’s earlier books,
_Matière et Mémoire_ and _Données immédiates de la Conscience_.

That is to say, in thinking about the flux of consciousness we
decompose it into what we regard as its constituent parts, and we
confer upon these parts separate existence in space and time. But it
is clear that none of the things which we thus regard as the elements
of our consciousness has any real existence apart from the others. The
smell of the flowers and that of the burnt oil interpenetrate in our
consciousness of the stimulation of our olfactory organs just as do the
jingle of the cab bells, the music of the orchestra, and the throb of
the motor car in the impressions transmitted by our auditory organs.
It is difficult to see that all these things, with the multitude of
other things which we perceive, constitute a “multiplicity in unity,”
that is an assemblage of things which are separate things, but which do
not lie alongside each other in space and mutually exclude each other,
but which are all jammed into each other, so to speak. It is easy to
see that we are conscious of a heterogeneity, and whenever we think of
this multitude of things it seems natural that we should separate them
from each other. The stream of our consciousness is so complex that we
cannot attend to it all at once, not even to the few things that we
have picked out in our example. If we concentrate our attention on any
part, or rather aspect of it, all the rest ceases to exist, or rather
we agree to ignore it, and this very concentration of thought upon one
part of our experience isolates it from all the rest. To a certain
extent the analysis of the complex of sensation is the result of the
work of different receptor organs; certain fields of energy, which we
call light, radiation, etc., affect the nerve-endings in the retina;
chemically active particles in the atmosphere affect the nerve-endings
in the olfactory membranes; and rapidly repeated changes of pressure
in the atmosphere (sound vibrations) affect the auditory organs in the
internal ear, and so on. But this reception of different stimuli by
different receptor organs exists only in the higher animal; there are
no specialised sense organs in a _Paramœcium_, for instance, and the
whole periphery of the animal must receive all these different kinds
of external stimuli at once. The specialisation of its receptor organs
in the higher animal is rather the means whereby the organism becomes
more receptive of its environment, than the means whereby it analyses
that environment. This analysis is the work of the consciousness of the
animal.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

Suppose that we draw a curve _AB_ freehand with a single undivided
sweep of the pencil. By making a certain assumption--that the curve
which we drew was one that might be regarded as cyclical, that is,
might be repeated over and over again--we can subject it to harmonic
analysis. We can decompose it into a number of other curves (_CD_,
_EF_, etc.), each of which is a separate “wave” rising above and
falling below the axis _OX_ in a symmetrical manner. If we draw any
vertical line _MN_ cutting these curves, we shall find that the
distance between the axis _OX_ and the main curve _AB_ is always
equal to the algebraic sum of the distances between the axis and the
other curves. These latter we call the harmonic constituents of the
curve _AB_, supposing them to “add up” so as to form it. But _AB_
was something quite simple and elemental and its constituents cannot
be said to have existed in it when we drew it freehand; it was only
by an artifice of practical utility in mathematical computations
that we _constructed_ them. It may be, of course, that the harmonic
constituents of a curve had actual existence apart from the curve
itself, but, in the case that we take, they certainly had not. Now
we must think of our stream of consciousness in much the same way.
It is something immediately experienced and elementary; it is the
concomitant, if we choose so to regard it, of the external processes
that go on outside our bodies. We can investigate it by thinking about
it, and attending to one aspect of it after another, thus arbitrarily
detaching one “part” of it from all the rest, but immediately we
do this we rise above the flux of experience into the region of
intellectual concepts. We have converted a multiplicity of states of
consciousness, all of which co-exist along with each other, and in
each other, and which have no spatial existence, into a multiplicity
of states, visual, auditory, olfactory, etc., which have become
separated from each other and have therefore acquired extension. This
dissociation of the flux of experience is the process of conceptual
analysis carried out by thought.

If we dissociate the stream of consciousness in this way, breaking it
up into states which we choose to regard as separate from each other,
we shall see that of the elements which we thus isolate many are
like each other and can be associated. Obviously there is a greater
resemblance between different smells than between smells and sounds.
Different musical sounds are more like each other than are sounds, and
feelings of heat and cold. There is a greater likeness between the
states of consciousness which arise from the stimulation of the same
receptor organ, than between those that arise from the stimulation
of different receptors. Those differences of sensation accompanying
the stimulation of different sense organs we regard as different in
kind; there is absolutely no resemblance between a colour and a sound,
we say, however much the modern annotator of concert programmes may
suggest the analogy. But we say that there may be different degrees of
stimulation of the same sense organ, and that the sensations that we
thus receive are of the same kind though they differ in intensity. The
whistle of a railway engine becomes louder as the train approaches,
that is to say, more intense, and if we study the physical conditions
that are concomitant with the stimulation of our tympanic membranes
we shall see that waves of alternate rarefaction and compression are
set up in the atmosphere outside our ears. All the time that the train
approaches the frequency of these waves remains the same, that is, just
as many occur in a second when the train is distant as when it is near.
But the amplitude of the waves has been increasing, and the velocity
with which the molecules of air strike against the tympanic membranes
becomes greater the nearer is the source of sound. We can represent
this by means of a diagram which shows that the amplitude of the
waves--which represents the loudness of the sound--increases while the
frequency--which represents the pitch--remains the same. The amplitude
is represented by the straight vertical lines, 11, 22, 33, etc.,
which are of increasing magnitude. Thus we represent the physical
cause of the increasing loudness of the sound by space-magnitudes,
and then we transfer these magnitudes to the states of consciousness
concomitant with the vibrating molecules of air. Suppose that we knew
nothing at all about the cause of the differences of pitch of musical
sounds and that we listen to the notes of the octave, C, D, E,----C,
sounded by an organ; all that we should experience would be that the
sounds were different. If we were to sing the notes we might attain
the intuition that the notes G, A, B were “higher” than the notes C,
D, E, because a greater effort was required in order to produce these
sounds, but obviously this is a different thing from saying that the
notes themselves were “higher” or “lower.” But let us match the notes
by striking tuning-forks, and then having selected forks which give the
notes of the octave let us fix them so that they will make a tracing,
while still vibrating, on a revolving strip of paper. We shall then
find that the fork emitting the note C makes (say) 256 vibrations per
second, the fork D 9/8 256 vibrations, the fork E 5/4 256 vibrations,
and so on. Thus we associate the notes of the octave together and we
say that their quality was the same but that their pitch differed,
and since the pitch depends on the frequency of vibration of the
fork, or of the air in its vicinity, we say that pitch differences are
quantitative ones, and that the states of consciousness which accompany
these physical events are also quantitatively different.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

So also with colour. If we had no such apparatus as prisms or
diffraction gratings, which enable us to find what is the wave length
of light, should we have any idea of the spectral hues, red, yellow,
orange, green, etc., as differing from each other quantitatively? It is
certain that we should not. But observation and experiment have shown
that the nerve-endings of the optic nerve in the retina are stimulated
by vibrations of something which we agree to call the ether of space,
and that the frequency of vibration of light which we call red is
less than that which we call orange, while the frequency of vibration
of orange light is less again than that of blue light, and so on. To
our consciousness red, orange, yellow, and blue light are absolutely
different, but we disregard this intuition and we say that our
perceptions of light are similar in kind but differ, in some of them
are more intense than are some others. Again, have we any intuitive
knowledge of increasing temperature? If we dip our hands into ice-cold
water the sensation is one of pain, if the water has a temperature
of 5° C. it feels cold, if it is at 15° C. we have no particular
appreciation of temperature, if at 25° C. it feels very warm, if it
is at 60° it is very hot, and if it is at 90° we are probably scalded
and the feeling is again one of pain. If we place a thermometer in
the water we notice that each sensation in turn is associated with a
progressive lengthening of the mercury thread, and if we investigate
the physical condition of the water we find that at each stage the
velocity of movement of the molecules was greater than that at the
preceding stage. We say, then, that our different perceptions were
those of heat of different degrees of intensity, so transferring to
the perceptions themselves the notions of space-magnitudes acquired by
a study of the expansion of the mercury in the thermometer, or by the
adoption of the physical theory of the kinetic structure of the water.
Yet it is quite certain that what we experienced were quite different
things or conditions, cold, warmth, heat, and pain, and indeed, in this
series of perceptions different receptor organs are involved.

Suppose we listen to the note emitted by a syren which is sounding with
slowly increasing loudness but with a pitch which remains constant. We
do not notice at first that the sound is becoming louder, but after a
little time we do notice a difference. Let us call the amplitude of
vibration of the air when the syren first sounds _E_, and then, when we
notice a difference, let us call the amplitude Δ_E_ + _E_, Δ_E_ being
the increment of amplitude. Let us call our sensation when the syren
first sounds _S_, and our sensations when the sound has become louder
_S_ + Δ_S_, Δ_S_ being the “increment of sensation.” Then the relation
holds:--

  Δ_E_/_E_ = constant.

That is to say, the louder is the sound the greater must be the
increase of loudness before we notice a difference. Let us assume now
that the successive sensations of loudness that we receive as the syren
blows louder and louder are, each of them, just the same amount louder
than the preceding sound; that is to say, let us assume that what we
experience are “minimal perceptible differences” of sensation--that
they are “elements of loudness”--thus we construct a series of sounds
each of which differs from that preceding it by an elemental increment
of loudness. Now things that cannot be further decomposed are
necessarily equal to each other; if, for instance, the atoms represent
the ultimate units into which we break up the matter called oxygen,
then these atoms are all equal to each other. Therefore the increments
of loudness are equal to each other.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

If we plot these equal increments of loudness as the dependent variable
_S_ in a graph, and the amplitude of the vibrations of the atmosphere
as the independent variable _E_, we can obtain the following curve.
If we investigate this we shall find that a certain relation exists
between the “values” of the sensation and the values of the stimuli
that correspond to them; a regular increase in the loudness of the
sensation corresponds to a regular increase in the logarithms of the
strength of the stimuli. Let S = the sensation, _E_ the stimulus, and
_C_ and _Q_ constants; then

  _S_ = _C_ log(_E_/_Q_);

so that we seem to establish a mathematical relation between the
intensity of our sensations and the intensity of the stimuli that give
rise to those sensations, but this relation depends on the assumption
that what we call “minimal perceptible differences” of sensation are
numerical differences that are equal to each other, and this is, of
course, an assumption that cannot possibly be proved.

Thus we decompose our stream of consciousness into a series of
quantitatively different and qualitatively different things, upon
each of which we confer independent existence. We attribute to these
different aspects of our consciousness extension, but the extension is
due only to our analysis; for the qualities of pitch, loudness, colour,
odour, etc., which we disentangle from each other, did not exist apart
from each other, any more than do the sine and cosine curves into which
we decompose an arbitrarily drawn curved line. The multiplicity of
our consciousness is intensive, like the multiplicity that we see to
exist in the abstract number ten. This number stands for a group of
things, but its multiplicity is intensive and only exists because we
are able to subdivide anything in thought to an indefinite extent. Now,
so far we have only separated what we agree to regard as the elemental
parts of our general perception of the environment, but it is to be
noted that we have not given to these elements anything like spatial
extension.

We may, if we like, regard our intuition of space as that of an
indefinitely large, homogeneous, empty medium which surrounds us and
in which we may, in imagination, place things. So regarded it is
difficult to see in what way our notion of space differs from our idea
of “nothing,” a pseudo-idea incapable of analysis, except into the
idea of something which might be somewhere else. The more we think
about it the more we shall become convinced that space, that is the
“form” of space, represents our actual or potential modes of motion,
that is, our powers of exertional activity. Space, we say, has three
dimensions; in all our analysis of the universe, and of the activities
that we can perceive in it, this idea of movement in three dimensions,
forward and backward, up and down, and right and left, occurs; and
we have to recognise that in it there is something fundamental, as
fundamental as the intuitive knowledge that we possess of the direction
of right and left. It is because we can move in such a way that any
of our motions, no matter how complex, can be resolved into the
components of backward and forward, right and left, and up and down,
these directions all being at right angles to each other, that we speak
of our movements as three-dimensional ones. Our geometry is founded,
therefore, on concepts derived from our modes of activity; and there is
nothing in the universe, apart from our own activity, that makes this
the only geometry possible to us. Euclidean geometry does not depend
on the constitution of the external universe, but on the nature of the
organism itself.

There is a little Infusorian which lives, in its adult phase, on the
surface of the spherical ova of fishes. These ova float freely in
sea water, and the Infusorian crawls on their surfaces, moving about
by means of ciliary appendages. It does not swim about in the water,
but adheres closely to the surface of the ovum on which it lives. Let
us suppose that it is an intelligent animal and that it is able to
construct a geometry of its own; if so, this geometry would be very
different from our own.

It would be a two-dimensional geometry, for the animal can move
backward and forward, and right and left, but not up and down; it
is a stereotropic organism, as Jacques Loeb would say, that is, it
is _compelled_ by its organisation to apply its body closely to the
surface on which it lives. But its two-dimensional geometry would, on
this account, be different from ours. Our straight lines are really the
_directions_ in which we move from one point to another point in such
a way as to involve the least exertion; they are the shortest distances
between two points, and if we deviate from them we exert a greater
degree of activity than if we had moved along them. For us there is
only one straight line that can be drawn between two points, but this
is not necessarily true for our Infusorian, and its straight line need
not be the shortest distance between two points. It might be either the
longest or the shortest distance between the points, for the latter can
always be placed on a great circle passing through the two points and
the poles of the egg, and in moving from a point on which it is placed
the animal could reach the other point by moving in two directions,
just as we could go round the earth along the equator by moving to the
east or to the west. Therefore the straight line of the Infusorian
would be not only a scalar quantity but a vector quantity, that is,
it would represent, not only a quantity of energy, but a quantity of
energy that has direction. For us only one straight line can be drawn
between two given points, but this limitation would not exist in the
two-dimensional geometry of a curved surface. Suppose that the two
points are situated on a great circle and that they are exactly 180°
apart; then the Infusorian could move from one pole to another pole
along an infinite number of straight lines or meridians all of which
had a different direction, but all of which were of the same length;
that is to say, in this geometry an infinite number of straight lines
can be drawn between the same two points. Again, its triangles _might_
be different from ours; our triangles are figures formed by drawing
straight lines between three points, and on a plane surface the sum
of the angles of the triangle are together equal to two right angles,
though on a curved surface they may be greater or less than two right
angles. But our Infusorian could not imagine a triangle in which the
sum of the angles was not greater than two right angles, for all its
figures would be drawn on a convex surface.

Our three-dimensional geometry depends, therefore, on our modes of
activity and the concepts with which it operates; points, straight
lines, etc. are conceptual limits to those modes of activity. We can
imagine a straight line only as a direction along which we can move
without deviating to the right or the left, or up or down. But even
if we draw such a line on paper with a fine pencil the trace would
still have some width, and we can imagine ourselves small enough to be
able to deviate to the right or the left within the width of the line
drawn on the paper. We might make a very small mark on the paper, but
no matter how small this mark is it would still have some magnitude;
otherwise we should be unable to see it. If the straight line had
no width and the point no magnitude they would have no perceptual
existence. Our perceptual triangles are not figures, the angles of
which are necessarily equal to two right angles. If we drive three
walking sticks into a field and then measure the angles between them by
means of a sextant we shall find that the sum is _nearly_ 180°, but in
general not that amount. If we stick a darning needle into the heads
of each of the walking sticks and then remeasure the angles by means
of a theodolite we shall obtain values which are nearer to that of two
right angles, but we should not, except by “accident,” obtain exactly
this value. We do not, therefore, get the “theoretical” result, and we
say this is because of the errors of our methods of observation; but
why do we suppose that there is such a theoretical result from which
our observations deviate, if our observations themselves do not in
general give this ideal result? We might accumulate a great series
of measurements of the angles of our triangle, and we should then
find that these results would tend to group themselves symmetrically
round a certain value which would be 180°. Some of the results would
be considerably less than the ideal, and some of them would be
considerably more; but these relatively great deviations would be small
in number and most of the results would be a very little less than 180°
or a very little more, and there would be as many which would be a
little less as those that were a little more. We should have formed a
“frequency distribution”[2] with its “mode” at 180°.

[2] See appendix, p. 350.

But by “reasoning” about the “properties” of these lines and triangles
in plane two-dimensional space, we should arrive at the conclusion
that the angles of a triangle were equal to 180°, and neither more nor
less. We should then think of a straight line as still a _path_ along
which we move in imagination, and a path which still has some width.
But we imagine the width of the path to become less and less, so that,
even if we imagine ourselves to become thinner and thinner, we should
be unable to deviate either to the right or left in moving along the
path, because the thinner we make ourselves the thinner becomes also
the path. We imagine our intuition of a deviation to the right or left
becoming keener and keener, so that, no matter how small the deviation
we should still be able to appreciate it by the extra exertion which
it would involve. We think of a point as a little spot, and we think
of ourselves as being very small indeed, so that we can move about on
this spot. But we can reduce the area of the spot more and more, until
it becomes “infinitesimally” small; and at the same time we think of
ourselves as becoming smaller and smaller, so that we can still move
about on the spot. But we think of the area of the spot as becoming so
small that no matter how small we make ourselves we are unable to move
on it.

This means that we substitute conceptual lines and points and triangles
for the perceptual ones of our experience, and then we operate in
imagination with these concepts. That is to say, we carry our modes
of exertional activity to their _limits_,[3] in the way which we have
tried to indicate above--a process of thought which is the foundation
of the reasoning of the infinitesimal calculus.

[3] See appendix, p. 346.

What we call space, therefore, depends on our intuition of bodily
exertion. This intuition includes the knowledge that a certain change
has occurred as the consequence of the expenditure of a certain amount
of bodily energy, and that, as the result of this change, the relation
of the rest of the universe to our body has become different. We think
of our body as the origin, or centre, of a system of co-ordinates:--

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

We imagine three lines at right angles to each other to extend
indefinitely out into space, and we think of ourselves as being
situated at the point of intersection of these three straight lines.
If anything moves in the universe outside ourselves we can resolve
this motion into three components, each of which is to be measured
along one of the axes of our system of co-ordinates. But any motion
whatever in the universe outside ourselves can be represented equally
well by supposing that the origin of the system of co-ordinates has
been changed; that is, by supposing that we have changed our position
relative to the rest of the universe. Therefore motion outside
ourselves is not to be distinguished from a contrary motion of our own
body--a statement of the “principle of relativity”--except that any
change outside ourselves may be distinguished from that compensatory
change in the position of our body which _appears_ to be the same
thing, by the absence of the intuition that we have expended a certain
quantity of energy in producing the change. Conscious motion of our own
body is something _absolute_; all other motion is relative.

So far we have been speaking of our crude bodily motion, but a very
little consideration will show that our knowledge of space attained
by scientific measurements depends just as much on our intuition of
our bodily activity, and its direction; the measurement of a stellar
parallax, or that of the meridian altitude of the sun, for instance,
by astronomical instruments, involves bodily exertion, though of a
refined kind. Three-dimensional space, that is _our_ space, therefore
represents the manner of our activity, just as convex two-dimensional
space represents the manner of the activity of the Infusorian, and
one-dimensional space would represent the manner of activity of an
animal which was compelled to live in a tube, the sides of which
it fitted closely, so that it could move only in one direction--up
and down. A parasite, living attached to some fixed object, and
the movements of which were represented only by the growth of its
tissues, could not form any idea of space; and the “higher” forms of
geometry, that is, space of four or more dimensions, present no clear
notion to our minds, even although we regard the operations included
in mathematics of this kind as pure symbolism, because we cannot
relate this imaginary space to any form of bodily exertion. Geometry,
then, represents the manner in which our bodily exertion cuts up the
homogeneous medium in which we live.

Motion, whether it be that of our own body in controlled muscular
activity, or that imaginary motion of the environment which we
call giddiness, or a sensibly perceived motion of some part of the
environment, that is, a motion which we can compensate by some actual
or imaginary change in the position of our own body produced by our
own exertion, is an intuitively felt change, and is incapable of
intellectual representation. It is not clearly conceived either in
ancient or in modern geometry. Euclidean geometry is, as we have
seen, based directly on our intuition of bodily exertion, but it is
essentially static in treatment. Let it be admitted that we can draw a
straight line of any length and in any direction, and so on; then we
regard these straight lines, etc., as motionless, abstract things, and
we proceed to discuss their relationships. Cartesian geometry, and the
methods of the infinitesimal calculus, do not treat of real motion, and
the concept, if it is introduced at all, is introduced illegitimately
and surreptitiously. Consider what we do when we “plot a curve.” Let
the latter be a parabola having the equation _y_ = 1/2 _x_. Now a
parabola is defined as “the locus of a point which _moves_, so that its
distance from a fixed point is in a constant relation to its distance
from a fixed straight line.” How do we construct such a curve?

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

We proceed to fix the positions of a series of points in this way:
there are two straight lines, _OX_ and _OY_, at right angles to each
other, and we measure off certain steps along the line _OX_; these
steps are _OX_↓{0·5}, _OX_↓{1}, _OX_↓{1·5}, _OX_↓{2}, and so on, the
small numerals indicating the distance of each point (_OX_↓{0·5}, etc.)
from the origin _O_. We then draw lines perpendicular to the _X_-axis
through these points. We have now to calculate one-half of the square
of each of these lengths _OX_↓{0·5}, _OX_↓{1}, etc., and then we mark
off these calculated lengths along the perpendicular lines. The point
_A_, for instance, is 1/2(0·5)^2 from the point _X_↓{0·5}, _B_ is
1/2(1)^2 from _X_↓{1}, and so on. In this way we obtain a series of
points, _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_, _E_, etc., and these are points on the
locus of the “moving” point.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

There is nothing at all about motion here. All that we have done is
to measure lengths. We have made a kind of counterpoint, _X_-points
against _Y_-points, but we have not even made a curve. We connect the
points _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_, _E_, etc., by means of short, straight
lines, and then we may connect together these short lines, and, if we
plot a number of intermediate points between those that we have already
obtained and join these, the points may be so close together that they
may seem to be indistinguishable from a curve. Yet, no matter how
numerous they may be, they can never be connected together so as to
form a curve; we therefore draw a curved line freehand through them,
and at once, in so doing, we abandon our intellectual methods, for our
curve depends on our intuition of _continuously changing direction_.
But if we think about it we shall find that we can form no clear
intellectual notion of continuity and we can only measure the curvature
of a line _at a point in_ the line by drawing a tangent to the curve at
this point, and then by measuring the slope of the tangent. The curve
itself we obviously leave out of consideration.

We cannot conceive of the point moving along the locus _OD_. We can
think of it only as _at_ the places _O_, _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_, _E_, etc.,
but we must neglect the intervals _OA_, _AB_, _BC_, _CD_, _DE_, and so
on, or we can divide them into smaller intervals by supposing the point
to have occupied the positions _f_, _g_, _i_, _j_, between the points
_A_ and _B_, for instance. Yet, no matter how many these intervals
may be, we can only think of the point as being _at_ the places _O_,
_A_, _B_, _C_, _D_, _E_, or at _f_, _g_, _i_, _j_, and so on. We never
think of the intervals themselves, and, if all we think about is the
_position_ of the point, we do not really think of it as in motion at
all. We can _see_ it in motion, but we cannot form an intellectual
concept of its motion. It is not really necessary that we should in the
affairs of everyday life, but for the adequate treatment of problems
involving rates of change science had to wait for the invention of the
methods of the infinitesimal calculus before this disability of the
human mind could be circumvented.

But the moving point occupies _successively_ a number of different
positions in space. If it is a material point that we observe to move
from one place to another, we perceive that a certain interval of our
duration corresponds with the change of position of the point. Duration
was not used up in the occupancy of the different positions _O_, _A_,
_B_, _C_, _D_, _E_, and so on, nor in that of the occupancy of the
indefinitely numerous other positions in which we may place the moving
point, but in the intervals themselves. We have said “duration” and
not “time,” using Bergson’s term. By duration and time we understand
different things.

Time is, for us, only a series of standard events which punctuate, so
to speak, our experienced duration. The unit of time is the sidereal
day, that is, the interval of time between two successive transits
of a fixed star across the arbitrary meridian. But if we try to
conceptualise this interval we find that we can do so only by breaking
it up into smaller intervals, and this we do by using a pendulum of a
certain length which makes a certain number of swings (86,400) during
the interval between the two transits of the star. Thus we obtain a
smaller interval of duration and we call this a second of time. But for
many purposes this interval is too long, and we can again sub-divide
it by making use of a tuning-fork which makes, say, 1000 complete
vibrations in a second; in this way we obtain still smaller intervals
of duration--the sigmata of the physiologists. A sigma, therefore,
represents the interval between the beginning and end of one complete
vibration of a certain kind of tuning-fork; a second, that between the
beginning and end of one complete swing of a pendulum of a certain
length, placed at certain parts of the earth’s surface; and a day,
that between two successive transits of a fixed star across a selected
meridian, after all the necessary corrections have been made to the
observation. These actual occurrences, the positions of the prongs
of the tuning-fork, or those of the bob of the pendulum, or those of
the fixed star do not involve duration. We consider the meridian of
Greenwich as an imaginary line drawn across the celestial sphere, and
the star as a point of light, so that the actual transit is, in the
limit, an occurrence which occupies only an “infinitesimal” interval of
duration. So also with the pendulum and the tuning-fork; the positions
of these things do not “use up” time, and even if the intervals into
which we divide astronomical time are indefinitely numerous no real
quantity of duration is taken up by their occurrence. We know that the
interval between two successive transits of a fixed star are not really
constant, that is, the astronomical day is lengthening by an incredibly
small part of a second each year, but how do we know this? It is
not that we can _feel_ the increments of duration, but just that we
assume that Newton’s laws of motion are true; and hence that the tidal
friction due to the motions of the earth, sun, and moon must retard
the period of rotation of the earth so that the intervals between two
successive transits of a star must become greater.

Thus we do not conceptualise the actual intervals of duration of which
we are able to mark the end-points; they are lived by us, and they are
real absolute things independent of our wills. Suppose we come in from
a long walk, tired and thirsty, and ask the maid to get tea ready at
once. She puts the kettle on the gas stove and then sits down to read.
The water takes, say, five minutes to boil. What do we mean by this?

This is what we mean:--

           {_The pendulum  _and it has                       _The time
           { of the clock   now swung_   _and now_   and so   elapses_
  Time     { has already                               on
           {   swung_
           {   M times     M + n times  M + 2n times          P swings
                  |             |            |                   |
           {_The water in  _it is now    _and now_          _the kettle
           {  the kettle       at_                   and so    boils_
           {    is at_                                 on
           {      T°         T° + t°      T° + 2t°              100°
  Tempera- {      |             |            |                   |
     ture  {_The  volume   _it is now_   _and now_             It is
           { of mercury in      |            |       and so      |
           {  the thermo-       |            |         on        |
           {   meter is_        |            |                   |
           {      V           V + v        V + 2v                W


What we call time here is only a series of simultaneously occurring
events. The standard events are the positions of the hands of the
clock on the clock face, that is, lengths of arc recording the number
of swings of the pendulum that have occurred since the beginning of
the operation of the boiling of the kettle. When this began, the hands
of the clock were at, say, 4.30, and the temperature of the water
was then, say, 17° C.; and, when it ended, the hands of the clock
were at 4.35 and the temperature of the water was 100° C. It is only
the simultaneities of these events that we have recorded and not the
interval of duration that they mark. It does not matter how many times
we might have looked at the hands of the clock and the thermometer, we
should still have observed only simultaneities.

But we had to _wait_ for the kettle to boil, and the temperature 100°
was attained _after_ the temperature 90°, and so on. What does this
mean? While we were waiting, the water seemed to take an intolerably
long time to boil. But the maid was reading one of Mr Charles Garvice’s
novels, and “before she knew where she was” the kettle boiled over.
There was a certain interval of duration experienced by her, and
another, but different, interval of duration experienced by us. In each
case there was a stream of consciousness. We felt fatigue, thirst, a
lack of satisfaction, wandering attention, and irritation--all that
was our duration. But the maid was identifying herself with Lady Mary,
who had sprained an ankle and was being helped along by the new, young
gamekeeper, and that was her duration.

There need not be any succession of events in the conceptual
representation of a physical process. There is, for instance, no
succession in such a conception as is represented by the following
diagram--a conception well worth analysis:--

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

The figure represents a tracing made by a muscle-nerve preparation.
A living muscle taken from an animal has been attached to a light
lever, the end of which makes a scratch on a piece of smoked paper.
The paper is fastened on a revolving cylinder and so long as the
muscle is motionless the end of the lever marks a horizontal line on
the paper. But if the muscle is stimulated so that it contracts and
then relaxes again the lever is pulled up and is then lowered, and so
its point makes a curve on the paper. The nerve going to the muscle
can be stimulated electrically and the moment of the stimulation can
be recorded by another lever, which makes a mark on the paper below
the trace made by the lever which is attached to the muscle. Two
such shocks have been applied to the nerve and they have elicited
two contractions of the muscle and these two contractions have fused
together.

In the actual experiment the operators could _see_ that the muscle
moved, and they could _feel_ that a certain interval of their own
duration coincided with the interval between the first and second
depressions of the key that made the electric shocks. But the extent
of motion of the muscle was too small, and the depressions of the key
succeeded each other too rapidly to be easily observed, and therefore
all these events were made to record themselves on the myogram. The
series of little notches at the base of the figure represent the
movements of the time-lever, that is, they are scratches made on
the paper by a little lever which moves up and down at a rate fixed
beforehand. Now when this time lever had made ten notches on the paper
the first shock was applied to the nerve, and at the eleventh the
muscle began to contract. At the seventeenth notch the second shock
was applied and the muscle continued to contract. At the twenty-fifth
notch the muscle ceased to contract and began to relax, and at the
forty-second notch the muscle had ceased to contract. Everything now
becomes clear and easy to represent mentally; the time-lever makes 100
notches on the paper in a second, so that there was an interval of
0.07 seconds between the two stimuli, and these two stimuli produced a
compound contraction of the muscle lasting for 0.1 second. This is what
the experimenters might have perceived, had human unaided senses been
sufficiently acute. But they are not, and so the crude perception of
the results of the experiment is replaced by a conception of the train
of events involved in the operation. Duration and succession disappear
and the myogram represents only a series of simultaneous events of
this nature; the first stimulus occurs simultaneously with the tenth
movement of the time-lever; the second stimulus with the seventeenth,
and so on. In seeing the experiment the operators had to _wait_ for one
phase to be completed before they could observe another one, but in
reasoning about it all the phases are spread out and are present in the
conception at once. The duration was in the operators but not in the
experiment: it was experienced, but it disappears when the results of
the experiment are conceptualised.

A succession of events is in ourselves and not in the events observed.
If a point is said to move along the locus _OD_ through the positions
_A_, _B_, _C_, it is we that have the feeling of succession, and
the whole trajectory, or locus, or path of the point corresponds
with a portion of our duration. The operation of boiling the kettle
corresponds with a portion of our duration, which in its turn
corresponds with that part of our duration which was marked by the
positions of the hands of the clock. Thus we perceive a simultaneity
in these two trains of events, and this enables us to assign a
certain period of astronomical time to the operation of raising the
temperature of the water, in the conditions of the experiment, from
17° C. to 100° C. But there is nothing absolute in this interval
of astronomical time: what is absolute is that certain successions
of events always correspond with other successions of events. A
certain number of swings of a seconds-pendulum always corresponds
with a certain rise in temperature of a definite mass of water which
is in thermal contact with an indefinitely large reservoir of heat
at a certain temperature, and, no matter how often we repeat this
experience, the same simultaneity is always to be observed. Thus what
the physicist considers is not intervals of his own duration but series
of correspondences--that is, correspondences of certain standard events
with the events which he is studying.

In reality time, in the sense of the astronomer’s time, does not enter
into the methods of the mathematical physicist. Let us suppose that he
is investigating the change that occurs in a material system between
the two moments of time _t_↓{1} and _t_↓{2}, these moments being
separated from each other by a period of duration that we can feel. Let
the system be, say, the earth and moon; the first body being supposed
to be motionless, and the second being supposed to have a certain
tangential velocity of movement. If the interval _t_↓{1} to _t_↓{2}
is really an interval of astronomical time, the problem, what is the
difference of position of the moon owing to the gravitation of the
earth, is incapable of solution, and even if we reduce the interval of
time indefinitely while still supposing that it is a finite interval,
the mathematical difficulty remains. We then replace the finite
interval _t_↓{1} to _t_↓{2} by the differential _dt_, which means
that the two phases of the system, motionless earth and moving moon
at the time _t_↓{1}, and motionless earth and moving moon at the time
_t_↓{2}, are separated by an interval of time _dt_, which is smaller
than any finite interval that we can conceive. We must then integrate
the differential of the position difference so as to obtain the real
difference in the condition of the system after the finite interval
of time _t_↓{1} to _t_↓{2} has elapsed. Thus mathematics, incapable
of dealing with real intervals of time, _evades_ this difficulty by
considering tendencies, not real occurrences.

Things that happen in a part of inorganic nature arbitrarily detached
from the rest, and investigated by the methods of mathematical physics,
do not endure. Let us suppose that we take some silver and add nitric
acid to it: the metal dissolves. We can then add hydrochloric acid
to the solution and precipitate the metal in the form of chloride;
and we can then fuse this chloride with carbonate of soda, or some
other substance, and so obtain the metal again. If we work carefully
enough we can repeat this series of operations again and again and the
original portion of silver will remain unchanged both in nature and
in mass. All the chemical reactions into which it has entered have
not affected it in any way; that is to say, these reactions have not
endured.

If we inject a serum, containing a toxin, into the blood stream of
a susceptible animal, certain things happen. The animal will become
ill, but, provided that the amount of serum which has been injected
was not too great, it will recover. If the toxin be again injected
a reaction occurs, but the animal does not become so ill as on the
first occasion, and after a number of injections the dose administered
may be so great as to kill a susceptible animal but may yet produce
no effect on the animal which is the subject of the process of
immunisation: immunity has been conferred on it. Now can we compare the
two operations, that of the solution and precipitation of the metal
and that of the immunisation of the animal? We can to some extent, but
the analogy soon fails, and indeed we should not attempt to formulate
a theory of immunity on a physico-chemical basis if we did not start
with the assumption that the series of operations was one in which
only physico-chemical reactions were involved, that is to say, there
is nothing in the phenomena of immunisation that suggests that what
occurs in the animal body is similar to what we can cause to occur in
inorganic materials outside the tissues of the living organism. We
start with the assumption that the administration of the toxin causes
the formation of an antitoxin in very much the same sort of way as
the administration of hydrochloric acid to a solution of nitrate of
silver causes the formation of chloride of silver. This antitoxin
then neutralises the dose of toxin which may be administered after
the process of immunisation has been effected, very much in the same
sort of way as a certain amount of some acid can be neutralised by an
equivalent amount of some base with which the acid can combine. If
the reader will analyse any of the theories of immunisation current
at the present day he will find that these are the physical ideas
that are involved in it.[4] But physiological science has the much
more formidable task of explaining the persistence of the immunity.
The animal rendered immune to the toxins produced by certain species
of bacteria may remain so for many years, that is, for a very long
time after the antitoxins originally produced by the reaction of the
tissues to the toxins first administered have disappeared. We must
imagine, therefore, that the anti-substances produced originally
by the reaction of the toxin are produced again and again by the
tissues of the susceptible animal, for the latter may resist repeated
infections, that is, repeated doses of toxin, without illness. But
then the tissues of the animal body are transitory substances and they
do not persist unchanged. Muscles, glands, connective tissues, even
nerve-fibres and nerve-cells undergo metabolism, and the chemical
substances of which they are composed break down into the excretory
products, pass out into the blood stream, and are eliminated from
the body; while at the same time these tissues are continually being
renewed from the nutritive substances in the blood and lymph. It is the
_organisation_ of the tissues--their form and modes of reaction--that
endure, but the material substances of which they are composed are
in a state of continual flux. Yet the organisation of these tissues
does not persist unchanged, for it is continually _responding_ to new
conditions experienced by it. The reactions that occur when a toxin
is administered to a susceptible animal affect the organisation of
its tissues in such a way that the latter acquire the capability of
producing antitoxins which may--if we like to say so--neutralise the
toxins that enter into them when they become infected. The reaction
endures. But this is a different thing from saying that the process is
a physico-chemical one alone.

[4] Except that, of course, the reactions that are supposed to occur
are very complex ones.

This is what we must understand by the duration of the organism.
Everything that it experiences for the first time persists in its
organisation. It acquires the ability of responding to some stimulus
by a definite, purposeful reaction, the effect of which is to aid
it in its struggle for existence; and this reaction, once carried
out, becomes a “motor habit” or the basis of a reflex, or in some
other way, as in the process of immunisation, remains a part of the
modes of functioning of the animal. In our behaviour certain cerebral
nerve tracts become laid down and continue to exist throughout life,
modifying all our future experience. Our past experience accumulates.
There must be direct continuity in our flux of consciousness, for
no perception seems ever to fade absolutely from memory. This
continual addition of perceptions to those that already exist makes
our consciousness ever become more complex, so that a perception
experienced for the first time is never quite the same when it is again
experienced. The first time that we go up and down in an elevator,
or sit on a “joy-wheel,” or ascend in a balloon or an aeroplane, or
become intoxicated, constitutes an unique event in our lives, and we
experience a “new sensation.” What the blasé man of the world complains
of is this accumulation, or rather persistence, of his experiences. A
repetition of the same stimulus never again begets the same perception.
The first hearing of a modern drawing-room song may be enjoyable, but
the next time we hear it we are not interested, and by-and-bye it
becomes very tiresome. The first hearing of a great symphony usually
perplexes us, and we are perhaps repelled by unusual harmonies, or
progressions, or strange modulations, but subsequent hearings afford
increasing pleasure. We say that there was “so much in it” that we
did not understand it, yet precisely the same series of external
stimuli affected our auditory membranes on each occasion, and the same
molecular disturbances were transmitted along our afferent nerves
to the central nervous system, where the same physical effects must
have been produced. The difference in all these cases between the
repetitions of the same stimuli was that the later ones became added
to the earlier ones, so that the state of consciousness produced by,
or which was concomitant with, these external stimuli was a different
state in each case.

This is the duration of the intelligently acting animal: it is not
merely memory, but memory and the accumulation of all its past modes
of responding to changes in its environment, whether these modes of
response were conscious ones (as in the case of an intelligently
performed or “learned” action), or unconscious ones (as, for instance,
in the case of the acquirement of immunity by an animal which had
become able to resist disease). It is not merely the experience of
the individual organism, but also all the experience of those things
which were done or experienced by the ancestry of the organism, and
which were transmitted by heredity to the progeny. Motor habits are
formed, so that much the same series of muscular actions are carried
out when a stimulus formerly experienced is again experienced. Pure
memory remains, so that the images of past things and actions somehow
persist in our consciousness. Physical analogy suggests that these
images are inscribed on the substance of the brain or are stored away
in some manner; but, apart from the incredible difficulty of imagining
a mechanism competent for this purpose, it is obvious that we thus
apply to the investigation of our consciousness (which is an intensive
multiplicity), the concept of extension which can only apply in all
its strictness to the things outside ourselves on which we are able
to act. All these motor habits, functional reactions, and memory
images are our duration or accumulated experience. The motor habits
and those functional habitual reactions of other parts of the body
than the sensori-motor system are the basis of our actions, but the
memory images are, so to speak, pressed back into that part of our
organisation which does not emerge into consciousness. Only so much
of them as bear on the situation in which we, for the moment, find
ourselves and which may therefore influence our actions, flash out
into consciousness. As “dreamers” we indulge ourselves in the luxury
of becoming conscious of these memory images, but as “men of action”
we sternly repress them, or so much of them as do not assist us in the
actions that we are performing. Yet it is in the experience of each of
us that, in spite of this continual inhibition, parts of our memories
slip through the barriers of utility and surreptitiously remind us of
all that we have been and thought.

       *    *    *    *    *

Thus we simplify the stream of our consciousness. That of which we
are conscious at any time is never more than a part of our crude
sensation: we never perceive more than a small part of all that our
organs of sense transmit to our central nervous system. But even these
chosen perceptions of the external world are so rich, so chaotic and
confused, that we are unable to attend to them all at once and we
therefore “skeletonise” the contents of our consciousness. We think
about it a bit at a time. It is an unitary thing, unable to be broken
up, but we look at it from a great number of different points of view,
so to speak; and then, fixing our attention on some aspect of it, we
agree to ignore all the rest. We thus detach parts of it from the rest
and, having thus arbitrarily decomposed it, we call these separate
aspects the elements of our perceptions, and confer upon them separate
existence in space and time. We remember and classify things and
group together all those that seem to resemble each other. We form
genera, agreeing to ignore all but the most general characteristics of
the things which we try to conceptualise. We do not think separately
about all the dogs or horses or fishes that we have ever seen, but we
group all these animals into species, and it is usually the species
that we think about when the idea of a dog or a horse or a herring
emerges into our consciousness. When we think about a tramcar we do
not think about all the separate vehicles that we have seen, nor
about their colours, nor the advertisements on the boards outside,
nor the people hanging on to the straps inside. Just so much of the
experience of what is relevant to the purpose of our thought enters
into our idea of the tramcar: it is a conceptual vehicle that we
think about. Such is the nature of the concepts that form the basis
of our reasoning: they are generalised aspects of our experience of
nature, usually poorer in content than were the actually perceived
things, except when it is necessary that some individual thing seen
or otherwise experienced should be investigated or reasoned about.
All our descriptions of nature are conceptual schemes. The world of
perception, says William James, is too rich to be attended to all at
once, but in conceptualising it we spread it out and make it thinner,
and we mark out boundaries and division lines in it that do not really
exist. It is this generalised nature that is the subject matter of
our reasoning of pure science; and it is these concepts that form the
matter of all our descriptions. We do not describe nature “as we see
it,” it is our conceptions that we write about. Genera and species
and varieties do not really exist in the animate world: all these are
logical categories generated by our thought, concepts that facilitate
our descriptions. When an anatomist gives an account of the structure
of an animal he does not say what it looks like, nor as a rule does
he content himself by making a photograph of his dissections. For him
the animal is a complex of muscles, skeleton, nerves, glands, and so
on, and in his drawings all these things are given an individuality
that they do not really possess. In the living creature there were no
such sharply-distinguished organs as a good drawing represents: all
are bound together and are continuous. But for practical convenience
in description--that is, in the long run, that we may act upon these
things, we isolate from each other aspects that are in reality one
unitary whole.

       *    *    *    *    *

The universe, that is, all that is given to us, presents itself
as immediately perceived phenomena which are then conceptually
transformed. It is an aggregate of things--gross matter, particles,
molecules, atoms, and electrons. These things have separate existence
and shape, so that each of them lies outside all other things--we apply
to them the category of extension. They possess properties--that is,
they are hard, or heavy, or hot, or cold, or they are coloured, or they
smell, and so on--we thus apply to them the category of inherence. They
are not things that are immutable, for they change in place, or are
transformed in other ways, that is, they are acted upon by energies.
But beneath the properties of the things, or the transformations that
they undergo, we imagine something that has properties and which
transforms: it is not convenient that we speak solely of attributes or
transformations as entities in themselves, for we think of things as
having properties and being subject to transformations. Thus we apply
the category of substance.

Has this universe that we construct from the data of sensation
objective reality? We are led quite naturally by our study of
physiology to the notion of idealism. We see that our perception
of things, that is, our knowledge of the universe, depends on the
integrity of functioning of certain bodily structures, and upon the
condition that in men in general this integrity of functioning is
normal, that is, common to the great majority of mankind.

To say that a thing exists is to say that it is perceived in some way;
that immediately or remotely it affects our state of consciousness.
To say that the star Sirius exists is to say that the stimulation
of the retina by a minute spot of light transmits certain molecular
disturbances along the optic nerve, and that other molecular
disturbances are set up in the tissues of the central nervous system.
Even if we do not see those dark stars that we know to exist, there are
still evidences of their being that in some way affect the instruments
of the astronomer and lead to their being perceived. Even if we do
not actually see the emanations from a radio-active substance, we can
cause these emanations to produce changes in something that we can
see. We speak of the star as a minute spot of coloured light. But if
we are short-sighted the spot becomes a little flare, and if we are
colour-blind the hue of the star is different from what it is to normal
persons. If we put a drop of atropine into one eye and then close the
other, objects appear to lose their distinctness, but if we close
this eye and then open the other, the original sharpness of vision
returns. When we are bilious, wisps and spots may appear on a sheet
of white paper that at other times was blank. If we take an overdose
of quinine, rustlings and singing noises become apparent even in
conditions that ought to preclude all sensation of sound. If we have
a bad cold, we do not smell substances which at other times strongly
affect our olfactory membranes. When we become intoxicated, a host of
aberrations of sense displace our normal perceptions of things.

Our perception of the universe, therefore, depends on the normal
functioning of our organs of sense, that is, such modes of functioning
as we can describe and communicate to others, and which are thus
common to the majority of other men and women. These perceptions
resulting from the normal functioning of the organs of sense constitute
givenness, and we enlarge, or conceptualise this givenness and call it
the subject matter of science. But what is this reality that we say
is external to us? It is, we see, our inner consciousness. If we walk
along a road in the dark we can feel what is the nature of the path on
which we tread, whether stones or gravel, or sand or grass. But this
feeling is obviously not in the soles of our boots, and neither is it
in the skin of the feet, for we should feel nothing if the afferent
nerves in the legs were severed. Is it then in the brain? It would
appear to be there, but it disappears if certain tracts in the brain
are injured.

All that we can say is that the appearance of reality of things outside
ourselves is only the ever-changing condition of our consciousness.
This is all that we immediately know, and if we say that there is an
universe external to ourselves we thus project outside our own minds
what is in them; and we construct an environment which may or may not
exist, but which we have no right to say does exist. A philosophy based
on the science of the organism would appear to be restricted to this
idealistic view of the universe. When we come across it for the first
time when we are young it appeals to us with all the force of exact
reasoning, and yet it has all the charm of paradox. There is no part
of our intuitive knowledge which appears to us to be more certain than
this distinction between ourselves and an outer environment: we know
that our conscious Ego is something different from our body--and we
know that outside our body there is something else. Yet the idealistic
view so appeals to the intellect that we cannot think speculatively
about it without, at times, almost convincing ourselves of the
unreality and shadowiness of all that at other times seems most real
and tangible; and we indulge in these speculations all the more readily
because we know that whenever we begin to _act_, the intuitively
felt body and outer world will return to us with all their original
conviction of reality.

Some such system of idealism must generally characterise a system of
philosophy founded on pure reasoning. We cannot but feel that the
universe that we construct is one that depends on our perceptions: it
is our perceptions. The essence of a thing is that it is perceived. If
there were no mind to perceive it, would it exist? The universe is our
thought, and we, that is our thought, exist only in the Thought of an
absolute Mind which we call God. Such is the metaphysics to which the
study of sensation led Berkeley.

The metaphysics of science has taken another turn. It is true
that men and women see something outside themselves which differs
slightly in different individuals--these differences are due to what
we call the “personal equation.” The image of the universe seen by
some individuals may differ profoundly from the image seen by some
others, or most others; but a well-marked gap separates these slight
individual deviations in the images seen by normal individuals from
the large deviations seen by those whose perceptions are what we call
pathological ones. The normal universe common to the majority of
men and women is an aggregate of molecules in motion. But this is a
conclusion with which modern physics has been unable to remain content,
for molecules must be able to act on each other across empty space, and
this is inconceivable. The universe therefore consists of a homogeneous
immaterial medium, the ether of space, and this is the true _substantia
physica_. Molecules and radiation are conditions of the ether, and for
the physicist it is the only reality. The “materialism” of our own
time is therefore the belief in the existence, unconditioned by time
or anything else, of the ether, or physical continuum; a homogeneous
medium, of which matter and energy, and the consciousness of the
organism, are only states or conditions.

The materialism of the twentieth century, like the idealism of
Berkeley, thus finds that there is something outside our own
consciousness that possesses absolute existence. To the materialist it
is the ether of space, and to Berkeley it is the existence of absolute
Mind. But if our desire to avoid metaphysics is a genuine one, we
must reject the notion of the universal ether no less than we must
reject the notion of an absolute Mind, and we must rest content with
pure phenomenalism. For each of us there can be no existence except
that which is perceived or conceptualised. There is nothing but our
own consciousness; there cannot even be an Ego which perceives; there
is only perception. We never do really believe this in spite of our
professions of reason. We find on strict self-analysis that we believe
that there is an Ego that perceives and that there are other Egos
that perceive, and that the universe which our Ego perceives is also
the same universe that other Egos perceive. If we did not believe that
there were other men and women that perceived--other consciousnesses
like our own, all that part of our own behaviour that we call morality
would be meaningless. In a philosophy of pure idealism other men and
women are only phenomena; only bodies moving in nature. Why, then,
should these elements of our consciousness influence the rest of our
consciousness as if they were men and women like ourselves. All this
amounts to saying that while our speculative thought suggests to us
that all that exists is our stream of consciousness, our actions must
convince us that there are other thinking individuals like ourselves.[5]

[5] The reader may recognise in this argument that of Driesch’s _Three
Windows into the Absolute_.

Even if we do surrender ourselves to phenomenalism and try to believe
that all that exists is our own consciousness, the fact of our duration
would suggest to us that this present consciousness is not all. Our
reality is not only that which is present in our minds now, but all
that was ever present in our mind. All that we have ever thought and
done persists and forms our conscious and unconscious experience. This
past of ours is something that is ever being added to, or becoming
incorporated with, our present state of consciousness; and if it is
something other than that which we now perceive and conceptualise, it
is something that has an existence of its own.

We must believe that there is something that we perceive, and not
that we merely perceive. For the phases of our immediate givenness,
that is, those things which were present in our minds from moment to
moment of the past were connected together and had direction, and this
direction was something that could not be influenced by our will, and
may even have been contrary to our will. Something that is very hot
always cools, a wheel that is revolving of itself always comes to a
stop, a pendulum ceases to swing, a stone that is rolling down a hill
continues to roll. Let us look back at a fire that was going out: it
is now nearly dead; let us start a pendulum to swing and then go away:
when we come back the pendulum is still swinging but the amplitude
of its vibrations is now less than it was; let us look away from the
stone that was falling: when we look again it is still falling but it
is not where it was. In all our givenness, in all the phenomena that
we perceive, there is something that is determined and unequivocal,
something that goes its own way apart from our consciousness of it.

Above all, we have the conviction of absoluteness in our sense of
personal identity. We, that is our Ego, are something that endures, and
we can trace no beginning to our identity, and we have no intuition
that it will cease to exist. Our Ego is now the same Ego that it was
in the past, and round it something has accumulated--the memories of
our former perceptions, and the habits that these have engendered. Did
our Ego create this from itself? Was it not rather a centre of action
which, residing in an existence other than itself--the absolute which
we call the universe--modified that existence and continually acquired
new relationships to it?




