CHAPTER VIII

THE ORGANIC AND THE INORGANIC


It is convenient that we should express the results of biological
investigation in schemes of classification, for only in this way can
we reduce the apparent chaos of naturally occurring organic things
to order, and state our knowledge in such a way that it can easily
be communicated to others. But we must always remember that the
classifications of systematic biology are conceptual arrangements,
depending for their precise nature on the point of view taken by their
authors. The clear-cut distinctions that apparently separate phylum
from phylum, class from class, order from order, and so on, do not
really exist. There are no such categories of organisms in nature as
genera, families, and the higher groupings. All that we can say exist
naturally are the species, since all the organisms composing each
of these groups are related together by ties of blood-relationship,
and all are isolated from the organisms composing other species by
physiological dissimilarities which render the plants or animals of
one species infertile with those of any other. Such would doubtless
have been the opinion of most botanists and zoologists prior to the
work of de Vries, but we must now recognise that the systematic, or
Linnean, species of the nineteenth century was just as artificial a
category as were the genera and families. Our arrangements of plants
and animals into systematic species and the higher groupings are
therefore convenient ways of symbolising the results of morphological
and physiological investigations, although they also indicate the main
directions taken by the evolutionary process, but the manner in which
they are stated in taxonomic schemes is always a more or less formal
one.

There are no absolute distinctions between group and group, even
between the animals and the plants. There is nothing, for instance, in
the morphology of a Diatom to indicate that it belongs to the vegetable
kingdom, or in that of a Radiolarian, to indicate that it is an animal.
Peridinians are either plants or animals according to the general
argument, or the point of view of the author who writes about them.
Even a study of the energy-transformations that are effected in the
living substance of these lower organisms does not afford an absolute
distinction: synthetic metabolic processes in which energy passes
into the potential condition may be carried out in animals, while
many plants--the saprophytic fungi, or the insectivorous plants, for
instances--may effect analytic energy-transformations of essentially
the same nature as those exhibited in the typical mode of animal
metabolism. Motility and the possession of a sensori-motor system
do not afford the means of making a sharply drawn line of division
between plants and animals. Potential energy passes into the condition
of kinetic energy in the typical animal, and this kinetic energy is
directed by the sensori-motor system. But some lower unicellular
plants are motile, and they possess the rudiments of a sensori-motor
system in the flagella by which their movements are effected. On the
other hand, the sensori-motor system has become vestigial in many
animal parasites--in the Crustacean _Sacculina_, for instance, which
is parasitic on some Crabs. The possession of consciousness, in so
far as we can say that other animals than ourselves possess it, is no
distinction between the two kingdoms of life. Consciousness, judged
by the degree of development of motility, must be supposed to be
absent or very dim in the extreme cases of parasitism attained by some
animals; on the other hand, we may assume that it is present, to some
extent at least, in the highly motile zoospores of the Algæ. Thus some
lower organisms, the Peridinians and the algal spores, exhibit all the
characters which we utilise in separating animals from plants--the
chlorophyllian apparatus, by means of which the kinetic energy of solar
radiation becomes transformed into the potential energy of organic
chemical compounds; the apparatus of receptor and motile organs, by
means of which the potential energy of stored chemical compounds passes
into the kinetic energy of bodily movements; and the existence (so far
as we can say that it exists in organisms other than ourselves) of some
degree of consciousness.

Neither do those morphological schemata which we construct as
diagnostic of phyla, or classes, or orders, etc., separate these groups
from each other so clearly and unequivocally as our classifications
suggest. It might seem for instance that the presence or absence of
a notochord would sharply distinguish between the vertebrate and
invertebrate, but structures which suggest in their development the
true notochordal skeleton of the typical vertebrate animal are to be
traced in animals which exhibit few or none of the characters which
we regard as diagnostic of the Vertebrate. Typical Arthropods and
typical Vertebrates seem to be distinct from each other, but the
extinct Ostracoderms of Silurian times _may_ have been animals which
possessed an internal axial skeleton, and which were also armed
by a heavy dermal exo-skeleton. It is a hypothesis of considerable
plausibility that they really were Arthropods, on the other hand they
are usually regarded as Vertebrates. So also with most other phyla: the
morphological characters which absolutely distinguish between one group
and others are very few indeed, and the small appended groups that lie
about the bases of these larger groups may present one or other of the
characters of several phyla. Looking at the morphology of the animal
kingdom in a general kind of way, one does indeed see that a certain
structural plan is characteristic of the organisms belonging to each
of the great phyla, while more detailed structural plans may be said
to be characteristic of the sub-groups. But minute morphological and
embryological investigation reduces almost to nothing the characters
which are absolutely diagnostic of these various groups.

No more than the nature of the energy-transformations, and the
essential morphology, does the behaviour of animals afford us the
means of setting up absolute distinctions between group and group.
Really tropistic behaviour is exhibited by the movements of the stems,
roots, and leaves of green plants, or in the movements of Bacteria,
and perhaps some unicellular animals. Typically instinctive behaviour
is exhibited by the individuals of societies of Insects and by many
solitary-living animals belonging to this class; and typically
intelligent behaviour is exhibited by the acting of the higher
Mammalia. Yet there is undoubtedly much that is truly instinctive
in the behaviour of Man, and something of the same nature as his
intelligence seems to inhere in the instinctively-acting mammal
or insect: how else could an instinctive action become capable of
improvement? We cannot doubt that intelligence is manifested by
a dog or by much that we see in the behaviour of ants. No rigid
distinctions between tropisms, such as we have mentioned above, and
the reflexes that may be taken to constitute instinctive behaviour,
can be established. Minute analysis, such as that carried out by
Jennings on the swimming movements of the Protozoa, leaves us quite
in doubt as to how these modes of behaviour are most properly to be
described; and all the controversy as to the nature of tropisms,
reflexes, instinct, and intelligence surely indicates that these modes
of behaviour have something that is common to all of them, and that
no clear and certain distinction can be said to separate one from the
other. Even those psychic processes which we call intellectual do not
seem to be different in kind from some that we attribute to the lower
animals: the Protozoan _Paramœcium_ studied by Jennings, or the crabs,
crayfishes, and starfishes studied by Yerkes and others really _learn_
to perform actions, but this learning is said to be the result of a
process of “trial and error.” The animal tries one series of movements
and finds that it fails, tries another and another with a similar
result, and in the end finds one that is effective. This is remembered,
and when the same problem again confronts the animal it is solved
after fewer trials, and finally, after experience, the end-result is
attained at once without previous trials. Now many of what we call
truly intellectual processes are certainly processes of precisely this
nature. Hypothesis after hypothesis _occurs_ to the scientific man (or
to the detective, or to the engineer confronted with some exceptional
difficulty), and one after another is tested by actual trial, or by a
process of reasoning (which is really the rapid and formal resuming of
previous experience), until a hypothesis verifiable, or _a priori_
verifiable, is found. What, for instance, are our mathematical methods
of integrating a function, or working a long division sum, but methods
of scientific “guessing,” and verification of the hypotheses so made?
They are truly instances of the method of trial and error practised by
the lower animals.

All the above amounts to saying that there is a community of energetic
processes, of morphology, and of behaviour in animals and plants.
“Protoplasm” is the same, or much the same chemical aggregate, whether
it is contained in the cells of animals or plants. The cell, with
its nucleus, chromatic architecture, cell-inclusions, and cell-wall,
is essentially the same structure in all organisms. The complex and
specialised process of nuclear division in tissue growth, or the
series of events which constitute the acts of fertilisation of the
ovum or its plant correlative, are the same all through the organic
world. The sensori-motor system--receptor organ, nerve-fibre and
cell, and effector-motor organ--is the same all through the animal
kingdom. Alimentary canal and glands, enzymes, excretory tubules,
contractile blood-vascular apparatus--all these are structures which
are functionally the same, which are built on essentially the same
morphological plan. Life, whether it is the life of plant or animal,
makes use of the same material means of perpetuating itself on the
earth and avoiding the descent of matter towards complete inertia.

Absolute dissimilarities, dissimilarities such as those between atoms
of hydrogen and oxygen, or between a point and a straight line, or
between rest and motion, do not exist between the different categories
of entities that make up the organic world. Yet differences do exist,
and must we conclude that because these differences are not absolute
ones, because they are differences of degree, and not of kind, they
are not essential, are not differences at all? Must we say, for
instance, that although an animal is a much more efficient machine
than a gas-engine (in the sense of efficiency as understood by the
engineer), there is really no difference between them, that they are
both thermo-dynamic mechanisms, since in both energy is dissipated?
Ought we to say that, because the last steps in the formation of urea
in the animal body are synthetic ones, there is really no difference
between the nature of the energy-transformations that occur in the
animal and the plant modes of metabolism? Ought we to say that,
because a dog may sometimes act intelligently and a man instinctively,
psychically they are similarly-behaving organisms? Surely this amounts
to saying that, because things are not absolutely different, they are
the same; and surely the mode of reasoning is a vicious one!

What we clearly see in the different kinds of organisms--in
the metabolically constructive plant and the metabolically
destructive animal; or in the instinctively-acting Arthropod and
the intelligently-acting Mammal--is the progressive development of
different _tendencies_. If the green plant is, in its essence, the
same kind of physico-chemical constellation as is the animal, yet the
tendency of its evolution has been that more and more it has acquired
the habit, or the power, of using solar radiation to combine together
carbon dioxide, water, and nitrogenous inorganic salts to form proteid
and carbohydrate substances. On the other hand, the tendency of the
animal has been more and more to absorb into its own tissues the
proteid and carbohydrates synthesised by the green plant, and then to
break these substances down into carbon dioxide and water, and less and
less to effect such syntheses as are effected by the plant. Even if
the Annelid worm, the Arthropod, and the Vertebrate were, at the origin
of their ancestries, animals which were very like each other in the
morphological sense; even if there are some Arthropods which are very
like Annelids, and some Annelids which might very easily be imagined
to become transformed into Vertebrates, and some extinct Arthropods
which may after all have been Vertebrates, yet it is the case that the
tendencies of the evolution of each of these groups have been very
different. All the while the Vertebrate tended more and more to develop
a rigid axial rod or notochord, becoming later a jointed vertebral
column, and a soft, pliable, exo-skeleton; while the Arthropod tended
more and more to develop a rigid exo-skeleton, and to remain soft in
its axial parts. Even if these two tendencies may not have been fully
realised, is it not the case that they are really different things?
The evolutionary process has therefore been, in its essence, the
development, or unfolding, of tendencies originally one.

What is the evolutionary process? It is usually regarded as a progress
from organic simplicity towards organic complexity. Yet if we think
about it as a physical process we cannot say that any one stage is
any more simple or complex than any other stage. Let us compare
organic evolution with the process of inorganic evolution, as, of
course, we are compelled to do if we regard the former process as a
physico-chemical one. Assume, then, that the nebular hypothesis of Kant
and Laplace is true--it will make no difference to our argument even if
this hypothesis is not true, and it is more easily understood than any
other hypothesis of planetary evolution. Originally all the materials
composing our solar system existed in the form of a gaseous nebula
possessing a slow rotatory motion of its own. It does not matter that
the silicates, carbonates, oxides, and all other mineral substances
that we now know existed then in the form of chemical elements, or the
precursors of chemical elements: all the material bodies now present
in the solar system were present in the original nebula. The energy
of this nebula consisted of the potential energy represented by the
separation of atoms which later on became combined together, and of the
kinetic energy of motion of these atoms; and this material and energy,
together with the other cosmic bodies radiating energy to it and
those bodies receiving the energy which it lost by its own radiation,
constituted a system, in the sense of the term as it is employed by the
physicists. Now, in the process of cosmic evolution this system became
transformed, because it was continually losing energy by radiation. As
it cooled, the mean free paths of its atoms and molecules became less
and less, and finally condensation to the liquid and then to the solid
condition occurred. The parts of the nebula continually gravitated
together, so that it became smaller and smaller while its rotatory
motion became greater. Finally, mechanical strains became set up in
its mass as the consequence of the increased velocity of rotation, and
disruption occurred with the formation of the sun, the planets, and
the satellites. There was no increase of complexity of the system. At
any moment of time its elements, that is, the chemical atoms composing
it and the energy of these atoms, was the same as at any other moment
of time. Heat-energy may have been radiated from one part of the
system--the heated nebula--to some other part of the system--the other
cosmic bodies absorbing this radiation, but the total energy of the
system remained the same. The chemical atoms may have combined together
to form molecules and compounds, and their energy of position may
have become the energy of motion, but the ultimate materials were
still the same. What happened during the cooling and contraction of
the nebula was a rearrangement of the elements of the system, that is,
of the atoms and their energies. At any moment of time the condition
of the system was an inevitable consequence of the condition at the
moment immediately preceding this, and a strict functionality, in the
mathematical sense, existed between the two conditions. It was not
more complex in the later stage than in the earlier one--it was merely
different. Stages of evolution were really _phases_ in a transforming
system of matter and energies.

If we choose to regard organic evolution as a similar process of
physico-chemical transformation, we must also regard the totality of
life on our earth, with all the inorganic materials which interact with
organic things, and with all the energies, cosmic and terrestrial,
which also so interact, as a system in the physical sense. We are
now compelled to think about this system in the same way as we
thought about the cosmic one, that is, we must postulate that a rigid
mathematical functionality existed between any two conditions of it,
and that the latter condition was inevitably determined by the former
one. We must think of the system as at all times composed of the same
elements. In its later condition life may have been manifested in a
greater mass of material substance than in its earlier conditions, but
this increase of mass was only the increase of one part of the system
at the expense of another part. At all times, then, the constitution
of the system was the same, and different stages of the evolutionary
process have only been different phases, or arrangements, of the same
elements. At no time was the organic world any more or less complex
than at any other time. In its “primitive” condition _all was given_.

Mechanistic biology does not, of course, hesitate to accept this view
of the evolutionary process. The “Laplacian mind” must have been able
to calculate what would be the condition of the system at any phase,
knowing the positions of all the atoms or molecules in the original
nebula, and the velocities and directions of motions of all these atoms
or molecules. Just as (in Huxley’s illustration) a physicist is able to
calculate what will be the fate of a man’s breath on a frosty day, so
the Laplacian mind must have been able to predict the fauna and flora
of the world in the year 1913 from a complete knowledge of the material
nature and energetic properties of the nebula from which it arose.

We cannot fail to see, on reflection, to what this view of the nature
of the evolutionary process leads us. The primitive world-nebula was a
system of parts which had extension in space. Materially it consisted
of atoms isolated from each other by space, and energetically it
consisted of the movements of these atoms, and of the energy of their
positions with regard to each other. No two atoms could occupy the
same space--they mutually excluded each other: this is what we mean by
saying that the original--and every other--state of the system was a
state of material things or elements spatially extended. Therefore, if
the physical analogy is consistently to be retained, the organic system
undergoing evolution was a system of elements which at any moment
whatever were spatially extended. It was really a system of atoms or
molecules possessing kinetic energy of motion, or potential energy of
position--molecules which lay outside each other, and energies which
were really the movements or positions of these molecules, and which
therefore lay outside each other in the same sense.

The evolution of the individual organism must be a process of the
same kind. Like cosmic and phylogenetic evolution, it is apparently
a progress from the simple to the complex. A minute fragment of
protoplasmic matter, homogeneous in composition, or apparently so,
grows and differentiates, becoming the complex structure of the adult
organism. Here the system in the physical sense is the fertilised ovum,
the oxygen and nutritive matter which have become incorporated with
it, and the physical environment with which these things interact. All
these elements existed in that phase of the system which contained
among its parts the fertilised ovum, as well as in that phase which
contained the fully developed organism. Complex by comparison with
the fertilised ovum and its environment as the adult animal and its
environment may seem to be, it is only a different phase of the same
system. Further, all the parts that form the tissues of the adult, and
all their motions, are spatially extended, and are only rearrangements
of the molecules and of the motions of the molecules that were actually
present in the system in its initial phase. Speculation along these
lines has led to all the results of Weismannism. All the parts of
the adult organism are really present in the fertilised ovum and the
nutritive matter which is to build up the fully developed animal, not
in potentiality it must be noted, but actually present in the spatially
extended condition. It is true that the hypothesis only requires that
the determinants of the adult organs and tissues, and of the adult
qualities, should be present in the ovum; but since the energies
necessary for the separation of these determinants, and for their
arrangement and growth in mass, must also be present in the initial
phase of the system, it is evident that the hypothesis implies that
all the material structure of the animal is present in the spatially
extended form in the initial phase of the system. Just as the adult
animal is a manifoldness of material parts and energies that possess
extension, so also is the undifferentiated embryo and its material
environment an extensive manifoldness. We cannot otherwise conceive
it if we are to retain the mechanistic view of the development of the
individual organism.

Let us think of the process of organic evolution in another way by
comparing it with the mathematical process by which we form the
permutations and combinations of a number of different things.
Individual development is termed the assumption of a mosaic structure,
that is, all the parts of the adult are assumed to be present in
the embryo, but in a sort of “jumbled-up” condition. As development
proceeds, these parts become sorted out and arranged in a pattern which
continually becomes more and more distinct. Much the same process
of arrangement and segregation must be assumed to have occurred
during the process of racial evolution: the parts of the “primitive”
life-substance, with all the parts of the physical environment which
become incorporated with it during its evolution, must have become
segregated and arranged so as to form the existing species of plants
and animals. A permutation, then, of the separate things _a_, _b_,
_c_--_x_, _y_, _z_, is an arrangement of all these things: obviously
there are a very great number of ways in which the letters of the
alphabet may be arranged, 26! in all. But we may take some
of the letters and arrange them in different ways: the selections _a_,
_b_, _c_, _d_, can be arranged in 4! ways _b_, _c_, _d_, _e_, also in
4! ways, and so on. Thus by a process of dissociation and arrangement
of a certain number of elements, a very great number of different
things--things which consist of elements spatially extended--can be
obtained.

The group of things, _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_--_x_, _y_, _z_, was an
extensive manifoldness, since it was formed by juxtaposing in space the
separate units of which it is composed. Yet it is an unitary thing, for
it is a different thing from the group, _b_, _c_, _a_--_x_, _y_, _z_.
It is also a multiplicity, for it can be transformed into every one of
the 26! permutations, and broken up into the selections of some of the
separate things of which it is composed, and of the permutations of the
things taken in each of these selections. In a way these arrangements
exist in the group _a_, _b_, _c_--_x_, _y_, _z_, and yet the group
itself possesses no other actual extended existence than the group of
things that it is. It is an _intensive multiplicity or manifoldness_
in that the potentiality of all the arrangements exists in it but not
in the spatially extended condition. It is a multiplicity only when we
associate with it the mental operations by which we conceive of its
dissociation and rearrangement. By reason of these mental operations
the intensive multiplicity of the group becomes the extensive
multiplicity of its arrangements.

This appears to be the only really philosophical way in which we can
attempt to picture to ourselves the processes of individual and racial
evolution. The “primitive” life-substance, or the undifferentiated
ovum, each of them with its environment, was an intensive manifoldness,
a multiplicity of distinct things or qualities which co-existed, and
which were not separate each from other in that they occupied different
compartments of space, but which interpenetrated each other. This
notion of distinct things co-existing in time, yet occupying the same
space, is not at all a difficult one. Our consciousness is such a
multiplicity of states or qualities all in one. The idea of a group
of figures has a very real existence for the sculptor, and he may
visualise it with almost all the appearance of reality that the actual,
material piece of statuary possesses. In his mind it is a real manifold
existence, which nevertheless does not occupy the three-dimensional
space which the marble fills. The musical notes C, F, A, C, heard
in arpeggio, are things which possess real existence, but which are
extended in time, and when we think of these separate sounds we lay
them alongside each other in our mind in an empty, homogeneous medium
which seems to be all that we think of as space. Yet the same notes
heard simultaneously as a chord are not extended. They interpenetrate
each other, but yet they are distinct things, since on hearing the
chord we can recognise the notes composing it. As an arpeggio the notes
are an extensive manifoldness, but as a chord they are an intensive
manifoldness.

The mechanistic biology of the latter part of the nineteenth century
based itself on the methods and concepts of physics, and it was
therefore compelled to assume that the manifoldness of the “primitive”
life-substance--the “Biophoridæ” of Weismann and his followers--or that
of the fertilised ovum, was a manifoldness that had spatial extension.
All the systems studied by physics were aggregates of elements, or
parts, that had such extension: the sun, with its attendant planets and
satellites, was a system of bodies isolated from each other in space.
Even the atmosphere, or the sea, media which to our unaided senses
appear to be homogeneous, are really media consisting of discrete
bodies, or molecules, which are not actually in contact with each
other, but which are separated from each other by empty space. Chemical
compounds were assemblages of molecules, molecules were assemblages of
atoms, and the atoms themselves were either simple or were composed of
corpuscles, or still smaller bodies. This mode of analysis was forced
upon the human mind by formal logic and geometry, and it was apparently
the only method of acquiring mastery over nature. Yet there were
difficulties, appreciated no less by the philosophical physicists than
by the writers on formal philosophy. How could bodies, or molecules,
or atoms that were separated from each other act upon each other?
The molecule A could only act upon the molecule B if there were some
particles between them which could convey the impulse or attraction,
but then we must suppose that there were other particles between these
intermediate ones, and so on _ad infinitum_, otherwise how could a
body act, that is, really exist, where it was not? In other words,
how could there be action at a distance? How, for instance, could the
atoms of the earth attract those of the moon with a force sufficient
to break a steel rope of 400 miles in diameter? Physics had therefore
to invent the ether of space, not only to account for interstellar
or interplanetary gravitation and other modes of radiant energy, but
also to account for the interaction of the atoms or molecules which
make up chemical compounds. In our own day atoms have ceased to be the
limits to the subdivision of things: they are composed of electrons,
but the electrons are entities separated from each other by empty
space. They are not, however, the ultimate limits of subdivision of
matter, as the atoms were supposed to be by the chemistry of the early
part of the last century, but are regarded as “singularities” in an
universal continuous medium or ether. It is of no moment that we are
unable to describe the ether in terms of our former concepts of matter
and energy, or at least that we can only so describe it in such a
way that it is represented by negative qualities: we are compelled to
postulate its existence in order to avoid philosophical confusion. The
universe is therefore a continuum, and an atom or any other body exists
wherever it can act. The atoms of a fixed star, so far away that we
can only represent its distance in billions of miles, are nevertheless
on our earth as well as at the point of space which we regard as their
astronomical position, for the light emitted by them acts on our
retinas. The universe is an unitary thing in that it is a continuous
medium or substance in the philosophic sense, but it is also a
multiplicity in that singularities or conditions of this medium pervade
each other throughout space. Such seem to be the conclusions towards
which the later physics forces us, and it is interesting to reflect how
different biological speculation might have been had it been formulated
now instead of half a century ago!

Why has a process of evolution occurred at all? Why is it that
tendencies that might have co-existed, that indeed do co-exist to
some extent, have become separate from each other? It is possible
to conceive of an organism which contains chlorophyll, and which
might therefore synthesise carbohydrate and proteid from inorganic
substances, but which might also contain a sensori-motor system, and
which might therefore expend the energy so obtained in regulated
movements. To a certain extent such organisms combining the plant
and animal modes of metabolism do exist among the Protista. Yet, the
effect of the evolutionary process has been more and more to dissociate
the plant and animal modes of metabolism until the typical animal is
quite unable to make use of carbon dioxide and water as materials to
be synthesised, while the typical plant has lost all power of motion
except the tropistic movements of its roots, leaves, and stems.
Instinctive and intelligent behaviour coexist in many animals, yet
the tendency of man, most highly intelligent of all, is more and more
to act intellectually; while the opposing tendency, that is, to act
instinctively, has been evolved in the Hymenoptera. It seems as if
such contrasting methods of transforming energy, or of acting, were
incompatible with each other, and yet it is clear that they are not
really incompatible, for they may co-exist. But it does seem clear
that each of these contrasting tendencies cannot be manifested to the
fullest extent if it is accompanied by the other. That is to say,
life is limited in its power over inert matter. Manifested in the
same material constellation, it cannot both use solar radiation to
build up substances of high potential energy and then break down these
substances so as to obtain kinetic energy of movement. Now we see
clearly that life on our earth is indeed limited to a very restricted
range of physical conditions. When we think of the mass of the earth we
are surprised to find what an insignificant fraction of all this matter
displays vital phenomena. The surface of the land is clothed with a
layer of vegetation, luxuriant and abundant as we see it when we walk
through a tropical forest, but which is really a film of inconceivable
tenuity when we compare its thickness with the diameter of the globe.
Even the whole surface of the land is not so clothed with vegetation,
for polar regions and the tops of high mountains are almost lifeless,
while desert tracts may be absolutely so. The lower strata of the
atmosphere are inhabited by birds, insects, and bacteria, but the total
mass of these is infinitesimal when compared with the total mass of
the gases of which the atmosphere is composed. Even the sea, which we
regard as rich in life, is not really so: estimates of the luxuriance
of planktonic life are really misleading, for although a single drop
of water may contain some hundreds of organisms, the mass of these is
exceedingly small and is usually expressed as one or two parts per
million. All this means that life has difficulty in manifesting itself
in material forms. Whether it be simply a mode of interaction of some
complex chemical substances with a relatively simple physico-chemical
environment--the mechanistic view--or whether it be an impetus or
agency which is neither physical nor chemical, but which acts through
physical and chemical elements--the vitalistic view,--life is capable
of acting on terrestrial materials to a very limited extent. Acting
through all the tendencies which we see to exist in it, life may be, so
to speak, diluted; but by being concentrated in one or a few of them it
becomes more effective. The dissociation of this bundle of tendencies
which we call life is therefore the meaning of the evolutionary process.

Ontogenetic development, says Roux, is the production of a _visible_
manifoldness. It cannot be said that this cautious description of the
developmental process has been apprehended by those who expound the
dogmas of mechanistic biology. Development is indeed the production
of a diversity, but this diversity is only a phase of a preceding
diversity, a rearrangement of spatially extended pre-existing elements.
How else could the developing embryo and its material environment be
regarded as a system of physico-chemical elements, capable of study
by the methods of experimental and mathematical physics, except by
regarding it as a system passing through phases each of which is a
necessary consequence of the preceding one, and each of which contained
the same elements separated from each other in space? Let us think
of water occupying a vessel at a high temperature and continually
cooling. The states of this system are (1) the gaseous state in
which the molecules of the water are moving at a high velocity and
are a relatively considerable distance apart, and in which they are
incessantly colliding with each other and with the walls of the vessel;
(2) the state of the system consisting of the separate phases, liquid
water and gaseous steam in contact with it; and (3) the solid phase, in
which the molecular motions almost, or quite, cease. Here the progress
of the system through its phases leads to physical diversity and then
again to physical homogeneity. But the diversity of the different
phases is in a sense an apparent one only: any single phase, or at
least those which involve the passage of the system from the gaseous
to the liquid phases, and _vice versa_, can be represented by van der
Waal’s general equation, RT = (_p_ + _a_/_v_^2) (_v_ - _b_). Does
anything in modern biological investigation, except, of course, the
speculations of non-physical physiologists, suggest that an ontogenetic
process can be represented in such a manner?

Are the arbitrary “stages” of the embryologists--the ovum, blastula,
gastrula, etc., phases in a system in the above sense, the only sense
in which the process can be regarded as capable of physico-chemical
analysis? What precisely is the embryo at the close of the process of
segmentation? It is an harmonious equipotential system, that is to say,
an assemblage of discrete organic parts or cells, each of which has all
the potentialities that every one of the others has. _Any_ cell in the
blastula may become a cell, or a series of such, in _any_ part of the
gastrula or pluteus larva. This is what the parts are in potentiality,
but actually their individual fates are different. The system is an
harmonious one, and each of its parts, although able to do whatever
any other part can do, yet does one thing only: it becomes an endoderm
cell, or an ectodermal cell, or a part of the skeleton, and so on; what
it does depends on its position with regard to the other cells. An
extensive manifoldness or diversity is produced, but this was not the
consequence of a preceding extensive manifoldness, for in the preceding
stage _all the parts of the system were the same_. The manifoldness of
the ovum or blastula--that potential manifoldness which became actual
in development--must be an intensive manifoldness, and admitting this
we must abandon the comparison of the ontogenetic (and, of course,
phylogenetic) processes with the phases of a physico-chemical system
in process of transformation. _Evolution is the transformation of an
intensive into an extensive manifoldness._

More than this--much more than this--must be the difference between the
transforming systems of physics and the evolving systems of biology.
There is a quality, or sense, or direction in all naturally occurring
inorganic processes which is not like that of organic evolutionary
processes. We return now to the consideration of the second law of
thermodynamics, for only in this way can we approach the notion of
the vital impetus. If an energy-transformation occurs in inorganic
nature, that is to say, if anything happens, the transformation occurs
or the thing happens because there were diversities in the system in
which it occurred. The condition for inorganic happening is that there
must have been differences of energy in the different parts of the
system: in the most general sense there must have been diversity of
the elements. But with the transformation this diversity disappears,
or tends to disappear, and it cannot be restored--that is, differences
of energy cannot again be established unless by a compensatory
energy-transformation; that is, energy must be expended on the system
from without by some external agency. Whatever else physics shows
us it shows us an unitary universe, that is, an universe in which
anything that happens affects, to some extent, all the other parts.
Therefore the diminution of diversities, or energy-differences, is
something that cannot be undone, or compensated, for there is nothing
without the universe.[32] Everything that happens in our universe
reduces the possibility of further happening. We desire, at the risk
of reiteration, that this principle of energetics should be perfectly
clear: inorganic happening, of whatever kind it may be, is a case or
consequence of the second law of energetics--_is_ the second law itself
in a sense. All energy-transformations occur because energy-differences
are being diminished, because diversities are being abolished. This is
the sense, or quality, or direction of inorganic phenomena.

[32] It is assumed that the universe is a finite one. If it were
infinite the whole discussion becomes meaningless, and we must _give
up_ this and other problems.

It is not the direction of organic evolution. In the development of
the individual organism what we most clearly see is the progressive
increase of diversity of the parts. In phylogenetic evolution one,
or a few, simple morphological forms of life have become, and are
becoming, indefinitely numerous morphological forms. Diversity is
continually increasing. If we cling to the mechanistic view of life,
we must suppose that the diversity of the fully developed organism, or
that of the organic world with all its species, was also the diversity
of the fertilised ovum or that of the primitive life-substance in
another phase. Then we commit ourselves to all the crudities of modern
speculations on heredity.

With this increasing diversity of form there is a concomitant
segregation of energy. We see as clearly as possible that the tendency
of all inorganic happening is the transformation of potential into
kinetic energy, and the equal distribution of this kinetic energy
throughout all the parts of the system in which the happening
occurred. On the other hand, the tendency of organic happening is the
transformation of kinetic energy into potential energy, (1) in the
stores of chemical compounds which result from the metabolism of the
green plants, and which are capable of yielding energy again; and (2)
in the results of the instinctive or intelligent activities of the
animal’s organism. The first result of organic evolution is clearly
to be traced and needs no further explanation, the second is apparent
on reflection, but is perhaps not clearly apprehended in all its
significance by the student of biology and physics.

Organic evolution is the process which has had, or is having, for its
tendency the development of the putrefactive and fermentation bacteria,
the chlorophyllian organisms, the Arthropods, and man and other
mammals. All that we have said has been futile if this teleological
description of the evolutionary process has not been clearly suggested.
The indefinitely numerous forms of life that have appeared on the
earth in the past, and are now appearing, seem to be experiments most
of which have been unsuccessful. Only in the organisms mentioned,
organisms which are complementary in their metabolic activities,
has life been successful in manifesting itself in activities which
are compensatory to those of inorganic nature. The energy which is
dissipated in the radiation of the cooling sun is again made potential
in the form of the carbohydrates, synthesised from water and carbon
dioxide by the agency of the chlorophyllian organisms, and this energy
accumulates. It is employed by the instinctive and intelligent animal,
in that it is used as food and converted into bodily energy, which can
then be utilised for any purpose that is contemplated. These plant
substances taken in by the animal as sources of energy are broken
down into excretory substances, which are further broken down by the
metabolic activity of the fermentation and putrefaction bacteria, and
become the substances used as foods by the chlorophyllian organisms.

If the activities of man were only those of undirected or misapplied
muscular movements (as indeed most of his activities have so far been),
then cosmic energy would truly be dissipated after it had become the
energy of organisms. But does not all the history of man point to his
ever-increasing activity in the conquest over nature, that is, the
effort to hoard and employ natural sources of energy, and to arrest its
tendency towards dissipation?

It must be admitted that the past history of human civilisation
has been almost entirely that of the irresponsible exploitation of
natural resources--for it has been founded on the thoughtless and
wasteful utilisation of energy which was made potential by the plant
and animal organisms of the past. Man, the hunter, maintained himself
and multiplied by the destruction of other animals or plants, or by
the mere collection and utilisation of naturally occurring fruits and
other plant-substances. During historic times the bison and other
animals have almost become extinct owing to his ruthless activity,
just as in our own days the whale, sole, and turbot are disappearing
before the activity of the machine-aided fisherman. Industrial man has
been successful with his factories and railroads and steamships, and
his electrical power and transport, only because he has been able to
utilise the stores of energy contained in the coal and oil accumulated
in the rocks of the earth. The progress of civilisation has been a
progress rendered possible by discovery and invention, and by the
application of the knowledge so obtained to the practical things of
human life, but in this speculation and its application two different
things are indicated. For the scientific man and the philosopher the
reduction of the apparent chaos of nature to law and regularity is
the beginning and end of his mental activity; but the object of the
“entrepreneur” or “organiser” or the “captain of industry” has been
to employ these results of thought to the irresponsible exploitation
and the selfish depletion of natural sources of energy. Just as the
bison and other animals have disappeared or are disappearing before the
hunter and fisherman, so the stores of coal and oil are disappearing
before the activities of commerce. It has been said that the triumphs
of industrialism are only the triumphs of the scientific childhood
of our race. Human effort has so far only contributed to the general
dissipation of natural energy.

Yet just as man, the hunter, has been succeeded by man, the
agriculturalist, so this irresponsible depletion of natural wealth
must be succeeded by the endeavour to retard, and not to accelerate,
the degradation of energy. Plants and animals which were simply killed
by primitive man are now sown and harvested, or cultivated and bred;
so that the energy of solar radiation, which formerly ran to waste,
so to speak, is now being fixed by the metabolic activity of the
green plants of our crops and harvests. Rainfall and winds, tides and
rivers, all represent energy primarily derived from solar radiation
and from the orbital and rotatory motions of the earth and moon. This
energy even now is almost entirely dissipated as waste, irrecoverable,
low-temperature heat; but more and more as our stores of coal and
oil are being depleted, the attention of men is being directed to
these sources of kinetic energy. Waterwheels and windmills, and the
more effective mechanisms that must be evolved from these primitive
motors, will capture this waste energy and convert it into the kinetic
energy of machines serviceable to man, or into the potential energy of
chemical compounds capable of storage and future utilisation. The study
of radio-activity has made us acquainted with the enormous stores of
potential energy locked up in the atoms, and if it ever should become
possible to utilise this by the disintegration of these particles, the
downward trend of natural energetic processes will further be retarded.

Life, when we regard it from the point of view of energetics, appears
therefore as a tendency which is opposed to that which we see to be
characteristic of inorganic processes. The direction of the latter
is towards the conversion of potential into kinetic energy, and the
equal distribution of the latter throughout all the parts of the
universe. The direction of the tendency which we call life is towards
the conversion of kinetic into potential energy, or towards the
establishment and maintenance of differences of kinetic energy, whereby
the latter remains available for the performance of work. In general
terms, the effect of the movement which we call inorganic is towards
the abolition of diversities, while that which we call life is towards
the maintenance of diversities. They are movements which are opposite
in their direction.

What is cosmic evolution? In all the hypotheses which astronomical
physics has imagined we see the transformation of a system--a part of
the universe arbitrarily detached from all the rest--through a series
of stages, each phase of the series being marked by a progressive
decrease of diversity, that is, by some degradation of energy. Two
main series of hypotheses accounting for the present condition of the
universe seem to have been the result of physical investigation: (1)
the origin of discrete solar and planetary bodies by a process of
condensation of a gaseous nebular substance; and (2) the origin of
the same systems by aggregations of meteoric dust. Plausible as is
the nebular hypothesis on first consideration, it fails when it is
subjected to minute analysis. What is a gaseous nebula? It is a mass
of heated vapour contracting by the mutual gravity of its parts as its
molecules lose their heat by radiation--so the hypothesis states. But
it has been pointed out that we cannot be certain that the gaseous
nebulæ known to astronomy are hot, or even that they gravitate. The
great nebula in Orion, it is stated, is at an enormous distance from
us, and making a minimal estimate of this distance the volume of the
nebula must still be incredibly great. There are good reasons for
believing that the mass of the visible universe cannot be greater than
that of a thousand million of suns such as our own. Assuming that all
this matter is contained in the great nebula in Orion (and obviously
only a small portion of it can be so contained), we find on calculation
that the “gas” so formed would be much less dense than even the trace
of gas contained in a high vacuum artificially produced.[33] How, then,
can we speak of such a body as this nebula as an extended mass of hot
gas, cooling and gravitating as it loses heat?

[33] Its density would be 1/(58 × 10^8)th that of our atmosphere.

Even on the other hypotheses, those of the formation of discrete
suns and planets by the aggregation of meteoric dust, and the
compensatory dispersal of such dust by radiation pressure, apparently
insurmountable difficulties arise. All such hypotheses as we have
indicated assume material substance and modes of energy-transformation
similar to those that we study in laboratory processes, and all such
hypotheses involve the notion of the degradation of energy. So long as
we suppose that all cosmic processes are transformations of extended
systems of material substances we must assume that energy is dissipated
at every stage of the transformation, and whenever we assume this we
admit that the processes are irreversible ones, and that the material
universe as a whole tends towards a condition of inertia. Yet this,
we see, cannot be true, for the universe teems with diversity. Is the
progress towards the ultimate state of inertia an asymptotic one, as
Ward suggests? This does not help us, since all that the suggestion
does is to misapply a mathematical device of service only in the
treatment of the problems for which it was developed. Somewhere or
other, it has been said, the second law of thermodynamics _must_ be
evaded in our universe.

How can it be evaded? That movement or progress which we call inorganic
is a movement of energy-transformations in one direction--towards their
cessation. It is a movement which we can easily reverse in imagination.
A cigarette consumed by a smoker represents the downfall of energy:
the cellulose and oils of the tobacco burn with the liberation of
heat, and the formation of water, carbon dioxide, and some soot; and
this is what happens when potential energy contained in an organised
substance becomes converted into kinetic energy. Now, the opposite
process can clearly be conceived--it can even be pictured. If we make a
kinematographic record of the smoking of the cigarette and then reverse
the direction of motion of the film, we shall see the particles of
soot recombining to form the substance of the cigarette, and we can
imagine the concomitant combination of the water, carbon dioxide, and
other substances formed during the combustion with the absorption of
kinetic energy. This is not a mere analogy, for the same reversal of
ordinary chemical happening occurs whenever a green plant builds up
starch from the water and carbon dioxide of the atmosphere and it
also occurs whenever a chemical synthesis of an “organic” compound,
like that of urea by Wöhler, or that of the sugars by Fischer, is
brought about in the laboratory. In all such syntheses the experimenter
_reverses_ the direction of inorganic chemical happening. He may
cause endothermic chemical reactions, reactions accompanied by the
absorption of available energy, to take place, and in these kinetic
energy becomes transformed into potential energy. All the syntheses of
organic compounds so complacently instanced by mechanistic biologists
and chemists as indicative of the lack of distinction between the
organic and the inorganic point to no such conclusion. Sugar is built
up in the cells of the green plant from the inorganic compounds,
water, and carbon dioxide, and is therefore a compound prepared by
life--that of the plant organism. But sugar may also be built up in
the laboratory from inorganic compounds, which may further have been
synthesised by the chemist from their elements. Does this destroy the
distinction between compounds formed by the agency of the organism and
those formed by inorganic agencies? Obviously it does not, for in the
green plant the sugar was formed as the result of the vital agency of
the living chlorophyllian cell, while in the laboratory it was built
up because of the intelligence of the experimenter. Apart from this
intelligence or vital agency, the series of chemical transformations
beginning with the elements carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, and ending
with the substance sugar, would not have occurred. We have no right to
say, therefore, that such syntheses destroy the distinction between the
organic and the inorganic. What they do indicate is the distinction
between the tendency expressed by the second law of thermo-dynamics
(inorganic processes), and those that occur as the result of direction
conferred upon processes taken as a whole, either by the vital agency
of the living cell, or by the intelligence of man (vital processes).

The direction, therefore, that may be conferred on a series of
physico-chemical processes is what we must understand by the “vital
impetus” of Bergson, or the “entelechy” of Driesch.

It must be admitted that it is difficult to describe more precisely
than we have done above what is meant by these terms. It is with very
much the same embarrassment that is experienced by the physicist
when he has to apply the concepts of mass and inertia, in their
eighteenth-century meaning, to his description of an universe in terms
of electro-magnetic theory, that we seek to describe the modern concept
of entelechy. Yet the physicist has had to make this step forward,
and the same adventure awaits the biologist if the speculative side
of his science is to make further progress, and if he is disinclined
to make his science an appendage of physics and chemistry. Entelechy
does not correspond to the eighteenth-century notion of a “vital
force,” or to the “soul” of Descartes, as the writer of a book on
evolutionary biology seems to suggest. It is a concept which is forced
upon us mainly because of the failure of mechanistic hypotheses of the
organism. If our physical analysis of the behaviour of the developing
embryo, or the evolving race or stock, or the activities of the
organism in the midst of an ever-changing environment, or even the
reactions of the functioning gland, fail, then we seem to be forced
to postulate an elemental agency in nature manifesting itself in the
phenomena of the organism, but not in those of inorganic nature. This
argument _per ignorantium_ possesses little force to many minds: it
makes little appeal to the thinker, or the critic, or the general
reader, but it is almost impossible to over-estimate the appeal which
it makes to the investigator, as his experience of the phenomena of the
organism increases, and as he feels more and more the difficulty of
describing in terms of the concepts of physics the activities of the
living animal.

We may, however, attempt to illustrate mainly by analogy what is
meant by Driesch’s _entelechia_, a more precise concept than is
Bergson’s _élan vital_. We return to the consideration of the behaviour
of the embryo at the close of the process of segmentation. The
organism at this stage consists of a number of cells organically in
continuity with each other, either by actual protoplasmic filaments
or by the apposition of parts of their surfaces, thus constituting
“semi-permeable” membranes. These cells are all similar to each
other, both structurally and functionally. It does not matter that
modern speculations on heredity describe them as unlike in that each
contains a different part of the original germ-plasm which had been
disintegrated in the process of the division of the ovum and the first
few blastomeres; and it does not matter that these hypotheses are
compelled to assume that a part of the original germ-plasm remains
intact, being destined to form the gonads of the adult animal. These
are hypotheses invented to account for the differentiation of the
embryo in terms of eighteenth-century physics and chemistry, and they
have yet to be supported by experiment before we can accept them as a
_description_ of what is to be observed in the processes of nuclear
division and segmentation. Further, it is certainly the case that any
one cell of the early embryo can give rise to any part of the larva.
The segmented embryo is therefore a system of parts, all of which are
potentially similar to each other. But actually each of these parts
has a different fate in the process of the development of the larva,
and this fate depends on what is the fate of the adjacent cells. There
is also a plan or design in the development of the embryo--that is,
a very definite structure results from this process--and each of the
cells shares in the evolution of this design. The system of cells is
therefore an harmonious equipotential system. The cells themselves are
not the ultimate parts of this system, for each of them is an aggregate
of a very great number of substances which are physico-chemically
characterised--at least our methods of analysis seem to show that each
cell is a mixture of a number of chemical compounds, but we must never
forget that it is the dead cell which we thus subject to analysis, and
not a living organism. Let us call these supposed chemical constituents
of the living cells the elements of the system; then at the beginning
of the process of development the latter is composed of elements
which are not definitely arranged but which are distributed in an
“homogeneous” manner very like the distribution which is effected
on shuffling a pack of cards. But as differentiation proceeds, the
elements of this system become unequally distributed, and the diversity
becomes greater and greater, attaining its maximum when the definitive
tissues and organs of the adult become established, just as at the
close of a game of bridge the cards acquire a particular arrangement
indicative of a very definite plan which was present in the minds of
the players shortly after the game began.

Mechanistic biology would seek to explain this transformation of a
homogeneous system of elements into a heterogeneous and specific
arrangement by the interaction of the elements with each other, and by
the reaction of the environment. But, given a homogeneous arrangement
of elements capable of interacting with each other, then only one final
phase can be supposed to be produced. A mixture of sulphur, carbon
dust, copper and iron filings raised suddenly to a high temperature
will only interact in one way, and the final phase of the system will
depend on the composition of the mixture, on the temperature, and
on the conduction of heat into the mixture in the initial stage of
heating. A mixture of chloroform and water shaken up in a bottle is at
first a “homogeneous” mixture of the particles of the two substances,
but under the influence of gravity the liquids separate from each other
and form two distinct layers, each of which will contain in solution
some of the other liquid. A homogeneous mixture of different substances
therefore becomes a heterogeneous arrangement in the inorganic system,
as in the organic one, but while we can predict the former one we
cannot predict the latter. We can express the result of the combination
of the elements of the inorganic mixture as something that depends
on chemical and physical potentials, but this is quite impossible
in the case of the development of the embryonic system. It is not
only that our knowledge of the developmental process is imperfect:
the distinction between the two processes of differentiation is a
fundamental one. A change in the conditions under which the inorganic
system differentiates leads of necessity to a different final phase,
but a change in the conditions under which the embryo develops need
have no such effect. If some unforeseen occurrence takes place--some
artificial interference with the process of segmentation, which could
never have been experienced in the racial history of the organism--a
_regulation_ by the parts of the embryo occurs, and the final phase of
development may be the same as if no interference had been experienced.
That which is operating in the development of the embryo is something
that is permitting, or suspending, or arranging physico-chemical
reactions.

Let us think of the developing embryo merely as an aggregation of
substances contained in an inorganic medium: the segmented frog’s egg
floating on the water at the surface of a pond is an example. As an
inorganic system its fate is determined. Autolysis of the substances
in the cells will occur and the proteids will break down with the
formation of amido-bodies, while other chemical changes, strictly
predictable if our knowledge of organic chemistry were more complete
than it is, would also occur. Putrefactive and fermentative bacteria
will attack the proteids, fats, and carbohydrates, and in the end our
aggregation of chemical substances will become an aggregation of much
simpler compounds--water, carbon dioxide, marsh gas, sulphuretted
hydrogen, phosphoretted hydrogen, ammonia, nitrates, etc., all of
which will dissolve in the water of the pond, or will diffuse into
the adjacent atmosphere. But in the living embryo this is not what
occurs: an entirely different, and much more complex, arrangement of
the chemical substances originally present in the segmented egg, or
at least a physical and chemical re-arrangement, is brought about.
The entelechy of the developing embryo prevents some reactions from
occurring and directs the energy which is potential in the system
towards the performance of other reactions.

Two analogies, suggested by Driesch, will perhaps make the rôle of
entelechy more clear. A workman, a heap of bricks, some mortar, some
food, and some oxygen constitute a system in the physico-chemical
sense. From his heap of bricks and mortar the workman may build one of
several different kinds of small house, or he may perhaps construct
several walls without any definite arrangement, or he may merely
convert one “disorderly” heap of bricks and mortar into another
“disorderly” heap. In the same way a man, a case of movable types, some
food, and some oxygen constitute another system. The initial phase of
this system consists of the compositor, his food, and some fifty-odd
boxes of types, each of which contains a large number of similar
elements. A final phase of the system may be the arrangement of the
types to form an epic poem, or a series of dramatic criticisms, or a
meaningless jumble of correctly spelt words. In all these cases the
same amount of energy was expended: the bricklayer used up the same
quantity of food and oxygen and excreted the same quantities of water,
carbon dioxide, and urea, whether he made a house, or a small chimney,
or a heap of bricks without architectural arrangement. The system of
bricks and mortar acquired during the process of differentiation a
gradually increasing complexity; while in the case of the type-setting
the diversity of arrangement acquired in the final phases may be of a
very high order. Yet the intelligent mind of the worker remained in
either case unchanged.

Let us consider further a man walking along the ties, or sleepers, of
a railway track. The ties are at variable distances apart, so that
the steps of the walker must vary in length, being sometimes closer
together, sometimes further apart. The _mean_ step has a definite
length and requires the expenditure of a certain amount of energy, and
the condition that the man takes sometimes a long step and sometimes
a short one does not require that the energy expended on the steps
should be more than if every one of them were of the mean length, for
the additional energy that is required for the long steps is saved from
the short ones. That which operates here is the power of regulation
exercised by the walker regarded as a mechanism. There is no purely
inorganic process precisely similar to this. It might be thought that
the governor of a steam engine did very much the same thing, admitting
more steam into the cylinder when the load on the engine increases,
and _vice versa_. But the governor is a mechanism _designed_ to
compensate for variations _that are given in advance_. In the case of
the man walking on the railway track, entelechy operates by suspending
energetic happening (the muscular contractions of the short steps) when
necessary, and allowing it to proceed when necessary. Entelechy itself,
whatever it may be, need not be affected by these regulations.

The organism is therefore an aggregation of chemical substances
arranged in a typical manner. These substances possess energy in the
potential form, capable of undergoing transformation so that they may
give rise to other chemical substances--secretions, for instance--or
to energy in the kinetic form, that is, the movements of muscles. In
the resting organism these transformations do not take place: the
energy remains potential, so that chemical happening is suspended. In
the unfertilised ovum, for instance, nothing happens although all the
potentialities of segmentation are contained in the cell. If reactions
did occur in consequence of the chemical potentials contained in the
substances of the cells, the progress of these would be such as to lead
to the formation of substances in which potential energy was minimal,
and in which the original energy of the cell would be represented by
the un-co-ordinated kinetic energy of the molecules resulting from the
breakdown of the substances undergoing the chemical changes. This is
not what happens in the differentiation of the ovum: the developing
cell forms new substances from those of its inorganic medium similar
to the substances of which it is already composed, and then these
substances become arranged to produce the specific form of the organism
into which the ovum is about to develop.

All hypotheses which attempt to describe the functioning of the
differentiating ovum, or the functioning organism, in terms of the
physical concepts of matter and energy alone, fail on being subjected
to close analysis. The manifestations of the life of the organism are,
it is said, particular “energy-forms,” of the same order as light,
heat, chemical and electrical energy, etc. All these energy-forms
are “concatenated,” that is, each can be converted into any of the
others. A particular frequency of the vibration of the ether can be
converted into a movement of the molecules of a material body, and so
become heat, while chemical energy may become converted into electrical
energy, or _vice versa_, and so on. It is said that life may be merely
a transformation of some “energy-form” known to us: the potential
energy of food may be converted into “biotic energy,” and this may
then manifest itself in the characteristic behaviour of the organism.
This is the method of physical science. Energy continually disappears
from our knowledge: the mechanical energy which was employed to carry
a weight to the top of a hill, or that which raises a pendulum to the
highest point of its swing, apparently disappears. If we pass a current
of electricity through water, energy disappears, for it requires more
current to pass through water than through a piece of metal of the
same section. In these and similar cases physics invents potential
energies in order to preserve the validity of the law of conservation.
The kinetic energy of the weight, or that of the swinging pendulum,
becomes the potential energy of the weight resting at the top of
the hill, or that of the bob of the pendulum at its highest point,
while the electrical energy that has apparently been lost becomes the
potential energy of the changed positions of the molecules of oxygen
and hydrogen. This assumption that the visible kinetic energy of motion
becomes converted into the invisible potential energy of position
is justified by our experience, for (neglecting dissipation) we can
recover this lost energy, in its original quantity, from the condition
of the bodies which became changed physically when the kinetic energy
disappeared. Apply the same method to the phenomena of the organism and
suppose that the chemical potential energy of the food consumed becomes
converted into the kinetic energy of motion of the parts of the body:
we are justified in this assumption by the results of physiology. But
then some of this chemical energy undergoes a transformation of quite
another kind and becomes the “biotic energy,” which is apparently that
which is in us which enables us to perform regulations, or establishes
that condition which we call consciousness. We cannot say exactly what
this “biotic energy” is, or what are the steps by which the energy
of food becomes converted into it; but no more can we say what is
electrical energy, nor what are the steps by which chemical energy
becomes converted into it. Thus our ignorance of the precise nature
of the energy-transformations of inorganic things--an ignorance which
is all the while disappearing--becomes the excuse for a comparison of
these with vital transformations, and for the assumption that there is
a fundamental similarity in the two kinds of happening.

Less is assumed in the assumption of an entelechian agency than in
assuming that the manifestations of life are the consequences of a
vital “energy-form,” different from inorganic forms, though belonging
to the same order, inasmuch as it may be concatenated with these
inorganic energy-forms. We need not suppose that a particular kind of
transformation occurs only in the sphere of the organic: all that we
need assume is that, by some agency inherent in the activities of the
organism, chemical reactions that would occur if the constellation
of parts were an inorganic one are suspended. Nothing unfamiliar to
physical science is involved in this assumption. Hydrogen and chlorine,
gases that combine together when mixed with the production of heat and
light, may be mixed under conditions such that the combination may be
delayed for an indefinite time. Iron which dissolves in nitric acid
may nevertheless be brought into the “passive” form when it remains in
contact with the re-agent but is not dissolved by it. Enzymes which
are in contact with the walls of the alimentary canal do not dissolve
these membranes so long as the tissues are alive, and they do not
dissolve the food stuff until they have been “activated.” Oxygen which
is contained in the tissues does not oxidise the tissue substances
until an enzyme or a catalase has exerted its influence. More and more,
as physiology has become more searching in its study of the functions
of the animal, has it sought to explain the metabolic processes
by assuming the intervention of enzymes, until the number of these
substances has become legion, and much of the original simplicity of
the notion of ferment-activity has been lost. But why do not these
enzymes, if they are always present in the tissues, always act? They
must be activated, says modern physiology; that is, the enzyme really
exists in the tissues as a “zymogen” or a substance which is not, but
which may become, an enzyme; or they exist as “zymoids,” that is,
substances which appear to be chemically enzymes, but which must be
activated by “kinases” before they can become functional.

Undoubtedly it is along these lines that physiology is making advances,
has increased our knowledge of the _activities_ of the animal, and is
conferring on the physician greater power of combating disease; but
the hypotheses of the activity of the enzymes is obviously one which
has been based on the results of the physico-chemical investigation
of inorganic reactions, and it has taken the precise form it has
because of the attempted analogy of many metabolic processes with
catalytic processes. Why do the inert zymoids become activated by the
kinases just when they are required by the general economy of the
whole organism? We do know that kinases are produced by the entrance
of digested food into certain parts of the alimentary canal, and that
these kinases are carried in the blood stream to other parts where
they activate the zymoids already there. But of the nature of the
machinery by means of which all this is effected physiology gives us no
hint, and it is an assumption that the mechanism involved is a purely
physico-chemical one. Suppose we say that the entelechy of the organism
possesses the power of suspending the activation of the enzyme, that
is to say, of arresting the drop of chemical potential involved in the
process of the hydrolysis of (say) a proteid. When this process of
hydrolysis is necessary in the interest of the organism entelechy can
then institute the reaction which it has itself suspended: all this
is in accord with the law of conservation. Entelechy does not cause
chemical reactions to occur which are “impossible”: it could not, for
instance, cause sulphuric acid and an alkaline phosphate to react with
the formation of hydrochloric acid. But chemical reactions which are
possible may be suspended, and suspended reactions may then become
actual when this is necessary in the interest of the organism.

Entelechy is therefore not energy, nor any particular form of
energy-transformation, and in its operations energy is neither used
nor dissipated. In all that it does the law of conservation holds with
all the rigidity with which we imagine it to hold in purely inorganic
happening--at least we need not assume that it does not hold--and this
is the essential difference between the entelechian manifestations and
the manifestations of the “vital” or “biotic” forces or energies of the
historic systems of vitalism. It is essentially arrangement, or order
of happening, and it is therefore a non-energetic agency. The workman
who may build half-a-dozen zigzag walls, or an archway, or a small
house, from the same materials and with the expenditure of the same
quantity of energy, is indeed an energetical agent, but he is more than
that. He is a physico-chemical system in which any one phase is not
determined by the preceding phase. Different results may arise from the
same initial arrangement of materials and energies, and this is because
the system contains more than the material and energetical elements.
It contains the intelligence or entelechy of the workman.

What is this entelechy? Sooner of later in all our speculation on
organic happening we must cross the arbitrary line which divides the
space of our concepts from the non-spatial--the intensive from the
extensive. Just as the physicists have left materiality behind them
in their speculations and treatment of the phenomena of radiation, so
biology must attempt to trace back the materiality of the organism to
something which is immaterial. Just as physics has now abandoned the
idea of matter as something which consists of discrete particles, or
atoms, having extension in space, and which therefore exclude each
other, so biology must seek the origin of living things, not in the
hypothetical “biophoridæ,” or other ultimate living material particles,
but in the intensive manifoldness of entelechy. There is a manifoldness
in the potentiality which the simple and homogeneous ovum possesses
of becoming the heterogeneous adult organism. This manifoldness, says
the mechanistic biologist, consists of a manifoldness of extended
material units, the determinants of Weismann, and the organisation
that arranges these units--what is this organisation? It cannot be
a three-dimensional machinery, as all close analysis of the facts
of development and regulation shows. It is then something that is
intensive, something which is not in space, but which _acts into
space_, and the result of which is manifested in spatial material
arrangements and activities. Vague and incomprehensible as is this
concept of the activities of the organisms, it is only vague and
incomprehensible because we have been accustomed to express all
chemical and physical happening in terms of the fundamental concepts
of matter and energy, and the science of the last two centuries
has left us with a terminology which applies strictly to operations
in which only these concepts are involved. But if, as all minute
analysis of vital phenomena shows, the search for the antecedents of
some energetic, material, extended system of elements in a preceding
energetical, material, extended system of elements only leads to
confusion and contradictions, then this concept of an agency which
is neither energetic, nor material, nor spatial must be formulated.
Entelechy, then, is not energy, but rather the arrangement and
co-ordination of energetic processes. It is not something that is
extended in space, but something which acts into space. It is not
material, but it manifests itself in material changes. It is a
manifoldness, or organisation, but the manifoldness is an intensive
one. Compare this definition with the notion of the ether of space
now accepted by the mathematical physicists, and it will be seen that
our speculations are similar to those of the physicists, and, like
them, the test of their reality and usefulness is to be justified
pragmatically.

       *    *    *    *    *

We may now attempt a formal description of the organism based on the
discussions of the previous chapters.[34]

[34] This description is largely an expansion of Driesch’s “Analytical
definition of the individual living organism.” The reader should note
also that it includes the Bergsonian idea of duration, and that of the
organism as a typical phase in an evolutionary flux, as parts of the
description.

_The organism is a typical constellation of physico-chemical parts or
elements._

That is to say, it is an object in nature possessing a definite form,
which is the result of the arrangement of its tissues. Each tissue is
again an arrangement of cells, and each cell is a complex of chemical
substances. The organism therefore resembles, so far as our definition
goes, an inorganic crystal. But it is the typical organism that
we are considering, and this is a pure conception, for our typical
organism does not occur in nature. The organisms that are accessible
to our observation are constellations of physico-chemical parts, but
these constellations tend continually to deviate from the conceptual
arrangement. Progressive variation from the type is something that
distinguishes the organic constellation from the inorganic one.

_The organism is an entity in which energy-transformations of a
particular nature are effected. These transformations raise energy from
a state of low, to a state of high potential._

This is the general tendency of terrestrial life, and it is
expressed most fully in the metabolism of the green plant. The
energy-transformations that are effected here are those in which the
kinetic energy of radiation is employed to build up chemical compounds
of high potential, from inorganic substances incapable in themselves
of undergoing further transformations. The general tendency of all
inorganic transformations is towards inertia. In them energy is not
destroyed, but it is dissipated: it becomes uniformly distributed
throughout material bodies as the un-co-ordinated motions of the
molecules of which those bodies are composed, and it ceases to be
available for further transformations. The green plant reverses
this transformation, and accumulates energy in the form of chemical
compounds of high potential. Inorganic processes are those in which
available energy becomes unavailable, and this unavailable energy can
only become available again if a compensatory energy-transformation
is effected. Life is that which effects these compensatory
energy-transformations.

_The organism is a constellation capable of indefinite growth by
dissociation._

That is to say, it is a constellation which reproduces itself in all
its specificity. Growth consists in the separation from the organism
of a part, or reproductive cell, which divides (or dissociates)
repeatedly, each dissociated part growing again in mass by the addition
of substances similar to its own, but which are taken from a medium
dissimilar in composition to itself. The aggregate of parts so formed
then differentiates so that the constellation is reproduced in all its
specificity. There is nothing precisely similar to this in inorganic
happening. The growth of a crystal consists simply of the accretion of
elements similar in nature to those of the growing body, and there is
no differentiation.

_The organism exhibits autonomy._

It is a constellation which persists in the midst of an ever-changing
environment, and the typical organic form remains the same, although
the material of which it is composed undergoes continual change. There
are inorganic entities which resemble the organism in this respect: the
form of a cyclone or atmospheric disturbance, for instance, remains
the same even though the air of which it is composed is continually
changed. But the form of the organism does not vary strictly with the
changes in the environment in which it is placed, for it may respond to
an environmental change by a regulation, or compensatory change in form
or functioning, the effect of which is to maintain the constellation
in all its specificity. The regulation is not a complete or perfect
one, for environmental changes do, to some extent, produce changes in
the organic constellation, but there is no functionality between the
environmental change and the organic response. In inorganic happening a
change in one part of a transforming system necessarily determines the
nature and extent of the changes that occur in the other parts of the
system.

_The organism is a centre of continuous action._

It is first of all a part of nature in which energy-transformations
continually take place--a description which applies equally well to
plants and animals. It is only when we attempt to seek an inorganic
system to which this definition would apply that we find how well it
differentiates the organic from the inorganic. An inorganic system
which transforms energy is either one which tends continually towards
stability, or it is a machine made by man for a definite purpose, and
it is therefore a system involving a teleological idea. An organic
centre of action is one in which energy-transformations proceed without
cessation.

In the plant organism the energy-transformations represent, with the
exception of the reproductive processes, the whole activity of the
organism. In the animal organism they are accessory to regulated and
purposeful motile activity, that is, muscular action. The object of
this muscular activity varies with the stage of evolution attained by
the animal. Its sole object in the lower animal is that of individual
or racial preservation. Living in an organic and inorganic environment
which is always hostile and tends continually towards its destruction,
the whole activity of the organism is directed to the attempt to master
this environment: it struggles for its individual existence, and that
of its offspring. The activities of man are also these, but they are
more than these, for, knowing that physical processes tend continually
towards inertia, he seeks to control these processes, and to preserve
the instability of nature on which the possibility of further becoming
depends.

The activity of the organism, whether it be the energy-transformations
of the plant or the motile activities of the animal, are directed and
regulated activities. The activity of the organism is not a functional
activity in the sense that the activity of a dynamo is a function of
the nature of the machine, and of the nature and quantity of the energy
supplied to it. The nature of the activity of the organism is regulated
autonomously by purposes which it “wills” to carry out.

_The organism is a phase in an evolutionary flux._

Categories of organisms--varieties, species, genera, etc.--are
fictions. They are arbitrary definitions designed to facilitate our
description of nature. They are types or ideas. In constructing them
we follow the method of the intellect, and we represent by immobility
that which is essentially mobile and flows. Between the fertilised egg
and the senile organism there is absolute continuity. Our description
of the individual organism is a description of it at a typical moment
of its life-history, and this description includes all that has led up
to, as well as all that will fall away from, the morphology at this
particular typical moment.

Even then the arbitrarily defined organism is only a phase. In
defining it we arrest, not only the individual, but also the racial,
evolutionary flux. The specific morphology is that of a typical
moment in a racial flux. Leading up to it at this moment are all the
variations that have joined it with its ancestry, and leading away from
it will be all the variations that will convert it into its descendants.

The individual and racial developments are true _evolutions_. They are
the unfolding of an organisation which was not expressed in a system
of material particles or elements interacting with each other, and
with the elements of the environment, but which we must seek in an
intensive, non-spatial manifoldness.

In the evolutionary flux the changes are non-functional ones, that
is to say, any phase, whether it be one in an individual or a racial
development, is not merely a rearrangement of the elements of the
preceding phases, as in the case of a transforming system of material
particles and energies. There is inherent, spontaneous variability.

_The organism endures._

That is, all its activities persist and become part of its
organisation. It does not matter whether or not we decide that
characters which are acquired are transmitted, nor does it matter
whether or not we conclude that the environment is the cause of these
acquirements. Some time or other in the individual or racial history
new characters arise by the activity of the organism itself, and
these characters either persist in an individual or in a race. They
endure. All its activities, even its thoughts, persist and form the
experience of the animal--an experience which continually modifies its
conduct. In man those true acquirements, the results of education and
of investigation, persist as written language, or as tradition, even if
they are not inherited.

Duration is not time. The mathematician does not employ, in his
investigations, intervals of duration. When he relates something which
is happening now to something which happened some time ago he employs
the differential co-efficient _dy/dx_, so that the interval between the
two occurrences becomes an “infinitesimal” one. When the astronomer
predicts events that will happen some years hence, or describes those
that happened some years ago, he is really describing things that are
all there at once, so to speak, things which are given. If we unfold
a fan, stick by stick, we see the separate members in succession, but
they are all there, and we can, if we like, see them all at once.

The more we reflect on it the more we see that mathematical time is
only a way in which we see things apart from each other. Things become
extended in time as they become extended in space. Whether occurrences
capable of analysis by the methods of physics are what we call past or
future occurrences, they are all given, in that each of them is only a
phase of the others.

Duration belongs to the organism. The past is known because all that
has occurred to the organism still persists in its organisation.
The future is unknown because it has still to be made. Duration is
therefore a vector--something having direction, and the organism
progresses out of the past into the future. It grows older but not
younger.

       *    *    *    *    *

Such appears to be the nature of life. Can we discuss the problem of
its _origin_?

Did life originate on our earth? We must first consider what we mean
when we speak of an origin. The organic world of the present moment,
with all its environment--that is to say, the totality of organisms
on the earth, with all the materials which they can utilise in any
way, the energy of radiation from which they ultimately derive
their energy, and all the parts of the cosmos which interact with
them--constitute a system in the physical sense. The present condition
of the organic world, that is, the kinds and numbers of organisms,
and their distribution, and the distribution of the materials which
they can utilise, and the quantity and nature of the energy which
is available to them, are the present phase of this system. All
the conditions of life in the past, that is to say, the kinds, and
numbers, and distribution of organisms, and the quantity and nature
of their environment at any time, together formed phases of this
system. If there was a time when life, as we know it, did not exist,
then the materials and the energies, which were antecedent to life
when it did appear, were also a phase of the system. On a strictly
mechanistic hypothesis there could be no origin: there could only be
a transformation of a system which was already in existence. All that
exists to-day was given then. When, therefore, we speak of the origin
of life from non-living materials we mean simply a transformation of
those materials and energies.

There was a time, it is said, when life could not exist on the earth.
For the organism is essentially that aggregate of chemical compounds
which we call protoplasm, and this cannot exist at temperatures higher
than 100° C., and it cannot function at temperatures lower than 0° C.
It requires carbon dioxide, and ammonia or nitrate, as the materials
for its constructive metabolism, and there was a time when these
compounds could not exist, for they must have been dissociated by
the heat of the gaseous nebula from which our earth originated. The
organism requires energy in the form of solar radiation of a particular
frequency of vibration, and there was a time when the sun’s radiation
was different from what it is now. Therefore life did not exist then.
Even if we believe that life came to the earth as germs, which existed
previously in outer cosmic space, this belief does not solve the
problem, which simply becomes transferred from our earth to some other
cosmic body.

But life, as we know it, makes use of the materials and the energies
which are available to it in the conditions in which it exists. The
plant organism obtains its energy from solar radiation because this
is the most abundant source of terrestrial energy. The human eye is
most susceptible to light of a particular frequency of wave-length,
but this is the radiation that is most abundant in the light of the
sun. Does this not mean that the organism has merely adapted itself
to the material and energetic conditions in which it exists? Does it
necessarily mean that because the conditions were very different life
could not exist? Protoplasm could not exist at a temperature of several
thousand degrees Centigrade, but does that mean that life, which on any
hypothesis of mechanism must be described in terms of energy, could not
exist in these conditions?

It must have had an origin, says Weismann, because it has an end.
Organic things are destroyed, inasmuch as they disintegrate into
inorganic things. Organisms die. Thus the organic process comes to
an end, and because it comes to an end it must have a beginning.
Spontaneous generation of life is thus, for Weismann, a “logical
necessity.”

Need this logical necessity exist? The argument clearly implies that
life is a reversible process. Organic things become inorganic, and
therefore inorganic things must become organic things. The first
statement is a fact of our experience, but the second one would only
be logically true if we were to postulate that the process of life,
whatever it may be, is a reversible process. But we must not postulate
this if we are to hold to a physico-chemical mechanism, for it is
a fundamental result of physical investigation that all inorganic
processes are irreversible: reversible inorganic processes are only
the limits to irreversible ones. Physical processes go only in one
way, and that organic substance is destroyed to the extent that it
becomes inorganic is a particular case of this irreversible physical
tendency. Now the mechanism of Weismann must base itself on the
concepts of physics and chemistry, and it must postulate the origin
of life from non-living substances. Why? Because life is a reversible
process, that is, it exhibits a tendency which does not exist in
inorganic processes. Clearly the logic is faulty! And must we conclude
that life has an end? Weismann himself suggests that nothing in the
results of biology indicates that physical death is a necessity: it
is rather an adaptation. The soma, or body, is the envelope of the
germ-plasm, and exposed as it is to the vicissitudes of an environment
which is always hostile, it becomes at length an unfit envelope. But
with the reproductive act the germ-plasm acquires a new soma, and it
is no longer necessary that the former one should continue to exist as
an unfit envelope. Physical death therefore occurs as an adaptation
serving for the best interests of the race. The organism need not die,
for the germ-plasm may be a physical continuum throughout innumerable
generations. Somatic death is only a destructive metabolism: it is a
catastrophic metabolism, if we like.

We may legitimately discuss such problems as the origin of
the protoplasm of the prototrophic organism, or that of the
chlorophyll-containing cell, or that of the nerve-cell. On the
mechanistic view each of these conditions is a phase of a transforming
physico-chemical system, and it is within the scope of the methods of
physical science to investigate the nature of these transformations.
But if the argument of this book is sound, then the problem of the
origin of life, as it is usually stated, is only a pseudo-problem;
we may as usefully discuss the origin of the second law of
thermo-dynamics! If life is not only energy but also the direction
and co-ordination of energies; if it is a tendency of the same
order, but of a different direction, from the tendency of inorganic
processes, all that biology can usefully do is to inquire into the
manner in which this tendency is manifested in material things and
energy-transformations. But the tendency itself is something elemental.




APPENDIX

MATHEMATICAL AND PHYSICAL NOTIONS[35]

[35] It must be understood that some of the things dealt with in these
appendices are very hard to understand by the reader acquainted only
with the results of biological science. We urge, however, that they are
all relevant if biological results are to be employed speculatively.


INFINITY

What is really meant when the mathematician uses the concept of
infinity in his operations? Suppose that we take a line of finite
length and divide it into halves, and then divide each half into
halves, and so on _ad infinitum_. We make cuts in the line, and these
cuts have no magnitude, so that the sum of the lengths into which we
divide the line is equal to the length of the undivided line. We can
divide the line into as many parts as we choose, that is, into an
“infinite” number of parts.

Suppose that we are making a thing which is to match another thing, and
suppose that we can make the thing as great as we choose. If, then, no
matter how great we make the thing, it is still too small, the thing
that we are trying to match is infinitely great.

Substitute “small” for “great,” and this is also a definition of the
infinitely small.

Clearly the idea of infinity does not reside in the _results_ of
an operation, but in its tendency. It inheres in our intuition of
_striving_ towards something, but not in the results of our striving.


FUNCTIONALITY

If we pour some mercury into a U-tube closed at one end, the air in
this end will be contained in a closed vessel under pressure. We can
increase the pressure by pouring more mercury into the open end of the
tube. We can measure the volume of the air by measuring the length of
the tube which it occupies. We can measure the pressure on this air by
measuring the difference of length of the mercury in the two limbs of
the tube. By taking all necessary precautions we shall find that for
each value which the pressure attains there is a corresponding value of
the volume of the air.

We thus find the pressure values, _p_↓{1}, _p_↓{2}, _p_↓{3}, _p_↓{4},
_p_↓{5}, etc., and the corresponding volumes, _v_↓{1}, _v_↓{2},
_v_↓{3}, _v_↓{4}, _v_↓{5}, etc., and we may then plot these values so
as to make a graph.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.]

In this figure the values represented along the horizontal axis are
pressure-values, and those represented along the vertical axis are
volume-values. We have so made the experiment that we can make the
pressure-values whatever we choose--let us call them the values of the
_independent variable_ or _argument_. For each value of the pressure,
or argument, there is a corresponding value of the volume, which
_depends_ on the pressure--let us call these values of the volume
values of the _dependent variable_ or _function_.

We can make arbitrary values of the pressure, but whenever we do
this the corresponding values of the volume are fixed. We say, then,
that the volume is a _function of the pressure_. In general, when we
choose one value of an independent variable, or argument, there can
be only one, or a small number, of values of the dependent variable,
or function. If there are two or more values of the function for one
value of the argument each of these is necessarily determined by the
value which we choose to assign to the argument. There is a strict
_functionality_ between the two series of variables. In the experiment
we have chosen this functionality is expressed by the equation _pv_ =
_k_(_1_ + _at_), where _p_ is the pressure, _v_ the volume, _k_ and
_a_ constants, and _t_ is the temperature at which the experiment
is carried out. In a number of experiments like that which we have
mentioned, _k_, _a_, and _t_ are the same throughout, and this is why
we call them _constants_. We give _p_ any value we like, and then _v_
can be calculated from the equation.


RATE OF VARIATION

If we know the equation _pv_ = _k_(_1_ + _at_), we can find how much
the volume changes when the pressure changes, that is, the rate of
variation of _v_ with respect to _p_. But even if we don’t know that
this equation applies, we can still find the rate of variation from our
experiments. We see from the graph that, when the pressure increases
from _p_↓{1} to _p_↓{2}, the volume decreases from _v_↓{1} to _v_↓{2}
but that if the pressure is again increased to _p_↓{3}, that is, by a
similar amount to the increase of pressure from _p_↓{1} to _p_↓{2}, the
volume decreases from _v_↓{2} to _v_↓{3}. Now we find, by measurements
made on the graph, that the decrease _v_↓{1} to _v_↓{2} is greater than
the decrease _v_↓{2} to _v_↓{3}, and the latter decrease is greater
again than the decrease from _v_↓{3} to _v_↓{4}. Evidently the rate
of variation of volume is not like the rate of variation of pressure,
that is, the same throughout, and when we look at the graph we see
that the rate of variation is greatest where the slope of the curve is
steepest. The latter is steepest near the point _a_, less steep near
the point _b_, and still less steep near the point _c_. Now any _small_
part of the curve is indistinguishable from a straight line. Let us
draw a straight line _ee_↓{1}, which appears to coincide with a small
part of the curve near _a_, and similar straight lines _ff_↓{1}, and
_gg_↓{1}, which also appear to coincide with small parts of the curve
near _b_ and _c_. Then the steepness of the curve will be proportional
to the angles which these straight lines make with the axis _op_, and
these angles are measured by their tangents, that is, by the ratio
_oe_↓{1}/_oe_, which is the tangent that _e_↓{1}_e_ makes with _op_,
the ratio _of_↓{1}/_of_, and the ratio _og_↓{1}/_og_.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.]

The point _a_ on the curve corresponds with a pressure _a_↓{1} and a
volume _a_↓{11}. The point _b_ corresponds with a pressure _b_↓{1}
and a volume _b_↓{11}, and _c_ with a pressure _c_↓{1} and a volume
_c_↓{11}. The _average_ rate of variation of the volume of the gas, as
the pressure changes from _a_ to _c_, is therefore proportional to the
sum of the tangents _oe_↓{1}/_oe_ and _og_↓{1}/_og_, divided by 2.


THE NOTION OF THE LIMIT

Suppose that we wish to find the rate of variation of volume for a
pressure change in the immediate vicinity of the value _b_↓{1}, that
is, the rate of variation as the pressure changes from a little less
than _b_↓{1} to a little more than _b_↓{1}. If we find the point _b_
on the curve corresponding to _b_↓{1}, and if we then draw a line
_ff_↓{1}, _touching_ the curve at the point _b_, we shall obtain the
angle _off_↓{1}. It might appear now that the tangent of this angle,
that is, the ratio _of_↓{1}/_of_, would give us a measure of the rate
of variation of volume.

But the reasoning would be faulty. The line _ff_↓{1} only _touches_
the curve, it does not coincide with an element of the curve. Also at
the point _b_↓{1} the pressure has a certain definite value, and there
is no change. At the corresponding point _b_↓{11} the volume also has
a certain definite value, and there is no change. There can therefore
be no rate of variation. The value of the tangent does not give us a
measure of the rate of variation: it gives us the _limit_ to the rate
of variation, when the pressure is changing in the immediate vicinity
of _b_↓{1}.

We must stick to the notion of a pressure change in the _immediate
vicinity_ of _b_↓{1}. What do we mean by “immediate vicinity”? We
mean that we are thinking of a range of pressure-values in which
the particular pressure-value _b_↓{1} is contained, but not as
an end-point. We mean also that we choose a definite standard of
approximation to the value _b_↓{1}, so that any pressure-value within
our interval differs from _b_↓{1} by _less_ than this standard of
approximation. It means further that, no matter how small is the number
representing this standard of approximation, _any_ pressure-value
within the interval will differ from _b_↓{1} by less than this number.
This is what we really mean when we say that the interval we are
thinking about is an “infinitely small one.”

Now corresponding to this interval of pressure-values in the immediate
vicinity of _b_↓{1}, there will be an interval of volume-values in
the immediate vicinity of _b_↓{11}, and, as before, any one of these
volume-values will differ from _b_↓{11} by less than any number
representing a standard of approximation to _b_↓{11}. We then find
the point on the curve corresponding to both _b_↓{1} and _b_↓{11},
that is b, and we draw the line _ff_↓{1}, and find the tangent of the
angle which this line makes with _op_. The value of this tangent is
the _limit_ of the rate of variation of the volume of the gas when the
pressure undergoes a change in the immediate vicinity of _b_↓{1}.

“Rate of variation” is a function of the argument “pressure.” This
function has the limit _l_ for a value of its argument _b_↓{1}, when,
as the argument varies in the immediate vicinity of _b_↓{1}, the value
of the function approximates to _l_ within _any standard whatever_ of
approximation.[36]

[36] If the reader does not understand this, he should read Whitehead’s
“Introduction to Mathematics.” He should read this book in any case.

We should not, of course, find the rate of variation of volume of the
gas by this means. We should calculate the value of the differential
co-efficient _dv_/_dp_ from the equation _pv_ = _k_(_1 + at_): this
would be _k_ (_1 + at_)/_p_^2. But the reasoning involved in the
methods of the calculus are those which we have attempted to outline.
We try to avoid the terms “infinitely small,” “infinitely near,”
“infinitely small quantities,” and so on, by the device of standards
of approximation. It may appear to the non-mathematical reader that
all this is rather to be regarded as “quibbling,” but the success of
the methods of mathematical physics should convince him that such is
not the case. He should also reflect that clear and definite ideas
on the fundamental concepts of the science are just as necessary in
speculative biology as they are in mathematics.

(Another example.)

Let us consider the case of a stone failing from a state of rest.
Observations will show that when the stone has fallen for one second
it has traversed a space of 16 feet; at the end of two seconds it has
fallen through 64 feet; and at the end of three seconds the space
traversed is 144 feet. From these and similar data we can deduce the
velocity of motion of the stone as it passes any point in its path.

The velocity is the space traversed in a certain time _s_/_t_. If we
take any easily observable space (say five feet) on either side of the
point chosen, and then determine the times when the stone was at the
extremities of this interval, and divide the interval of space by the
interval of time, we shall obtain the _average_ velocity of motion of
the stone over this fraction of the whole path chosen. But the velocity
did not vary in a constant manner during this interval (as we see by
considering the spaces traversed during the first three seconds of the
fall). Therefore our average velocity does not accurately represent the
velocity of the stone as it passes the point at the middle of the path
chosen.

We therefore reduce the length of the path more and more so as to make
the average velocity approximate closer and closer to the velocity
near the middle portion of the path. In this way we find the ratio
δ_s_/δ_t_, where δ_s_ is a very small interval of path containing
the point chosen, but not as an end-point, and δ_t_ is a very small
interval of time. Perhaps this average velocity may be near enough
for our purposes, but perhaps it may not. The interval of path δ_s_
is still a finite interval, and δ_t_ is still a finite time, and so
long as these values are finite ones the velocity deduced from them
remains a mean one. All that we can say is that it approximates to the
velocity, as the arbitrary point was passed, within a certain standard
of approximation.

Obviously the smaller the interval δ_s_, the closer will be this
approximation. Suppose, then, that we diminish δ_s_ till it “becomes
zero.” It might appear now that when δ_s_ coincides with the point
chosen we shall obtain the velocity of the stone at this point. But
if there is no interval of path, and no interval of time, there can
be no velocity, which is an interval of path divided by an interval
of time; and if the stone is “at the point,” it does not move at all.
We must stick to the idea of intervals of space and time, and yet we
must think of these intervals as being so small that no error whatever
is involved in regarding the mean velocity deduced from them as the
“true velocity.” We therefore think of the point as being placed in
an interval of path, but not at an end-point of this interval. We
think of the velocity as a mean one, but we must have a standard of
approximation, so that we may be able to say that the mean velocity
approximates to the “actual” or _limiting_ velocity of the stone as it
passes the point, within this standard of approximation. The smaller we
make the interval, the closer will the mean velocity approximate to the
limiting velocity.

We therefore think of the stone as moving in the immediate vicinity of
the point in the sense already discussed. We say that the “immediate
vicinity” is an interval such that any point in it, _p_↓{1},
approximates to the arbitrary point _p_ which we are considering within
any standard of approximation: that is, no point in the interval is
further away from _p_ than a certain number expressing the standard
of approximation, and this can be _any_ number, however small. We say
the same thing about the interval of time. That is to say, we make the
intervals as small as we like: they can be smaller than any interval
which will cause an error in our deduced velocity, no matter how small
this error may be.

The limit of the velocity of a stone falling past a point in its
path is, therefore, that velocity towards which the mean velocities
approximate within any standard of approximation, when we regard the
interval of space as being the immediate vicinity of the point, and the
interval of time as being the time in the immediate vicinity of the
moment when the stone passes the point. The limit of the velocity is
not δ_s_/δ_t_ but _ds_/_dt_, _dt_ and _ds_ being, not finite intervals
of time and space, but “differentials.” We determine this limit by the
methods of the differential calculus.


FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTIONS AND PROBABILITY

Let the reader keep a note of the number of trumps held by himself and
partner in a large number of games of whist (the cards being cut for
trump). In 200 hands he may get such results as the following:

  _No. of trumps in his own and partner’s hands_--0, 1, 2, 3,
     4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

  _No. of times this hand was held_--0, 0, 0, 1, 9, 29, 53,
     52, 35, 14, 6, 1, 0, 0.

He should note also the number of times that trumps were spades, clubs,
diamonds, and hearts: he will get some such results as the following:
spades, 46; clubs, 53; diamonds, 51; hearts, 50.

The numbers in the lower line of the first series form a “frequency
distribution,” for they tell us the frequency of occurrence of the
hands indicated in the numbers above them. “No. of trumps” is the
independent variable, and “no. of times these nos. of trumps were held”
is the dependent variable.

A frequency distribution represents the way in which the results of a
series of experiments differ from the mean result. A particular result
is expected from the operation of one, or a few, main causes. But a
number of other relatively unimportant causes lead to the deviation
of a number of results from this mean or characteristic one. Yet
since one, or a few, main causes are predominant, the majority of
the results of the experiment will approximate closely to the mean;
and a relatively small proportion will deviate to variable distances
on either side of the mean. If a pack of cards were shuffled so that
all the suits were thoroughly mixed among each other, then we should
expect the trumps to be as equally divided as possible between the four
players. But a number of causes lead to irregularities in this desired
uniform distribution, and so the results of a large number of deals
deviate from the mean result. It is possible, by an application of the
theory of probability, to calculate ideal, or theoretical frequency
distributions, basing our reasoning on the considerations suggested
above. We then find that the observed and calculated frequency
distributions may be very much alike.

In biological investigation, far more than in physical investigation,
we deal with mean results. It is, however, just as important that the
mean should be considered as the individual divergences from the mean.
We want to know the mean results, and the way and the extent in which
the individual results diverge from the mean.

There is a mean or “ideal” result, but we must think of a great number
of small independent causes which cause the actually obtained results
to diverge from this mean. If these small un-co-ordinated causes
are just as likely to cause the results to be less than the mean,
as greater than the mean, we shall obtain a frequency distribution
resembling the one given above, in that the variations from the mean
are equal on both sides of the mean. But if the general tendency of the
small un-co-ordinated causes is to cause the results, on the whole, to
tend to be greater than the mean, then the frequency distribution will
be “one-sided,” that is, if we represent it by a curve the latter will
be an asymmetrical one. Curves which are asymmetrical are those most
frequently obtained in biological, statistical investigations.


MATTER

Our generalised notion of matter is that it is the physical substance
underlying phenomena. Immediately, or intuitively, we attain the notion
of matter because of our perceptions of touch, and our perception of
muscular exertion. The distance sense-receptors, visual, auditory, and
olfactory, would not give us this intuition of matter.

Material things are extended, that is, they have form, and they
exclude each other, so that they cannot occupy the same place. They
appear to us to be aggregates of different nature: they may be solid
and homogeneous, like a piece of metal; or solid and porous, like a
piece of pumice-stone; or loose and granular, like sand; or viscous or
liquid, like pitch or water. They may have colour. They are opaque, or
transparent in various degrees. They may have odour. Material things,
as they are perceived by the distance sense-receptors, appear to have
qualities.

Material things are aggregates of molecules. The aggregates may possess
essential form, like that of a crystal, or an organism. The form of
the aggregate may be essential and homogeneous, so that it consists
of molecules, all of which are of the same kind, like a crystal. It
may be heterogeneous and essential, like the body of the organism,
when it consists of molecules which are not all of the same kind. The
aggregates may have accidental form, like that of a river valley, or a
delta, or a mountain, and the form in these, and similar cases, is not
a part of the essential nature of the aggregate.

The molecules are selections (in the mathematical sense) of some of
about eighty different kinds of atoms. A molecule is a small number of
atoms arranged together in a definite way, and its nature depends, not
only on the kinds of atoms of which it is composed, but also on the
arrangement of these atoms. Two or more different arrangements of the
same atoms are, in general, different molecules.


MASS

When matter is perceived by the tactile and muscular sense organs, we
have the intuition of mass. It is _heavy_, and the degree of heaviness
is proportional to the quantity of matter in the body which we feel,
that is, to its mass. Heaviness is synonymous with weight, but weight
does not depend alone on the quantity of matter in the body. If the
latter were removed to an infinite distance from the earth or other
cosmic bodies, its weight would disappear, but its mass would remain.
We could still touch and move it, and we should still find that
different degrees of muscular exertion would be necessary when bodies
of different masses had to be moved.


INERTIA

If the body were in motion, we should find that muscular exertion is
necessary in order that it might be brought to rest; and if it were at
rest, we should find that muscular exertion was necessary in order that
it might be moved. The body, matter in general, possesses inertia, and
this is its most fundamental attribute. Mass we can only conceive in
terms of inertia. If two bodies were at rest, and if the same degree
of muscular exertion conferred on each the same initial velocity of
motion, their masses would be equal. If the same degree of muscular
exertion conferred different velocities on different bodies, their
masses would be different, and would vary directly with the initial
velocities conferred.


FORCE

The feeling which we experience when we move a body from a state of
rest, or stop a body which is moving, is what we call force. If on
climbing a stair in the dark we think there is one step more than there
is, and so have the queer, familiar, feeling of treading on nothing,
we have the intuition of energy; but when we tread on the steps, and
so raise our body, we have the intuition of force. Force is that which
accelerates the velocity of a mass. If the latter is at rest, we
consider it to have zero velocity. If it is moving, and we stop it,
there is still acceleration, but this is negative.

Matter, that is, the _substantia physica_, is clearly to be conceived
only in terms of energy. It is, to our direct intuitions, resistance,
or inertia, that which requires energy in order that it may be made to
undergo change. Our static idea of physical solidity, or massiveness,
disappears on ultimate analysis. Molecules are made up of atoms, and
the atoms are assumed to have all the characters of matter: we could
not _see_ them, of course, even if we possessed all the magnifying
power that we wished, for they would be too small to reflect light.
Modern physical theory is compelled to regard atoms as complex, and
imagines them as being composed of moving electrons. The electron
is immaterial--it is the unit-charge of electricity. It is said to
possess mass, but mass is now understood to mean inertia. So long as
the electron is moving, it sets up a field of energy round it, and this
field--the electro-magnetic one--extends in all directions. Periodic
disturbances in it constitute radiation, and this radiation travels
with the velocity of light. It is because of the existence of this
field that we are _obliged_ to postulate the existence of an ether
of space. Unfamiliar to us until the discovery of Hertzian waves and
“wireless” telegraphy, this electro-magnetic radiation in space is now
accessible to our direct intuitions. We can initiate it by setting
electrons in motion, that is, by expending energy (producing the
sparking in the transmitters of the wireless telegraphy apparatus); and
we can stop it, if it is in existence, by absorbing the energy (in the
receivers of the wireless telegraphy apparatus). This is essentially
what we understand by the inertia of gross matter. We set a body in
motion by expending energy on it (the explosion of the powder in a
cartridge, which converts potential chemical energy into the kinetic
energy of the moving projectile); and we can stop a body which is in
motion by absorbing this energy of motion (by causing the projectile to
strike against a target, when the kinetic energy of its motion becomes
the kinetic energy of the heat of the arrested body).

Inertia is therefore the same thing whether it be the inertia of
visible, material bodies, or the inertia of invisible, material
molecules, or the inertia of the immaterial, non-tangible ether. It is
the condition that energy-changes must occur if anything accessible to
our observation is to change its state of rest or motion.


ENERGY

Energy is therefore indefinable. It is an elemental aspect of our
experience.

Nature to us is an aggregate of particles in motion. We have to speak
of massive particles, whether we call these visible material bodies,
or molecules, or atoms, or electrons, in order that we may describe
nature. We must employ the fiction of a _substantia physica_. We only
know the substance or matter in terms of energy; it is really the
latter that is known to us. It is the poverty of our language, or
rather it is the legacy of a materialistic age, that compels us to
speak of particles that move, rather than of motions as entities in
themselves.

Considering, then, the idea of particles in motion as a fiction
necessary for clear description, we can study energy. There is only
one kind, or form, of energy which presents itself to our aided or
unaided intuitions, that is kinetic energy. Bodies that move possess
this energy represented by their motion: they can be made to do work,
that is, their energy can be transformed into other forms of energy.
All things are in motion. A gas consists of molecules incessantly
moving with high velocity, and colliding and rebounding from each
other. The energy of a gas is the sum of one-half of the masses of all
the molecules, multiplied by the squares of the velocities of all the
molecules, that is, Σ1/2_mv_^2. This is also the kinetic energy of a
projectile, or of a planet revolving round the sun. Kinetic energy is
that of the uniform, unchanging motion of some entity possessing mass,
but we must extend our notion of mass so as to include immaterial,
imponderable entities such as electrons.

This energy cannot be destroyed or created--the law of conservation
of energy. This is a principle or mode of our thought. We are unable
scientifically or philosophically to think of an entity ceasing to be.
Dreams and phantoms show us entities which are real _while they last_,
but which cease to exist. If we do attempt to think of entities that
appear from, or disappear into, nothing, we surrender the notion of
reality. The more we think of it the more clearly we shall see that the
_things which we call real are the things which are conserved_.

Yet energy, to our immediate intuitions, seems to disappear. A flying
bullet strikes against a target and becomes flattened out into a
motionless piece of lead. A red-hot piece of iron cools down to the
temperature of its surroundings. A golf-ball driven up the side of
a hill comes to rest in the grass. A current of electricity passing
through water is used up, that is, electricity of a higher potential
is required to force the current through water than to force it through
thick copper wire. In all these cases we might think that energy is
lost, but we cannot believe this. The kinetic energy of the flying
bullet becomes transformed into the increase of the kinetic energy of
the molecules of the metal of which the bullet was composed; for the
latter becomes greatly heated when its flight is arrested and this
increased heat ought to be equal to the kinetic energy of the bullet
in flight. The red-hot piece of iron cools, and the kinetic energy of
its molecules becomes less and less, but this does not cease to exist,
for the energy is simply transferred by radiation and conduction to the
surrounding bodies, the temperature of which it raises. The golf-ball
driven up the hill comes to rest and loses its kinetic energy. Some
of this has been transferred to the air through which it passes, the
latter being heated very slightly; some of it is expended by friction
with the grass over which the ball rolls before coming to rest, and
this energy is traceable in heat-effects, or in mechanical effects,
but the rest of it apparently ceases to exist. But this would be
contradictory to the principle of conservation, and so we say that the
lost kinetic energy has become potential. The current of electricity
may heat the water through which it passes, and some of the energy
which seems to disappear is so to be traced, but the greater fraction
is apparently lost. A quantity of free hydrogen and oxygen is, however,
generated, and we say that the kinetic energy of the moving electrons
has become transformed into the potential chemical energy of the
gaseous mixture.


POTENTIAL ENERGY

Therefore, if energy disappears or appears, we do not say that it is
destroyed or is created: we invent potential energies, into which
we suppose that the energies in question have become transformed, in
order that we may still think of them as being subject to an _a priori_
principle of conservation. Although a particle of radium continually
generates heat, we do not therefore think of the first principle of
energetics as being invalidated, for we suppose that the energy which
thus appears was really potential in the atoms of radium. But it
was contrary to all our former experience of atoms that they should
contain any other energy than that of their own motion, and so the
further assumption was made that the atom, at least the atom of the
radio-active substance, is really complex, and not simple, as chemical
theory demands. It is made up of smaller particles, and possesses a
definite structure. In certain circumstances the atom may disintegrate,
and the energy which held together its particles, whether these were
simpler corpuscles or electrons, is given off as the heat which the
radio-active substance apparently generates. The potential energy of
the chemical atom is therefore a hypothesis which has been devised
in order to preserve the validity of the law of conservation, and
the reality of this hypothesis is being tested by investigation. If
we accept it as true, are the deductions made from it justified in
our experience? That is the test which must be satisfied in all the
hypotheses where potential energies are invented, and the potentials
are only real if the test is satisfactory. The golf ball at rest at
the top of the hill is a different entity from the golf ball at rest
at the bottom of the hill: it is capable of developing energy, for
a touch may cause it to roll down the hill, when most of the energy
which was expended in order to drive it to the top of the hill will
reappear in the form of the kinetic energy of motion of the ball. The
atoms of hydrogen and oxygen which were dissociated by the energy of
the electric current are different things from the atoms of hydrogen
and oxygen which are combined together to form the molecules of water.
Their state when the gases are in the elementary condition, or are
“free,” is that of molecules moving rapidly and incessantly, rebounding
from each other after colliding with each other: they possess energy of
position--potential energy--because they are separate from each other.
If they “combine,” as when a minute electric spark explodes the mixture
of gases, they tractate together, and remain in proximity to each
other, becoming molecules of water. The energy which became potential
in the gaseous mixture, when the electric energy of the current seemed
to disappear, now appears as the heat generated by the combustion,
that is, as the greatly increased kinetic energy of the molecules of
the gas (steam) which takes the place of the mixture of hydrogen and
oxygen. Previous to the explosion this gas was a mixture of molecules
of hydrogen and oxygen (2H↓{2} + 2O) at the ordinary temperature, but
after the explosion it consists of a smaller number of molecules at a
very much higher temperature.

What is “energy of position”? The golf ball at the bottom of the hill
was at a distance of _R_ feet from the centre of the earth, but at
the top of the hill it is at a distance of _R_ + 100 feet from the
centre of the earth. In the first case it was free to fall _R_ feet,
but in the second case it is free to fall _R_ + 100 feet. The atoms
of the constituent molecules of water occupy the position H - O - H,
the bonds (-) indicating that the atoms are very close together; but
when the water is decomposed by an electric current, the atoms occupy
the positions O - O + H - H + H - H, the (+) indicating that the atoms
are relatively far apart from each other. Now the golf ball and the
earth, or the atoms of hydrogen and oxygen, are physically the same
material entities, whether they are close together or far apart, yet
when the earth and the ball, or the atoms of oxygen and hydrogen,
are separated from each other, their “properties” are different from
what they are when they are close together. What is it that makes
the difference? It is that which is _between_ them. Is it, in the
last case, “the potential energy of chemical affinity”? This dreadful
phrase is actually used in a recent book on biology: “In the elements
carbon and oxygen, so long as they remain separate, a certain amount
of energy remains latent. When the carbon and oxygen atoms are allowed
to come together and unite, this potential energy of chemical affinity
is liberated as kinetic energy.” What is changed by the tractation and
pellation (the terms suggested by Soddy in place of the anthropomorphic
ones, “attraction” and “repulsion”)? It is the ether which has become
changed in some way. Potential energy resides therefore in the ether of
space.


ISOTHERMAL AND ADIABATIC CHANGES

Let us consider the changes which occur in a gas under the influence
of changes in temperature and pressure, premising that the remarks
which we have to make can be applied to bodies in the liquid and solid
conditions, with some necessary modifications. A gas, then, consists
of a very great number of particles, or molecules, in motion. These
molecules move in straight lines at very high velocities, and if
the envelope in which the gas is contained is a restricted one, the
molecules collide with each other, and with the walls of the envelope;
and, being assumed perfectly elastic, they rebound from each other,
and from the walls of the vessel, with the same velocity which they
had when they collided. The pressure of the gas (say that of steam at
a temperature of 110° C., and a pressure of 120 lbs. to the square
inch in a steam boiler) is the sum of the impacts of the molecules
on the walls of the containing vessel. When the temperature is high
the molecules are moving at a higher mean velocity than when the
temperature is lower, and their mean free path tends to become greater.
The volume of a certain mass of gas, that is, the volume occupied by a
certain very great number of molecules, is greater the higher is the
temperature, provided the envelope is one capable of yielding. If we
reduce the capacity of the envelope in which the gas is contained, the
pressure will rise, for the intrinsic energy of the gas is still the
same; but we have done work on it, and by the law of conservation this
work, or at least the energy represented by it, must still exist. It is
represented by the decreased length of free path of the molecules, and
this means that the impacts on the walls of the vessel will be greater
than they were. There is, therefore, a certain relation between the
volume of a gas and its pressure, and this relation can be represented
by an equation involving the temperature, the pressure, and the volume.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.]

The diagram represents the pressure and the volume of a gas when these
things change. There are two conditions, (1) when the heat developed
by the compression is allowed to escape through the walls of the vessel
to the outside, or when the heat lost in the expansion of the gas is
compensated by the conduction of heat through the walls of the vessel
from outside; and (2) when the heat developed is retained in the gas,
as when the latter is contained in a vessel the walls of which do not
conduct heat. The pressure of the gas is measured along the horizontal
axis, and the volume is measured along the vertical axis, and a curve
is drawn so that for any value of the pressure there is a corresponding
value of the volume. Thus the values of the pressures _p_ and _p_↓{1}
in the diagram correspond to the value of the volume _v_. The curve
relating the change of pressure with a corresponding change of volume
is, in general, that called a rectangular hyperbola. But there are
two kinds of such curves: (1) that which we obtain by plotting the
corresponding values of pressure and volume, when the temperature
of the gas remains constant throughout the series of changes, that
is, when the rise of temperature which would occur when the gas is
compressed is compensated by the conduction of this heat to the outside
of the vessel containing the gas. Such a series of changes of pressure
and volume is called an _isothermal_ one. (2) When the heat developed
by the compression of the gas is retained in the gas, as when the walls
of the vessel in which these changes are effected are such as do not
conduct heat: such a series of changes is called an adiabatic one.
Adiabatic curves are steeper than are isothermal ones.


THE CARNOT ENGINE

This is an imaginary mechanism which performs a certain cycle
of operations. It does not really exist, but the conception of
its operation is of the greatest value in the consideration of
energy-transformations, and it is for this reason that we discuss it
here.

Consider a gas, or some other substance capable of expanding or
contracting. It contains intrinsic energy, and it is capable of doing
work. Thus, since a gas can expand indefinitely it can be made to do
mechanical work. A mass of gas at a pressure _p_↓{1}, and having a
volume _v_↓{1}, and at a temperature _T_°, can do work by expanding
till its pressure is reduced to _p_, and its volume increased to _v_.
If it expands adiabatically its temperature will fall to _t_°. Let us
suppose that _t_° is the temperature of the surrounding medium: the
gas cannot therefore cool further, and we can obtain no more work from
it. If the gas is the substance which we wish to employ as the working
substance in the Carnot engine, we must therefore bring it back to the
condition represented by _A_. That is, we must raise its temperature to
_T_°, we must reduce its volume to _v_↓{1}, and we must increase its
pressure to _p_↓{1}.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.]

Thus the steam of an engine is (say) at a temperature of 110° C., and a
pressure of 120 lbs. to the square inch. When it has passed through the
cylinder and condenser it is water at a temperature of, say, 15° C.,
and it is at atmospheric pressure. We must, therefore, bring it back to
its former condition by heating this water in the boiler till it is
steam under the former conditions of temperature and pressure.

Therefore we must, in order to obtain a self-acting engine, cause the
working substance, and the mechanism of the engine, to perform a series
of cyclical operations.

The Carnot engine is a cylinder containing a gas called the working
substance _S_, and this gas can be brought into thermal contact with a
source of heat, or a refrigerator, that is, the gas can be heated or
cooled by a mechanism outside itself. The walls of the cylinder are
made of some substance which is a perfect non-conductor of heat, but
the bottom of the cylinder is made of a substance which conducts heat
perfectly. There is a piston in the cylinder which fits it closely,
but which moves up and down without friction. At the bottom of the
latter is a valve which can be turned so as to place the bottom of the
cylinder, and therefore the gas, in thermal contact with a reservoir
of heat (+), or a refrigerator (-). But when the valve is turned so
that the non-conducting part _O_ fills the bottom, the gas is perfectly
insulated, and heat can neither enter nor leave it.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.]

Such an engine is, of course, an imaginary one, since there can be no
mechanism in which there is not a certain amount of friction between
moving parts, and there are no substances which conduct or insulate
heat perfectly. The engine is, in fact, the _limit_ to a series of
engines each of which is supposed to be more perfect than the last one.
It is a fiction which is of considerable use in theoretical work.


THE CARNOT POSITIVE CYCLE

We have therefore a substance which can be heated by contact with a
hot body, and which can then expand, doing mechanical work by raising
a piston, and perhaps turning a flywheel, and on which work is then
done so that it returns to its original condition. This is a cycle of
operations. If we consider only the changes which occur in the working
substance we can represent these changes by a diagram.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.]

_First operation_, (1→2). We suppose that the valve is turned so that
the non-conducting plug closes the cylinder. The piston is in the
position II (Fig. 31). Heat cannot then enter or leave the gas. But the
latter already contains heat: it is at a temperature of _T_↓{2}°, so
that it can expand doing work. Let it expand, forcing up the piston.
During this operation the pressure of the gas will fall from a point
on the vertical axis opposite 1 to a point opposite 2, and its volume
will increase from a point on the horizontal axis beneath 1 to a point
beneath 2. It will cool because it has expanded, and no heat is allowed
to enter it during this act of expansion. The expansion is therefore
adiabatic; the temperature falls from _T_↓{2}° to _T_↓{1}°; and work is
done _by_ the gas.

_Second operation_, (2→3). The piston is now at the position I, that
is, at the upper end of its stroke, and we must bring it back again
to the lower end of the cylinder. The valve is turned so that the
bottom of the cylinder is placed in thermal communication with the
refrigerator (-), and the piston is pushed in to the position II. The
gas is therefore compressed until its volume decreases from a point
beneath 2 to a point beneath 3. As it is being compressed, heat is
generated and its temperature would rise, but as this heat is generated
it flows into the refrigerator, so that the temperature of the gas
remains the same during the operation. The contraction is therefore an
isothermal one; the temperature remains at _T_↓{1}°; and work is done
on the gas from outside.

_Third operation_, (3→4). But the piston is not at the lower end of
its stroke yet. We turn the valve so that the bottom of the cylinder
is closed by the non-conducting plug _O_, and then push in the piston
until it reaches the position III. The gas is still further compressed,
and this compression generates heat. But the heat cannot escape, so
that the temperature of the gas rises until it reaches _T_↓{2}°. The
contraction is therefore an adiabatic one. Work is done _on_ the gas.

_Fourth operation_, (4→1). The piston is now at the lower end of its
stroke. We turn the valve so that the bottom of the cylinder is placed
in communication with the source of heat (+). The gas expands from
the point beneath 4 to the point beneath 1, raising the piston to the
position II. This expansion of the gas would lower its temperature,
but it is in communication with the source of heat, and so it does
not cool, but draws heat from the source and remains at a constant
temperature, _T_↓{2}°. The expansion is therefore an isothermal one.
Work is done _by_ the gas.

This completes the cycle. But the gas is heated, and when the piston
is at position II, the valve is turned so as to close the cylinder by
the non-conducting plug _O_. The heat already contained in the gas
continues to expand, the latter doing more work, but this expansion
causes the temperature to fall from _T_↓{2}° to _T_↓{1}°. This is the
operation with which the cycle commenced.

Summarising the positive Carnot cycle, we see that the engine takes
heat from a source (+) and gives up part of this to a refrigerator (-),
(in an actual steam-engine heat is taken from the boiler and given up
to the condenser water). If we measure the quantity of heat taken from
the boiler in the steam which enters the cylinders we shall find that
this quantity of heat is greater than the quantity which is given up
to the condenser water. What becomes of the balance? It is converted
into the mechanical work of the engine. The Carnot engine therefore
takes a quantity of heat, _Q_↓{2}, from the source and gives up another
quantity of heat, _Q_↓{1}, to the refrigerator. We find that _Q_↓{2} is
greater than _Q_↓{1} and the balance, _Q_↓{2} - _Q_↓{1}, is represented
by the work done by the engine. Heat-energy falls from a state of high,
to a state of low potential, and is partly transformed into mechanical
work.


THE CARNOT NEGATIVE CYCLE

This is simply the positive cycle _reversed_. The reader should puzzle
it out for himself if he is not already familiar with it. It consists
of an adiabatic contraction 2→1, an isothermal contraction 1→4, an
adiabatic expansion 4→3, and an isothermal expansion 3→2. A quantity
of heat, _Q_↓{1}, is taken from the refrigerator at a temperature
_T_↓{1}°, and another quantity, _Q_↓{2}, is given up to the source at
a temperature _T_↓{2}°. But _Q_↓{2} is greater than _Q_↓{1}, and the
engine therefore gives up more heat than it receives, while, further,
heat flows from a body at a low temperature to another body at a higher
temperature. Where does the engine get this energy from? It gets it
because work is done _upon_ it by means of an outside agency, and all
of this work is converted into heat.


REVERSIBILITY

The Carnot engine and cycle are therefore perfectly reversible. Not
only can the engine turn heat into work, but it can turn work into
heat. This perfect, quantitative reversibility is, however, a property
of the imaginary mechanism only, and it does not exist in any actual
engine.


ENTROPY

Let us consider the cycle more closely. In the operation 4→1, which
is an isothermal expansion, there is a flow of heat-energy from the
source and a transformation of energy into work. The gas in the
condition represented by the point 4 had a certain pressure and a
certain volume. In the condition represented by the point 1, its
pressure has decreased, its volume has increased, and its temperature
is the same. Its physical condition has been changed, and to bring
it back into its former condition something must be done to it. Let,
then, the gas continue to expand without receiving any more heat, or
parting with any: that is, let it undergo the adiabatic expansion 1→2
until its temperature falls to that of the refrigerator, _T_↓{1}°. We
now compress the gas while keeping it at this temperature, that is,
we cause it to undergo the isothermal contraction 2→3, during which
operation it is giving up heat to the refrigerator, so that there is
again a flow of heat-energy. We then compress it still further without
allowing heat to escape from it, that is, we cause it to undergo the
adiabatic contraction 3→4. During this operation the gas rises in
temperature to _T_↓{2}°. It is now in the condition that it was when
the cycle commenced.

In this cycle of operations heat first entered, and then left the gas,
and with this entrance or rejection of heat, the condition of the
gas with respect to its power of doing work changed. We investigate
this flow of heat, and the concomitant change of properties of the
substance, with regard to which the flow took place, by forming the
concept called _entropy_. We make the convention that when heat enters
a substance the entropy of the latter increases, and when heat leaves
it its entropy decreases. We call the quantity of heat entering or
leaving a substance _Q_, and the temperature of the substance _T_. Then
_Q_/_T_ is proportional to the change of entropy of the substance when
the quantity of heat, _Q_, enters or leaves it.

Now it is a fact of our experience that heat can only flow, _of
itself_, from a hotter to a colder body. Consider two such bodies
forming an isolated system, the temperature of the hotter one being
_T_↓{2}°, and that of the colder one _T_↓{1}°. Let _Q_ units of heat
flow from the body at _T_↓{2}° to that at _T_↓{1}° no work being done.

Then the loss of entropy of the hotter body is _Q_/_T_↓{2}°, and the
gain of entropy of the colder body is _Q_/_T_↓{1}°. The nett change of
entropy of the system is _Q_/_T_↓{1}° - _Q_/_T_↓{2}°. Since _T_↓{2}°
is greater than _T_↓{1}°, _Q_/_T_↓{2}° is less than _Q_/_T_↓{1}°.
Therefore the expression _Q_/_T_↓{1}° - _Q_/_T_↓{2}° is positive,
that is, the entropy of the system, as a whole, has increased. When
heat flows from a hotter to a colder body the nett entropy of the two
bodies, therefore, increases.

But we can also cause heat to flow from a colder to a hotter body _by
effecting a compensatory energy-transformation_. Such a compensation
would not occur by itself in any system capable of effecting an
energy-transformation, if it is to be effected some external agency
must act on the transforming system. We can suppose it to happen in
a perfectly reversible imaginary mechanism. Suppose a Carnot engine
works in the positive direction, taking heat from a reservoir at
temperature _T_↓{2}°, and giving up part of this heat to a refrigerator
at _T_↓{1}°, and doing a certain amount of work _W_. Suppose that
this work is stored up, so to speak, say by raising a heavy weight,
which can then fall and actuate the same Carnot engine in the opposite
(negative) direction. The engine then exactly reverses its former
series of operations. The work it did is reconverted into heat, and as
much of this heat flows from the refrigerator into the source, that
is, from a colder to a hotter body, in the negative operations, as
flowed from the source to the refrigerator in the positive operations.
In this primary energy-transformation, combined with a compensatory
energy-transformation, there is no change of entropy. The mechanism is
an ideal one--the limit to an irreversible mechanism.

But--and now we appeal to experience and cease to work with ideal
mechanisms--the actual engine which we can design and work is one
in which there will be friction, in which some parts will conduct
heat imperfectly, and other parts will insulate heat imperfectly.
Let the friction generate _q_ units of heat, and let the quantity
of heat which is “wasted” by imperfect conduction and insulation
be _q_↓{1}. This heat will flow into the refrigerator, or will be
radiated or conducted to the surrounding medium, which we suppose to
be at the same temperature as the refrigerator. If, then, we divide
this total quantity of heat by the temperature _T_↓{1}°, we get (_q_
+ _q_↓{1})/_T_↓{1}° = _S_↓{1} as the quantity of entropy which is
generated as the result of the imperfections of the engine, in addition
to the quantity of entropy, _S_, which would be generated if the engine
were a perfect one. Both _S_ and _S_↓{1}_ are positive.

Also in the working of the engine in the negative direction a certain
quantity of entropy, _S_↓{1}, is generated for reasons similar to those
mentioned above.

The entropy generated when the engine works in the positive direction
is therefore _S_ + _S_↓{1}, and when it works negatively the quantity
generated is also _S_↓{1}. The entropy destroyed when the engine works
negatively is _S_. The total change of entropy is therefore 2_S_↓{1}
+ _S_ - _S_, that is, 2_S_↓{1}. In an actual energy-transformation
combined with a compensatory energy-transformation there is therefore
an increase of entropy.

We can generalise these statements so that they will apply
not only to a heat-engine but to all mechanisms which effect
energy-transformations. In all such transformations entropy is
generated. Therefore _the Entropy of the Universe tends to a maximum_.


AVAILABLE AND UNAVAILABLE ENERGY

Consider the Carnot engine as a perfect mechanism. It takes heat-energy
from a source at a temperature _T_↓{2}°, and it gives up heat to a
refrigerator at a temperature _T_↓{1}°_, _T_↓{2}° being greater than
_T_↓{1}°. In the adiabatic expansion 1→2 the gas continues to expand
until its temperature becomes equal to that of the refrigerator. It
cannot, then, expand and do work any longer, and thus the proportion
of the heat, _Q_↓{2}, received from the source, which can be converted
into work, depends on the difference of temperature _T_↓{2}° -
_T_↓{1}°. The greater is this difference the greater will be the
proportion of the heat-energy received which can be converted into
work. If the engine were a perfect one, and if the gas were also a
perfect one (that is a gas which would continue to expand according
to the equation for the adiabatic expansion of gases), and if the
refrigerator were absolutely cold, then _all_ the heat energy received
from the source could be converted into work.

We cannot produce a refrigerator of absolute temperature 0°, and
therefore only a certain proportion of the heat which is received by
the engine can be transformed into mechanical work. But this work can
be used to reverse the action of the engine, and thus the same fraction
of the total heat-energy which was given to the refrigerator can be
taken from it and given back to the source. The perfect engine is
therefore reversible without loss of available energy.

Now consider still the engine as a mechanism which takes heat from a
source and gives it to a refrigerator, but let it be an actual engine.
Instead of giving up a certain fraction of the heat received to the
refrigerator--a fraction equal to _Q_↓{1} (_T_↓{1}°/_T_↓{2}°), it
gives up rather more, because it is not a perfect mechanism, that is,
it generates friction, etc. Some of the heat received thus ceases
to be available for the performance of work; and passes into the
refrigerator. The fraction of the heat-energy which passes into the
refrigerator in the perfectly reversible engine was unavailable energy
in the conditions in which the mechanism worked, or was imagined to
work, but in the actual engine this fraction is increased. If we
divide the increase of unavailable energy by the temperature of the
refrigerator, the product is the increase of entropy generated in the
actual engine over that generated in the ideal engine. Because of this
reduction of available energy the actual engine is an irreversible
mechanism.

This is the connection between unavailable energy and entropy. In all
transformations some fraction of the transforming energy becomes heat,
and this heat flows by conduction and radiation into the surrounding
bodies. In general this heat simply raises the temperature of the
medium into which it flows, and becomes unavailable for further
transformations. With every transformation that occurs some part of the
energy involved becomes unavailable. Therefore although the sum of the
available and unavailable energy of the Universe remains constant, the
fraction of unavailable energy tends continually to a maximum.


INERT MATTER

We can see now what is indicated by Bergson’s “inert matter.” It is not
matter deprived of energy--such an expression has no meaning--_it is
energy which is unavailable for further transformations_.

The matter in which we choose to say that this energy is inherent has
become _inert_. Let us substitute for the Carnot engine the actual
steam-engine of a ship, the condenser of which is cooled by the sea
water which is taken in, and which is then heated and flows out again
into the sea. The heat derived from the source, that is, from the
furnace of the boiler where coal is burned to raise steam, thus passes
out into the sea. Now the heat capacity of the sea is so great that the
temperature of the water is not appreciably raised by this heat, which
drains into it from the engine: even if it were appreciably raised, the
heat would be conducted into the earth, or would be radiated out into
space, and would then raise the temperature of the material bodies of
the universe. But let all this heat remain in the sea. It then simply
raises the temperature of the water by an exceedingly small amount,
and the motions of the molecules become infinitesimally increased.
But the heat becomes equally distributed by conduction and convection
throughout the mass of the water in the sea, and as there are no
differences in adjacent parts there are no means whereby the energy
which thus passes into the sea can be again transformed.

A new order of things is the result of the processes we have indicated.
The segregated, available heat-energy of material bodies has become
transferred to the un-co-ordinated, diffuse, unavailable energies of
the molecules which compose these bodies. The transformations which we
can effect depend on the condition that the energy which we utilise
is that of aggregates of molecules which are in a different physical
condition, as regards this energy, from adjacent aggregates. But when
this energy becomes equally distributed among the molecules of all the
aggregates, the matter in which it inheres becomes inert. If we could,
by a sorting process like that of Maxwell’s hypothetical demons, a
process which does not expend the energy with which it deals, separate
the molecules which were moving slowly from those which were moving
more quickly, we could make this energy again available. But it must
clearly be understood that our physics is the physics not of individual
molecules, but of aggregates of molecules.




INDEX


  Absolute, Driesch’s theory of, 47.

  Acceleration (in physics), 355.

  Acquired characters induced by the environment, 216;
    a means of transformism, 220;
    evidence of transmission scanty, 225;
    transmission not inconceivable, 226.

  Actions, categories of, and consciousness, 282;
    deliberative, 283;
    mechanistic hypothesis of, 157;
    stereotyped, 283;
    at a distance, 304.

  Activation of the ovum, 176.

  Adaptability, indicative of dominance, 258.

  Adaptation, 217;
    and acquired characters, 219;
    and changes of morphology and function, 219;
    not inherited, 220;
    causes of, 239.

  Adaptive response, 219.

  Adiabatic changes, 361.

  Aggregates, molecular, 353.

  Algæ, distribution of, 260.

  Allelomorphs, Mendelian, 231.

  Alternation of generations, 175.

  Amido-substances, 88.

  Anabolism, 88.

  Anatomical parts, homologies of, 251.

  Animal action, considered objectively, 278.

  Animal and plant contrasted, 269.

  Animality, 269.

  Annectant forms of life, 253.

  Annelids, morphology of, 248.

  Anthropomorphism in theories of action, 148.

  Anti-enzymes, 94.

  Antitoxins, 36.

  Ants, a dominant group, 260.

  Appendix vermiformis, 250.

  Approximation, standards of, 347.

  Armoured animals, 263.

  Arthropods, morphology of, 249;
    a dominant group, 259;
    distribution, 260;
    musculature of, 275;
    adaptations for mobility, 275;
    limits to size of, 275.

  Assimilation, 67.

  Atoms, constitution of, 355;
    arrangements of, 353.

  Automatism of animals deduced from mechanistic theories, 280.

  Autonomy in development, 322.

  Available energy, 62;
    and entropy, 374.


  Bacteria, a dominant group, 259;
    distribution, 259;
    geological history, 259, 261;
    morphology, 268;
    metabolism, 266;
    specialisation, 263;
    parasitism, 259;
    nitrogen, 73;
    prototrophic, 119, 266;
    paratrophic, 266;
    putrefactive, 266;
    fermentation, 266;
    and Brownian movements, 119;
    compensatory to plants, 267.

  Bergson, 28;
    creative evolution, 244;
    duration, 154;
    animals and plants, 78;
    eye of Pecten, 234;
    inert matter, 375;
    infinitesimal analysis of the organism, 111;
    kinematographic analysis, 110;
    theory of intellectualism, 51;
    memory, 156;
    morphological themes, 250;
    theory of pain, 281;
    theory of perception, 7, 10;
    the vital impetus, 318.

  Biology, systematic, 201, 203.

  Biophors, 132;
    size of, 183;
    growth of, 185.

  Biotic energy, 325.

  Borelli and animal mechanism, 125.

  Brownian movement, 118;
    significance of, 119.

  Bryan and thermodynamics, 62.

  Bud-formation, 165.


  Calculus, infinitesimal, 25, 115, 350.

  Calorimetric experiments, 65, 68.

  Capacity-energy factors, 61.

  Carnot’s cycle, 69, 78, 113;
    negative, 368;
    description of, 363, 366;
    compared with plant metabolism, 75;
    compared with the organism, 73.

  Catalysis, 90;
    universality of, 91.

  Catalysts, characters of, 91.

  Categories of organisms, 209.

  Central nervous system, specialisation of, 273;
    a switchboard, 273;
    evolution of, parallel with evolution of muscular system, 281.

  Chance in evolution, 237.

  Chemical affinity, 361.

  Chemical energy, degradation of, 75.

  Chemical reactions, direction of, 78;
    exothermic, 86;
    explosive, 86;
    similar in organic and inorganic systems, 78.

  Chemical synthesis, involve vital activity, 318.

  Chemistry, medieval, 125.

  Chlorophyll, 69.

  Chlorophyllian organisms, 88;
    metabolism of, 265;
    a dominant group, 259;
    essential morphology of, 268;
    distribution of, 260.

  Chromatin of the nucleus, 130;
    the material basis of inheritance, 182.

  Chromosomes, 130, 182, 183.

  Classification of organisms, 209.

  Classificatory systems, are artificial arrangements, 289;
    suggest evolutionary process, 210.

  Clausius, 54;
    and Carnot’s Law, 113.

  Cœlenterates, morphology of, 248.

  Cœlomate animals, 256.

  Colloidal platinum, 91.

  Colloids, 107.

  Colonial organisms, 164.

  Comparative anatomy, task of, 251.

  Compensatory energy-transformations effected by life, 309.

  Conjugation, 173;
    and heredity, 176;
    a stimulus to growth, 175.

  Consciousness involves analysis of the environment, 11;
    analysis of, is an arbitrary process, 12;
    a feeling of normality, 6;
    a part of crude sensation, 40;
    simplified by reasoning, 41;
    an intensive multiplicity, 303;
    degree of, is parallel to development of sensori-motor system, 280;
    not existent outside ourselves, 278;
    not a function of chemico-physical mechanism, 160;
    intense in difficultly performed operations, 281;
    and activity of cerebral cortex, 281;
    absent in parasites, 291.

  Conservation a test of reality, 357.

  Conservation of energy, 52;
    in organisms, 83.

  Conservation of structure, 253, 256.

  Constants, mathematical, 344.

  Continuity of cells in embryo, 171.

  Contractility, 100;
    muscular, 103.

  Co-ordinates, systems of, 23.

  Corals, 164.

  Cosmic evolution, 314;
    is a tendency towards degradation of energy, 316.

  Creation, special, 214.

  Curvature, 27.

  Curves, isothermal and adiabatic, 362.

  Cuttle-fishes, 250.

  Cytoplasm, 130.


  Darwin, and natural selection, 221;
    acquired characters are inherited, 220;
    hypothesis of pangenesis, 181.

  Death, is catastrophic katabolism, 340.

  Degradation of energy, 81.

  Deliberation and consciousness, 281.

  Demons, Maxwell’s, 116.

  Descartes and mechanism, 121;
    the rational soul, 123, 318;
    his physiology, 122;
    his spiritualism, 124;
    and animal automatism, 125.

  Descent, collateral, 257.

  Determinants in embryology, 132, 183;
    arrangement of, 184;
    latent in regenerative processes, 142.

  Development, organisation in, 128;
    parthenogenetic, 176;
    reverses inorganic tendencies, 324;
    impossibility of chemical hypotheses, 141;
    is the assumption of a mosaic structure, 301;
    blastula stage in, 129;
    gastrula stage in, 130;
    pluteus stage in, 140;
    individual, 300.

  Developmental systems prospective value of, 138;
    prospective potency of, 138.

  Diatoms, 163;
    distribution of, 260.

  Differential elements, 115.

  Differentiation in development, 170.

  Diffusion in the animal body, 95.

  Digestion, 67;
    chemistry of, 72.

  Dinosaurs, an unsuccessful line of evolution, 275.

  Dissipation of energy, 114;
    in physical mechanisms, 59;
    by the organism, 68, 79.

  Distribution of organisms, 262;
    limits to, 259;
    indicative of dominance, 258.

  Diversity, physical, 54;
    effective and ineffective, 115.

  Dominance in geological time, 258;
    implies long geological history, 261;
    Mendelian, 196.

  Dominant organisms, 258, 259, 264.

  Driesch natural selection, 229;
    analytical definition of the organism, 331;
    entelechy, 318;
    experimental embryology, 134;
    historical basis of reacting, 154;
    logical proof of vitalism, 136;
    proof of vitalism from behaviour, 153;
    theory of the absolute, 47.

  Duration, 28;
    duration and time illustrated, 30;
    illustrated by immunity, 35;
    more than memory, 155;
    a factor in responding, 155.


  Ecdysis, 276.

  Echinoderms, morphology of, 248.

  Ectoderm, 177.

  Effector organs, 158, 271.

  _Élan vital_, 161.

  Electromagnetism, 355.

  Electrons, 304, 355.

  Elimination, natural, 229.

  Embryological stages compared with physical phases, 308.

  Embryology, 127;
    hypotheses of, 128;
    physical hypotheses fail, 128;
    experimental, 128;
    suggests phylogenetic history, 213.

  Emulsoids, 108.

  Endoskeleton, 177, 276.

  Energetics, first law of, 51;
    second law of, 113.

  Energy, 356;
    available and unavailable, 55;
    biotic, 325;
    chemical, 61;
    and causation, 54;
    degradation of, 63;
    dissipation of, 53;
    electrical, 61;
    forms of, 325;
    kinetic, 52, 357;
    mechanical, 60, 61;
    potential, 53, 358;
    of position, 360.

  Energy-transformations, 54, 371;
    anabolic, 89;
    in the animal, 70;
    compensatory, 88;
    compensatory organic, 268;
    irreversible, 59;
    in physical mechanisms, 58;
    in the plant, 71.

  Engelmann, and the artificial muscle, 105.

  Entelechy, 161, 318;
    not energy, 329;
    is power of direction, 329;
    not spatial but acts into space, 330;
    an intensive manifoldness, 330;
    is arrangement, 323;
    involves regulations, 323;
    arrests inorganic happening, 327;
    initiates chemical happening, 327;
    compared with enzyme action, 327;
    illustrated by analogy, 322.

  Entropy, 54;
    augmentation of, 75;
    and Carnot engine, 369.

  Environment, does not select variations, 235;
    made by the organism, 236.

  Enzymes, 90;
    nature of, 92;
    pancreatic, 93;
    reversible, 93;
    activation of, 92.

  Enzyme activity, 93.

  Epigenesis in development, 129.

  Equilibrium, chemical, 102.
    false, 86, 151.

  Ether of space, 46, 304, 361;
    potential energy resides in, 361.

  Evolution tendencies of, 252, 264, 276, 295;
    separation of tendencies, 296;
    a transformation of intensive into extensive manifoldness, 309;
    a dissociation of tendencies originally coalescent, 305;
    increases diversity, 310;
    segregates energy, 311;
    compared with permutations and combinations, 301;
    a series of phases in a transforming system, 298;
    a logical hypothesis, 214;
    parallel processes in, 234;
    geological time inadequate for, 237;
    side paths in, 262;
    mechanistic hypotheses inadequate, 237;
    cosmic, 214, 297, 314;
    of the crust of the earth, 264.

  Excretory products, 269.

  Exoskeleton, 276.

  Exothermic reactions, 86.

  Experience and duration, 156.

  Experimental biology proves evolution, 246.

  Explosive reactions, 101.

  Extension in space, 18.

  Extinct groups, 263.


  Fats, digestion of, 93.

  Fecundity of animals, 179, 239.

  Ferments, 92.

  Fertilisation (in reproduction), 176.

  Finalism, 216.

  Fishes, distribution of, 261.

  Fluctuating variations, 200.

  Food-stuffs, absorption of, 89.

  Force, 354.

  Form, accidental and essential, 167, 353;
    geological, 168;
    crystalline, 168.

  Frequency distributions, 22, 187, 350.

  Frog, development of egg of, 131.

  Functionality, 343;
    in physical systems, 307.


  Galvanotropism, 145.

  Gases, compression of, 362;
    kinetic theory of, 117, 361.

  Gastrea-theory, 177;
    illustrated, 255;
    limitations of, 256.

  Genera, stability of, 186.

  Geometry, Cartesian, 25;
    Euclidean, 19, 25;
    perceptual and conceptual limits, 21.

  Geotropism, 144.

  Germ-cells, 175;
    and soma, 179.

  Germinal selection, 241.

  Germ-layers, 177;
    theory of, 256.

  Germ-plasm, a mixture, 240;
    stability of, 240.

  Givenness, 47.

  Gonads, 179.

  Growth law of, in the organism, 172;
    by accretion, 169;
    by ecdysis, 276;
    geometrical, 169;
    physical, 167;
    of crystals, 167;
    and differentiation, 170;
    variability of, 172.


  Haeckel, the Gastrea-Theorie, 177, 254.

  Harmonic analysis, 11.

  Harvey, and the circulation of the blood, 121.

  Heat, flow of, 117;
    production of, in physical changes, 114.

  Heliotropism, 144.

  Heredity, 181.

  Hertzian waves, 355.

  Homoiothermic animals, 67.

  Hormones, 225.

  Human activity, tends to arrest dissipation of energy, 312.

  Huxley, 84;
    and mechanistic biology, 127;
    and the physical basis of life, 113;
    and mechanism, 106;
    and universal mathematics, 215.

  Hybrids, Mendelian, 196;
    infertility of, 195;
    between Linnean species, 194.

  Hydra, regeneration of, 162.


  Idants, 183.

  Idealism founded on pure reasoning, 45;
    of Berkeley, 45.

  Ids, 183.

  Immunity, 35.

  Individual, 162;
    definition of, 167.

  Individuality, orders of, 163;
    physical concept of, 165;
    morphologically an artificial concept, 166;
    in societies, 171.

  Inertia, 354.

  Infinity, a definition of, 342.

  Inorganic happening abolishes diversity, 310.

  Instinct, a problem for naturalists, 283;
    an inheritable adaptation of behaviour, 287.

  Instinct and intelligence, 283;
    distinction not absolute, 294;
    may coexist, 306.

  Instinct and functioning, 286.

  Instinctive actions not necessarily unconscious, 283;
    not learned, 286;
    not necessarily perfect, 284;
    effective from the first, 285;
    capable of improvement, 285.

  Intelligent actions, non-inheritable adaptations of behaviour, 287;
    involve deliberation, 50, 287;
    involve conscious relations with the environment, 288;
    involve use of tools, 284.

  Intensity-factors, 61.

  Intensive multiplicity, 303.

  Irreversibility, 62.

  Irritability, 100.

  Isothermal changes, 361.


  James, William (and academic philosophies), 80.

  Jennings, and physiological states, 154;
    behaviour of Protozoa, 293;
    animal movements, 149;
    the avoiding reaction, 149.


  Katabolism, 90.

  Kinases, 92.

  Kinematographic analysis, 316.


  Lamarck, hypotheses of evolution, 220.

  Lamarckian inheritance, an inadequate cause of transformism, 227.

  Lankester, acquired characters not inherited, 221.

  Laplace, and universal mathematics, 215.

  Laplacian mind, 299.

  Larval stages, 170.

  Latency (of characters), 195.

  Lavoisier, and chemistry of the organism, 127.

  Life and adaptation to physical conditions, 338;
    and reversibility, 339;
    a direction of energies, 341;
    defined energetically, 337;
    cosmic origin of, 338;
    physical conditions for, 338;
    limited in power, 306;
    sparsity of, on the earth, 306;
    tends to arrest dissipation of energy, 314;
    its origin a pseudo-problem, 337.

  Life-substance, the primitive, 301.

  Locomotion, 258.

  Loeb and the associative memory, 155;
    and artificial parthenogenesis, 176;
    mechanism and life, 127;
    stereotropism, 19;
    theory of tropisms, 144;
    tropistic movements, 146;
    theories of heredity, 181.

  Limit, the mathematical, 346.

  Limits to perceptual activity, 23.

  Links, missing, 252.

  Linnean species, 201.


  Manifoldness, intensive, 302.

  Mass, 353.

  Mass action, 140.

  Materialism, 85.

  Mathematics, evades consideration of time, 35.

  Matter, 353;
    inert, 375;
    notion of is an intuitive one, 352.

  Maxwell, and sorting demons, 116, 377.

  Mayow, and chemical physiology, 126.

  Mechanical work, done by the animal, 67;
    not done by the plant, 71.

  Mechanism, organic and inorganic, 78;
    the thermodynamic, 66;
    radical, 215;
    in life, 121.

  Membranes, semi-permeable, 95.

  Memory, 39;
    a possible cerebral mechanism of, 158;
    mechanistic hypotheses impossible, 157.

  Mendelism, 196;
    a logical hypothesis, 199;
    terminology is a symbolism, 198;
    analogy of unit characters with chemical radicles, 197;
    transmission of characters of, 230.

  Mesoderm, 177;
    origin of, 255.

  Metabolism, 37, 88, 209;
    analytic, 269;
    of animals, 65, 67;
    constructive, 269;
    destructive, 269;
    direction of, 69;
    in green plant, 70, 75;
    intra-cellular, 99;
    integration of its activities, 111;
    rôle of oxygen in, 105;
    specialisation of during evolution, 305;
    synthetic, 269.

  Metaphysics of science, 45.

  Metazoan animals, 162.

  Mitosis, 182.

  Mobility, organic, 269;
    structural adaptations tending to, 275.

  Modifications of structure adaptive and non-adaptive, 251.

  Molecules, 353;
    size of, 116;
    in a gas, 115;
    aggregations of, 108.

  Molluscs, morphology of, 249.

  Morgan, and physico-chemical mechanisms, 128, 143.

  Morphogenesis, 257.

  Morphological evolution, tendencies of, 295.

  Morphological structures degeneration of, 251;
    suppression of, 250;
    coalescence of, 250;
    replacement of, 250;
    specialisation of, 250;
    change of function of, 251.

  Morphology, 209;
    a basis of classification, 210;
    relates groups of organisms, 211;
    distinctions of, not absolute, 285, 290;
    generalised, 250;
    suggests blood relationships, 213;
    schemata of, 249, 291;
    cannot be considered apart from physiology, 285.

  Mosaic-theory of development, 131.

  Motion not an intellectual concept, 27;
    not considered in Euclidean or Cartesian geometry, 26;
    bodily motion is absolute, 24;
    outside ourselves is relative, 24.

  Motor-habits, 38, 155.

  Multicellular organisms, evolution of, 223.

  Muscular contraction, 104;
    metabolism in, 104;
    heat production in, 104.

  Muscular and nervous organs, 275.

  Musculature and weight of body, 275.

  Mutations, 189;
    essential nature of, 193;
    causes of, 200;
    must be co-ordinated, 231;
    physical model of, 192;
    the material for selection, 230.


  Nägeli, and autonomy in development, 160.

  Natural selection, 228;
    generality of, 229;
    a slow process, 230.

  Nebulæ, 315.

  Nebular hypothesis, 296.

  Nerve impulses, 100;
    velocity of, 101;
    integration of, 273.

  Nervous system, 272;
    in co-ordination of activities, 171;
    paths in, 157.

  Nervous activity, 107;
    metabolism in, 107;
    electric changes in, 107;
    influence of metabolism on, 97.

  Nothing, a pseudo-idea, 18.

  Nucleus, evolution of, 222;
    division of, 130, 182.


  Ontogenetic stages, 255.

  Orders of individuality, 171.

  Organism, definition of, 331;
    analysis of its activities, 109;
    animal and plant, 76;
    considered energetically, 77;
    the dominant, 258;
    a function of the environment, 216;
    a mechanism, 51;
    the primitive, 222;
    a physico-chemical system, 65;
    a thermodynamic mechanism, 104.

  Organic chemical syntheses, 317.

  Organisation in development, 137.

  Organ-rudiments, 257.

  Osmosis, 95, 99.

  Ostracoderms, 291.

  Ostwald on catalysis, 91.

  Ovum, development of, 129;
    maturation of, 198, 239;
    an intensive manifoldness, 302.

  Oxidases, 105.

  Oxygen in metabolism, 69.


  Pain, Bergson on, 281.

  Palæontology, 210;
    relates groups of organisms, 211.

  Pangenesis, 181.

  Paramœcium, division of, 173, 175;
    responses of, 4.

  Parasitism, 259;
    tends to immobility, 290.

  Parthenogenesis, 176;
    artificial, 176.

  Particles, 356.

  Pecten, eye of, 233.

  Perception
    not merely physical stimulation, 7;
    involves effector activity, 7;
    involves deliberative action, 9;
    arises from acting, 50;
    and choice of response, 155;
    is unfamiliar cerebral activity, 8;
    skeletonises consciousness, 40.

  Peridinians, 77, 163;
    distribution of, 260.

  Personal equation, 45.

  Personality, 167;
    an intuition, 167;
    division of, 173;
    is absolute, 48.

  Pflüger, and experimental embryology, 131.

  Phases in physical systems and organic systems, 321;
    in transforming systems, 308.

  Phenomenalism, 46.

  Photosynthesis, 70, 76, 86.

  Phototaxis, 144.

  Phyla
    animal, 247;
    morphology of, 247;
    relations between, 252;
    ancestries of, 252.

  Phylogenies, 253;
    are summaries of morphological results, 254;
    indicative of directions of evolution, 254;
    criteria of, 253.

  Phylogeny, 246.

  Phylum, 210.

  Physical basis of life, 84.

  Physico-chemical reactions, 80;
    are directed, 118;
    the means of development and behaviour in the organism, 160.

  Physico-psychical parallelism, 160.

  Physics, a statistical science, 116, 377.

  Physiology
    Galenic, 122;
    an analysis of organic activity, 120, 328.

  Plants, geological history of, 261;
    characterised by immobility, 277;
    contrasted with animals, 277.

  Platonic ideas, 204.

  Platyhelminths, morphology of, 248.

  Poikilothermic animals, 68.

  Poincaré, and Brownian movement, 119.

  Polar bodies, 198.

  Polyzoa, 164.

  Porifera, 248.

  Potential, 61.

  Potential energy, 58, 114.

  Preformation an embryological hypothesis, 128.

  Probability, 350.

  Proteids, digestion of, 90.

  Proto-forms, 254.

  Protoplasm, nature of, 106;
    artificial, 106;
    disintegration of, 107;
    activities of, 107;
    similar in plant and animal, 294.

  Protozoa, 247;
    behaviour of, 293.

  Pterodactyls, 274.


  Races (in specific groups), 194.

  Radiation, 355;
    of sun, 51;
    transformation of energy of, 57.

  Radio-activity, 56, 359.

  Reality, objective, 43.

  Reception, 3;
    organs of, 271;
    by specialised sense-organs, 11.

  Recessiveness, Mendelian, 196.

  Reflex action, 4, 272;
    concatenated, 150;
    a complex series of actions, 6;
    not necessarily accompanied by perception, 155;
    the basis of instincts, 150;
    a schematic description, 5;
    in decapitated frog, 6;
    frictionless cerebral activity, 8;
    involves a limited part of the environment, 50.

  Reflex arcs, 272.

  Regeneration, 142;
    in Hydra, 164;
    in sea-urchin embryo, 164;
    in Planaria, 164.

  Regression, 189.

  Reinke, and structure of protoplasm, 106.

  Reintegration in development, 171.

  Rejuvenescence, 175.

  Releasing agencies, 157.

  Reproduction, 167;
    asexual, 175;
    by brood-formation, 173;
    by conjugation, 173;
    sexual, 174;
    by division, 172;
    compared with minting machine, 242;
    of the tissues, 180.

  Responses of organisms, 217;
    directed, 269;
    of magnet, 279;
    of green plant, 279.

  Reversibility, physical, 369.

  Rodewald, chemical nature of protoplasm, 106.

  Roux, experimental embryology, 131;
    development the production of a visible manifoldness, 307.


  Saliva, secretion of, 96.

  Salivary glands, metabolism of, 96.

  Salivary secretion, not a purely mechanistic process, 112.

  Sea, not really rich in life, 306.

  Sea-urchin gastrula, 170.

  Secretion described mechanistically, 98.

  Secretion, psychical, 99.

  Segmentation of the ovum, 129.

  Selection, natural, 228;
    from fluctuating variations, 189;
    from mutations, 190.

  Semon, mnemic hypothesis of heredity, 181.

  Senescence, 175.

  Sensation, 2;
    analysis of, 13.

  Sense-receptors and the idea of matter, 352.

  Sensori-motor system, 270;
    dominant in animals, 271, 273;
    specialisation of, 271, 273;
    essentially the same in all animals, 294;
    absent in plants, 269;
    vestigial in some parasites, 290.

  Sexuality, 174.

  Siphonophores, regeneration in, 163.

  Size of animals, 274.

  Skeleton of vertebrates, 276;
    of arthropods, 276;
    and mobility, 276.

  Soddy, and chemical energy, 361.

  Soma, 179;
    evolution of, 223.

  Space, form of, 18;
    3-dimensional, 18;
    3-dimensional space an intuition, 19;
    2-dimensional, 19;
    the form of, depends on modes of activity, 21, 25.

  Species, are categories of structure, 201;
    comparison with Platonic ideas, 204;
    criteria of, 202;
    elementary, 193;
    are intellectual constructions, 203;
    individuality of, 203;
    Linnean, 201, 289;
    are phases in an evolutionary flux, 206;
    are families in the human sense, 208;
    systematic, 201.

  Specific organisation, stability of, 186.

  Stahl, and the phlogistic hypothesis, 126;
    and vitalism, 126.

  Stimuli, elemental, 151;
    physico-chemical, 151;
    formative, 176;
    complex auditory, 152;
    integration of, 152;
    individualised, 152, 270;
    contractile, 103.

  Stimulus and response, functionality of, 152.

  Substantia physica, 46, 355.

  Surface tension, 105, 106.

  Suspensoids, 108.

  Sylvius, the organism a chemical mechanism, 125.

  Symbiosis, 77.

  Symbiotic organisms, 88.

  Synapses, in central nervous system, 158, 272.

  Synthetic chemistry, 236, 317.

  System, isolated, 63.

  Systems in development
    equipotential, 139;
    harmonious equipotential, 139;
    complex equipotential, 140.


  Taxis, 144;
    no perception in, 155.

  Telegraphy, wireless, 355.

  Temperature of sun, 56;
    of space, 57.

  Thermodynamics, 51;
    1st law of, 51;
    2nd law of, 54, 63, 309, 316;
    and Maxwell’s demons, 118;
    laws of subject to limitations, 115.

  Thermodynamical mechanism, the organism not a, 69.

  Thomson, W., dissipation of energy, 113.

  Time a series of standard events, 28;
    astronomical, 34;
    time differentials, 34.

  Tissues, evolution of, 223.

  Tools, nature of, 285;
    use of must be learned, 285;
    bodily, 285.

  Toxins, 36.

  Transformism, 213.

  Trematodes, larval stages of, 165.

  Trial and error, 293;
    in reasoning, 293;
    a hypothesis of animal movements, 150.

  Trigger reactions, 87.

  Trilobites, an ancient group, 261.

  Tropisms, 144;
    in plants, 269, 279;
    in moths, 280;
    and natural selection, 147;
    and movements of caterpillars, 146;
    an inadequate basis for a theory of animal movements, 147.

  Tunicates, suppressed notochord of, 250.


  Unavailable energy and entropy, 375;
    tendency to increase of, 375.

  Unicellular organisms, energy-transformations in, 177.

  Unit-characters, 230.


  Van’t Hoff’s law, 218.

  Variability, 172, 186;
    continuous, 188;
    discontinuous, 188;
    examples of, 187;
    and the environment, 189;
    independent of the environment, 239;
    and growth, 188;
    tendencies of, 235.

  Variation, rate of (mathematical), 344;
    in biology, 186;
    atavistic, 195;
    direction of, 233;
    fluctuating, 189;
    must be co-ordinated, 231;
    mathematical probability of co-ordination of 233;
    the material for selection, 229;
    origin of, 230;
    selected by the organism, 237;
    cause of, a pseudo-problem, 242;
    arise de novo, 244.

  Variables (mathematical), 343.

  Varieties, specific, 194.

  Vegetable life, 265.

  Vertebrates, 249;
    adaptations securing mobility, 275;
    ancestry of, 253;
    morphology of, 249;
    a dominant group, 259;
    distribution of, 260.

  Verworn, and mechanism in life, 127.

  Vesalius, anatomical school of, 121.

  Vital activities, integration of, 128;
    co-ordination of, 171.

  de Vries and mutations, 191;
    fluctuating variations inherited, 220.

  Vital force, 318.

  Van der Waal’s equation, 308.


  Weber’s law, 16;
    a quasi-mathematical relation, 17.

  Weismann, hypothesis of heredity, 182;
    hypothesis of germinal selection, 241;
    hypothesis of development, 132;
    mosaic-theory, 131;
    preformation hypothesis, 133;
    hypothesis of the germ-plasm, continuity of the germ-plasm, 181;
    germinal changes inconceivable, 224;
    size of biophors, 183;
    origin of life, 339;
    spontaneous generation a logical necessity, 339.

  Weismannism, a series of logical hypotheses, 320;
    physico-chemical analogies, and subsidiary hypotheses, 223.

  Whales, an unsuccessful line of evolution, 274.

  Whitehead, and mathematical reasoning, 347.

  Wilson, mosaic-theory of development, 139.


  Yerkes, and behaviour of crustacea, 293.


  Zymogens, 92.

  Zymoids, 94.




        PRINTED BY
  TURNBULL AND SPEARS,
        EDINBURGH




Spelling corrections:

  animo-acids → amino-acids
  animo-substances → amino-substances
  differen tkinds → different kinds
  algae → algæ
  organsim → organism (x2)
  diffusbility → diffusibility
  marjoity → majority
  hythothesis → hypothesis
  execretory → excretory
  conconsidered → considered





End of Project Gutenberg's The philosophy of biology, by James Johnstone

