CHAPTER XXXIII.

MENEXENUS.


Persons and situation of the dialogue   401

Funeral harangue at Athens--Choice of a public orator--Sokrates
declares the task of the public orator to be easy--Comic
exaggeration of the effects of the harangue   401

Sokrates professes to have learnt a funeral harangue from Aspasia,
and to be competent to recite it himself. Menexenus entreats him
to do so   402

Harangue recited by Sokrates   403

Compliments of Menexenus after Sokrates has finished, both to the
harangue itself and to Aspasia   _ib._

Supposed period--shortly after the peace of Antalkidas   _ib._

Custom of Athens about funeral harangues. Many such harangues
existed at Athens, composed by distinguished orators or
logographers--Established type of the harangue   404

Plato in this harangue conforms to the established type--Topics on
which he insists   405

Consolation and exhortation to surviving relatives   407

Admiration felt for this harangue, both at the time and afterwards
407

Probable motives of Plato in composing it, shortly after he
established himself at Athens as a teacher--His competition with
Lysias--Desire for celebrity both as rhetor and as dialectician
_ib._

Menexenus compared with the view of rhetoric presented in the
Gorgias--Necessity for an orator to conform to established
sentiments   409

Colloquial portion of the Menexenus is probably intended as
ridicule and sneer at Rhetoric--The harangue itself is serious,
and intended as an evidence of Plato's ability   410

Anachronism of the Menexenus--Plato careless on this point   411


CHAPTER XXXIV.

KLEITOPHON.


Persons and circumstances of Kleitophon   413

Conversation of Sokrates with Kleitophon alone: he alludes to
observations of an unfavourable character recently made by
Kleitophon, who asks permission to explain   _ib._

Explanation given. Kleitophon expresses gratitude and admiration
for the benefit which he has derived from long companionship with
Sokrates   414

The observations made by Sokrates have been most salutary and
stimulating in awakening ardour for virtue. Arguments and
analogies commonly used by Sokrates   _ib._

But Sokrates does not explain what virtue is, nor how it is to be
attained. Kleitophon has had enough of stimulus, and now wants
information how he is to act   415

Questions addressed by Kleitophon with this view, both to the
companions of Sokrates and to Sokrates himself   416

Replies made by the friends of Sokrates unsatisfactory   _ib._

None of them could explain what the special work of justice or
virtue was   417

Kleitophon at length asked the question from Sokrates himself. But
Sokrates did not answer clearly. Kleitophon believes that Sokrates
knows, but will not tell   417

Kleitophon is on the point of leaving Sokrates and going to
Thrasymachus. But before leaving he addresses one last entreaty,
that Sokrates will speak out clearly and explicitly   418

Remarks on the Kleitophon. Why Thrasyllus placed it in the eighth
Tetralogy immediately before the Republic, and along with Kritias,
the other fragment   419

Kleitophon is genuine, and perfectly in harmony with a just theory
of Plato   420

It could not have been published until after Plato's death   _ib._

Reasons why the Kleitophon was never finished. It points out the
defects of Sokrates, just as he himself confesses them in the
Apology   421

The same defects also confessed in many of the Platonic and
Xenophontic dialogues   422

Forcible, yet respectful, manner in which these defects are set
forth in the Kleitophon. Impossible to answer them in such a way
as to hold out against the negative Elenchus of a Sokratic pupil
423

The Kleitophon represents a point of view which many objectors
must have insisted on against Sokrates and Plato   424

The Kleitophon was originally intended as a first book of the
Republic, but was found too hard to answer. Reasons why the
existing first book was substituted   _ib._




