CHAPTER XXX.

POLITIKUS.


The Politikus by itself, apart from the Sophistês   260

Views of Plato on mensuration. Objects measured against each
other. Objects compared with a common standard. In each Art, the
purpose to be attained is the standard   _ib._

Purpose in the Sophistês and Politikus is--To attain dialectic
aptitude. This is the standard of comparison whereby to judge
whether the means employed are suitable   261

Plato's defence of the Politikus against critics. Necessity that
the critic shall declare explicitly what his standard of
comparison is   262

Comparison of Politikus with Protagoras, Phædon, Philêbus, &c.
_ib._

Definition of the statesman, or Governor. Scientific competence.
Sokratic point of departure. Procedure of Plato in subdividing
263

King during the Saturnian period, was of a breed superior to the
people--not so any longer   264

Distinction of causes Principal and Causes Auxiliary. The King is
the only Principal Cause, but his auxiliaries pretend to be
principal also   266

Plato does not admit the received classification of government. It
does not touch the point upon which all true distinction ought to
be founded--Scientific or Unscientific   267

Unscientific governments are counterfeits. Government by any
numerous body must be counterfeit. Government by the one
scientific man is the true government   268

Fixed laws, limiting the scientific Governor, are mischievous, as
they would be for the physician and the steersman. Absurdity of
determining medical practice by laws, and presuming every one to
know it   269

Government by fixed laws is better than lawless government by
unscientific men, but worse than lawless government by scientific
men. It is a second-best   _ib._

Comparison of unscientific governments. The one despot is the
worse. Democracy is the least bad, because it is least of a
government   270

The true governor distinguished from the General, the Rhetor, &c.
They are all properly his subordinates and auxiliaries   271

What the scientific Governor will do. He will aim at the formation
of virtuous citizens. He will weave together the energetic virtues
with the gentle virtues. Natural dissidence between them   272

If a man sins by excess of the energetic element, he is to be
killed or banished: if of the gentle, he is to be made a slave.
The Governor must keep up in the minds of the citizens an
unanimous standard of ethical orthodoxy   272

Remarks--Sokratic Ideal--Title to govern mankind derived
exclusively from scientific superiority in an individual person
273

Different ways in which this ideal is worked out by Plato and
Xenophon. The man of speculation and the man of action   _ib._

The theory in the Politikus is the contradiction to that theory
which is assigned to Protagoras in the Protagoras   274

Points of the Protagorean theory--rests upon common sentiment
275

Counter-Theory in the Politikus. The exigencies of the Eleate in
the Politikus go much farther than those of Protagoras   276

The Eleate complains that under the Protagorean theory no adverse
criticism is allowed. The dissenter is either condemned to silence
or punished   _ib._

Intolerance at Athens, not so great as elsewhere. Plato complains
of the assumption of infallibility in existing societies, but
exacts it severely in that which he himself constructs   277

Theory of the Politikus--distinguished three gradations of polity.
Gigantic individual force the worst   278

Comparison of the Politikus with the Republic. Points of analogy
and difference   279

Comparison of the Politikus with the Kratylus. Dictatorial,
constructive, science or art, common to both: applied in the
former to social administration--in the latter to the formation
and modification of names   281

Courage and Temperance are assumed in the Politikus. No notice
taken of the doubts and difficulties raised in Lachês and
Charmidês   282

Purpose of the difficulties in Plato's Dialogues of Search--To
stimulate the intellect of the hearer. His exposition does not
give solutions   284


