CHAPTER XXVII.

PARMENIDES.

Character of dialogues immediately preceding--much transcendental
assertion. Opposite character of the Parmenides   56

Sokrates is the juvenile defendant--Parmenides the veteran censor
and cross-examiner. Parmenides gives a specimen of exercises to be
performed by the philosophical aspirant   _ib._

Circumstances and persons of the Parmenides   57

Manner in which the doctrine of Parmenides was impugned. Manner in
which his partisan Zeno defended him   58

Sokrates here impugns the doctrine of Zeno. He affirms the
Platonic theory of ideas separate from sensible objects, yet
participable by them   60

Parmenides and Zeno admire the philosophical ardour of Sokrates.
Parmenides advances objections against the Platonic theory of
Ideas   60

What Ideas does Sokrates recognise? Of the Just and Good? Yes. Of
Man, Horse, &c.? Doubtful. Of Hair, Mud, &c.? No   _ib._

Parmenides declares that no object in nature is mean to the
philosopher   61

Remarks upon this--Contrast between emotional and scientific
classification   _ib._

Objections of Parmenides--How can objects participate in the
Ideas. Each cannot have the whole Idea, nor a part thereof   62

Comparing the Idea with the sensible objects partaking in the
Idea, there is a likeness between them which must be  represented
by a higher Idea--and so on _ad infinitum_   63

Are the Ideas conceptions of the mind, and nothing more?
Impossible   64

The Ideas are types or exemplars, and objects partake of them by
being likened to them. Impossible   65

If Ideas exist, they cannot be knowable by us. We can know only
what is relative to ourselves. Individuals are relative to
individuals: Ideas relative to Ideas   _ib._

Forms can be known only through the Form of Cognition, which we do
not possess   66

Form of cognition, superior to our Cognition, belongs to the Gods.
We cannot know them, nor can they know us   _ib._

Sum total of objections against the Ideas is grave. But if we do
not admit that Ideas exist, and that they are knowable, there can
be no dialectic discussion   67

Dilemma put by Parmenides--Acuteness of his objections   68

The doctrine which Parmenides attacks is the genuine Platonic
theory of Ideas. His objections are never answered in any part of
the Platonic dialogues   _ib._

Views of Stallbaum and Socher. The latter maintains that Plato
would never make such objections against his own theory, and
denies the authenticity of the Parmenidês   69

Philosophers are usually advocates, each of a positive system of
his own   70

Different spirit of Plato in his Dialogues of Search   _ib._

The Parmenidês is the extreme manifestation of the negative
element. That Plato should employ one dialogue in setting forth
the negative case against the Theory of Ideas is not unnatural
71

Force of the negative case in the Parmenidês. Difficulties about
participation of sensible objects in the world of Ideas   _ib._

Difficulties about the Cognizability of Ideas. If Ideas are
absolute, they cannot be cognizable: if they are cognizable, they
must be relative. Doctrine of Homo Mensura   72

Answer of Sokrates--That Ideas are mere conceptions of the mind.
Objection of Parmenides correct, though undeveloped   73

Meaning of Abstract and General Terms, debated from ancient times
to the present day--Different views of Plato and Aristotle upon it
76

Plato never expected to make his Ideas fit on to the facts of
sense: Aristotle tried to do it and partly succeeded   78

Continuation of the Dialogue--Parmenides admonishes Sokrates that
he has been premature in delivering a doctrine, without sufficient
preliminary exercise   79

What sort of exercise? Parmenides describes: To assume
provisionally both the affirmative and the negative of many
hypotheses about the most general terms, and to trace the
consequences of each   _ib._

Impossible to do this before a numerous audience--Parmenides is
entreated to give a specimen--After much solicitation he agrees
80

Parmenides elects his own theory of the _Unum_, as the topic for
exhibition--Aristoteles becomes respondent   _ib._

Exhibition of Parmenides--Nine distinct deductions or
Demonstrations, first from _Unum Est_--next from _Unum non Est_
81

The Demonstrations in antagonising pairs, or Antinomies.
Perplexing entanglement of conclusions given without any
explanation   _ib._

Different judgments of Platonic critics respecting the Antinomies
and the dialogue generally   82

No dogmatical solution or purpose is wrapped up in the dialogue.
The purpose is negative, to make a theorist keenly feel all the
difficulties of theorising   85

This negative purpose is expressly announced by Plato himself. All
dogmatical purpose, extending farther, is purely hypothetical, and
even inconsistent with what is declared   87

The Demonstrations or Antinomies considered. They include much
unwarranted assumption and subtlety. Collection of unexplained
perplexities or [Greek: a)pori/ai]   88

Even if Plato himself saw through these subtleties, he might still
choose to impose and to heap up difficulties in the way of a
forward affirmative aspirant   89

The exercises exhibited by Parmenides are exhibited only as
illustrative specimens of a method enjoined to be applied to many
other Antinomies   91

These Platonic Antinomies are more formidable than any of the
sophisms or subtleties broached by the Megaric philosophers
_ib._

In order to understand fully the Platonic Antinomies, we ought to
have before us the problems of the Megarics and others.
Uselessness of searching for a positive result   93

Assumptions of Parmenides in his Demonstrations convey the minimum
of determinate meaning. Views of Aristotle upon these
indeterminate predicates, Ens,  Unum, &c.   94

In the Platonic Demonstrations the same proposition in words is
made to bear very different meanings   95

First demonstration ends in an assemblage of negative conclusions.
_Reductio ad Absurdum_, of the assumption--Unum non Multa   96

Second Demonstration   97

It ends in demonstrating _Both_, of that which the first
Demonstration had demonstrated _Neither_   98

Startling paradox--Open offence against logical canon--No logical
canon had then been laid down   99

Demonstration third--Attempt to reconcile the contradiction of
Demonstrations I. and II.   100

Plato's imagination of the Sudden or Instantaneous--Breaches or
momentary stoppages in the course of time   _ib._

Review of the successive pairs of Demonstrations or Antinomies in
each, the first proves the Neither, the second proves the Both
101

The third Demonstration is mediatorial but not satisfactory--The
hypothesis of the Sudden or Instantaneous found no favour   102

Review of the two last Antinomies. Demonstrations VI. and VII.
103

Demonstration VII. is founded upon the genuine doctrine of
Parmenides   104

Demonstrations VI. and VII. considered--Unwarrantable steps in the
reasoning--The fundamental premiss differently interpreted, though
the same in words   105

Demonstrations VIII. and IX.--Analysis of Demonstration VIII.
106

Demonstration VIII. is very subtle and Zenonian   107

Demonstration IX. _Neither_ following _Both_   _ib._

Concluding words of the Parmenides--Declaration that he has
demonstrated the Both and the Neither of many different
propositions   108

Comparison of the conclusion of the Parmenides to an enigma of the
Republic. Difference. The constructor of the enigma adapted its
conditions to a foreknown solution. Plato did not   _ib._


