CHAPTER XXX.

PHIL'S TRUST.

Among the duties which devolved upon Phil was Mr. Carter's bank
business. He generally made deposits for Uncle Oliver, and drew money on
his personal checks whenever he needed it.

It has already been said that Mr. Carter was a silent partner in the
firm of which Mr. Pitkin was the active manager. The arrangement between
the partners was, that each should draw out two hundred dollars a week
toward current expenses, and that the surplus, if any, at the end of the
year, should be divided according to the terms of the partnership.

When Phil first presented himself with a note from Mr. Carter, he was an
object of attention to the clerks, who knew that he had been discharged
by Mr. Pitkin. Yet here he was, dressed in a new suit provided with a
watch, and wearing every mark of prosperity. One of the most surprised
was Mr. G. Washington Wilbur, with whom, as an old friend, Phil stopped
to chat.

“Is old Pitkin going to take you back?” he inquired.

“No,” answered Phil promptly. “He couldn't have me if he wanted me.”

“Have you got another place?”

“Yes.”

“What's the firm?”

“It isn't in business. I am private secretary to Mr. Carter.”

Mr. Wilbur regarded him with surprise and respect.

“Is it a soft place?” he inquired.

“It's a very pleasant place.”

“What wages do you get?”

“Twelve dollars a week and board.”

“You don't mean it?”

“Yes, I do.”

“Say, doesn't he want another secretary?” asked Mr. Wilbur.

“No, I think not.”

“I'd like a place of that sort. You're a lucky fellow, Phil.”

“I begin to think I am.”

“Of course you don't live at the old place.”

“No; I live on Madison Avenue. By the way, Wilbur, how is your
lady-love?”

Mr. Wilbur looked radiant.

“I think I'm getting on,” he said. “I met her the other evening, and she
smiled.”

“That is encouraging,” said Phil, as soberly as possible. “All things
come to him who waits! That's what I had to write in my copy-book once.”

Phil was received by Mr. Pitkin with more graciousness than he expected.
He felt that he must do what he could to placate Uncle Oliver, but he
was more dangerous when friendly in his manner than when he was rude
and impolite. He was even now plotting to get Phil into a scrape which
should lose him the confidence of Uncle Oliver.

Generally Phil was paid in a check payable to the order of Mr. Carter.
But one Saturday two hundred dollars in bills were placed in his hands
instead.

“You see how much confidence I place in your honesty,” said Mr. Pitkin.
“You couldn't use the check. This money you could make off with.”

“It would be very foolish, to say the least,” responded Phil.

“Of course, of course. I know you are trustworthy, or I would have given
you a check instead.”

When Phil left the building he was followed, though he did not know it,
by a man looking like a clerk.

Ah, Phil, you are in danger, though you don't suspect it.



CHAPTER XXXI.

PHIL IS SHADOWED.

Phil felt that he must be more than usually careful, because the money
he had received was in the form of bills, which, unlike the check, would
be of use to any thief appropriating it. That he was in any unusual
danger, however, he was far from suspecting.

He reached Broadway, and instead of taking an omnibus, started to
walk up-town. He knew there was no haste, and a walk up the great busy
thoroughfare had its attractions for him, as it has for many others.

Behind him, preserving a distance of from fifteen to twenty feet, walked
a dark-complexioned man of not far from forty years of age. Of course
Phil was not likely to notice him.

Whatever the man's designs might be, he satisfied himself at first
with simply keeping our hero in view. But as they both reached Bleecker
Street, he suddenly increased his pace and caught up with Phil. He
touched the boy on the shoulder, breathing quickly, as if he had been
running.

Phil turned quickly.

“Do you want me, sir?” he asked, eying the stranger in surprise.

“I don't know. Perhaps I am mistaken. Are you in the employ of Mr.
Oliver Carter?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Ah I then you are the boy I want. I have bad news for you.”

“Bad news!” repeated Phil, alarmed. “What is it?”

“Mr. Carter was seized with a fit in the street half an hour since.”

“Is he--dead?” asked Phil, in dismay.

“No, no! I think he will come out all right.”

“Where is he?”

“In my house. I didn't of course know who he was, but I found in his
pocket a letter directed to Oliver Carter, Madison Avenue. There was
also a business card. He is connected in business with Mr. Pitkin, is he
not?”

“Yes, sir,” answered Phil; “where is your house?”

“In Bleecker Street, near by. Mr. Carter is lying on the bed. He is
unconscious, but my wife heard him say: 'Call Philip.' I suppose that is
you?”

“Yes, sir; my name is Philip.”

“I went around to his place of business, and was told that you had just
left there. I was given a description of you and hurried to find you.
Will you come to the house and see Mr. Carter?”

“Yes, sir,” answered Phil, forgetting everything except that his kind
and generous employer was sick, perhaps dangerously.

“Thank you; I shall feel relieved. Of course you can communicate with
his friends and arrange to have him carried home.”

“Yes, sir; I live at his house.”

“That is well.”

They had turned down Bleecker Street, when it occurred to Phil to say:

“I don't understand how Mr. Carter should be in this neighborhood.”

“That is something I can't explain, as I know nothing about his
affairs,” said the stranger pleasantly. “Perhaps he may have property on
the street.”

“I don't think so. I attend to much of his business, and he would have
sent me if there had been anything of that kind to attend to.”

“I dare say you are right,” said his companion.

“Of course I know nothing about it. I only formed a conjecture.”

“Has a physician been sent for?” asked Phil.

“Do you know of any we can call in?”

“My wife agreed to send for one on Sixth Avenue,” said the stranger. “I
didn't wait for him to come, but set out for the store.”

Nothing could be more ready or plausible than the answers of his new
acquaintance, and Phil was by no means of a suspicious temperament. Had
he lived longer in the city it might have occurred to him that there
was something rather unusual in the circumstances, but he knew that Mr.
Carter had spoken of leaving the house at the breakfast-table, indeed
had left it before he himself had set out for the store. For the time
being the thought of the sum of money which he carried with him had
escaped his memory, but it was destined very soon to be recalled to his
mind.

They had nearly reached Sixth Avenue, when his guide stopped in front of
a shabby brick house.

“This is where I live,” he said. “We will go in.”

He produced a key, opened the door, and Phil accompanied him up a shabby
staircase to the third floor. He opened the door of a rear room, and
made a sign to Phil to enter.



