PART II. THE EVOLUTION OF SYMBOLISM.




Section I. Symbolism and Ideographs.


    Is not a symbol ever, to him who has eyes for it, some dimmer or
    clearer revelation of the God‐like?... Through all ... there
    glimmers something of a Divine Idea. Nay, the highest ensign that
    men ever met and embraced under, the cross itself, had no meaning,
    save an accidental extrinsic one.

    CARLYLE.


The study of the hidden meaning in every religious and profane legend, of
whatsoever nation, large or small, and preëminently in the traditions of
the East, has occupied the greater portion of the present writer’s life.
She is one of those who feel convinced that no mythological story, no
traditional event in the folk‐lore of a people, has ever, at any time,
been pure fiction, but that every one of such narratives has an actual
historical lining to it. In this the writer disagrees with those
symbologists, however great their reputation, who find in every myth
nothing more than additional proof of the superstitious bent of mind of
the Ancients, and who believe that all mythologies sprang from, and are
built upon, _solar myths_. Such superficial thinkers have been admirably
disposed of by Mr. Gerald Massey, the poet and Egyptologist, in a lecture
on “Luniolatry, Ancient and Modern.” His pointed criticism is worthy of
reproduction in this part of our work, as it echoes so well our own
feelings, expressed openly so far back as 1875, when _Isis Unveiled_ was
written.


    For thirty years past Professor Max Müller has been teaching in
    his books and lectures, in the _Times_, _Saturday Review_, and
    various magazines, from the platform of the Royal Institution, the
    pulpit of Westminster Abbey, and his chair at Oxford, that
    mythology is a disease of language, and that the ancient symbolism
    was a result of something like a primitive mental aberration.

    “We know,” says Renouf, echoing Max Müller, in his Hibbert
    lectures, “We know that mythology _is_ the disease which springs
    up at a peculiar stage of human culture.” Such is the shallow
    explanation of the non‐evolutionists, and such explanations are
    still accepted by the British public, that gets its thinking done
    for it by proxy. Professor Max Müller, Cox, Gubernatis, and other
    propounders of the Solar Mythos, have portrayed the primitive
    myth‐maker for us as a sort of Germanised‐Hindû metaphysician,
    projecting his own shadow on a mental mist, and talking
    ingeniously concerning smoke, or, at least, _cloud_; the sky
    overhead becoming like the dome of dreamland, scribbled over with
    the imagery of aboriginal nightmares! They conceive the early man
    in their own likeness, and look upon him as perversely prone to
    self‐mystification, or, as Fontenelle has it, “subject to
    beholding things that are not there”! They have misrepresented
    primitive or archaic man as having been idiotically misled from
    the first by an active but untutored imagination into believing
    all sorts of fallacies, which were directly and constantly
    contradicted by his own daily experience; a fool of fancy in the
    midst of those grim realities that were grinding his experiences
    into him, like the griding icebergs making their imprints upon the
    rocks submerged beneath the sea. It remains to be said, and will
    one day be acknowledged, that these accepted teachers have been no
    nearer to the beginnings of mythology and language than Burns’s
    poet Willie had been near to Pegasus. My reply is, ’Tis but a
    dream of the metaphysical theorist that mythology was a disease of
    language, or of anything else except his own brain. The origin and
    meaning of mythology have been missed altogether by these
    solarites and weather‐mongers! Mythology was a primitive mode of
    _thinking_ the early thought. It was founded on natural facts, and
    is still verifiable in phenomena. There is nothing insane, nothing
    irrational in it, when considered in the light of evolution, and
    when its mode of expression by sign‐language is thoroughly
    understood. The insanity lies in mistaking it for human history or
    Divine Revelation.(453) Mythology is the repository of man’s most
    ancient science, and what concerns us chiefly is this—when truly
    interpreted once more, it is destined to be the death of those
    false theologies to which it has unwittingly given birth!(454)

    In modern phraseology a statement is sometimes said to be mythical
    in proportion to its being untrue; but the ancient mythology was
    not a system or mode of falsifying in that sense. Its fables were
    the means of conveying facts; they were neither forgeries nor
    fictions.... For example, when the Egyptians portrayed the moon as
    a _cat_, they were not ignorant enough to suppose that the moon
    was a cat; nor did their wandering fancies see any likeness in the
    moon to a cat; nor was a cat‐myth any _mere expansion of verbal
    metaphor_; nor had they any intention of making puzzles or
    riddles.... They had observed the simple fact that the cat saw in
    the dark, and that her eyes became full‐orbed, and grew most
    luminous by night. The moon was the seer by night in heaven, and
    the cat was its equivalent on the earth; and so the familiar cat
    was adopted as a representative, a natural sign, a living
    pictograph of the lunar orb.... And so it followed that the sun
    which saw down in the under‐world at night could also be called
    the cat, as it was, because _it also saw_ in the dark. The name of
    the cat in Egyptian is _mau_, which denotes the seer, from _mau_,
    to see. One writer on mythology asserts that the Egyptians
    “imagined a great cat behind the sun, which is the pupil of the
    cat’s eye.” But this imagining is all modern. It is the Müllerite
    stock in trade. The moon, _as cat, was_ the eye of the sun,
    _because it reflected the solar light_, and because the eye gives
    back the image in its mirror. In the form of the goddess Pasht,
    the cat keeps watch for the sun, with her paw holding down and
    bruising the head of the serpent of darkness, called his eternal
    enemy!


This is a very correct exposition of the lunar mythos from its
astronomical aspect. Selenography, however, is the least esoteric of the
divisions of lunar Symbology. To master thoroughly—if one is permitted to
coin a new word—Selenognosis, one must become proficient in more than its
astronomical meaning. The Moon is intimately related to the Earth, as
shown in the Stanzas, and is more directly concerned with all the
mysteries of our Globe than is even Venus‐Lucifer, the occult sister and
_alter ego_ of the Earth.(455)

The untiring researches of Western, especially German, symbologists,
during the last and the present centuries, have induced the most
unprejudiced students, and of course every Occultist, to see that without
the help of symbology—with its seven departments, of which the moderns
know nothing—no ancient Scripture can ever be correctly understood.
Symbology must be studied from every one of its aspects, for each nation
had its own peculiar methods of expression. In short, no Egyptian papyrus,
no Indian olla, no Assyrian tile, no Hebrew scroll, should be read and
interpreted _literally_.

This every scholar now knows. The able lectures of Mr. Gerald Massey alone
are sufficient to convince any fair‐minded Christian that to accept the
dead‐letter of the _Bible_ is equivalent to falling into a grosser error
and superstition than any hitherto evolved by the brain of the savage
South Sea Islander. But the fact to which even the most truth‐loving and
truth‐searching Orientalists—whether Âryanists or Egyptologists—seem to
remain blind, is that every symbol on papyrus or olla is a many‐faced
diamond, each of whose facets not only includes several interpretations,
but also relates to several sciences. This is instanced in the just quoted
interpretation of the cat symbolizing the moon—an example of sidereo‐
terrestrial imagery; for the moon has with other nations many other
meanings besides.

As a learned Mason and Theosophist, the late Kenneth Mackenzie, has shown
in his _Royal Masonic Cyclopædia_, there is a great difference between
_emblem_ and _symbol_. The former “comprises a larger series of thoughts
than a symbol, which may be said rather to illustrate some single special
idea.” Hence, the symbols—lunar, or solar, for example—of several
countries, each illustrating such a special idea, or series of ideas, form
collectively an esoteric emblem. The latter is “a concrete visible picture
or sign representing principles, or a series of principles, _recognizable
by those who have received certain instructions_ [Initiates].” To put it
still plainer, an emblem is usually _a series of graphic pictures_ viewed
and explained allegorically, and unfolding an idea in panoramic views, one
after the other. Thus the _Purânas_ are written emblems. So are the Mosaic
and Christian _Testaments_, or the _Bible_, and all other exoteric
Scriptures. As the same authority shows:


    All esoteric societies have made use of emblems and symbols, such
    as the Pythagorean Society, the Eleusinia, the Hermetic Brethren
    of Egypt, the Rosicrucians, and the Freemasons. Many of these
    emblems it is not proper to divulge to the general eye, and _a
    very minute difference_ may make the emblem or symbol differ
    widely in its meaning. The magical sigilla, being founded on
    certain principles of number, partake of this character, and
    although monstrous or ridiculous in the eyes of the uninstructed,
    convey a whole body of doctrine to those who have been trained to
    recognize them.


The above enumerated societies are all comparatively modern, none dating
back earlier than the Middle Ages. How much more proper, then, that the
students of the oldest archaic school should be careful not to divulge
secrets of far more importance to humanity (as being dangerous in ignorant
hands) than any of the so‐called “Masonic Secrets,” which have now become
those of Polichinelle, as the French say! But this restriction can apply
only to the psychological or rather psycho‐physiological and cosmical
significance of symbol and emblem, and even to that only partially. For
though an Adept is compelled to refuse to impart the conditions and means
that lead to any correlation of Elements—whether psychic or physical—which
may produce harmful as well as beneficent results; yet he is ever ready to
impart to the earnest student the secret of the ancient thought, in
anything that has respect to history concealed under mythological
symbolism, and thus to furnish a few more land‐marks for a retrospective
view of the past, in so far as it furnishes useful information with regard
to the origin of man, the evolution of the Races and geognosy. And yet it
is the crying complaint to‐day, not only among Theosophists, but also
among the few profane interested in the subject: Why do not the Adepts
reveal that which they know? To this, one might answer: Why should they,
since one knows beforehand that no man of Science will accept it, even as
a hypothesis, much less as a theory or axiom. Have you so much as accepted
or believed in the A B C of the Occult Philosophy contained in the
_Theosophist_, _Esoteric Buddhism_, and other works and periodicals? Has
not even the little which has been given, been ridiculed and derided, and
made to face the “animal‐” and “ape‐theory” of Huxley and Hæckel, on the
one hand, and the rib of Adam and the apple on the other? Notwithstanding
such an unenviable prospect, however, a mass of facts is given in the
present work, and the origin of man, the evolution of the Globe and the
Races, human and animal, are as fully treated as the writer is able to
treat them.

The proofs brought forward in corroboration of the old teachings are
scattered widely throughout the old scriptures of ancient civilizations.
The _Purânas_, the _Zend Avesta_, and the old classics, are full of such
facts; but no one has ever taken the trouble of collecting and collating
them together. The reason for this is that all such events were recorded
symbolically; and that the best scholars, the most acute minds, among our
Âryanists and Egyptologists, have been too often darkened by one or
another preconception, and still oftener, by one‐sided views of the secret
meaning. Yet even a parable is a spoken symbol: a fiction or a fable, as
some think; an allegorical representation, we say, of life‐realities,
events, and facts. And just as a moral was ever drawn from a parable, such
moral being an actual truth and fact in human life, so a historical, real
event was deduced, by those versed in the hieratic sciences, from emblems
and symbols recorded in the ancient archives of the temples. The religious
and esoteric history of every nation was embedded in symbols; it was never
expressed literally in so many words. All the thoughts and emotions, all
the learning and knowledge, revealed and acquired, of the early Races,
found their pictorial expression in allegory and parable. Why? Because
_the spoken word has a potency not only unknown to, but even unsuspected
and naturally disbelieved in_, by the modern “sages.” Because sound and
rhythm are closely related to the four Elements of the Ancients; and
because such or another vibration in the air is sure to awaken the
corresponding Powers, union with which produces good or bad results, as
the case may be. No student was ever allowed to recite historical,
religious, or real events of any kind, in so many unmistakable words, lest
the Powers connected with the event should be once more attracted. Such
events were narrated only during Initiation, and every student had to
record them in corresponding symbols, drawn out of his own mind and
examined later by his Master, before they were finally accepted. Thus by
degrees was the Chinese Alphabet created, as just before it the hieratic
symbols were fixed upon in old Egypt. In the Chinese language, the
characters of which may be read in any language, and which, as just said,
is only a little less ancient than the Egyptian alphabet of Thoth, every
word has its corresponding symbol in a pictorial form. This language
possesses many thousands of such symbol‐letters, or logograms, each
conveying the meaning of a whole word; for letters proper, or an alphabet
as we understand it, do not exist in the Chinese language, any more than
they did in the Egyptian, till a far later period.

Thus a Japanese who does not understand one word of Chinese, meeting with
a Chinaman who has never heard the language of the former, will
communicate in writing with him, and they will understand each other
perfectly—because their writing is symbolical.

The explanation of the chief symbols and emblems is now attempted, as Book
II, which treats of Anthropogenesis, would be most difficult to understand
without a preparatory acquaintance with at least the metaphysical symbols.

Nor would it be just to enter upon an esoteric reading of symbolism,
without giving due honour to one who has rendered it the greatest service
in this century, by discovering the chief key to ancient Hebrew symbology,
strongly interwoven with metrology, one of the keys to the once universal
Mystery Language. Mr. Ralston Skinner, of Cincinnati, the author of _The
Key to the Hebrew‐Egyptian Mystery in the Source of Measures_, has our
thanks. A Mystic and a Kabalist by nature, he has laboured for many years
in this direction, and his efforts have certainly been crowned with great
success. In his own words:


    The writer is quite certain that there was an ancient language
    which modernly and up to this time appears to have been lost, the
    vestiges of which, however, abundantly exist.... The author
    discovered that this geometrical ratio [the integral ratio of the
    diameter to the circumference of a circle] was the very ancient,
    and probably the divine origin of ... linear measures.... It
    appears almost proven that the same system of geometry, numbers,
    ratio, and measures was known and made use of on the continent of
    North America, even prior to the knowledge of the same by the
    descending Semites....

    The peculiarity of this language was that it could be contained in
    another, concealed and not to be perceived, save through the help
    of special instruction; letters and syllabic signs possessing at
    the same time the powers or meanings of numbers, of geometrical
    shapes, pictures, or ideographs and symbols, the designed scope of
    which would be determinatively helped out by parables in the shape
    of narratives or parts of narratives; while also it could be set
    forth separately, independently, and variously, by pictures, in
    stone work, or in earth constructions.

    To clear up an ambiguity as to the term language: Primarily the
    word means the expression of ideas by human speech; but,
    secondarily, it may mean the expression of ideas by any other
    instrumentality. This old language is so composed in the Hebrew
    text, that by the use of the written characters, which uttered
    shall be the language first defined, a distinctly separated series
    of ideas may be intentionally communicated, other than those ideas
    expressed by the reading of the sound‐signs. This secondary
    language sets forth, under a veil, series of ideas, copies in
    imagination of things sensible, which may be pictured, and of
    things which may be classed as real without being sensible: as,
    for instance, the number 9 may be taken as a reality, though it
    has no sensible existence, so also a revolution of the moon, as
    separated from the moon itself by which that revolution has been
    made, may be taken as giving rise to, or causing a real idea,
    though such a revolution has no substance. This idea‐language may
    consist of symbols restricted to arbitrary terms and signs, having
    a very limited range of conceptions, and quite valueless, or it
    may be a reading of nature in some of her manifestations of a
    value almost immeasurable, as regards human civilization. A
    picture of something natural may give rise to ideas of
    coördinating subjects, radiating out in various and even opposing
    directions, like the spokes of a wheel, and producing natural
    realities in departments very foreign to the apparent tendency of
    the reading of the first or starting picture. Notion may give rise
    to connected notion, but if it does, then, however apparently
    incongruous, all resulting ideas must spring from the original
    picture and be harmonically connected, or related the one with the
    other. Thus with a pictured idea radical enough, the imagination
    of the cosmos itself, even in its details of construction, might
    result. Such a use of ordinary language is now obsolete, but it
    has become a question with the writer whether at one time, far
    back in the past, it, or such, was not the language of the world
    and of universal use, possessed, however, as it became more and
    more moulded into its arcane forms, by a select class or caste. By
    this I mean that the popular tongue or vernacular commenced even
    in its origin to be made use of as the vehicle of this peculiar
    mode of conveying ideas. Of this the evidences are very strong;
    and, indeed, it would seem that in the history of the human race
    there happened, from causes which at present, at any rate, we
    cannot trace, a lapse or loss from an original perfect language
    and a perfect system of science—shall we say perfect because they
    were of divine origin and importation?(456)


“Divine origin” does not here mean a revelation from an anthropomorphic
God on a mount amidst thunder and lightning; but, as we understand it, a
language and a system of science imparted to early mankind by a more
advanced mankind, so much higher as to be _divine_ in the sight of that
infant humanity: by a “mankind,” in short, from other spheres; an idea
which contains nothing supernatural in it, but the acceptance or rejection
of which depends upon the degree of conceit and arrogance in the mind of
him to whom it is stated. For, if the professors of modern knowledge would
only confess that, though they know nothing of the future of the
disembodied man—or rather will accept nothing—yet this future may be
pregnant with surprises and unexpected revelations to them, once their
Egos are rid of their gross bodies—then materialistic unbelief would have
fewer chances than it has. Who of them knows, or can tell, what may happen
when once the Life‐Cycle of this Globe is run down, and our mother Earth
herself falls into her last sleep? Who is bold enough to say that the
_divine_ Egos of our mankind—at least the elect out of the multitudes
passing on to other spheres—will not become in their turn the “divine”
instructors of a new mankind generated by them on a new Globe, called to
life and activity by the disembodied “principles” of our Earth? All this
may have been the experience of the Past, and these strange records lie
embedded in the “Mystery Language” of the pre‐historic ages, the language
now called SYMBOLISM.




Section II. The Mystery Language and Its Keys.


Recent discoveries made by great mathematicians and Kabalists thus prove,
beyond a shadow of doubt, that every theology, from the earliest down to
the latest, has sprung, not only from a common source of abstract beliefs,
but from one universal Esoteric, or Mystery, Language. These scholars hold
the key to the universal language of old, and have turned it successfully,
though only _once_, in the hermetically closed door leading to the Hall of
Mysteries. The great archaic system known from prehistoric ages as the
sacred Wisdom‐Science, one that is contained and can be traced in every
old as well as in every new religion, had, and still has, its universal
language—suspected by the Mason Ragon—the language of the Hierophants,
which has seven “dialects,” so to speak, each referring, and being
specially appropriate, to one of the seven mysteries of Nature. Each had
its own symbolism. Nature could thus be either read in its fulness, or
viewed from one of its special aspects.

The proof of this lies, to this day, in the extreme difficulty which the
Orientalists in general, and the Indianists and Egyptologists in
particular, experience in interpreting the allegorical writings of the
Âryans and the hieratic records of old Egypt. This is because they will
never remember that all the ancient records were written in a language
which was universal and known to all nations alike in days of old, but
which is now intelligible only to the few. Like the Arabic figures which
are understandable to men of every nation, or like the English word _and_,
which becomes _et_ for the Frenchman, _und_ for the German, and so on, yet
which may be expressed for all civilized nations in the simple sign &—so
all the words of that Mystery Language signified the same thing to each
man, of whatever nationality. There have been several men of note who have
tried to reëstablish such a universal and _philosophical_ tongue,
Delgarme, Wilkins, Leibnitz; but Demaimieux, in his _Pasigraphie_, is the
only one who has proven its possibility. The scheme of Valentinius, called
the “Greek Kabalah,” based on the combination of Greek letters, might
serve as a model.

The many‐sided facets of the Mystery Language have led to the adoption of
widely varied dogmas and rites in the exotericism of the Church rituals.
It is these, again, which are at the origin of most of the dogmas of the
Christian Church; for instance, the seven Sacraments, the Trinity, the
Resurrection, the seven Capital Sins and the seven Virtues. The Seven Keys
to the Mystery Tongue, however, having always been in the keeping of the
highest among the initiated Hierophants of antiquity; it is only the
partial use of a few out of the seven which passed, through the treason of
some early Church Fathers—ex‐Initiates of the Temples—into the hands of
the new sect of the Nazarenes. Some of the early Popes were Initiates, but
the last fragments of their knowledge have now fallen into the power of
the Jesuits, who have turned them into a system of sorcery.

It is maintained that _India_—not confined to its present limits, but
including its ancient boundaries—is the only country in the world which
still has among her sons Adepts, who have the knowledge of all the seven
sub‐systems and the key to the entire system. From the fall of Memphis,
Egypt began to lose these keys one by one, and Chaldæa had preserved only
three in the days of Berosus. As for the Hebrews, in all their writings
they show no more than a thorough knowledge of the astronomical,
geometrical and numerical systems of symbolizing the human, and especially
the physiological functions. They never had the higher keys.

M. Gaston Maspero, the great French Egyptologist and the successor of
Mariette Bey, writes:


    Every time I hear people talking of the religion of Egypt, I am
    tempted to ask _which_ of the Egyptian religions they are talking
    about? Is it of the Egyptian religion of the fourth dynasty, or of
    the Egyptian religion of the Ptolemaic period? Is it of the
    religion of the rabble, or of that of the learned? Of the religion
    such as was taught in the schools of Heliopolis, or of that which
    was in the minds and conceptions of the Theban sacerdotal class?
    For, between the first Memphite tomb, which bears the _cartouche_
    of a king of the third dynasty, and the last stones engraved at
    Esneh under Cæsar Philippus, the Arabian, there is an interval of
    at least five thousand years. Leaving aside the invasion of the
    Shepherds, the Ethiopian and Assyrian dominions, the Persian
    conquest, Greek colonization, and the thousand revolutions of its
    political life, Egypt had passed during those five thousand years
    through many vicissitudes of life, moral and intellectual. Chapter
    XVII of the _Book of the Dead_, which seems to contain the
    exposition of the system of the world, as it was understood at
    Heliopolis during the time of the first dynasties, is known to us
    by a few copies of the eleventh and twelfth dynasties. Every one
    of the verses composing it was already interpreted in three or
    four different ways; so different, indeed, that according to this
    or another school, the Demiurge became either the solar fire—Ra‐
    shoo, or the primordial water. Fifteen centuries later, the number
    of readings had increased considerably. Time, in its course, had
    modified their ideas about the universe and the forces that ruled
    it. In the short eighteen centuries that Christianity has existed,
    it has worked up, developed and transformed most of its dogmas;
    how many times, then, might not the Egyptian priesthood have
    altered their dogmas during those fifty centuries that separate
    Theodosius from the King Builders of the Pyramids.(457)


Here we believe the eminent Egyptologist is going too far. The exoteric
dogmas may often have been altered, the esoteric never. He does not take
into account the sacred immutability of the primitive truths, revealed
only during the mysteries of Initiation. The Egyptian priests _had
forgotten much, they altered nothing_. The loss of a great part of the
primitive teaching was due to the sudden deaths of the great Hierophants,
who passed away before they had time to reveal _all_ to their successors,
mostly in the absence of worthy heirs to the knowledge. Yet they have
preserved in their rituals and dogmas the principal teachings of the
Secret Doctrine.

Thus, in the Chapter of the _Book of the Dead_, mentioned by Maspero, we
find (1) Osiris saying he is Toom—the creative force in Nature, giving
form to all beings, spirits and men, self‐generated and self‐
existent—issued from Noon, the celestial river, called Father‐Mother of
the Gods, the primordial deity, which is Chaos or the Deep, impregnated by
the unseen Spirit. (2) He has found Shoo, the solar force, on the Stairway
in the City of the Eight (the two squares of Good and Evil), and he has
annihilated the Children of Rebellion, the evil principles in Noon
(Chaos). (3) He is the Fire and Water, Noon the Primordial Parent, and he
created the Gods out of his Limbs—fourteen Gods (twice seven), seven dark
and seven light Gods—the seven Spirits of the Presence of the Christians,
and the seven dark Evil Spirits.

(4) He is the Law of Existence and Being, the Bennoo, or Phœnix, the Bird
of Resurrection in Eternity, in whom Night follows Day, and Day Night—an
allusion to the periodical cycles of cosmic resurrection and human
reïncarnation. For what else can this mean? “The Wayfarer who crosses
millions of years is the name of one, and the Great Green [Primordial
Water or Chaos] the name of the other,” one begetting millions of years in
succession, the other engulfing them, to restore them back. (5) He speaks
of the Seven Luminous Ones who follow their Lord, Osiris, who confers
justice, in Amenti.

All this is now shown to have been the source and origin of Christian
dogmas. That which the Jews had from Egypt, through Moses and other
Initiates, was confused and distorted enough in later days; but that which
the Church got from both, is still more misinterpreted.

Yet the system of the former, in this special department of symbology—the
key, namely, to the mysteries of astronomy as connected with those of
generation and conception—is now proven identical with those ideas in
ancient religions which have developed the phallic element of theology.
The Jewish system of sacred measures, applied to religious symbols, is the
same, so far as geometrical and numerical combinations go, as those of
Greece, Chaldæa and Egypt, for it was adopted by the Israelites during the
centuries of their slavery and captivity among the two latter
nations.(458) What was this system? It is the intimate conviction of the
author of _The Source of Measures_ that: “the Mosaic Books were intended,
by a mode of art‐speech, to set forth a geometrical and numerical system
of exact science, which should serve as an origin of measures.” Piazzi
Smyth believes similarly. This system and these measures are found by some
scholars to be identical with those used in the construction of the Great
Pyramid: but this is only partially so. “The foundation of these measures
was the Parker ratio,” says Ralston Skinner, in _The Source of Measures_.

The author of this very extraordinary work has discovered it, he says, in
the use of the integral ratio of the diameter to the circumference of a
circle, discovered by John A. Parker, of New York. This ratio is 6561 for
diameter, and 20612 for circumference. Furthermore, that this geometrical
ratio was the very ancient and probably the divine origin of what have now
become, through exoteric handling and practical application, the British
linear measures, “the underlying unit of which, viz., the _inch_, was
likewise the base of one of the royal Egyptian _cubits_, and of the Roman
_foot_.”


    He also discovered that there was a modified form of the ratio,
    viz., 113 to 355; and that while this last ratio pointed through
    its origin to the exact integral _pi_, or to 6561 to 20612, it
    also served as a base for astronomical calculations. The author
    discovered that a system of _exact science_, geometrical,
    numerical, and astronomical, founded on these ratios, and to be
    seen in use in the construction of the Great Egyptian Pyramid, was
    in part the burden of this _language_, as contained in, and
    concealed under, the verbiage of the Hebrew text of the Bible. The
    _inch_ and the two‐foot rule of 24 inches, interpreted for use
    through the elements of the circle and the ratios mentioned, were
    found to be at the basis or foundation of this natural, and
    Egyptian, and Hebrew system of science; while, moreover, it seems
    evident enough that the system itself was looked upon as of divine
    origin, and of divine revelation.


But let us see what is said by the opponents of Prof. Piazzi Smyth’s
measurements of the Pyramid.

Mr. Petrie seems to deny them, and to have made short work altogether of
Piazzi Smyth’s calculations in their Biblical connection. So does Mr.
Proctor, the champion “Coincidentalist” for many years past in every
question of ancient arts and sciences. Speaking of “the multitude of
relations independent of the Pyramid, which have turned up while the
Pyramidalists have been endeavouring to connect the Pyramid with the solar
system,” he says:


    These coincidences [which “would still remain if the Pyramid had
    no existence,”] are altogether more curious than any coincidence
    between the Pyramid and astronomical numbers: the former are as
    close and remarkable as they are real; the latter, which are only
    _imaginary_ (?), have only been established by the process which
    schoolboys call “fudging,” and now new measures have left the work
    to be done all over again.(459)


On this Mr. C. Staniland Wake justly observes:


    They must, however, have been more than _mere coincidences_, if
    the builders of the Pyramid had the astronomical knowledge
    displayed in its perfect orientation and in its other admitted
    astronomical features.(460)


They had it assuredly; and it is on this “knowledge” that the programme of
the Mysteries and of the series of Initiations was based: hence, the
construction of the Pyramid, the everlasting record and the indestructible
symbol of these Mysteries and Initiations on Earth, as the courses of the
stars are in Heaven. The cycle of Initiation was a reproduction in
miniature of that great series of cosmic changes to which astronomers have
given the name of the Tropical or Sidereal Year. Just as, at the close of
the cycle of the Sidereal Year (25,868 years), the heavenly bodies return
to the same relative positions as they occupied at its outset, so at the
close of the cycle of Initiation the Inner Man has regained the pristine
state of divine purity and knowledge from which he set out on his cycle of
terrestrial incarnation.

Moses, an Initiate into the Egyptian Mystagogy, based the religious
mysteries of the new nation which he created, upon the same abstract
formulæ derived from this Sidereal Cycle, symbolized by the form and
measurements of the Tabernacle, which he is supposed to have constructed
in the Wilderness. On these data, the later Jewish High Priests
constructed the allegory of Solomon’s Temple—a building which never had a
real existence, any more than had King Solomon himself, who is as much a
solar myth as is the still later Hiram Abif of the Masons, as Ragon has
well demonstrated. Thus, if the measurements of this allegorical Temple,
the symbol of the cycle of Initiation, coincide with those of the Great
Pyramid, it is due to the fact that the former were derived from the
latter through the Tabernacle of Moses.

That our author has undeniably discovered _one_ and even _two_ of the
_keys_, is fully demonstrated in the work just quoted. One has only to
read it, to feel a growing conviction that the hidden meaning of the
allegories and parables of both _Testaments_ is now unveiled. But that he
owes this discovery far more to his own genius than to Parker and Piazzi
Smyth, is also as certain, if not more so. For, as just shown, it is not
so certain whether the measures of the Great Pyramid adopted by the
Biblical Pyramidalists are beyond suspicion. A proof of this is to be
found in the work called _The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh_, by Mr. F.
Petrie, and also in other works written quite recently to oppose the said
calculations, which their authors call “biassed.” We gather that nearly
every one of Piazzi Smyth’s measurements differs from the later and more
carefully made measurements of Mr. Petrie, who concludes the Introduction
to his work with this sentence:


    As to the results of the whole investigation, perhaps many
    theorists will agree with an American who was a warm believer in
    Pyramid theories when he came to Gizeh. I had the pleasure of his
    company there for a couple of days, and at our last meal together
    he said to me in a saddened way: “Well, sir! I feel as if I had
    been to a funeral. By all means let the old theories have a decent
    burial, though we should take care that in our haste none of the
    wounded ones are buried alive.”


As regards the late J. A. Parker’s calculation in general, and his third
proposition especially, we have consulted some eminent mathematicians, and
this is the substance of what they say:

Parker’s reasoning rests on sentimental, rather than on mathematical,
considerations, and is logically inconclusive.

Proposition III, namely, that:


    The circle is the natural basis or beginning of all area, and the
    square being made so in mathematical science, is artificial and
    arbitrary.


—is an illustration of an arbitrary proposition, and cannot safely be
relied upon in mathematical reasoning. The same observation applies, even
more strongly, to Proposition VII, which states that:


    Because the circle is the primary shape in nature, and hence the
    basis of area; and because the circle is measured by, and is equal
    to the square only in ratio of half its circumference by the
    radius, therefore, circumference and radius, and not the square of
    diameter, are the only natural and legitimate elements of area, by
    which all regular shapes are made equal to the square, and equal
    to the circle.


Proposition IX is a remarkable example of faulty reasoning, though it is
the one on which Mr. Parker’s Quadrature mainly rests. It states that:


    The circle and the equilateral triangle are opposite to one
    another in all the elements of their construction, and hence the
    fractional diameter of one circle, which is equal to the diameter
    of one square, is in the opposite duplicate ratio to the diameter
    of an equilateral triangle whose area is one, etc., etc.


Granting, for the sake of argument, that a triangle can be said to have a
radius, in the sense in which we speak of the radius of a circle—for what
Parker calls the radius of the triangle, is the radius of a circle
inscribed in a triangle, and therefore not the radius of the triangle at
all—and granting for the moment the other fanciful and mathematical
propositions united in his premisses, why must we conclude that, if the
equilateral triangle and circle are opposite in all the elements of their
construction, the diameter of any defined circle is in the opposite
duplicate ratio of the diameter of any given equivalent triangle? What
necessary connection is there between the premisses and the conclusion?
The reasoning is of a kind not known in geometry, and would not be
accepted by strict mathematicians.

Whether the archaic Esoteric system originated the British inch or not, is
of little consequence, however, to the strict and true metaphysician. Nor
does Mr. Ralston Skinner’s esoteric reading of the _Bible_ become
incorrect, merely because the measurements of the Pyramid may not be found
to agree with those of Solomon’s Temple, the Ark of Noah, etc., or because
Mr. Parker’s Quadrature of the Circle is rejected by mathematicians. For
Mr. Skinner’s reading depends primarily on the Kabalistic methods and the
Rabbinical value of the Hebrew letters. But it is extremely important to
ascertain whether the measures used in the evolution of the symbolic
religion of the Âryans, in the construction of their temples, in the
figures given in the _Purânas_, and especially in their chronology, their
astronomical symbols, the duration of the cycles, and other computations,
were, or were not, the same as those used in the Biblical measurements and
glyphs. For this will prove that the Jews, unless they took their sacred
cubit and measurements from the Egyptians—Moses being an Initiate of their
Priests—must have got those notions from India. At any rate they passed
them on to the early Christians. Hence, it is the Occultists and Kabalists
who are the true heirs to the Knowledge, or the Secret Wisdom, which is
still found in the _Bible_; for they alone now understand its real
meaning, whereas profane Jews and Christians cling to the husks and dead
letter thereof. That it was this system of measures which led to the
invention of the God‐names Elohim and Jehovah, and to their adaptation to
Phallicism, and that Jehovah is a not very flattering copy of Osiris, is
now demonstrated by the author of the _Source of Measures_. But the latter
and Mr. Piazzi Smyth both seem to labour under the impression that (_a_)
the priority of the system belongs to the Israelites, the Hebrew language
being the divine language, and that (_b_) this universal language belongs
to direct revelation!

The latter hypothesis is correct only in the sense shown in the last
paragraph of the preceding Section; but we have yet to agree as to the
nature and character of the divine “Revealer.” The former hypothesis as to
priority will for the profane, of course depend on (_a_) the internal and
external evidence of the revelation, and (_b_) on each scholar’s
individual preconceptions. This, however, cannot prevent either the
Theistic Kabalist, or the Pantheistic Occultist, from believing each in
his way; neither of the two convincing the other. The data furnished by
history are too meagre and unsatisfactory for either of them to prove to
the sceptic which of them is right.

On the other hand, the proofs afforded by tradition are too constantly
rejected for us to hope to settle the question in our present age.
Meanwhile, Materialistic Science will be laughing at both Kabalists and
Occultists indifferently. But the vexed question of priority once laid
aside, Science, in its departments of Philology and Comparative Religion,
will find itself finally taken to task, and be compelled to admit the
common claim.

One by one the claims become admitted, as one Scientist after another is
compelled to recognize the facts given out from the Secret Doctrine;
though he rarely, if ever, recognizes that he has been anticipated in his
statements. Thus, in the palmy days of Mr. Piazzi Smyth’s authority on the
Pyramid of Gizeh, his theory was, that the porphyry sarcophagus of the
King’s Chamber was “_the unit of measure_ for the two most enlightened
nations of the earth, England and America,” and was no better than a
“corn‐bin.” This was vehemently denied by us in _Isis Unveiled_, which had
just been published at that time. Then the New York press arose in arms
(the _Sun_ and the _World_ newspapers chiefly) against our presuming to
correct or find fault with such a star of learning. In that work, we had
said, that Herodotus, when treating of that Pyramid:


    ... might have added that, externally it symbolized _the creative
    principle of Nature_, and illustrated also the _principles of
    geometry_, _mathematics_, _astrology_, _and astronomy_.
    Internally, it was a majestic fane, in whose sombre recesses were
    performed the Mysteries, and whose walls had often witnessed the
    initiation‐scenes of members of the royal family. The porphyry
    sarcophagus, which Professor Piazzi Smyth, Astronomer Royal of
    Scotland, degrades into a corn‐bin, was the _baptismal font_, upon
    emerging from which the neophyte was “born again” and became an
    adept.(461)


Our statement was laughed at in those days. We were accused of having got
our ideas from the “craze” of Shaw, an English writer who had maintained
that the sarcophagus had been used for the celebration of the Mysteries of
Osiris, although we had never heard of that writer. And now, six or seven
years later (1882), this is what Mr. Staniland Wake writes:


    The so‐called King’s Chamber, of which an enthusiastic pyramidist
    says, “The polished walls, fine materials, grand proportions, and
    exalted place, eloquently tell of glories yet to come,” if not
    “the chamber of perfections” of Cheops’ tomb, was probably _the
    place to which the initiant was admitted after he had passed
    through the narrow upward passage and the grand gallery, with its
    lowly termination, which gradually prepared him for the final
    stage of the Sacred Mysteries_.(462)


Had Mr. Staniland Wake been a Theosophist, he might have added that the
narrow upward passage leading to the King’s Chamber had a “narrow gate”
indeed; the same “strait gate” which “leadeth unto life,” or the new
spiritual re‐birth alluded to by Jesus in Matthew;(463) and that it was of
this gate in the Initiation Temple, that the writer, who recorded the
words alleged to have been spoken by an Initiate, was thinking.

Thus the greatest scholars of Science, instead of pooh‐poohing that
supposed “farrago of absurd fiction and superstitions,” as the Brâhmanical
literature is generally termed, will endeavour to learn the symbolical
universal language, with its numerical and geometrical keys. But here,
again, they will hardly be successful, if they share the belief that the
Jewish Kabalistic system contains the key to the _whole_ mystery; for it
_does not_. Nor does any other Scripture at present possess it in its
entirety, since even the _Vedas_ are not complete. Every old religion is
but a chapter or two of the entire volume of archaic primeval mysteries;
Eastern Occultism alone being able to boast that it is in possession of
the full secret, with its _seven_ keys. Comparisons will be instituted,
and as much as possible will be explained in this work; the rest is left
to the student’s personal intuition. In saying that Eastern Occultism has
the secret, it is not as if a “complete” or even an approximate knowledge
was claimed by the writer, which would be absurd. What I know, I give out;
that which I cannot explain, the student must find out for himself.

But though we may suppose that the entire cycle of the universal Mystery
Language will not be mastered for centuries to come, yet even the little
which has hitherto been discovered in the _Bible_ by some scholars, is
quite sufficient to demonstrate the claim—mathematically. As Judaism
availed itself of two keys out of the seven, and as these two keys have
now been re‐discovered, it becomes no longer a matter of individual
speculation and hypothesis, least of all of “coincidence,” but one of a
correct reading of the Biblical texts, just as anyone acquainted with
arithmetic reads and verifies an addition sum. In fact, all we have said
in _Isis Unveiled_ is now found corroborated in the _Egyptian Mystery_, or
_The Source of Measures_, by such readings of the _Bible_ with the
numerical and geometrical keys.

A few years longer, and this system will kill the dead‐letter reading of
the _Bible_, as it will that of all the other exoteric faiths, by showing
the dogmas in their real, naked meaning. And then this undeniable meaning,
however incomplete, will unveil the mystery of Being, and will, moreover,
entirely change the modern scientific systems of Anthropology, Ethnology
and especially that of Chronology. The element of Phallicism, found in
every God‐name and narrative in the _Old_, and to some degree in the
_New_, _Testament_, may also in time considerably change modern
materialistic views on Biology and Physiology.

Divested of their modern repulsive crudeness, such views of Nature and man
will, on the authority of the celestial bodies and their mysteries, unveil
the evolutions of the human mind and show how natural was such a course of
thought. The so‐called phallic symbols have become offensive only because
of the element of materiality and animality in them. In the beginning,
such symbols were but natural, as they originated with the archaic races,
which, issuing to their personal knowledge from an androgyne ancestry,
were the first phenomenal manifestations in their own sight of the
separation of the sexes and the ensuing mystery of creating in their turn.
If later races, especially the “chosen people,” have degraded them, this
does not affect the origin of the symbols. This little Semitic tribe—one
of the smallest branchlets from the commingling of the fourth and fifth
sub‐races, the Mongolo‐Turanian and the so‐called Indo‐European, after the
sinking of the great Continent—could only accept its symbology in the
spirit which was given to it by the nations from which it was derived.
And, perchance, in the Mosaic beginnings, the symbology was not so crude
as it became later under the handling of Ezra, who remodelled the whole
_Pentateuch_. To take an instance, the glyph of Pharaoh’s daughter (the
woman), the Nile (the Great Deep and Water), and the baby‐boy found
floating therein in the ark of rushes, was not primarily composed for, or
by, Moses. It was anticipated in the fragments found on the Babylonian
tiles, in the story of King Sargon, who lived far earlier than Moses.

In his _Assyrian Antiquities_,(464) Mr. George Smith says: “In the palace
of Sennacherib at Kouyunjik, I found another fragment of the curious
history of Sargon ... published in my translation in the _Transactions of
the Society of Biblical Archeology_.”(465) The capital of Sargon the
Babylonian Moses, “was the great city of Agadi, called by the Semites
Akkad—mentioned in _Genesis_(466) as the capital of Nimrod.... Akkad lay
near the City of Sippara on the Euphrates and North of Babylon.”(467)
Another strange “coincidence” is found in the fact that the name of the
neighbouring City of Sippara is the same as the name of the wife of
Moses—Zipporah.(468) Of course the story is a clever addition by Ezra,
_who could not have been ignorant of the original_. This curious story is
found on fragments of tablets from Kouyunjik, and reads as follows:


    1. Sargina, the powerful king, the king of Akkad am I.

    2. My mother was a princess, my father I did not know; a brother
    of my father ruled over the country.

    3. In the city of Azupiranu, which by the side of the river
    Euphrates is situated,

    4. My mother, the princess, conceived me; in difficulty she
    brought me forth;

    5. She placed me in an ark of rushes, with bitumen my exit she
    sealed up;

    6. She launched me in the river, which did not drown me.

    7. The river carried me, to Akki, the water‐carrier, it brought
    me.

    8. Akki, the water‐carrier, in tenderness of bowels, lifted
    me.(469)


And now let us compare the _Bible_ narrative in _Exodus_:


    And when she [Moses’ mother] could not longer hide him, she took
    for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with
    pitch, and put the child therein, and she laid it in the flags by
    the river’s brink.(470)


Mr. G. Smith then continues:


    The story is supposed to have happened about 1600 B.C., rather
    earlier than the supposed age of Moses; and, as we know that the
    fame of Sargon reached Egypt, it is quite likely that this account
    had a connection with the events related in _Exodus_ II, for every
    action, when once performed, has a tendency to be repeated.


But now that Professor Sayce has had the courage to push back the dates of
the Chaldean and Assyrian Kings by two thousand years more, Sargon must
have preceded Moses by 2,000 years at the least. The confession is
suggestive, but the figures lack a cypher or two.

Now, what is the logical inference? Most assuredly, that which gives us
the right to say that the story told of Moses by Ezra had been learned by
him while at Babylon, and that he applied the allegory told of Sargon to
the Jewish lawgiver. In short, that _Exodus_ was never written by Moses,
but was re‐fabricated from old materials by Ezra.

And if so, then why should not other symbols and glyphs far more crude in
their phallic element have been added by this adept in the later Chaldean
and Sabæan phallic worship? We are taught that the primeval faith of the
Israelites was quite different from that which was developed centuries
later by the Talmudists, and before them by David and Hezekiah.

All this, notwithstanding the exoteric element, as now found in the two
_Testaments_, is quite sufficient to class the _Bible_ among esoteric
works, and to connect its secret system with Indian, Chaldean, and
Egyptian symbolism. The whole cycle of Biblical glyphs and numbers, as
suggested by astronomical observations—Astronomy and Theology being
closely connected—is found in Indian exoteric, as well as esoteric,
systems. These figures and their symbols, the signs of the Zodiac, the
planets, their aspects and nodes—the last term having now passed even into
our modern Botany—are known in Astronomy as Sextiles, Quartiles and so on,
and have been used for ages and æons by the archaic nations, and in one
sense have the same meaning as the Hebrew numerals. The earliest forms of
elementary geometry must have certainly been suggested by the observation
of the heavenly bodies and their groupings. Hence, the most archaic
symbols in Eastern Esotericism are a circle, a point, a triangle, a
square, a pentagon, and a hexagon, and other plane figures with various
sides and angles. This shows the knowledge and use of geometrical
symbology to be as old as the world.

Starting from this, it becomes easy to understand how Nature herself, even
without the help of their divine instructors, could have taught primeval
mankind the first principles of a numerical and geometrical symbol‐
language.(471) Hence we find numbers and figures used as an expression and
a record of thought in every archaic symbolical Scripture. They are ever
the same, with certain variations only, arising from the first figures.
Thus the evolution and correlation of the mysteries of Kosmos, of its
growth and development—spiritual and physical, abstract and concrete—were
first recorded in geometrical changes of shape. Every Cosmogony began with
a circle, a point, a triangle and a square, up to number 9, when it was
synthesized by the first line and a circle—the Pythagorean mystic Decad,
the sum of all, involving and expressing the mysteries of the entire
Kosmos; mysteries recorded a hundred times more fully in the Hindû system
than elsewhere, for him who can understand its mystic language. The
numbers 3 and 4, in their combination 7, and also 5, 6, 9, and 10, are the
very corner‐stones of Occult Cosmogonies. This Decad and its thousand
combinations are found in every portion of the globe. One recognizes it in
the caves and rock‐cut temples of Hindûstan and Central Asia; in the
Pyramids and Lithoi of Egypt and America; in the Catacombs of Ozimandyas;
in the mounds of the snow‐capped Caucasian fastnesses; in the ruins of
Palenque; in Easter Island; everywhere whither the foot of ancient man has
ever journeyed. The 3 and the 4, the triangle and the square, or the
universal male and female glyphs, showing the first aspect of the evolving
deity, are stamped for ever in the Southern Cross in the Heavens, as in
the Egyptian Crux Ansata. As well expressed by the author of _The Source
of Measures_:


    The Cube unfolded is in display a cross of the Tau, or Egyptian
    form, or of the Christian cross‐form.... A circle attached to the
    first, gives the Ansated Cross ... numbers 3 and 4, counted on the
    cross, showing a form of the [Hebrew] golden candlestick [in the
    Holy of Holies], and of the 3 + 4 = 7, and 6 + 1 = 7, days in the
    _circle of the week_, as 7 lights of the sun. So also as the week
    of 7 lights gave origin to the _month_ and _year_, so it is the
    _time‐marker of birth_.... The cross‐form being shown, then, by
    the connected use of the form 113:355, the symbol is completed by
    the _attachment of a man to the cross_.(472) This kind of measure
    was made to coördinate with the idea of the _origin_ of human
    life, and hence the _phallic form_.


The Stanzas show the cross and these numbers playing a prominent part in
archaic Cosmogony. Meanwhile we may profit by the evidence collected by
the same author, in the section which he rightly calls the “Primordial
Vestiges of these Symbols,” to show the identity of symbols and their
esoteric meaning all over the globe.


    Under the general view taken of the nature of the number‐forms ...
    it becomes a matter of research of the utmost interest as to when
    and where their existence and their use first became known. Has it
    been a matter of revelation in what we know as the historic age—a
    cycle exceedingly modern when the age of the human race is
    contemplated? It seems, in fact, as to the date of its possession
    by man, to have been farther removed, in the past, from the old
    Egyptians than are the old Egyptians from us.

    The Easter Isles in “_mid Pacific_” present the feature of the
    remaining peaks of the mountains of _a submerged continent_, for
    the reason that these peaks are thickly studded with cyclopean
    statues, remnants of the civilization of a dense and cultivated
    people, who must have, of necessity, occupied a widely extended
    area. On the backs of these images is to be found the “_ansated
    cross_” and the same modified to the outlines of the human form. A
    full description, with plate showing the land with the thickly
    planted statues, also with copies of the images, is to be found in
    the January number, 1870, of the _London Builder_....

    In the _Naturalist_, published at Salem, Massachusetts, in one of
    the early numbers (about 36), is to be found a description of some
    very ancient and curious carving on the crest walls of the
    mountains of South America, older by far, it is averred, than the
    races now living. The strangeness of these tracings is in that
    they exhibit the outlines of a man stretched out on a cross,(473)
    by a series of drawings, by which from the form of a _man_ that of
    a _cross_ springs, but so done that the cross may be taken as the
    man, or the man as the cross....

    It is known that tradition among the Aztecs has handed down a very
    perfect account of the _deluge_.... Baron Humboldt says that we
    are to look for the country of Aztalan, the original country of
    the Aztecs, as high up, at least, as the 42nd parallel north;
    whence journeying, they at last arrived in the vale of Mexico. In
    that vale the earthen mounds of the far north become the elegant
    stone pyramidal, and other structures, whose remains are now
    found. The correspondences between the Aztec remains and those of
    the Egyptians are well known.... Atwater, from examination of
    hundreds of them, is convinced that they had a knowledge of
    astronomy. As to one of the most perfect of the pyramidal
    structures among the Aztecs, Humboldt gives a description to the
    following effect:

    “The form of this pyramid [of Papantla] which has _seven_ stories,
    is more tapering than any other monument of this kind yet
    discovered, but its height is not remarkable, being but 57 feet,
    its base but 25 feet on each side. However, it is remarkable on
    one account: it is built entirely of hewn stones, of an
    extraordinary size, and very beautifully shaped. _Three_
    staircases lead to the top, the steps of which were decorated with
    hieroglyphical sculptures and small _niches_, arranged with great
    symmetry. The number of these niches seem to allude to the 318
    _simple and compound signs of the days of their civil calendar_.”

    318 is the Gnostic value of Christ, and the famous number of the
    trained or circumcized servants of Abram. When it is considered
    that 318 is an _abstract value_, and _universal_, as expressive of
    a diameter value to a circumference of _unity_, its use in the
    composition of a civil calendar becomes manifest.


Identical glyphs, numbers and esoteric symbols are found in Egypt, Peru,
Mexico, Easter Island, India, Chaldæa, and Central Asia—Crucified Men, and
symbols of the evolution of races from Gods—and yet behold Science
repudiating the idea of a human race other than one made in _our_ image;
Theology clinging to its 6,000 years of Creation; Anthropology teaching
our descent from the ape; and the Clergy tracing it from Adam 4,004 years
B.C.!!

Shall one, for fear of incurring the penalty of being called a
superstitious fool, and even a liar, abstain from furnishing proofs—as
good as any existent—only because that day, when all the Seven Keys shall
be delivered unto Science, or rather the men of learning and research in
the department of symbology, has not yet dawned? In the face of the
crushing discoveries of Geology and Anthropology with regard to the
antiquity of man, shall we—in order to avoid the usual penalty that awaits
every one who strays outside the beaten paths of either Theology or
Materialism—hold to the 6,000 years and “special creation” or accept in
submissive admiration our genealogy and descent from the ape? Not so, as
long as it is known that the Secret Records hold the said Seven Keys to
the mystery of the genesis of man. Faulty, materialistic, and biassed as
the scientific theories may be, they are a thousand times nearer the truth
than the vagaries of Theology. The latter are in their death agony for
every one but the most uncompromising bigot and fanatic. Or rather, some
of its defenders must have lost their reason. For what can one think when,
in the face of the dead‐letter absurdities of the _Bible_, these are still
publicly supported, and as fiercely as ever, and one finds the Theologians
maintaining that though “the Scriptures carefully refrain [?] from making
any direct contribution to scientific knowledge, they have _never_
stumbled upon any statement _which will not abide the light of_ Advancing
Science”!!!(474)

Hence we have no choice but either to blindly accept the deductions of
Science, or to cut ourselves adrift from it, and withstand it fearlessly
to its face, stating what the Secret Doctrine teaches us, and being fully
prepared to bear the consequences.

But let us see whether Science, in its materialistic speculations, and
even Theology, in its death‐rattle and supreme struggle to reconcile the
6,000 years since Adam with Sir Charles Lyell’s _Geological Evidences of
the Antiquity of Man_, do not themselves unconsciously give us a helping
hand. Ethnology, on the confession of some of its most learned votaries,
finds it already impossible to account for the varieties in the human
race, unless the hypothesis of the _creation of several Adams_ be
accepted. They speak of “a white Adam and a black Adam, a red Adam and a
yellow Adam.”(475) Were they Hindûs enumerating the rebirths of Vâmadeva,
from the _Linga Purâna_, they could say little more. For, enumerating the
repeated births of Shiva, they show him in one Kalpa of a _white_
complexion, in another of a _black_ colour, in still another of a _red_
colour, after which the Kumâra becomes “four youths of a _yellow_ colour.”
This strange “coincidence,” as Mr. Proctor would say, speaks only in
favour of scientific intuition, as Shiva‐Kumâra simply represents,
allegorically, the human Races during the genesis of man. But it has led
to another intuitional phenomenon—in the theological ranks this time. The
unknown author of _Primeval Man_, in a desperate effort to screen the
Divine Revelation from the merciless and eloquent discoveries of Geology
and Anthropology, remarking that “it would be unfortunate if the defenders
of the _Bible_ should be driven into the position of either surrendering
the inspiration of Scripture, or denying the conclusions of
Geologists”—finds a compromise. Nay, he devotes a thick volume to proving
this fact: “Adam was not the _first man_(476) created upon this earth.”
The exhumed relics of pre‐Adamic man, “instead of shaking our confidence
in Scripture, supply additional proof of its veracity.”(477) How so? In
the simplest way imaginable; for the author argues that, henceforth “we
[the clergy] are enabled to leave scientific men to pursue their studies
without attempting to coërce them by the fear of heresy.” This must be a
relief indeed to Messrs. Huxley, Tyndall, and Sir Charles Lyell!


    The Bible narrative _does not commence with creation_, as is
    commonly supposed, but with the formation of Adam and Eve,
    _millions of years after_ our planet had been created. Its
    previous history, so far as Scripture is concerned, is yet
    unwritten.... There may have been not one, but twenty different
    races upon the earth before the time of Adam, just as there may be
    twenty different races of men on other worlds.(478)


Who, then, or what were those races, since the author still maintains that
Adam is _the first man of our race_? It was the Satanic Race and Races!
“Satan [was] never in heaven, Angels and men [being] one species.” It was
the pre‐Adamic race of “Angels that sinned.” Satan was the “first prince
of this world,” we read. Having died in consequence of his rebellion, he
remained on earth as a _disembodied Spirit_, and tempted Adam and Eve.


    The earlier ages of the Satanic race, and more especially _during
    the life‐time of Satan_ [!!!], may have been a period of
    patriarchal civilization and comparative repose—a time of Tubal‐
    Cains and Jubals, when both sciences and arts attempted to strike
    their roots into the accursed ground.... What a subject for an
    epic!... There are inevitable incidents which must have occurred.
    We see before us ... the gay primeval lover wooing his blushing
    bride at dewy eve under the Danish oaks, that then grew where now
    no oaks will grow ... the grey primeval patriarch ... the primeval
    offspring innocently gambolling by his side.... A thousand such
    pictures rise before us!(479)


The retrospective glance at this Satanic “blushing bride,” in the days of
Satan’s innocence, does not lose in poetry as it gains in originality.
Quite the reverse. The modern Christian bride—who does not often blush
now‐a‐days before her gay modern lovers—might even derive a moral lesson
from this daughter of Satan, created in the exuberant fancy of her first
human biographer. These pictures—and to appreciate them at their true
value they must be examined in the volume that describes them—are all
suggested with a view to reconcile the infallibility of revealed Scripture
with Sir Charles Lyell’s _Antiquity of Man_, and other damaging scientific
works. But this does not prevent truth and fact appearing at the
foundation of these vagaries, which the author has not dared to sign with
his own, or even a borrowed, name. For, his pre‐Adamic Races—not Satanic
but simply Atlantean, and the Hermaphrodites before the latter—are
mentioned in the _Bible_, if read esoterically, as they are in the Secret
Doctrine. The Seven Keys open the mysteries, past and future, of the seven
great Root‐Races, and of the seven Kalpas. Though the genesis of man, and
even the geology, of Esotericism will surely be rejected by Science, just
as much as the Satanic and pre‐Adamic Races, yet if the Scientists, having
no other way out of their difficulties, are compelled to choose between
the two, we feel certain that—Scripture notwithstanding—once the Mystery
Language is approximately mastered, it is the archaic teaching that will
be accepted.




Section III. Primordial Substance and Divine Thought.


    As it would seem irrational to affirm that we already know all
    existing causes, permission must be given to assume, if need be,
    _an entirely new agent_.

    Assuming, what is not strictly accurate as yet, that the
    undulatory hypothesis accounts for all the facts, we are called on
    to decide whether the existence of an undulating ether is thereby
    proved. _We cannot positively affirm that no other supposition
    will explain the facts._ Newton’s corpuscular hypothesis is
    admitted to have broken down on interference; and there is, at the
    present day, no rival. Still, it is extremely desirable in all
    such hypotheses to find some collateral confirmation, some
    evidence _aliunde_, of _the supposed Ether_.... Some hypotheses
    consist of assumptions as to the minute structure and operations
    of bodies. From the nature of the case, these assumptions can
    never be proved by direct means. Their only merit is _their
    suitability to express the phenomena_. They are _representative
    fictions_.

    _Logic_, by ALEXANDER BAIN, L.L.D., Part II, p. 133.


Ether—this hypothetical Proteus, one of the “representative fictions” of
Modern Science, which, nevertheless, was so long accepted—is one of the
lower “principles” of what we call Primordial Substance (Âkâsha, in
Sanskrit), one of the dreams of old, which has now again become the dream
of Modern Science. It is the greatest, as it is the boldest, of the
surviving speculations of ancient philosophers. For the Occultists,
however, both Ether and the Primordial Substance are realities. To put it
plainly, Ether is the Astral Light, and the Primordial Substance is
Âkâsha, the Upâdhi of Divine Thought.

In modern language, the latter would be better named Cosmic Ideation,
Spirit; the former, Cosmic Substance, Matter. These, the Alpha and the
Omega of Being, are but the two _facets_ of the one Absolute Existence.
The latter was never addressed, or even mentioned, by any name in
antiquity, except in allegory. In the oldest Âryan race, the Hindû, the
worship of the intellectual classes at no time ever consisted in an
adoration of marvellous form and art, however fervent, as with the Greeks;
an adoration, which led later on to anthropomorphism. But while the Greek
philosopher adored form, and the Hindû sage alone “perceived the true
relation of earthly beauty and eternal truth”—the uneducated of every
nation understood neither, at any time.

They do not understand it even now. The evolution of the God‐idea proceeds
apace with man’s own intellectual evolution. So true is it that the
noblest ideal to which the religious spirit of one age can soar, will
appear but a gross caricature to the philosophic mind in a succeeding
epoch! The philosophers themselves had to be _initiated into perceptive
mysteries_, before they could grasp the correct idea of the Ancients in
relation to this most metaphysical subject. Otherwise—outside such
Initiation—for every thinker there will be a “thus far shalt thou go and
no farther” mapped out by his intellectual capacity, as clearly and as
unmistakably as there is one for the progress of any nation or race in its
cycle by the law of Karma. Outside of Initiation, the ideals of
contemporary religious thought must always have their wings clipped, and
remain unable to soar higher; for idealistic, as well as realistic,
thinkers, and even free‐thinkers, are but the outcome and the natural
product of their respective environments and periods. The ideals of each
are but the necessary results of their temperaments, and the outcome of
that phase of intellectual progress to which a nation, in its
collectivity, has attained. Hence, as already remarked, the highest
flights of modern Western metaphysics have fallen far short of the truth.
Much of current Agnostic speculation on the existence of the “First Cause”
is little better than veiled Materialism—the terminology alone being
different. Even so great a thinker as Mr. Herbert Spencer speaks of the
“Unknowable” occasionally in terms that demonstrate the lethal influence
of materialistic thought, which, like the deadly Sirocco, has withered and
blighted all current ontological speculation.

For instance, when he terms the “First Cause” the “Unknowable,” a “power
_manifesting_ through phenomena,” and “an infinite eternal _energy_,” it
is clear that he has grasped solely the _physical_ aspect of the Mystery
of Being—the Energies of Cosmic Substance only. The coeternal aspect of
the One Reality, Cosmic Ideation, is absolutely omitted from
consideration, and as to its Noumenon, it seems non‐existent in the mind
of the great thinker. Without doubt, this one‐sided mode of dealing with
the problem is due largely to the pernicious Western practice of
subordinating Consciousness to Matter, or regarding it as a “bye‐product”
of molecular motion.

From the early ages of the Fourth Race, when Spirit alone was worshipped
and the Mystery was made manifest, down to the last palmy days of Grecian
art, at the dawn of Christianity, the Hellenes alone had dared publicly to
raise an altar to the “Unknown God.” Whatever St. Paul may have had in his
profound mind, when declaring to the Athenians that this “Unknown,” which
they ignorantly worshipped, was the true God announced by himself—that
Deity _was not_ “Jehovah,” nor was he “the maker of the world and all
things.” For it is not the “God of Israel” but the “Unknown” of the
ancient and modern Pantheist that “dwelleth not in temples _made with
hands_.”(480)

Divine Thought cannot be defined, nor can its meaning be explained, except
by the numberless manifestations of Cosmic Substance, in which the former
is _sensed_ spiritually by those who can do so. To say this, after having
defined it as the Unknown Deity, abstract, impersonal, sexless, which must
be placed at the root of every Cosmogony and its subsequent evolution, is
equivalent to saying nothing at all. It is like attempting a
transcendental equation of conditions, having in hand for deducing the
true value of its terms only a number of _unknown_ quantities. Its place
is found in the old primitive symbolic charts, in which, as already shown,
it is represented by a boundless darkness, on the ground of which appears
the first central point in white—thus symbolizing coëval and coëternal
Spirit‐Matter making its appearance in the phenomenal world, before its
first differentiation. When “the One becomes Two,” it may then be referred
to as Spirit _and_ Matter. To “Spirit” is referable every manifestation of
Consciousness, reflective or direct, and of “unconscious purposiveness”—to
adopt a modern expression used in Western _philosophy_, so‐called—as
evidenced in the Vital Principle, and Nature’s submission to the majestic
sequence of immutable Law. “Matter” must be regarded as objectivity in its
purest abstraction, the self‐existing basis, whose septenary manvantaric
differentiations constitute the objective reality underlying the phenomena
of each phase of conscious existence. During the period of Universal
Pralaya, Cosmic Ideation is non‐existent; and the variously differentiated
states of Cosmic Substance are resolved back again into the primary state
of abstract potential objectivity.

Manvantaric impulse commences with the reäwakening of Cosmic Ideation, the
Universal Mind, concurrently with, and parallel to, the primary emergence
of Cosmic Substance—the latter being the manvantaric vehicle of the
former—from its undifferentiated pralayic state. Then, Absolute Wisdom
mirrors itself in its Ideation; which, by a transcendental process,
superior to and incomprehensible by human Consciousness, results in Cosmic
Energy, Fohat. Thrilling through the bosom of inert Substance, Fohat
impels it to activity, and guides its primary differentiations on all the
seven planes of Cosmic Consciousness. There are thus Seven Protyles—as
they are now called, whereas Âryan antiquity named them the Seven
Prakritis, or Natures—serving, severally, as the _relatively_ homogeneous
bases, which in the course of the increasing heterogeneity, in the
evolution of the Universe, differentiate into the marvellous complexity
presented by phenomena on the planes of perception. The term “relatively”
is used designedly, because the very existence of such a process,
resulting in the primary segregations of undifferentiated Cosmic Substance
into its septenary bases of evolution, compels us to regard the Protyle of
each plane as only a _mediate_ phase assumed by Substance in its passage
from abstract, into full objectivity. The term Protyle is due to Mr.
Crookes, the eminent Chemist, who has given that name to _pre‐matter_, if
one may so call primordial and purely homogeneous substance, suspected, if
not actually yet found, by Science in the ultimate composition of the
atom. But the incipient segregation of primordial matter into atoms and
molecules takes its rise subsequent to the evolution of our Seven
Protyles. It is the last of these that Mr. Crookes is in search of, having
recently detected the possibility of its existence on our plane.

Cosmic Ideation is said to be non‐existent during pralayic periods, for
the simple reason that there is no one, and nothing, to perceive its
effects. There can be no manifestation of consciousness, semi‐
consciousness, or even “unconscious purposiveness,” except through a
vehicle of Matter; that is to say, on this our plane, wherein human
consciousness, _in its normal state_, cannot soar beyond what is known as
transcendental metaphysics, it is only through some molecular aggregation,
or fabric, that Spirit wells up in a stream of individual or sub‐conscious
subjectivity. And as Matter existing apart from perception is a mere
abstraction, both of these aspects of the Absolute—Cosmic Substance and
Cosmic Ideation—are mutually interdependent. In strict accuracy, to avoid
confusion and misconception, the term “Matter” ought to be applied to the
aggregate of objects of possible perception, and the term “Substance” to
Noumena; for inasmuch as the phenomena of _our_ plane are the creations of
the perceiving Ego—the modifications of its own subjectivity—all the
“states of matter representing the aggregate of perceived objects” can
have but a relative and purely phenomenal existence for the children of
our plane. As the modern Idealists would say, the coöperation of Subject
and Object results in the sense‐object, or phenomenon.

But this does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that it is the same
on all other planes; that the coöperation of the two, on the planes of
their septenary differentiation, results in a septenary aggregate of
phenomena which are likewise non‐existent _per se_, though concrete
realities for the Entities of whose experience they form a part, in the
same manner as the rocks and rivers around us are real from the stand‐
point of a Physicist, though unreal illusions of sense from that of the
Metaphysician. It would be an error to say, or even conceive, such a
thing. From the stand‐point of the highest metaphysics, the whole
Universe, Gods included, is an Illusion (Mâyâ). But the illusion of him
who is in himself an illusion differs on every plane of consciousness; and
we have no more right to dogmatize about the possible nature of the
perceptive faculties of an Ego on, say, the sixth plane, than we have to
identify our perceptions with, or make them a standard for, those of an
ant, in _its_ mode of consciousness. Cosmic Ideation focussed in a
Principle, or Upâdhi (Basis), results as the consciousness of the
individual Ego. Its manifestation varies with the degree of the Upâdhi.
For instance, through that known as Manas, it wells up as Mind‐
Consciousness; through the more finely differentiated fabric (sixth state
of matter) of Buddhi—resting on the experience of Manas as its Basis—as a
stream of Spiritual Intuition.

The pure Object apart from consciousness is unknown to us, while living on
the plane of our three‐dimensional world, for we know only the mental
states it excites in the perceiving Ego. And, so long as the contrast of
Subject and Object endures—to wit, so long as we enjoy our five senses and
no more, and do not know how to divorce our all‐perceiving Ego from the
thraldom of these senses—so long will it be impossible for the _personal_
Ego to break through the barrier which separates it from a knowledge of
“things in themselves,” or Substance.

That Ego, progressing in an arc of ascending subjectivity, must exhaust
the experience of every plane. But not till the Unit is merged in the ALL,
whether on this or any other plane, and Subject and Object alike vanish in
the absolute negation of the Nirvânic State—negation, again, only _from
our plane_—not until then, is scaled that peak of Omniscience, the
Knowledge of Things‐in‐themselves, and the solution of the yet more awful
riddle approached, before which even the highest Dhyân Chohan must bow in
silence and ignorance—the Unspeakable Mystery of that which is called by
the Vedântins, Parabrahman.

Therefore, such being the case, all those who have sought to give a name
to the Incognizable Principle have simply degraded it. Even to speak of
Cosmic Ideation—save in its _phenomenal_ aspect—is like trying to bottle
up primordial Chaos, or to put a printed label on Eternity.

What, then, is the “Primordial Substance,” that mysterious object of which
Alchemy was ever talking, and which was the subject of philosophical
speculation in every age? What can it be finally, even in its _phenomenal_
pre‐differentiation? Even _that_ is the All of manifested Nature
and—_nothing_ to our senses. It is mentioned under various names in every
cosmogony, referred to in every philosophy, and shown to be, to this day,
the ever grasp‐eluding Proteus in Nature. We touch and do not feel it; we
look at it without seeing it; we breathe it and do not perceive it; we
hear and smell it without the smallest cognition that it is there; for it
is in every molecule of that which, in our illusion and ignorance, we
regard as Matter in any of its states, or conceive as a feeling, a
thought, an emotion. In short, it is the Upâdhi, or Vehicle, of every
possible phenomenon, whether physical, mental, or psychic. In the opening
sentences of _Genesis_, and in the Chaldean Cosmogony; in the _Purânas_ of
India, and in the _Book of the Dead_ of Egypt; everywhere it opens the
cycle of manifestation. It is termed Chaos, and the Face of the Waters,
incubated by the Spirit, proceeding from the Unknown, whatever that
Spirit’s name may be.

The authors of the Sacred Scriptures in India go deeper into the origin of
the evolution of things than does Thales or Job, for they say:


    From Intelligence [called Mahat, in the _Purânas_], associated
    with Ignorance [Îshvara, as a _personal_ deity], _attended by its
    projective power_, in which the quality of dulness [_tamas_,
    insensibility] predominates, proceeds _Ether_—from ether, air;
    from air, heat; from heat, water; and from water, earth with
    everything on it.


“From This, from this same Self, was the Ether produced,” says the
_Veda_.(481)

It thus becomes evident that it is not _this_ Ether—sprung at the fourth
remove from an _emanation_ of “Intelligence, associated with
Ignorance”—which is the high Principle, the _deific_ Entity worshipped by
the Greeks and Latins under the name of “Pater, Omnipotens Æther,” and
“Magnus Æther,” in its collective aggregate. The septenary gradation, and
the innumerable sub‐divisions and differences, made by the Ancients
between the powers of Ether collectively—from its outward fringe of
effects, with which our Science is so familiar, up to the “Imponderable
Substance,” once admitted as the “Ether of Space,” but now about to be
rejected—have been ever a vexing riddle for every branch of knowledge. The
Mythologists and Symbologists of our day, confused by this
incomprehensible glorification on the one hand, and degradation on the
other, of the same deified Entity and in the same religious systems, are
often driven to the most ludicrous mistakes. The Church, firm as a rock in
each and all of her early errors of interpretation, has made of Ether the
abode of her Satanic legions. The whole Hierarchy of the “Fallen” Angels
is there; Cosmocratores, the “World Bearers,” according to Bossuet; Mundi
Tenentes, the “World Holders,” as Tertullian calls them; Mundi Domini,
“World Dominations,” or rather Dominators; the Curbati, or “Curved,” etc.;
thus making of the stars and celestial orbs in their courses—Devils!

For it is thus that the Church has interpreted the verse: “For we wrestle
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world.”(482) Further, St. Paul
mentions the spiritual malices (“wickedness,” in English texts), in the
Air—_spiritualia nequitiæ cœlestibus_—the Latin texts giving various names
to these “malices,” the innocent “Elementals.” But the Church is right
this time, though wrong in calling them all Devils. The Astral Light, or
lower Ether, _is_ full of conscious, semi‐conscious and unconscious
entities; only the church has less _power_ over them than over invisible
microbes or mosquitoes.

The difference made between the seven states of Ether—itself one of the
Seven Cosmic Principles, whereas the Æther of the ancients is Universal
Fire—may be seen in the injunctions by Zoroaster and Psellus,
respectively. The former said: “Consult it only when it is without form or
figure”—_absque formâ et figurâ_—which means, without flames or burning
coals. “When it has a form, _heed it not_”; teaches Psellus, “but when it
is formless, obey it, for it is then _sacred fire_, and all it will reveal
thee shall be true.”(483) This proves that Ether, itself an aspect of
Âkâsha, has in its turn several aspects or “principles.”

All the ancient nations deified Æther in its imponderable aspect and
potency. Virgil calls Jupiter, _Pater Omnipotens Æther_, and the “Great
Æther.”(484) The Hindûs have also placed it among their deities, under the
name of Âkâsha, the synthesis of Ether. And the author of the Homœomerian
System of philosophy, Anaxagoras of Clazomenæ, firmly believed that the
spiritual prototypes of all things, as well as their elements, were to be
found in the boundless Æther, where they were generated, whence they
evolved, and whither they returned—an Occult teaching.

It thus becomes clear that it is from Æther, in its highest synthetic
aspect, once anthropomorphized, that sprang the first idea of a personal
Creative Deity. With the philosophical Hindûs the Elements are _tâmasa_,
_i.e._, “unenlightened by _intellect_, which they obscure.”

We have now to exhaust the question of the mystical meaning of Primordial
Chaos and of the Root‐Principle, and show how they were connected in the
ancient philosophies with Âkâsha, incorrectly translated Ether, and also
with Mâyâ, Illusion, of which Îshvara is the male aspect. We shall speak
further on of the Intelligent Principle, or rather of the invisible
immaterial properties, in the visible and material elements, that “sprang
from the Primordial Chaos.”

For “what is the primordial Chaos but Æther?”—it is asked, in _Isis
Unveiled_. Not the _modern_ Ether; not such as is recognized now, but such
as _was_ known to the ancient philosophers long before the time of
Moses—Æther, with all its mysterious and occult properties, containing in
itself the germs of universal creation. The Upper Æther, or Âkâsha, is the
Celestial Virgin and Mother of every existing form and being, from whose
bosom, as soon as “incubated” by the Divine Spirit, are called into
existence Matter and Life, Force and Action. Æther is the Aditi of the
Hindûs, and it is Âkâsha. Electricity, magnetism, heat, light, and
chemical action are so little understood even now, that fresh facts are
constantly widening the range of our knowledge. Who knows where ends the
power of this protean giant—Æther; or whence its mysterious origin? Who,
we mean, that denies the Spirit that works in it, and evolves out of it
all visible forms?

It will be an easy task to show that the cosmogonical legends all over the
world are based on a knowledge among the Ancients of those sciences, which
have, in our days, allied themselves in support of the doctrine of
evolution; and that further research may demonstrate that these Ancients
were far better acquainted with the fact of evolution itself, embracing
both its physical and spiritual aspects, than we are now.


    With the old philosophers, evolution was a universal theorem, a
    doctrine embracing the _whole_, and an established principle;
    whereas our modern evolutionists are enabled to present us merely
    with speculative theoretics; with _particular_, if not wholly
    _negative_ theorems. It is idle for the representatives of our
    modern wisdom to close the debate and pretend that the question is
    settled, merely because the obscure phraseology of the Mosaic ...
    account clashes with the definite exegesis of “Exact
    Science.”(485)


If we turn to the _Ordinances of Manu_, we find the prototype of all these
ideas. Mostly lost, to the Western world, in their original form,
disfigured by later interpolations and additions, they have, nevertheless,
preserved quite enough of their ancient spirit to show its character.

“Removing the darkness, the Self‐existent Lord [Vishnu, Nârâyana, etc.]
became manifest; and, wishing to produce beings from his Essence, created,
in the beginning, water alone. In that he cast seed. That became a Golden
Egg.”

Whence this Self‐existent Lord? It is called This, and is spoken of as
“Darkness, imperceptible, without definite qualities, undiscoverable,
unknowable, as if wholly in sleep.” Having dwelt in that Egg for a whole
Divine Year, he “who is called in the world Brahmâ,” splits that Egg in
two, and from the upper portion he forms the heaven, from the lower the
earth, and from the middle the sky and “the perpetual place of
waters.”(486)

Directly following these verses, however, there is something more
important for us, as it entirely corroborates our Esoteric teachings. From
verse 14 to 36, evolution is given in the order described in the Esoteric
Philosophy. This cannot be easily gainsaid. Even Medhâtithi, the son of
Virasvâmin, and the author of the Commentary, the _Manubhâsya_, whose
date, according to the western Orientalists, is 1,000 A.D., helps us with
his remarks to the elucidation of the truth. He shows himself either
unwilling to give out more, because he knew what had to be kept from the
profane, or else he was really puzzled. Still, what he does give out makes
the septenary principle in man and Nature plain enough.

Let us begin with Chapter I of the _Ordinances_, or “Laws,” after the
Self‐existent Lord, the Unmanifesting Logos of the Unknown “Darkness,”
becomes manifested in the Golden Egg. It is from this Egg, from

11. “That which is the undiscrete [undifferentiated] Cause, eternal, which
_is_ and _is not_, from It issued that Male who is called in the world
Brahmâ.”

Here, as in all genuine philosophical systems, we find even the “Egg,” or
the Circle, or Zero, Boundless Infinity, referred to as “It,”(487) and
Brahmâ, the first Unit only, referred to as the “Male” God, _i.e._, the
fructifying Principle. It is [circle split by vertical line], or 10 (ten),
the Decad. On the plane of the Septenary, or _our_ World, only, it is
called Brahmâ. On that of the Unified Decad, in the realm of Reality, this
male Brahmâ is an Illusion.

14. “From Self (_Âtmanah_) he created Mind, _which is and is not_; and
from Mind, Ego‐ism [Self‐Consciousness] (_a_), the ruler (_b_), the Lord.”

(_a_) The Mind is Manas. Medhâtithi, the commentator, justly observes here
that it is the reverse of this, and shows already interpolation and
rearranging; for it is Manas that springs from Ahamkâra or (Universal)
Self‐Consciousness, as Manas in the microcosm springs from Mahat, or
Mahâ‐Buddhi (Buddhi, in man). For Manas is dual. As shown and translated
by Colebrooke, “Mind, _serving both for sense and action_, is an organ by
affinity, being cognate with the rest”;(488) “the rest” here meaning that
Manas, our Fifth Principle (the _fifth_, because the body was named the
_first_, which is the reverse of the true philosophical order), is in
affinity both with Âtmâ‐Buddhi and with the lower Four Principles. Hence,
our teaching: namely, that Manas follows Âtmâ‐Buddhi to Devachan, and that
the Lower Manas, that is to say, the dregs or residue of Manas, remains
with Kâma Rûpa, in Limbus, or Kâma Loka, the abode of the “Shells.”

(_b_) Medhâtithi translates this as “the one conscious of the I,” or Ego,
not “the ruler,” as do the Orientalists. Thus also they translate the
following shloka:

16. “He also, having made the subtile parts of those six [the great Self
and the five organs of sense], of unmeasured brightness, to enter into the
elements of self (_âtmamâtrâsu_), created all beings.”

When, according to Medhâtithi, it ought to read _mâtrâbhih_ instead of
_âtmamâtrâsu_, and thus would read:

“He having pervaded the subtile parts of those six, of unmeasured
brightness, by elements of self, created all beings.”

The latter reading must be the correct one, since He, the Self, is what we
call Âtmâ, and thus constitutes the seventh principle, the synthesis of
the “six.” Such is also the opinion of the editor of the _Mânava Dharma
Shâstra_, who seems to have intuitionally entered far deeper into the
spirit of the philosophy than has the translator, the late Dr. Burnell;
for he hesitates little between the text of Kullûka Bhatta and the
commentary of Medhâtithi. Rejecting the _tanmâtra_, or subtile elements,
and the _âtmamâtra_ of Kullûka Bhatta, he says, applying the principles to
the Cosmic Self:

“The six appear rather to be the _manas_ plus the five principles of
ether, air, fire, water, earth; ‘having united five portions of those six
with the spiritual element [the _seventh_] he (thus) created all existing
things;’ ... _âtmamâtra_ is therefore the spiritual atom as opposed to the
elementary, not reflexive ‘elements of himself’.”

Thus he corrects the translation of verse 17:

“As the subtile elements of bodily forms of this One depend on these six,
so the wise call his form Sharîra.”

And he adds that “elements” mean here portions, or parts (or principles),
which reading is borne out by verse 19, which says:

“This non‐eternal (Universe) arises then from the Eternal, by means of the
subtile elements of forms of _those seven_ very glorious Principles
(_Purusha_).”

Commenting upon which emendation of Medhâtithi, the editor remarks: “the
five elements _plus_ mind [_Manas_] and self‐consciousness
[_Ahamkâra_](489) are probably meant; ‘subtile elements,’ as before
[meaning] ‘fine portions of form’ [or principles].” Verse 20 shows this,
when saying of these five elements, or “fine portions of form” (Rûpa
_plus_ Manas and Self‐Consciousness) that they constitute the “Seven
Purusha,” or Principles, called in the _Purânas_ the “Seven Prakritis.”

Moreover, these “five elements,” or “five portions,” are spoken of in
verse 27 as “those which are called the atomic destructible portions,” and
which are, therefore, “distinct from the atoms of the Nyâya.”

This creative Brahmâ, issuing from the Mundane or Golden Egg, unites in
himself both the male and female principles. He is, in short, the same as
all the creative Protologoi. Of Brahmâ, however, it could not be said, as
of Dionysos, “πρωτόγονον διφυῆ τρίγονον βακχεῖον Ἅνακτα Ἄγριον ἀρρητὸν
κρύφιον δικέρωτα δίμορφον”—a lunar Jehovah, Bacchus truly, with David
dancing nude before his _symbol_ in the ark—because no licentious Dionysia
were ever established in his name and honour. All such public worship was
exoteric, and the great universal symbols were distorted universally, as
those of Krishna are now by the Vallabâchâryas of Bombay, the followers of
the “infant” God. But are these popular Gods the _true_ Deity? Are _they_
the apex and synthesis of the sevenfold creation, man included?
Impossible! Each and all are one of the rungs of that septenary ladder of
Divine Consciousness, Pagan as Christian. Ain Suph is said to manifest
through the _Seven Letters_ of the Name of Jehovah who, having usurped the
place of the Unknown Limitless, was given by his devotees his Seven Angels
of the Presence—his Seven Principles. But, indeed, they are mentioned in
almost every school. In the pure Sânkhya philosophy Mahat, Ahamkâra and
the five Tanmâtras are called the Seven Prakritis, or Natures, and are
counted from Mahâ‐Buddhi, or Mahat, down to Earth.(490)

Nevertheless, however disfigured by Ezra for Rabbinical purposes is the
original Elohistic version, however repulsive at times is even the
_esoteric_ meaning in the Hebrew scrolls, far more so indeed than its
outward veil or cloaking may be—once the Jehovistic portions are
eliminated, the Mosaic Books are found full of purely Occult and priceless
knowledge, especially in the first six chapters.

Read by the aid of the _Kabalah_, one finds a matchless temple of Occult
truths, a well of deeply concealed beauty, hidden under a structure, the
_visible_ architecture of which, notwithstanding its apparent symmetry, is
unable to stand the criticism of cold reason, or to reveal the age of its
hidden truth, for it belongs to all the ages. There is more Wisdom
concealed under the exoteric _fables_ of the _Purânas_ and _Bible_ than in
all the exoteric _facts_ and science in the literature of the world, and
more Occult true Science, than there is of exact knowledge in all the
academies. Or, in plainer and stronger language, there is as much esoteric
wisdom in some portions of the _exoteric Purânas_ and _Pentateuch_, as
there is of nonsense and of designedly childish fancy, when read only in
the dead‐letter and murderous interpretations of the great dogmatic
religions, and especially of their sects.

Let anyone read the first verses of _Genesis_ and reflect upon them.
There, “God” commands _another_ “God,” _who does his bidding_—even in the
_cautious_ English Protestant authorized translation of King James I.

In the “beginning”—the Hebrew language having no word to express the idea
of eternity(491)—“God” fashions the Heaven and the Earth; and the latter
is “without form and void,” while the former is in fact not Heaven, but
the “Deep,” Chaos, with darkness upon its face.(492)

“And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters,” or the Great
Deep of the Infinite Space. And this Spirit is Nârâyana, or Vishnu.

“And God said, Let there be a firmament....” And “God,” the second, obeyed
and “_made_ the firmament.” “And God said let there be light.” And “there
was light.” Now the latter does not mean light at all, but, as in the
_Kabalah_, the androgyne Adam Kadmon, or Sephira (Spiritual Light), for
they are one; or, according to the Chaldean _Book of Numbers_, the
_secondary_ Angels, the first being the Elohim, who are the aggregate of
that “fashioning” _God_. For to whom are those words of command addressed?
And who is it who commands? That which commands is the Eternal Law, and he
who obeys, the Elohim, the known quantity acting in and with _x_, or the
coëfficient of the unknown quantity, the Forces of the One Force. All this
is Occultism, and is found in the archaic Stanzas. It is perfectly
immaterial whether we call these “Forces” the Dhyân Chohans, or the
Auphanim as Ezekiel does.

“The one Universal Light, which to man is Darkness, is ever existent,”
says the Chaldean _Book of Numbers_. From it proceeds periodically the
Energy, which is reflected in the Deep, or Chaos, the store‐house of
future Worlds, and, once awakened, stirs up and fructifies the latent
Forces, which are the ever present eternal potentialities in it. Then
awake anew the Brahmâs and Buddhas—the co‐eternal Forces—and a new
Universe springs into being.

In the _Sepher Yetzirah_, the Kabalistic Book of Creation, the author has
evidently repeated the words of Manu. In it, the Divine Substance is
represented as having alone existed from the eternity, boundless and
absolute; and as having emitted from itself the Spirit.(493) “One is the
Spirit of the living God, blessed be Its name, which liveth for ever!
Voice, Spirit, and Word, this is the Holy Spirit.”(494) And this is the
Kabalistic abstract Trinity, so unceremoniously anthropomorphized by the
Christian Fathers. From this triple One emanated the whole Kosmos. First
from One emanated number Two, or Air (the Father), the creative Element;
and then number Three, Water (the Mother), proceeded from Air; Ether or
Fire completes the Mystic Four, the Arbo‐al.(495) When the Concealed of
the Concealed wanted to reveal Himself, he first made a Point [the
Primordial Point, or the first Sephira, Air, or Holy Ghost,] shaped into a
sacred Form, [the Ten Sephiroth, or the Heavenly Man,] and covered it with
a rich and splendid Garment, _that is the World_.(496)

“He maketh the Wind His messengers, flaming Fire His servants”;(497) says
the _Yetzirah_, showing the cosmical character of the later euhemerized
Elements, and that Spirit permeates every atom in Kosmos.

Paul calls the invisible Cosmic Beings the “Elements.” But now the
Elements are degraded into, and limited to, atoms of which nothing is
known so far, and which are only “children of necessity,” as is Ether
also. As we said in _Isis Unveiled_:


    The poor primordial Elements have long been exiled, and our
    ambitious Physicists run races, to determine who shall add one
    more to the fledgling brood of the sixty and odd elementary
    substances.


Meanwhile there rages a war in modern Chemistry about terms. We are denied
the right to call these substances “chemical elements,” for these are not
“primordial principles of self‐existing essences, out of which the
universe was fashioned,” according to Plato. Such ideas associated with
the word “element” were good enough for the old Greek Philosophy, but
Modern Science rejects them; for, as Mr. William Crookes says: “they are
unfortunate terms,” and experimental Science will have “nothing to do with
any kind of essences except those which it can see, smell, or taste. It
leaves others to the metaphysicians....” We must feel grateful even for so
much!

This “Primordial Substance” is called by some Chaos. Plato and the
Pythagoreans named it the Soul of the World, after it had been impregnated
by the Spirit of that which broods over the Primeval Waters, or Chaos. It
is by being reflected in it, say the Kabalists, that the brooding
Principle “created” the phantasmagoria of a visible, manifested Universe.
Chaos before, Ether after this “reflection,” it is still the Deity that
pervades Space and all things. It is the invisible, imponderable Spirit of
things, and the invisible, but only too tangible, fluid that radiates from
the fingers of the healthy magnetizer, for it is Vital Electricity—Life
itself. Called in derision, by the Marquis de Mirville, the “Nebulous
Almighty,” it is to this day termed by the Theurgists and Occultists the
“Living Fire”; and there is not a Hindû who practises at dawn a certain
kind of meditation but knows its effects. It is the “Spirit of Light” and
Magnes. As truly expressed by an opponent, Magus and Magnes are two
branches growing from the same trunk and shooting forth the same
resultants. And in this appellation of “Living Fire” we may also discover
the meaning of the puzzling sentence in the _Zend Avesta_: there is “a
Fire that gives knowledge of the future, science and amiable speech”; that
is to say, which develops an extraordinary eloquence in the sibyl, the
sensitive, and even some orators. Writing upon this subject, in _Isis
Unveiled_, we said:


    The Chaos of the ancients, the Zoroastrian Sacred Fire, or the
    Atash‐Behram of the Parsîs; the Hermes‐fire, the Elmes‐fire of the
    ancient Germans; the Lightning of Cybele; the Burning Torch of
    Apollo; the Flame on the altar of Pan; the Inextinguishable Fire
    in the temple on the Acropolis, and in that of Vesta; the Fire‐
    flame of Pluto’s helm; the brilliant Sparks on the caps of the
    Dioscuri, on the Gorgon’s head, the helm of Pallas, and the staff
    of Mercury; the Egyptian Ptah‐Ra; the Grecian Zeus Cataibates (the
    Descending) of Pausanias; the Pentecostal Fire‐tongues; the
    Burning Bush of Moses; the Pillar of Fire of _Exodus_, and the
    Burning Lamp of Abram; the Eternal Fire of the “bottomless pit”;
    the Delphic oracular vapours; the Sidereal Light of the
    Rosicrucians; the Âkâsha of the Hindû Adepts; the Astral Light of
    Éliphas Lévi; the Nerve‐Aura and the Fluid of the Magnetists; the
    Od of Reichenbach; the Psychod and Ectenic Force of Thury; the
    “Psychic Force” of Sergeant Cox, and the atmospheric magnetism of
    some Naturalists; galvanism; and finally, electricity—all these
    are but various names for many different manifestations or effects
    of the same mysterious, all‐pervading Cause, the Greek Archæus.


We now add—it is all this and much more.

This “Fire” is spoken of in all the Hindû Sacred Books, as also in the
Kabalistic works. The _Zohar_ explains it as the “White Hidden Fire, in
the Risha Havurah,” the White Head, whose Will causes the fiery fluid to
flow in 370 currents in every direction of the Universe. It is identical
with the “Serpent that runs with 370 leaps” of the _Siphrah Dtzenioutha_,
the Serpent, which, when the “Perfect Man,” the Metatron, _is raised_,
that is to say, when the _Divine_ Man indwells in the _animal_ man,
becomes _three_ Spirits, or Âtmâ‐Buddhi‐Manas, in our Theosophical
phraseology.

Spirit, then, or Cosmic Ideation, and Cosmic Substance—one of whose
“principles” is Ether—are _one_, and include the Elements, in the sense
St. Paul attaches to them. These Elements are the veiled Synthesis
standing for Dhyân Chohans, Devas, Sephiroth, Amshaspends, Archangels,
etc. The Ether of Science—the Ilus of Berosus, or the Protyle of
Chemistry—constitutes, so to speak, the _rude_ material, relatively, out
of which the above‐named Builders, following the plan traced out for them
eternally in the Divine Thought, fashion the Systems in the Kosmos. They
are “myths,” we are told. No more so than Ether and the Atoms, we answer.
The two latter are absolute necessities of Physical Science, and the
Builders are as absolute a necessity of Metaphysics. We are twitted with
the objection: You never saw them. And we ask the Materialists: Have you
ever seen Ether, or your Atoms, or, again, your Force? Moreover, one of
the greatest Western Evolutionists of our modern day, co‐“discoverer” with
Darwin, Mr. A. R. Wallace, when discussing the inadequacy of Natural
Selection alone accounting for the physical form of Man, admits the
guiding action of “higher intelligences” as a “_necessary_ part of the
great laws which govern the material Universe.”(498)

These “higher intelligences” are the Dhyân Chohans of the Occultists.

Indeed, there are few myths in any religious system worthy of the name,
but have a historical as well as a scientific foundation. “Myths,” justly
observes Pococke, “are now proved to be _fables_, just in proportion as
_we misunderstand_ them; _truths_, in proportion as _they were once
understood_.”

The most distinct and the one prevailing idea, found in all ancient
teaching, with reference to Cosmic Evolution and the first “creation” of
our Globe with all its products, organic and _inorganic_—strange word for
an Occultist to use!—is that the whole Kosmos has sprung from the Divine
Thought. This Thought impregnates Matter, which is co‐eternal with the One
Reality; and all that lives and breathes evolves from the Emanations of
the One Immutable, Parabrahman‐Mûlaprakriti, the Eternal One‐Root. The
former of these, in its aspect of the Central Point turned inward, so to
say, into regions quite inaccessible to human intellect, is Absolute
Abstraction; whereas, in its aspect as Mûlaprakriti, the Eternal Root of
all, it gives one at least some hazy comprehension of the Mystery of
Being.


    Therefore, it was taught in the _inner_ temples that this visible
    Universe of Spirit and Matter is but the concrete Image of the
    ideal Abstraction; it was built on the Model of the first Divine
    Idea. Thus our Universe existed from eternity in a latent state.
    The Soul animating this purely spiritual Universe is the Central
    Sun, the highest Deity Itself. It was not the One who built the
    concrete form of the idea, but the First‐Begotten; and, as it was
    constructed on the geometrical figure of the dodecahedron,(499)
    the First‐Begotten “was pleased to employ 12,000 years in its
    creation.” The latter number is expressed in the Tyrrhenian
    Cosmogony,(500) which shows man created in the sixth millennium.
    This agrees with the Egyptian theory of 6,000 “years,”(501) and
    with the Hebrew computation. But it is the exoteric form of it.
    The secret computation explains that the “12,000 and the 6,000
    years” are Years of Brahmâ, one Day of Brahmâ being equal to
    4,320,000,000 years. Sanchuniathon, in his _Cosmogony_,(502)
    declares that when the Wind (Spirit) became enamoured of its own
    principles (Chaos), an intimate union took place, which connection
    was called Pothos (ποθος), and from this sprang the seed of all.
    And the Chaos knew not its own production, for it was _senseless_;
    but from its embrace with the Wind was generated Môt, or the Ilus
    (Mud).(503) From this proceeded the spores of creation and the
    generation of the Universe.(504)

    Zeus‐Zên (Æther), and Chthonia (Chaotic Earth) and Metis (Water),
    his wives; Osiris—also representing Æther, the first emanation of
    the Supreme Deity, Amun, the primeval source of Light—and Isis‐
    Latona, the Goddess Earth and Water again; Mithras,(505) the rock‐
    born God, the symbol of the male Mundane Fire, or the personified
    Primordial Light, and Mithra, the Fire‐Goddess, at once his mother
    and his wife—the pure element of Fire, the active or male
    principle, regarded as light and heat, in conjunction with Earth
    and Water, or matter, the female, or passive, element of cosmical
    generation—Mithras who is the son of Bordj, the Persian mundane
    mountain,(506) from which he flashed out as a radiant ray of
    light; Brahmâ, the Fire‐God, and his prolific consort; and the
    Hindû Agni, the refulgent Deity from whose body issue a thousand
    streams of glory and _seven_ tongues of flame, and in whose honour
    certain Brâhmans to this day maintain a perpetual fire; Shiva,
    personated by Meru, the mundane mountain of the Hindûs, the
    terrific Fire‐God, who is said in the legend to have descended
    from heaven, like the Jewish Jehovah, “in a pillar of fire”; and a
    dozen other archaic double‐sexed Deities—all loudly proclaim their
    hidden meaning. And what could be the dual meaning of these myths
    but the psycho‐chemical principle of primordial creation; the
    First Evolution, in its triple manifestation of Spirit, Force and
    Matter; the divine _correlation_, at its starting point,
    allegorized as the marriage of Fire and Water, the products of
    electrifying Spirit—the union of the male active principle with
    the female passive element—which become the parents of their
    tellurian child, Cosmic Matter, the Prima Materia, whose Soul is
    Æther, and whose Shadow is the Astral Light!(507)


But the fragments of the cosmogonical systems that have reached us are now
rejected as absurd fables. Nevertheless, Occult Science—which has survived
even the Great Flood that submerged the Antediluvian Giants and with them
their very memory, save the record preserved in the Secret Doctrine, the
_Bible_ and other Scriptures—still holds the Key to all the world
problems.

Let us, then, apply this Key to the rare fragments of long‐forgotten
Cosmogonies, and by means of their scattered portions endeavour to
reestablish the once Universal Cosmogony of the Secret Doctrine. The Key
fits them all. No one can seriously study ancient philosophies without
perceiving that the striking similitude of conception in all of them, in
their exoteric form very frequently, and in their hidden spirit
invariably, is the result of no mere coincidence, but of a concurrent
design; and that, during the youth of mankind, there was but one language,
one knowledge, one universal religion, when there were no churches, no
creeds or sects, but when every man was a priest unto himself. And, if it
is shown that already in those early ages which are shut out from our
sight by the exuberant growth of tradition, human religious thought
developed in uniform sympathy in every portion of the globe; then, it
becomes evident that that thought, born under whatever latitude, in the
cold North or the burning South, in the East or West, was inspired by the
same revelations, and that man was nurtured under the protecting shadow of
the same _Tree of Knowledge_.




Section IV. Chaos: Theos: Kosmos.


These three are the containment of Space; or, as a learned Kabalist has
defined it: “Space, the all‐containing uncontained, is the primary
embodiment of simple Unity ... boundless extension.”(508) But, he asks
again: “boundless extension of what?”—and makes the correct reply: “The
Unknown Container of All, the _Unknown First Cause_.” This is a most
correct definition and answer; most esoteric and true, from every aspect
of Occult Teaching.

_Space_, which, in their ignorance and with their iconoclastic tendency to
destroy every philosophic idea of old, the modern wiseacres have
proclaimed “an abstract idea” and a “void,” is, in reality, the Container
and the Body of the Universe in its Seven Principles. It is a Body of
limitless extent, whose Principles, in Occult phraseology—each being in
its turn a septenary—manifest in our phenomenal World only the grossest
fabric of their _sub‐divisions_. “No one has ever seen the Elements in
their fulness,” the Doctrine teaches. We have to search for our Wisdom in
the original expressions and synonyms of the primeval peoples. Even the
Jews, the latest of these, show the same idea, in their Kabalistic
teachings, when they speak of the seven‐headed Serpent of Space, called
the “Great Sea.”


    In the beginning, the Alhim created the Heavens and the Earth; the
    Six [Sephiroth].... They created Six, and on these all things are
    based. And these [Six] depend upon the _seven forms_ of the
    Cranium up to the Dignity of all Dignities.(509)


Now Wind, Air and Spirit have ever been synonymous in every nation. Pneuma
(Spirit) and Anemos (Wind), with the Greeks, Spiritus and Ventus, with the
Latins, were convertible terms, even if dissociated from the original idea
of the Breath of Life. In the “Forces” of Science we see but the _material
effect_ of the _spiritual effect_ of one or other of the four primordial
Elements, transmitted to us by the Fourth Race just as we shall transmit
Æther, or rather its gross sub‐division, in its fulness to the Sixth Root‐
Race.

Chaos was called _senseless_ by the Ancients, because—Chaos and Space
being synonymous—it represented and contained in itself all the Elements
in their rudimentary, undifferentiated State. They made Æther, the fifth
Element, the synthesis of the other four; for the Æther of the Greek
philosophers was not its Dregs, although indeed they knew more than
Science does now of these Dregs (Ether), which are rightly enough supposed
to act as an agent for many Forces that manifest on Earth. Their Æther was
the Âkâsha of the Hindûs; the Ether accepted in Physics is but one of its
sub‐divisions, on our plane, the Astral Light of the Kabalists with all
its _evil_ as well as its good effects.

Seeing that the Essence of Æther, or the Unseen Space, was considered
divine, as being the supposed Veil of Deity, it was regarded as the Medium
between this life and the next. The Ancients considered that when the
directing active Intelligences—the Gods—retired from any portion of Æther
in _our_ Space, or the four realms which they superintend, then that
particular region was left in the possession of _evil_, so called by
reason of the absence from it of _good_.


    The existence of Spirit in the common Mediator, the Ether, is
    denied by Materialism; while Theology makes of it a Personal God.
    But the Kabalist holds that both are wrong, saying that in Ether,
    the elements represent only Matter, the blind Cosmic Forces of
    Nature; while Spirit represents the Intelligence which directs
    them. The Âryan, Hermetic, Orphic, and Pythagorean cosmogonical
    doctrines, as well as those of Sanchuniathon and Berosus, are all
    based upon one irrefutable formula, viz., that Æther and Chaos,
    or, in the Platonic language, Mind and Matter, were the two
    primeval and eternal principles of the Universe, utterly
    independent of anything else. The former was the all‐vivifying
    intellectual principle, while Chaos was a shapeless liquid
    principle, without “form or sense”; from the union of which two
    sprang into existence the Universe, or rather the Universal World,
    the first Androgynous Deity—Chaotic Matter becoming its Body, and
    Ether its Soul. According to the phraseology of a Fragment of
    Hermeias: “Chaos, from this union with Spirit, obtaining _sense_,
    shone with pleasure, and thus was produced Protogonos the (First‐
    Born) Light.”(510) This is the universal Trinity, based on the
    metaphysical conceptions of the Ancients, who, reasoning by
    analogy, made of man, who is a compound of Intellect and Matter,
    the Microcosm of the Macrocosm, or Great Universe.(511)


“Nature abhors Vacuum” said the Peripatetics, who though Materialists in
their way, comprehended perhaps why Democritus, with his instructor
Leucippus, taught that the first principles of all things contained in the
Universe were Atoms and a Vacuum. The latter means simply _latent_ Force
or Deity, which, before its first manifestation—when it became Will,
communicating the first impulse to these Atoms—was the great Nothingness,
Ain Suph, or No‐Thing; and, therefore, to every sense, a Void, or Chaos.

This Chaos, however, became the “Soul of the World,” according to Plato
and the Pythagoreans. According to Hindû teaching, Deity, in the shape of
Æther or Âkâsha, pervades all things. It was called, therefore, by the
Theurgists the “Living Fire,” the “Spirit of Light,” and sometimes
“Magnes.” According to Plato, the highest Deity itself built the Universe
in the geometrical form of the dodecahedron, and its “First‐Begotten” was
born of Chaos and Primordial Light—the Central Sun. This First‐Born,
however, was only the aggregate of the Host of the Builders, the first
Constructive Forces, who are called in ancient Cosmogonies, the Ancients,
born of the Deep or Chaos, and the First Point. He is the Tetragrammaton,
so‐called, at the head of the Seven lower Sephiroth. This was also the
belief of the Chaldeans. Philo, the Jew, speaking very flippantly of the
first instructors of his ancestors, writes as follows:


    These Chaldeans were of opinion that the Kosmos, _among the things
    that exist_ [?], is a single Point, either being itself God
    [Theos] or that in it is God, comprehending the Soul of all
    things.(512)


Chaos, Theos, Kosmos are but the three symbols of their synthesis—_Space_.
One can never hope to solve the mystery of this Tetraktys, by holding to
the dead‐letter even of the old philosophies as now extant. But even in
these, Chaos, Theos, Kosmos and Space are identified in all Eternity, as
the One Unknown Space, the last word on which will never, perhaps, be
known, before our Seventh Round. Nevertheless, the allegories and
metaphysical symbols about the primeval and _perfect_ Cube, are
remarkable, even in the exoteric _Purânas_.

There, also, Brahmâ is Theos, evolving out of Chaos, or the Great Deep,
the Waters, over which Spirit or Space—the Spirit moving over the face of
the future boundless Kosmos—is silently hovering, in the first hour of
reäwakening. It is also Vishnu, sleeping on Ananta‐Shesha, the great
Serpent of Eternity, of which Western Theology, ignorant of the _Kabalah_,
the only key that opens the secrets of the _Bible_, has made—the Devil. It
is the first Triangle or the Pythagorean Triad, the “God of the _three_
Aspects,” before it is transformed, through the perfect quadrature of the
Infinite Circle, into the “four‐faced” Brahmâ. “Of him who is and yet is
not, from Non‐Being, the Eternal Cause, is born the Being, Purusha,” says
Manu, the legislator.


    In the Egyptian mythology, Kneph, the Eternal _Unrevealed_ God, is
    represented by a snake‐emblem of Eternity encircling a water urn,
    with its head hovering over the waters, which it incubates with
    its breath. In this case, the Serpent is the Agathodaimôn, the
    Good Spirit; in its opposite aspect, it is the Kakodaimôn, the
    Evil Spirit. In the Scandinavian _Eddas_, the honey‐dew, the fruit
    of the Gods, and of the creative busy Yggdrasil bees, falls during
    the hours of night, when the atmosphere is impregnated with
    humidity; and in the Northern mythologies, as the passive
    principle of creation, it typifies the creation of the Universe
    out of Water. This dew is the Astral Light in one of its
    combinations, and possesses creative as well as destructive
    properties. In the Chaldean legend of Berosus, Oannes or Dagon,
    the man‐fish, instructing the people, shows the infant World
    created out of Water, and all beings originating from this Prima
    Materia. Moses teaches that only Earth and Water can bring into
    existence a Living Soul: and we read in the Scriptures that herbs
    could not grow until the Eternal caused it to _rain_ upon Earth.
    In the Mexican _Popol Vuh_, man is created out of _mud_ or clay
    (_terre glaise_), taken from under the Water. Brahmâ creates the
    great Muni, or first man, seated on his Lotus, only after having
    called spirits into being, who thus enjoyed over mortals a
    priority of existence; and he creates him out of Water, Air and
    Earth. Alchemists claim that the primordial or pre‐adamic Earth,
    when reduced to its first substance, is in its _second_ stage of
    transformation like clear Water, the first being the Alkahest
    proper. This primordial substance is said to contain within itself
    the essence of all that goes to make up man; it contains not only
    all the elements of his physical being, but even the “breath of
    life” in a latent state, ready to be awakened. This it derives
    from the “incubation” of the “Spirit of God” upon the face of the
    Waters—Chaos. In fact, this substance is Chaos itself. From this
    it was that Paracelsus claimed to be able to make his Homunculi;
    and this is why Thales, the great natural philosopher, maintained
    that Water was the principle of all things in nature.(513)... Job
    says that dead _things_ are formed from under the Waters, and the
    inhabitants thereof.(514) In the original text, instead of “dead
    _things_,” it is written dead Rephaim, Giants or mighty Primitive
    Men, from whom Evolution may one day trace our present race.(515)


“In the primordial state of the creation,” says Polier’s _Mythologie des
Indous_, “the rudimental Universe, submerged in Water, reposed in the
bosom of Vishnu. Sprung from this Chaos and Darkness, Brahmâ, the
Architect of the World, poised on a lotus‐leaf, floated [moved] upon the
waters, unable to discern anything but water and darkness.” Perceiving
such a dismal state of things, Brahmâ soliloquizes in consternation: “Who
am I? Whence came I?” Then he hears a voice:(516) “Direct your thoughts to
Bhagavat.” Brahmâ, rising from his natatory position, seats himself upon
the lotus, in an attitude of contemplation, and reflects upon the Eternal,
who, pleased with this evidence of piety, disperses the primeval darkness
and opens his understanding. “After this Brahmâ issues from the Universal
Egg [Infinite Chaos] as Light, for his understanding is now opened, and he
sets himself to work. He moves on the eternal Waters, with the Spirit of
God within himself; and in his capacity of Mover of the Waters he is
Vishnu, or Nârâyana.”

This is, of course, exoteric; yet, in its main idea, it is as identical as
possible with the Egyptian Cosmogony, which, in its opening sentences,
shows Athtor,(517) or Mother Night, representing Illimitable Darkness, as
the Primeval Element which covered the Infinite Abyss, animated by Water
and the Universal Spirit of the Eternal, dwelling alone in Chaos.
Similarly in the Jewish Scriptures, the history of the creation opens with
the Spirit of God and his creative Emanation—another Deity.(518)

The _Zohar_ teaches that it is the Primordial Elements—the trinity of
Fire, Air and Water—the Four Cardinal Points, and all the Forces of
Nature, which form collectively the Voice of the Will, Memrab, or the
Word, the Logos of the Absolute Silent ALL. “The indivisible Point,
limitless and unknowable,” spreads itself over space, and thus forms a
Veil, the Mûlaprakriti of Parabrahman, which conceals this Absolute Point.

In the Cosmogonies of all the nations it is the Architects, synthesized by
the Demiurge, in the _Bible_ the Elohim, or Alhim, who fashion Kosmos out
of Chaos, and who are the collective Theos, male‐female, Spirit and
Matter. “By a series (_yom_) of foundations (_hasoth_), the Alhim caused
earth and heaven to be.”(519) In _Genesis_, it is first Alhim, then Jahva‐
Alhim, and finally Jehovah—after the separation of the sexes in the fourth
chapter. It is noticeable that nowhere, except in the later, or rather the
_last_, Cosmogonies of our Fifth Race does the ineffable and unutterable
NAME(520)—the symbol of the Unknown Deity, which was used only in the
MYSTERIES—occur in connection with the “Creation” of the Universe. It is
the Movers, the Runners, the Theoi (from θέειν to run), who do the work of
formation, the Messengers of the Manvantaric Law, who have now become in
Christianity simply the “Messengers” (Malachim). This seems to be also the
case in Hindûism or early Brâhmanism. For in the _Rig Veda_, it is not
Brahmâ who creates, but the Prajâpatis, the “Lords of Being,” who are also
the Rishis; the term Rishi, according to Professor Mahadeo Kunte, being
connected with the word to move, to lead on, applied to them in their
terrestrial character, when, as Patriarchs, they lead their Hosts on the
Seven Rivers.

Moreover, the very word “God,” in the singular, embracing all the Gods, or
Theoi, came to the “superior” civilized nations from a strange source, one
as entirely and preëminently phallic as the sincere outspokenness of the
Indian Lingham. The attempt to derive _God_ from the Anglo‐Saxon synonym
_Good_ is an abandoned idea, for in no other language, from the Persian
_Khoda_ down to the Latin _Deus_, has an instance been found of the name
for God being derived from the attribute of _Goodness_. To the Latin races
it comes from the Âryan _Dyaus_ (the Day); to the Slavonian, from the
Greek Bacchus (_Bagh‐bog_); and to the Saxon races directly from the
Hebrew _Yod_, or _Jod_. The latter is י the number‐letter 10, male and
female, and Yod is the phallic _hook_. Hence the Saxon _Godh_, the
Germanic _Gott_, and the English _God_. This symbolic term may be said to
represent the Creator of Physical Humanity, on the _terrestrial_ plane;
but surely it had nothing to do with the Formation, or “Creation,” of
either Spirit, Gods, or Kosmos?

Chaos‐Theos‐Kosmos, the Triple Deity, is _all in all_. Therefore, it is
said to be male and female, good and evil, positive and negative; the
whole series of contrasted qualities. When latent, in Pralaya, it is
incognizable and becomes the Unknowable Deity. It can be known only in its
active functions; hence as Matter‐Force and _living_ Spirit, the
correlations and outcome, or the expression, on the visible plane, of the
ultimate and ever‐to‐be unknown Unity.

In its turn this Triple Unit is the producer of the Four Primary
Elements,(521) which are known, in our visible terrestrial Nature, as the
seven (so far the five) Elements, each divisible into forty‐nine—seven
times seven—sub‐elements, with about seventy of which Chemistry is
acquainted. Every Cosmical Element, such as Fire, Air, Water, Earth,
partaking of the qualities and defects of its Primaries, is in its nature
Good and Evil, Force or Spirit, and Matter, etc.; and each, therefore, is
at one and the same time Life and Death, Health and Disease, Action and
Reaction. They are ever forming Matter, under the never‐ceasing impulse of
the One Element, the Incognizable, represented in the world of phenomena
by Æther. They are “the immortal Gods who give birth and life to all.”

In _The Philosophical Writings of Solomon Ben Yehudah Ibn Gebirol_, in
treating of the structure of the Universe, it is said:


    R. Yehudah began, it is written: “Elohim said: Let there be a
    firmament in the midst of the waters.” Come, see! At the time that
    the Holy ... created the World, He created 7 heavens Above. He
    created 7 earths Below, 7 seas, 7 days, 7 rivers, 7 weeks, 7
    years, 7 times, and 7,000 years that the World has been. The Holy
    _is in the seventh_ of all.(522)


This, besides showing a strange identity with the Cosmogony of the
_Purânas_,(523) corroborates all our teachings with regard to number
seven, as briefly given in _Esoteric Buddhism_.

The Hindûs have an endless series of allegories to express this idea. In
the Primordial Chaos, before it became developed into the Sapta Samudra,
or Seven Oceans—emblematical of the Seven Gunas, or conditioned Qualities,
composed of Trigunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas)—lie latent both Amrita, or
Immortality, and Visha, or Poison, Death, Evil. This is to be found in the
allegorical Churning of the Ocean by the Gods. Amrita is beyond any Guna,
for it is _unconditioned_, _per se_; but when once fallen into phenomenal
creation, it became mixed with Evil, Chaos, with latent Theos in it,
before Kosmos was evolved. Hence we find Vishnu, the personification of
Eternal Law, periodically calling forth Kosmos into activity, or, in
allegorical phraseology, churning out of the Primitive Ocean, or Boundless
Chaos, the Amrita of Eternity, reserved only for the Gods and Devas; and
in the task he has to employ Nâgas and Asuras, or Demons in exoteric
Hindûism. The whole allegory is highly philosophical, and indeed we find
it repeated in every ancient system of philosophy. Thus we find it in
Plato, who having fully embraced the ideas which Pythagoras had brought
from India, compiled and published them in a form more intelligible than
the original mysterious numerals of the Samian Sage. Thus the Kosmos is
the “Son” with Plato, having for his Father and Mother Divine Thought and
Matter.(524)

“The Egyptians,” says Dunlap, “distinguish between an older and younger
Horus; the former the _brother_ of Osiris, the latter the _son_ of Osiris
and Isis.”(525) The first is the Idea of the World remaining in the
Demiurgic Mind, “born in Darkness before the Creation of the World.” The
second Horus is this Idea going forth from the Logos, becoming clothed
with Matter, and assuming an actual existence.(526)

The _Chaldean Oracles_ speak of the “Mundane God, eternal, boundless,
young and old, of winding form.”(527) This “winding form” is a figure to
express the vibratory motion of the Astral Light, with which the ancient
priests were perfectly well acquainted, though the name “Astral Light” was
invented by the Martinists.

Cosmolatry has the finger of scorn pointed at its superstitions by Modern
Science. Science, however, before laughing at it, ought, as advised by a
French savant, “to entirely remodel its own system of cosmo‐
pneumatological education.” _Satis eloquentiæ, sapientiæ parum!_
Cosmolatry, like Pantheism, in its ultimate expression, may be made to
express itself in the same words in which the _Purâna_ describes Vishnu:


    He is only the _ideal cause_ of the _potencies_ to be created in
    the work of creation; and from him proceed the potencies to be
    created, after they have become the real cause. _Save that one
    ideal cause_, there is no other to which the world can be
    referred.... _Through the potency of that cause_, every created
    thing comes by its proper nature.(528)




Section V. On the Hidden Deity, Its Symbols and Glyphs.


The Logos, or Creative Deity, the “Word made Flesh,” of every religion,
has to be traced to its ultimate source and essence. In India, it is a
Proteus of 1,008 divine names and aspects in each of its _personal_
transformations, from Brahmâ‐Purusha, through the Seven _Divine_ Rishis
and Ten _Semi‐divine_ Prajâpatis (also Rishis), down to the _Divine‐human_
Avatâras. The same puzzling problem of the “One in Many,” and the
Multitude in One, is found in other Pantheons; in the Egyptian, the Greek
and the Chaldeo‐Judaic, the latter having made confusion still more
confused by presenting its Gods as euhemerizations, in the shapes of
Patriarchs. And these Patriarchs are now accepted by those who reject
Romulus as a myth, and are represented as living and _historical_
Entities. _Verbum satis sapienti!_

In the _Zohar_, Ain Suph is also the One, the Infinite Unity. This was
known to the very few learned Fathers of the Church, who were aware that
Jehovah was no “highest” God, but a _third‐rate_ Potency. But while
complaining bitterly of the Gnostics, and saying: “our Heretics hold ...
that Propatôr is known but to the Only‐begotten Son(529) [who is Brahmâ],
that is to the Mind [Nous],” Irenæus failed to mention that the Jews did
the same in their real _secret_ books. Valentinus, “the profoundest doctor
of the Gnosis,” held that “there was a perfect Aiôn who existed before
Bythos [the first Father of unfathomable nature, which is the Second
Logos], called Propatôr.” It is this Aiôn who springs as a Ray from Ain
Suph, which _does not create_, and Aiôn who creates, or _through_ whom,
rather, everything is created, or evolves. For, as the Basilidians taught,
“there was a Supreme God, Abrasax, by whom was created Mind [Mahat, in
Sanskrit; Nous, in Greek]. From Mind proceeded the Word, Logos; from the
Word, Providence [Divine Light, rather]; then from it Virtue and Wisdom in
Principalities, Powers, Angels, etc.” By these Angels the 365 Æons were
created. “Amongst the lowest, indeed, and those who made this world, he
[Basilides] sets last of all the God of the Jews, whom he denies to be God
[and very rightly], affirming he is one of the Angels.”

Here, then, we find the same system as in the _Purânas_, wherein the
Incomprehensible drops a Seed, which becomes the Golden Egg, from which
Brahmâ is produced. Brahmâ produces Mahat, etc. True Esoteric Philosophy,
however, speaks neither of “creation,” nor of “evolution,” in the sense in
which the exoteric religions do. All these personified Powers are not
evolutions from one another, but so many aspects of the one and sole
manifestation of the Absolute All.

The same system as that of the Gnostic Emanations prevails in the
Sephirothic aspects of Ain Suph, and, as these aspects are in Space and
Time, a certain order is maintained in their successive appearances.
Therefore, it becomes impossible not to take notice of the great changes
that the _Zohar_ has undergone under the handling of generations of
Christian Mystics. For, even in the metaphysics of the _Talmud_, the Lower
Face or Lesser Countenance, or Microprosopus, could never be placed on the
same plane of abstract ideals as the Higher, or Greater Countenance,
Macroprosopus. The latter is, in the Chaldean _Kabalah_, a pure
abstraction, the Word or Logos, or Dabar in Hebrew; which Word, though it
becomes in fact a plural number, or Words, D(a)B(a)R(i)M, when it reflects
itself, or falls into the aspect of a Host of Angels, or Sephiroth—the
“Number”—is still collectively One, and on the ideal plane a nought,
[circle], “Nothing.” _It_ is without form or being, “with no likeness with
anything else.”(530) And even Philo calls the Creator, the Logos who
stands next God, the “Second God,” when he speaks of “the Second God, who
is his [the Highest God’s] Wisdom.”(531) Deity is not God. It is No‐thing,
and Darkness. It is nameless, and therefore called Ain Suph, the word
“Ayin meaning nothing.”(532) The “Highest God,” the Unmanifested Logos, is
Its Son.

Nor are most of the Gnostic systems which have come down to us, mutilated
as they are by the Church Fathers, anything better than the distorted
shells of the original speculations. Nor were they, moreover, ever _open_
to the public or general reader; for had their hidden meaning or
esotericism been revealed, it would have been no more an esoteric
teaching, and this could never have been. Marcus, the chief of the
Marcosians, who flourished in the middle of the second century, and taught
that Deity had to be viewed under the symbol of _four_ syllables, gave out
more of the esoteric truths than any other Gnostic. But even he was never
well understood. For it is only on the surface or dead‐letter of his
_Revelation_ that it appears that God is a Quaternary, to wit, “the
Ineffable, the Silence, the Father, and Truth,” since in reality it is
quite erroneous, and divulges only one more esoteric riddle. This teaching
of Marcus was that of the early Kabalists and is ours. For he makes of
Deity the Number 30, in four syllables, which, translated esoterically,
means a Triad or Triangle, and a Quaternary or a Square, in all seven,
which, on the lower plane, made the seven divine or Secret Letters of
which the God‐name is composed. This requires demonstration. In his
_Revelation_, speaking of divine mysteries expressed by means of letters
and numbers, Marcus narrates how the Supreme “Tetrad came down” unto him
“from the region which cannot be seen nor named, _in a female form_,
because _the world would have been unable to bear her appearing in a male
figure_,” and revealed to him “the generation of the universe, _untold
before to either_ Gods or men.”

The first sentence already contains a double meaning. Why should the
apparition of a female figure be more easily borne, or listened to, by the
world than a male figure? On the face of it, this appears nonsensical. But
to one who is acquainted with the Mystery Language, it is quite clear and
simple. Esoteric Philosophy, or the Secret Wisdom, was symbolized by a
female form, while a male figure stood for the Unveiled Mystery. Hence,
the world, not being ready to receive it, could not bear it, and the
Revelation of Marcus had to be given allegorically. Thus he writes:


    When first its Father [_sc._ of the Tetrad] ... the Inconceivable,
    the Beingless, Sexless [the Kabalistic Ain Suph], desired that Its
    Ineffable [the First Logos, or Æon] should be born, and Its
    Invisible should be clothed with form, Its mouth opened and
    uttered the Word like unto Itself. This Word [Logos] standing near
    showed It what It was, manifesting itself in the form of the
    Invisible One. Now the uttering of the [Ineffable] Name [through
    the Word] came to pass in this manner. It [the Supreme Logos]
    uttered the first Word of its Name, ... which, was a combination
    [syllable] of _four_ elements [letters]. Then the second
    combination was added, also of _four_ elements. Then the third,
    composed of _ten_ elements; and after this the fourth was uttered,
    which contained _twelve_ elements. The utterance of the whole Name
    consisted thus of _thirty_ elements and of _four_ combinations.
    Each element has its own letters and peculiar character, and
    pronunciation, and groupings and similitudes; but none of them
    perceives the form of that of which it is the element, nor
    understands the utterance of its neighbour, but, what each sounds
    forth itself, as sounding forth all [it can], that it thinks good
    to call the whole.... And these sounds are they which manifest in
    form the Beingless and Ingenerable Æon, and these are the forms
    which are called Angels, perpetually beholding the Face of the
    Father,(533) the Logos, the “Second God,” who stands next God the
    “Inconceivable,” according to Philo.(534)


This is as plain as ancient esoteric secresy could make it. It is as
Kabalistic though less veiled than the _Zohar_, in which the mystic names,
or attributes, are also four syllabled, twelve, forty‐two, and even
seventy‐two syllabled words! The Tetrad shows to Marcus the Truth in the
shape of a naked woman, and letters every limb of that figure, calling her
head Α Ω, her neck Β Ψ, shoulders and hands Γ Χ, etc. In this, Sephira is
easily recognized; the head, or Crown, Kether, being numbered 1; the
brain, or Chokmah, 2; the Heart, or Intelligence, Binah, 3; and the other
seven Sephiroth representing the limbs of the body. The Sephirothic Tree
is the Universe, and Adam Kadmon personifies it in the West, as Brahmâ
represents it in India.

Throughout, the Ten Sephiroth are represented as divided into the Three
higher, or the spiritual Triad, and the lower Septenary. The true esoteric
meaning of the sacred number Seven though cleverly veiled, in the _Zohar_,
is betrayed by the double way of writing the term, “in the Beginning,” or
_Be‐rasheeth_, and _Be‐raishath_, the latter the “Higher, or Upper
Wisdom.” As shown by S. L. MacGregor Mathers(535) and Isaac Myer,(536)
both of these Kabalists being supported by the best ancient authorities,
these words have a dual and secret meaning. _Braisheeth barah Elohim_
means, that the _six_, over which stands the _seventh_ Sephira, belong to
the lower material class, or, as the author says: “Seven ... are applied
to the Lower Creation, and Three to the Spiritual Man, the Heavenly
Prototypic or First Adam.”

When the Theosophists and Occultists say that God is no Being, for It is
Nothing, No‐Thing, they are more reverential and religiously respectful to
the Deity than those who call God _He_, and thus make of Him a gigantic
Male.

He who studies the _Kabalah_ will soon find the same idea in the ultimate
thought of its authors, the earlier and great Hebrew Initiates, who got
this Secret Wisdom in Babylonia from the Chaldean Hierophants, just as
Moses got his in Egypt. The Zoharic system cannot very well be judged by
its translations into Latin and other tongues, when all its ideas were
softened and made to fit in with the views and policy of its Christian
arrangers; for its original ideas are identical with those of all other
religious systems. The various Cosmogonies show that the Universal Soul
was considered by every archaic nation as the Mind of the Demiurgic
Creator; and that it was called the Mother, Sophia, or the female Wisdom,
with the Gnostics; the Sephira, with the Jews; Sarasvatî or Vâch, with the
Hindûs; the Holy Ghost also being a female Principle.

Hence, the Kurios, or Logos, born from it, was, with the Greeks, the God,
Mind (Nous). “Now Koros [Kurios] ... signifies the pure and unmixed nature
of Intellect—Wisdom,” says Plato, in _Cratylus_;(537) and Kurios is
Mercury (Mercurius, Mar‐kurios), the Divine Wisdom, and “Mercury is Sol
[the Sun],”(538) from whom Thot‐Hermes received this Divine Wisdom. While,
then, the Logoi of all countries and religions are correlative, in their
sexual aspects, with the female Soul of the World or the Great Deep, the
Deity, from which these Two in One have their being, is ever concealed and
called the Hidden One, and is connected only indirectly with
“Creation,”(539) as it can act only through the Dual Force emanating from
the Eternal Essence. Even Æsculapius, called the “Saviour of all,” is
identical, according to ancient classical writers, with the Egyptian Ptah,
the Creative Intellect, or Divine Wisdom, and with Apollo, Baal, Adonis
and Hercules:(540) and Ptah, in one of its aspects, is the Anima Mundi;
the Universal Soul of Plato; the Divine Spirit of the Egyptians; the Holy
Ghost of the early Christians and Gnostics; and the Âkâsha of the Hindûs,
and even, in its lower aspect, the Astral Light. For Ptah was originally
the God of the Dead, he into whose bosom they were received, hence the
Limbus of the Greek Christians, or the Astral Light. It was far later that
Ptah was classed with the Sun‐Gods, his name signifying “he who opens,” as
he is shown to be the first to unveil the face of the dead mummy, to call
the Soul to _life in his bosom_. Kneph, the Eternal Unrevealed, is
represented by the snake‐emblem of eternity encircling a water‐urn, with
its head hovering over the “Waters,” which it incubates with its
breath—another form of the one original idea of “Darkness,” with its Ray
moving on the Waters, etc. As the Logos‐Soul, this _permutation_ is called
Ptah; as the Logos‐Creator, he becomes Imhotep, his Son, the “God of the
handsome face.” In their primitive characters, these two were the first
Cosmic Duad, Noot, Space or “Sky,” and Noon, the “Primordial Waters,” the
Androgyne Unity, above whom was the Concealed Breath of Kneph. And all of
them had the aquatic animals and plants sacred to them, the ibis, the
swan, the goose, the crocodile, and the lotus.

Returning to the Kabalistic Deity, this Concealed Unity is then Ain Suph
(אין סוף, τὸ πάν, τό ἄπειρον), Endless, Boundless, Non‐Existent (אין), so
long as the Absolute is within Oulom,(541) the Boundless and Termless
Time; as such, Ain Suph cannot be the Creator or even the Modeller of the
Universe, nor can It be Aur (Light). Therefore Ain Suph is also Darkness.
The _immutably_ Infinite, and the _absolutely_ Boundless, can neither
will, think, nor act. To do this, it has to become Finite, and _it_ does
so by its Ray penetrating into the Mundane Egg, or Infinite Space, and
emanating from it as a Finite God. All this is left to the Ray latent in
the One. When the period arrives, the Absolute Will expands naturally the
Force within it, according to the Law of which it is the inner and
ultimate Essence. The Hebrews did not adopt the Egg as a symbol, but they
substituted for it the “Duplex Heavens,” for, translated correctly, the
sentence “God made the heavens and the earth” would read: “In and out of
his own Essence, as a Womb [the Mundane Egg], God created the Two
Heavens.” The Christians, however, have chosen the Dove, the bird and not
the egg, as the symbol of their Holy Ghost.

“Whoever acquaints himself with Hud, the Mercabah and the Lahgash [secret
speech or incantation], will learn the secret of secrets.” Lahgash is
nearly identical in meaning with Vâch, the hidden power of the Mantras.

When the active period has arrived, from within the Eternal Essence of Ain
Suph, comes forth Sephira, the Active Power, called the Primordial Point
and the Crown, Kether. It is only through her that the “Un‐bounded Wisdom”
could give a Concrete Form to the Abstract Thought. Two sides of the Upper
Triangle, by which the Ineffable Essence and its Manifested Body, the
Universe, are symbolized, the right side and the base, are composed of
unbroken lines; the third, the left side, is dotted. It is through the
latter that emerges Sephira. Spreading in every direction, she finally
encompasses the whole Triangle. In this emanation the triple Triad is
formed. From the invisible Dew falling from the higher Uni‐triad, the
“Head,”—thus leaving 7 Sephiroth only—Sephira _creates_ Primeval Waters,
or in other words, Chaos takes shape. It is the first stage towards the
solidification of Spirit which, through various modifications, will
produce Earth. “It requires Earth and Water to make a Living Soul,” says
Moses. It requires the image of an aquatic bird to connect it with Water,
the female element of procreation, with the egg and the bird that
fecundates it.

When Sephira emerges as an Active Power from within the Latent Deity, she
is female; when she assumes the office of a Creator, she becomes a male;
hence, she is androgyne. She is the “Father and Mother, Aditi,” of the
Hindû Cosmogony and of the Secret Doctrine. If the oldest Hebrew scrolls
had been preserved, the modern Jehovah‐worshipper would have found that
many and uncomely were the symbols of the “Creative God.” The frog in the
moon, typical of his generative character, was the most frequent. All the
birds and animals now called “unclean” in the _Bible_ have been the
symbols of this Deity, in days of old. A mask of uncleanness was placed
over them, in order to preserve them from destruction, because they were
so sacred. The brazen serpent is not a bit more poetical than the goose or
swan, if symbols are to be accepted _à la lettre_.

In the words of the _Zohar_:


    The Indivisible Point, which has no limit and cannot be
    comprehended because of Its purity and brightness, expanded _from
    without_, forming a brightness that served the Indivisible Point
    as a Veil; [yet the latter also] _could not be viewed in_
    consequence of its immeasurable Light. It too _expanded from
    without_, and this expansion was its Garment. Thus through a
    constant _upheaving_ [motion] finally the world originated.(542)


The Spiritual Substance sent forth by the Infinite Light is the First
Sephira or Shekinah. Sephira, _exoterically_, contains all the other nine
Sephiroth in her: _esoterically_, she contains but two, Chokmah or Wisdom,
“a masculine, _active_ potency whose divine name is Jah (יה),” and Binah,
or Intelligence, a feminine passive potency, represented by the divine
name Jehovah (יהוה); which two potencies form, with Sephira the third, the
Jewish Trinity or the Crown, Kether. These two Sephiroth, called Abba,
Father, and Amona, Mother, are the Duad, or the double‐sexed Logos, from
which issued the other seven Sephiroth. Thus, the first Jewish Triad,
Sephira, Chokmah and Binah, is the Hindû Trimûrti.(543) However veiled
even in the _Zohar_, and still more in the exoteric Pantheon of India,
every particular connected with one is reproduced in the other. The
Prajâpatis are the Sephiroth. Ten with Brahmâ, they dwindle to seven when
the Trimûrti, or the Kabalistic Triad, are separated from the rest. The
seven Builders, or “Creators,” become the seven Prajâpati, or the seven
Rishis, in the same order as the Sephiroth become the Creators, then the
Patriarchs, etc. In both Secret Systems, the One Universal Essence is
incomprehensible and inactive, in its Absoluteness, and can be connected
with the Building of the Universe only in an indirect way. In both, the
primeval Male‐female, or Androgynous, Principle and its ten and seven
Emanations—Brahmâ‐Virâj and Aditi‐Vâch, on the one hand; and the Elohim‐
Jehovah, or Adam‐Adami (Adam Kadmon) and Sephira‐Eve, on the other; with
their Prajâpatis and Sephiroth—in their totality, represent primarily the
Archetypal Man, the Protologos; and it is only in their secondary aspect
that they become cosmic powers, and astronomical or sidereal bodies. If
Aditi is the Mother of the Gods, Deva‐Mâtri, Eve is the Mother of All
Living; both are the Shakti, or Generative Power, in their female aspect,
of the Heavenly Man, and they are both compound Creators. Says a Guptâ
Vidyâ Sûtra:

_In the beginning, a Ray, issuing from Paramârthika [the one and only True
Existence], became manifested in Vyâvahârika [Conventional Existence],
which was used as a Vâhana to descend with into the Universal Mother, and
to cause her to expand [swell, brih]._

And in the _Zohar_ it is stated:


    The Infinite Unity, formless and without similitude, after the
    Form of the Heavenly Man was created, used it. The Unknown
    Light(544) [Darkness] used the Heavenly Form (אדם עילאה—Adam
    Oilah) as a Chariot (מרכבה—Mercabah), through which to descend,
    and wished to be called by this Form, which is the sacred name
    Jehovah.


As the _Zohar_ again says:


    In the beginning was the Will of the King, prior to any other
    existence.... It [the Will] sketched the forms of all things that
    had been concealed but now came into view. And there went forth as
    a sealed secret, from the head of Ain Suph, a nebulous spark of
    matter, without shape or form.... Life is drawn from below, and
    from above the source renews itself, the sea is always full and
    spreads its waters everywhere.


Thus the Deity is compared to a shoreless sea, to Water which is “the
fountain of life.”(545) “The seventh palace, the fountain of life, is the
first in the order from above.”(546) Hence the Kabalistic tenet on the
lips of the very Kabalistic Solomon, who says in _Proverbs_: “Wisdom hath
builded her house; it hath hewn out its _seven_ pillars.”(547)

Whence, then, all this identity of ideas, if there were no primeval
Universal Revelation? The few points so far brought out are like a few
straws in a stack, in comparison to that which will be disclosed as the
work proceeds. If we turn to the Chinese Cosmogony, the most hazy of all,
even there the same idea is found. Tsi‐tsai, the Self‐Existent, is the
Unknown Darkness, the Root of the Wu‐liang‐sheu, Boundless Age; Amitâbha,
and Tien, Heaven, come later on. The “Great Extreme” of Confucius gives
the same idea, his “straws” notwithstanding. The latter are a source of
great amusement to the missionaries, who laugh at every “heathen”
religion, despise and hate that of their brother Christians of other
denominations, and yet one and all accept their own _Genesis_,
_literally_.

If we turn to the Chaldean we find in it Anu, the Concealed Deity, the
One, whose name, moreover, shows it to be of Sanskrit origin; for Anu in
Sanskrit means Atom, Anîyâmsam‐anîyasâm, smallest of the small, being a
name of Parabrahman, in the Vedântic philosophy, in which Parabrahman is
described as smaller than the smallest atom, and greater than the greatest
sphere or universe, Anagrânîyas and Mahatoruvat. In the first verses of
the Akkadian _Genesis_, as found in the cuneiform texts on the Babylonian
tiles or Lateres Coctiles, and as translated by George Smith, we find Anu,
the Passive Deity, or Ain Suph; Bel, the Creator, the Spirit of God, or
Sephira, moving on the Face of the Waters, hence Water itself; and Hea,
the Universal Soul, or Wisdom of the Three combined.

The first eight verses read as follows:


    1. When above, were not raised the heavens:
    2. and below on the earth a plant had not grown up;
    3. the abyss had not broken open their boundaries.
    4. The Chaos (or Water) Tiamat (the Sea) was the producing‐mother
                of the whole of them. [This is the Cosmical Aditi and
                Sephira.]
    5. Those waters at the beginning were ordained; but
    6. a tree had not grown, a flower had not unfolded.
    7. When the Gods had not sprung up, any one of them;
    8. a plant had not grown, and order did not exist.(548)


This was the Chaotic or Ante‐genetic Period; the double Swan, and the Dark
Swan which becomes white, when Light is created.(549)

The symbol chosen for the majestic ideal of the Universal Principle may
perhaps seem little calculated to answer its sacred character. A goose, or
even a swan, will, no doubt, be thought an unfit symbol to represent the
grandeur of the Spirit. Nevertheless, it must have had some deep Occult
meaning, since it figures not only in every Cosmogony and World‐religion,
but was also chosen by the Crusaders, among the mediæval Christians, as
the Vehicle of the Holy Ghost, which was supposed to be leading the army
to Palestine, to wrench the tomb of the Saviour from the hands of the
Saracen. If we are to credit Professor Draper’s statement, in his
_Intellectual Development of Europe_, the Crusaders, under Peter the
Hermit, were preceded, at the head of the army, by the Holy Ghost, under
the shape of a white gander in the company of a goat. Seb, the Egyptian
God of Time, carries a goose on his head; Jupiter assumes the form of a
swan, and so also does Brahmâ; and the root of all this is that mystery of
mysteries—the Mundane Egg. One should learn the reason of a symbol before
depreciating it. The dual element of Air and Water is that of the ibis,
swan, goose and pelican, of crocodiles and frogs, lotus flowers and water
lilies, etc.; and the result is the choice of the most unseemly symbols by
the modern as much as by the ancient Mystics. Pan, the great God of
Nature, was generally figured in company with aquatic birds, geese
especially, and so were other Gods. If later on, with the gradual
degeneration of religion, the Gods to whom geese were sacred, became
priapic deities, it does not, therefore, follow that water‐fowls were made
sacred to Pan and other phallic deities, as some scoffers even of
antiquity would have it,(550) but that the abstract and divine power of
Procreative Nature had become grossly anthropomorphized. Nor does the swan
of Leda show “priapic doings and her enjoyment thereof,” as Mr. Hargrave
Jennings chastely expresses it; for the myth is but another version of the
same philosophical idea of Cosmogony. Swans are frequently found
associated with Apollo, as they are the emblems of Water and Fire, and
also of the Sun‐light, before the separation of the Elements.

Our modern symbologists might profit by some remarks made by a well‐known
writer, Mrs. Lydia Maria Child, who says:


    From time immemorial an emblem has been worshipped in Hindûstan as
    the type of creation, or the origin of life.... Shiva, or the
    Mahâdeva, being not only the reproducer of human forms, but also
    the fructifying principle, the generative power that pervades the
    Universe. The maternal emblem is likewise a religious type. This
    reverence for the production of life introduced into the worship
    of Osiris the sexual emblems. Is it strange that they regarded
    with reverence the great mystery of human birth? Were they impure
    thus to regard it? Or are _we_ impure that we do not so regard it?
    But _no clean and thoughtful mind_ could so regard them.... We
    have travelled far, and unclean have been the paths, since those
    old anchorites first spoke of God and the soul in the solemn
    depths of their first sanctuaries. Let us not smile at their mode
    of tracing the infinite and the incomprehensible Cause throughout
    all the mysteries of nature, lest by so doing we cast the shadow
    of our own grossness on their patriarchal simplicity.(551)




Section VI. The Mundane Egg.


Whence this universal symbol? The Egg was incorporated as a sacred sign in
the Cosmogony of every people on the earth, and was revered both on
account of its form and of its inner mystery. From the earliest mental
conceptions of man, it has been known as that which represented most
successfully the origin and secret of Being. The gradual development of
the imperceptible germ within the closed shell; the inward working,
without any apparent outward interference of force, which from a latent
_nothing_ produced an active _something_, needing naught save heat; and
which, having gradually evolved into a concrete, living creature, broke
its shell, appearing to the outward senses of all as a self‐generated and
self‐created being; all this must have been a standing miracle from the
beginning.

The Secret Teaching explains the reason for this reverence by the
symbolism of the prehistoric races. In the beginnings, the “First Cause”
had no name. Later it was pictured in the fancy of the thinkers as an ever
invisible, mysterious Bird that dropped an Egg into Chaos, which Egg
became the Universe. Hence Brahmâ was called Kâlahansa, the “Swan in
[Space and] Time.” Becoming the Swan of Eternity, Brahmâ, at the beginning
of each Mahâmanvantara, lays a Golden Egg, which typifies the great
Circle, or [circle] itself a symbol for the Universe and its spherical
bodies.

A second reason for the Egg having been chosen as the symbolical
representation of the Universe, and of our Earth, was its form. It was a
Circle and a Sphere; and the ovi‐form shape of our Globe must have been
known from the beginning of symbology, since it was so universally
adopted. The first manifestation of the Kosmos in the form of an Egg was
the most widely diffused belief of Antiquity. As Bryant shows,(552) it was
a symbol adopted among the Greeks, the Syrians, Persians, and Egyptians.
In the Egyptian _Ritual_, Seb, the God of Time and of the Earth, is spoken
of as having laid an Egg, or the Universe, an “Egg conceived at the hour
of the Great One of the Dual Force.”(553)

Ra is shown like Brahmâ gestating in the Egg of the Universe. The Deceased
is “resplendent in the Egg of the Land of Mysteries.”(554) For, this is
“the Egg to which is given Life among the Gods.”(555) “It is the Egg of
the great clucking Hen, the Egg of Seb, who issues from it like a
hawk.”(556)

Among the Greeks the Orphic Egg is described by Aristophanes, and was part
of the Dionysiac and other Mysteries, during which the Mundane Egg was
consecrated and its significance explained; Porphyry also shows it to be a
representation of the world: “Ἑρμηνεύει δὲ τὸ ὠὸν τὸν κόσμον.” Faber and
Bryant have tried to show that the Egg typified the Ark of Noah—a wild
belief, unless the latter is accepted as purely allegorical and
symbolical. It can only have typified the Ark as a synonym of the Moon,
the Argha which carries the universal seed of life; but had surely nothing
to do with the Ark of the _Bible_. Anyhow, the belief that the Universe
existed in the beginning in the shape of an Egg was general. And as Wilson
says:


    A similar account of the first aggregation of the elements in the
    form of an Egg is given in all the _Purânas_, with the usual
    epithet Haima or Hiranya, “golden,” as it occurs in _Manu_, I.
    9.(557)


Hiranya, however, means “resplendent,” “shining,” rather than “golden,” as
is proven by the great Indian scholar, the late Svâmi Dayanand Sarasvatî,
in his unpublished polemics with Professor Max Müller. As said in the
_Vishnu Purâna_:


    Intellect [Mahat] ... the [unmanifested] gross elements inclusive,
    formed an Egg ... and the Lord of the Universe himself abided in
    it, in the character of Brahmâ. In that Egg, O Brâhmana, were the
    continents, and seas and mountains, the planets and divisions of
    the planets, the gods, the demons and mankind.(558)


Both in Greece and in India the first visible male Being, who united in
himself the nature of either sex, abode in the Egg and issued from it.
This “First‐born of the World” was Dionysus, with some Greeks; the God who
sprang from the Mundane Egg, and from whom the Mortals and Immortals were
derived. The God Ra is shown, in the _Book of the Dead_, beaming in his
Egg [the Sun], and the stars off as soon as the God Shoo [the Solar
Energy] awakens and gives him the impulse.(559) “He is in the Solar Egg,
the Egg to which is given Life among the Gods.”(560) The Solar God
exclaims: “I am the Creative Soul of the Celestial Abyss. None sees my
Nest, none can break my Egg, I am the Lord!”(561)

In view of this circular form, the “[vertical bar]” issuing from the
“[circle],” or the Egg, or the male from the female in the androgyne, it
is strange to find a scholar saying, on the ground that the most ancient
Indian MSS. show no trace of it, that the ancient Âryans were ignorant of
the decimal notation. The 10, being the sacred number of the Universe, was
secret and esoteric, both as regards the unit and cipher, or zero, the
circle. Moreover, Professor Max Müller tells that “the two words _cipher_
and _zero_, which are but one, are sufficient to prove that our figures
are borrowed from the Arabs.”(562) Cipher is the Arabic _cifron_, and
means “empty,” a translation of the Sanskrit _sunyan_, or “nought,” says
the Professor.(563) The Arabs had their figures from Hindûstan, and never
claimed the discovery for themselves. As to the Pythagoreans, we need but
turn to the ancient manuscripts of Boethius’ treatise, _De Arithmetica_,
composed in the sixth century, to find among the Pythagorean numerals the
“1” and the “0,” as the first and final figures.(564) And Porphyry, who
quotes from the Pythagorean Moderatus,(565) says that the numerals of
Pythagoras were “hieroglyphical symbols, by means whereof he explained
ideas concerning the nature of things,” or the origin of the Universe.

Now, if, on the one hand, the most ancient Indian MSS. show as yet no
trace of decimal notation in them, and Max Müller states very clearly that
until now he has found but nine letters, the initials of the Sanskrit
numerals; on the other hand, we have records as ancient, to supply the
wanted proof. We speak of the sculptures and the sacred imagery in the
most ancient temples of the far East. Pythagoras derived his knowledge
from India; and we find Professor Max Müller corroborating this statement,
at least so far as to allow that the Neo‐Pythagoreans were the first
teachers of “ciphering,” among the Greeks and Romans; that they “at
Alexandria, or in Syria, became acquainted with the Indian figures, and
adapted them to the Pythagorean Abacus.” This cautious admission implies
that Pythagoras himself was acquainted with only _nine_ figures. Thus we
might reasonably answer that, although we possess no certain proof,
exoterically, that the decimal notation was known to Pythagoras, who lived
at the very close of the archaic ages,(566) yet we have sufficient
evidence to show that the full numbers, as given by Boethius, were known
to the Pythagoreans, even before Alexandria was built.(567) This evidence
we find in Aristotle, who says that “some philosophers hold that ideas and
numbers are of the same nature, and amount to _ten_ in all.”(568) This, we
believe, will be sufficient to show that the decimal notation was known
among them at least as early as four centuries B.C., for Aristotle does
not seem to treat the question as an innovation of the Neo‐Pythagoreans.

But we know more than this; _we know_ that the decimal system must have
been used by the mankind of the earliest archaic ages, since the whole
astronomical and geometrical portion of the secret sacerdotal language was
built upon the number 10, or the combination of the male and female
principles, and since the “Pyramid of Cheops,” so‐called, is built upon
measures of this decimal notation, or rather upon the digits and their
combinations with the _nought_. Of this, however, sufficient has been said
in _Isis Unveiled_, and it is useless to repeat it.

The symbolism of the Lunar and Solar Deities is so inextricably mixed up,
that it is next to impossible to separate from each other such glyphs as
the Egg, the Lotus, and the “Sacred” Animals. The Ibis, for instance, was
held in the greatest veneration in Egypt. It was sacred to Isis, who is
often represented with the head of that bird, and also sacred to Mercury
or Thoth, who is said to have assumed its form while escaping from Typhon.
There were two kinds of Ibises in Egypt, Herodotus(569) tells us; one
_quite black_, the other black and white. The former is credited with
fighting and exterminating the winged serpents which came every spring
from Arabia, and infested the country. The other was sacred to the Moon,
because the latter planet is white and brilliant on her external side,
dark and black on that side which she never turns to the Earth. Moreover,
the Ibis kills land serpents, and makes the most terrible havoc amongst
the eggs of the crocodile, and thus saves Egypt from having the Nile over‐
infested by those horrible saurians. The bird is credited with doing this
in the moonlight, and thus being helped by Isis, whose sidereal symbol is
the Moon. But the more correct esoteric truth underlying these popular
myths is, that Hermes, as shown by Abenephius,(570) watched over the
Egyptians under the form of that bird, and taught them the Occult arts and
sciences. This simply means that the _ibis religiosa_ had, and has,
“magical” properties in common with many other birds, the albatross
preëminently, and the mythical white swan, the Swan of Eternity or Time,
the Kâlahansa.

Were it otherwise, indeed, why should all the ancient peoples, who were no
more fools than we are, have had such a superstitious dread of killing
certain birds? In Egypt, he who killed an Ibis, or the Golden Hawk, the
symbol of the Sun and Osiris, risked death, and could hardly escape it.
The veneration of some nations for birds was such that Zoroaster, in his
precepts, forbids their slaughter as a heinous crime. In our age, we laugh
at every kind of divination. Yet why should so many generations have
believed in divination by birds, and even in Oömancy, which is said by
Suidas to have been imparted by Orpheus, who taught how, under certain
conditions, to perceive in the yolk and white of an egg, that which the
bird born from it would have seen around it during its short life. This
Occult art, which, 3,000 years ago, demanded the greatest learning and the
most abstruse mathematical calculations, has now fallen into the depths of
degradation; and to‐day it is the old cooks and fortune‐tellers who read
the future for servant‐girls in search of husbands, from the white of an
egg in a glass.

Nevertheless, even Christians have to this day their sacred birds; for
instance, the Dove, the symbol of the Holy Ghost. Nor have they neglected
the sacred animals; and the evangelical zoölatry, with its Bull, Eagle,
Dion, and Angel—in reality the Cherub, or Seraph, the fiery‐winged
Serpent—is as much Pagan as that of the Egyptians or the Chaldeans. These
four animals are, in reality, the symbols of the four Elements, and of the
four _lower_ Principles in man. Nevertheless, they correspond physically
and materially to the four constellations that form, so to speak, the
_suite_ or _cortège_ of the Solar God, and which, during the winter
solstice, occupy the four cardinal points of the zodiacal circle. These
four “animals” may be seen in many of the Roman Catholic _New Testaments_
in which the “portraits” of the Evangelists are given. They are the
animals of Ezekiel’s Mercabah.

As truly stated by Ragon:


    The ancient Hierophants have combined so cleverly the dogmas and
    symbols of their religious philosophies, that these symbols can be
    fully explained only by the combination and knowledge of _all_ the
    keys.


They can be only _approximately_ interpreted, even if one discovers three
out of these seven systems, viz., the anthropological, the psychic and the
astronomical. The two chief interpretations, the highest and the lowest,
the spiritual and the physiological, were preserved in the greatest
secrecy, until the latter fell into the dominion of the profane. Thus far,
with regard only to the pre‐historic Hierophants, with whom that which has
now become purely—or impurely—phallic, was a science as profound and as
mysterious as Biology and Physiology are now. This was their exclusive
property, the fruit of their studies and discoveries. The other two were
those which dealt with the Creative Gods, or Theogony, and with creative
man; that is to say, with the ideal and the practical Mysteries. These
interpretations were so cleverly veiled and combined, that many were those
who, while arriving at the discovery of one meaning, were baffled in
understanding the significance of the others, and could never unriddle
them sufficiently to commit dangerous indiscretions. The highest, the
first and the fourth—Theogony in relation to Anthropogony—were almost
impossible to fathom. We find the proofs of this in the Jewish “Holy
Writ.”

It is owing to the serpent being oviparous, that it became a symbol of
Wisdom and an emblem of the Logoi, or the Self‐Born. In the temple of
Philæ, in Upper Egypt, an egg was artificially prepared of clay mixed with
various incenses. This was hatched by a peculiar process, and a cerastes
or horned viper was produced. The same was done in the Indian temples, in
antiquity, in the case of the cobra. The Creative God emerges from the Egg
that issues from the mouth of Kneph, as a winged Serpent, for the Serpent
is the symbol of the All‐Wisdom. With the Hebrews the same Deity is
glyphed by the Flying or “Fiery Serpents” of Moses in the Wilderness; and
with the Alexandrian Mystic she becomes the Orphio‐Christos, the Logos of
the Gnostics. The Protestants try to show that the allegory of the Brazen
Serpent and of the Fiery Serpents has a direct reference to the mystery of
the Christ and the Crucifixion, whereas, in truth, it has a far nearer
relation to the _mystery of generation_, when dissociated from the Egg
with the Central Germ, or the _Circle with its Central Point_. Protestant
Theologians would have us believe their interpretation _only_ because the
Brazen Serpent was lifted on a pole! Whereas it had rather a reference to
the Egyptian Egg standing upright supported by the sacred Tau; since the
Egg and the Serpent are in‐separable in the old worship and symbology of
Egypt, and since both the Brazen and Fiery Serpents were Seraphs, the
burning “Fiery” Messengers, or the Serpent Gods, the Nâgas of India.
Without the Egg it was a purely phallic symbol, but when associated
therewith, it related to cosmic creation. The Brazen Serpent had no such
holy meaning as the Protestants would ascribe to it; nor was it, in fact,
glorified above the Fiery Serpents, _for the bite of which it was only a
natural remedy_; the symbological meaning of the word “Brazen” being the
feminine principle, and that of “Fiery,” or “Gold,” the masculine
principle.


    Brass was a metal symbolizing the _nether world_ ... that of the
    womb where life should be given.... The word for serpent in Hebrew
    was _Nachash_, but this is also the term for _brass_.


It is said in _Numbers_ that the Jews complained of the Wilderness _where
there was no water_,(571) after which “the Lord sent fiery serpents” to
bite them, and then, to oblige Moses, he gave him as a remedy the Brazen
Serpent on a pole for them to look at; after which “any man when he beheld
the serpent of brass ... _lived_” (?). After that the “Lord,” gathering
the people together at the well of Beer, gave them water, and grateful
Israel sang this song, “Spring up, O well.” When, after studying
symbology, the Christian reader comes to understand the innermost meaning
of these three symbols, Water, Brazen, and Serpent, and a few more, _in
the sense given to them in the Holy Bible_, he will hardly like to connect
the sacred name of his Saviour with the Brazen Serpent incident. The
Seraphim (שרפים) or Fiery Winged Serpents, are no doubt connected with,
and inseparable from, the idea of the “Serpent of Eternity—God,” as
explained in Kenealy’s _Apocalypse_; but the word Cherub also meant
Serpent, in one sense, though its direct meaning is different, for the
Cherubim and the Persian Winged Griffins (Γρύπες), the guardians of the
Golden Mountain, are the same, and the compound name of the former shows
their character, as it is formed of _kr_ (כר), a circle, and _aub_ or _ob_
(אוב), a serpent, and therefore means a “serpent in a circle.” And this
settles the phallic character of the Brazen Serpent, and justifies
Hezekiah for breaking it.(572) _Verbum satis sapienti!_

In the _Book of the Dead_, as just shown,(573) reference is often made to
the Egg. Ra, the Mighty One, remains in his Egg, during the struggle
between the “Children of the Rebellion” and Shoo, the Solar Energy and the
Dragon of Darkness. The Deceased is resplendent in his Egg when he crosses
to the Land of Mystery. He is the Egg of Seb. The Egg was the symbol of
Life in Immortality and Eternity; and also the glyph of the generative
matrix; whereas the Tau, which was associated with it, was only the symbol
of life and birth in _generation_. The Mundane Egg was placed in Khoom,
the Water of Space, or the feminine _abstract_ Principle; Khoom becoming,
with the “fall” of mankind into generation and phallicism, Ammon the
Creative God. When Ptah, the “Fiery God,” carries the Mundane Egg in his
hand, then the symbolism becomes quite terrestrial and concrete in its
significance. In conjunction with the Hawk, the symbol of Osiris‐Sun, the
symbol is dual, and relates to both Lives—the mortal and the immortal. The
engraving of a papyrus in Kircher’s _Œdipus Egyptiacus_,(574) shows an egg
floating above the mummy. This is the symbol of hope and the promise of a
Second Birth for the Osirified Dead; his Soul, after due purification in
the Amenti, will gestate in this Egg of Immortality, to be reborn
therefrom into a new life on earth. For this Egg, in the Esoteric
Doctrine, is Devachan, the Abode of Bliss; the Winged Scarabæus also being
another symbol of it. The Winged Globe is but another form of the Egg, and
has the same significance as the Scarabæus, the Khopiroo—from the Root
_khoproo_, to become, to be reborn—which relates to the rebirth of man, as
well as to his spiritual regeneration.

In the _Theogony_ of Mochus, we find Æther first, and then Air, the two
principles from which Ulom, the Intelligible (Νοητὸς) Deity, the visible
Universe of Matter, is born, out of the Mundane Egg.(575)

In the _Orphic Hymns_, Eros‐Phanes evolves from the Divine Egg, which the
Æthereal Winds impregnate, Wind being the “Spirit of God,” or rather the
“Spirit of the Unknown Darkness”—the Divine Idea of Plato—which is said to
move in Æther.(576) In the Hindû _Kathopanishad_, Purusha, the Divine
Spirit, already stands before the Original Matter, “from whose union
springs the Great Soul of the World,” Mahâ‐Âtmâ, Brahmâ, the Spirit of
Life,(577) etc.; the latter appellations being all identical with Anima
Mundi, or the “Universal Soul,” the Astral Light of the Kabalist and the
Occultist, or the “Egg of Darkness.” Besides this there are many charming
allegories on this subject, scattered through the Sacred Books of the
Brâhmans. In one place, it is the female creator who is first a germ, then
a drop of heavenly dew, a pearl, and then an Egg. In such cases, of which
there are too many to enumerate separately, the Egg gives birth to the
four Elements within the fifth, Æther, and is covered with seven
coverings, which become later on the seven upper and the seven lower
worlds. Breaking in two, the shell becomes the Heaven, and the contents
the Earth, the white forming the Terrestrial Waters. Then, again, it is
Vishnu who emerges from within the Egg, with a Lotus in his hand. Vinatâ,
a daughter of Daksha and wife of Kashyapa, “the Self‐born, sprung from
Time,” one of the seven “Creators” of our World, brought forth an Egg from
which was born Garuda, the Vehicle of Vishnu; the latter allegory having a
relation to our Earth, as Garuda is the Great Cycle.

The Egg was sacred to Isis; and therefore the priests of Egypt never ate
eggs.

Isis is almost always represented holding a Lotus in one hand, and in the
other a Circle and a Cross (_crux ansata_).

Diodorus Siculus states that Osiris was born from an Egg, like Brahmâ.
From Leda’s Egg, Apollo and Latona were born, and also Castor and Pollux,
the bright Gemini. And though the Buddhists do not attribute the same
origin to their Founder, yet, no more than the ancient Egyptians or the
modern Brâhmans, do they eat eggs, lest they should destroy the germ of
life latent in them, and thereby commit sin. The Chinese believe that
their First Man was born from an Egg, which Tien dropped down from Heaven
to Earth into the Waters.(578) This egg‐symbol is still regarded by some
as representing the idea of the origin of life, which is a scientific
truth, though the human _ovum_ is invisible to the naked eye. Therefore we
see respect shown to it from the remotest antiquity, by the Greeks,
Phœnicians, Romans, the Japanese, and the Siamese, the North and South
American tribes, and even the savages of the remotest islands.

With the Egyptians, the Concealed God was Ammon or Mon, the “Hidden”, the
Supreme Spirit. All their Gods were dual—the scientific _Reality_ for the
sanctuary; its double, the fabulous and mythical Entity, for the masses.
For instance, as observed in the Section “Chaos, Theos, Kosmos,” the Elder
Horus was the Idea of the World remaining in the Demiurgic Mind, “born in
Darkness before the Creation of the World”; the Second Horus was the same
Idea going forth from the Logos, becoming clothed with matter and assuming
an actual existence.(579) Horus, the “Elder,” or Haroiri, is an ancient
aspect of the Solar God, contemporary with Ra and Shoo; Haroiri is often
mistaken for Hor (Horsusi), Son of Osiris and Isis. The Egyptians very
often represented the rising Sun under the form of Hor, the Elder, rising
from a full‐blown Lotus, the Universe, when the solar disk is always found
on the hawk‐head of that God. Haroiri is Khnoom. The same with Khnoom and
Ammon, both are represented as ram‐headed, and both are often confused,
though their functions are different. Khnoom is the “modeller of men,”
fashioning men and things out of the Mundane Egg, on a potter’s wheel;
Ammon‐Ra, the Generator, is the secondary aspect of the Concealed Deity.
Khnoom was adored at Elephanta and Philæ,(580) Ammon at Thebes. But it is
Emepht, the One, Supreme Planetary Principle, who blows the Egg out of his
mouth, and who is, therefore, Brahmâ. The Shadow of the Deity, Kosmic and
Universal, of that which broods over and permeates the Egg with its
vivifying Spirit, until the Germ contained in it is ripe, was the Mystery
God whose name was unpronounceable. It is Ptah, however, “he who opens,”
the opener of Life and Death,(581) who proceeds from the Egg of the World
to begin his dual work.(582)

According to the Greeks, the phantom form of the Chemis (Chemi, ancient
Egypt) which floats on the Ethereal Waves of the Empyrean Sphere, was
called into being by Horus‐Apollo, the Sun‐God, who caused it to evolve
out of the Mundane Egg.

The _Brahmânda Purâna_ contains fully the mystery about Brahmâ’s Golden
Egg; and this is why, perhaps, it is inaccessible to the Orientalists, who
say that this _Purâna_, like the _Skanda_, is “no longer procurable in a
collective body,” but “is represented by a variety of Khandas and
Mâhâtmyas professing to be derived from it.” The _Brahmânda Purâna_ is
described as “that which has declared in 12,200 verses, the magnificence
of the Egg of Brahmâ, and in which an account of the future Kalpas is
contained, as revealed by Brahmâ.”(583) Quite so, and much more,
perchance.

In the Scandinavian Cosmogony, placed by Professor Max Müller, in point of
time, as “far anterior to the _Vedas_,” in the poem of Wöluspa, the Song
of the Prophetess, the Mundane Egg is again discovered in the Phantom‐Germ
of the Universe, which is represented as lying in the Ginnungagap, the Cup
of Illusion, Mâyâ, the Boundless and Void Abyss. In this World’s Matrix,
formerly a region of night and desolation, Nefelheim, the Mist‐Place, the
_nebular_, as it is called now, in the Astral Light, dropped a _Ray of
Cold Light_ which overflowed this cup and froze in it. Then the Invisible
blew a scorching Wind which dissolved the frozen Waters and cleared the
Mist. These Waters (Chaos), called the Streams of Eliwagar, distilling in
vivifying drops, fell down and created the Earth and the Giant Ymir, who
had only the “semblance of man” (the Heavenly Man), and the Cow, Audumla
(the “Mother,” Astral Light or Cosmic Soul), from whose udder flowed
_four_ streams of milk—the four cardinal points; the four heads of the
four rivers of Eden, etc.—which “four” are symbolized by the Cube in all
its various and mystical meanings.

The Christians—especially the Greek and Latin Churches—have fully adopted
the symbol, and see in it a commemoration of life eternal, of salvation
and of resurrection. This is found in, and corroborated by, the time‐
honoured custom of exchanging “Easter Eggs.” From the Anguinum, the “Egg”
of the Pagan Druid, whose name alone made Rome tremble with fear, to the
red Easter Egg of the Slavonian peasant, a cycle has passed. And yet,
whether in civilized Europe, or among the abject savages of Central
America, we find the same archaic, primitive thought, if we will only
search for it, and do not—in the haughtiness of our fancied mental and
physical superiority—disfigure the original idea of the symbol.




Section VII. The Days and Nights of Brahmâ.


This is the name given to the Periods called Manvantara (Manuantara, or
between the Manus) and Pralaya, or Dissolution; one referring to the
Active Periods of the Universe; the other to its times of relative and
complete Rest, whether they occur at the end of a Day or an Age, or Life,
of Brahmâ. These Periods, which follow each other in regular succession,
are also called Small and Great Kalpas, the Minor and the Mahâ Kalpas;
though, properly speaking, the Mahâ Kalpa is never a Day, but a whole Life
or Age of Brahmâ, for it is said in the _Brahma Vaivarta_: “Chronologers
compute a Kalpa by the Life of Brahmâ. Minor Kalpas, as Samvarta and the
rest, are numerous.” In sober truth they are infinite; for they have never
had a commencement; or, in other words, there never was a _first_ Kalpa,
nor will there ever be a _last_, in Eternity.

One Parârdha, or half of the existence of Brahmâ, in the ordinary
acceptation of this measure of time, has already expired in the present
Mahâ Kalpa; the last Kalpa was the Padma, or that of the Golden Lotus; the
present one is the Varâha,(584) the “Boar” Incarnation, or Avatâra.

One thing is to be especially noted by the scholar who studies the Hindû
religion from the _Puranâs_. He must never take the statements found
therein literally, and in one sense only; and those especially, which
concern the Manvantaras, or Kalpas, have to be understood in their several
references. Thus these Ages relate, in the same language, to both the
great and the small periods, to Mahâ Kalpas and to Minor Cycles. The
Matsya, or Fish Avatâra, happened before the Varâha or Boar Avatâra; the
allegories, therefore, must relate to both the Padma and the present
Manvantara, and also to the Minor Cycles which have occurred since the
reäppearance of our Chain of Worlds and the Earth. And as the Matsya
Avatâra of Vishnu and Vaivasvata’s Deluge are correctly connected with an
event that happened on our Earth during this Round, it is evident that,
while it may relate to pre‐cosmic events, pre‐cosmic in the sense of _our_
Cosmos, or Solar System, it has reference, in our case, to a distant
geological period. Not even Esoteric Philosophy can claim to know, except
by analogical inference, that which took place before the reäppearance of
our Solar System, and previous to the last Mahâ Pralaya. But it teaches
distinctly, that after the first geological disturbance of the Earth’s
axis, which ended in the sweeping down to the bottom of the seas of the
whole Second Continent, with its primeval races—of which successive
Continents, or “Earths,” Atlantis was the fourth—there came another
disturbance owing to the axis again resuming its previous degree of
inclination as rapidly as it had changed it: when the Earth was indeed
once more _raised_ out of the waters—as above, so below, and _vice versâ_.
There were “Gods” on Earth in those days; Gods, and not men, as we know
them now, says the tradition. As will be shown in Volume II, the
computation of periods, in exoteric Hindûism, refers to both the great
cosmic and the small terrestrial events and cataclysms, and the same may
be demonstrated in respect to names. For instance, the name
Yudishthira—the first king of the Sacae or Shakas, who opens the Kali Yuga
Era, which has to last 432,000 years, “an actual king who lived 3,102
years B.C.”—applies also to the Great Deluge, at the time of the first
sinking of Atlantis. He is the “Yudishthira,(585) born on the mountain of
the hundred peaks, at the extremity of the world, _beyond which nobody can
__ go_” and “immediately after the flood.”(586) We know of no “Flood”
3,102 years B.C., not even that of Noah, for, agreeably with Judæo‐
Christian chronology, it took place 2,349 years B.C.

This relates to an esoteric division of time and a mystery explained
elsewhere, and may therefore be left aside for the present. Suffice it to
remark, at this juncture, that all the efforts of imagination of the
Wilfords, Bentleys, and other would‐be Œdipuses of esoteric Hindû
Chronology, have sadly failed. No computation of either the Four Ages, or
the Manvantaras, has ever yet been unriddled by our very learned
Orientalists, who have therefore cut the Gordian Knot by proclaiming the
whole “a figment of the Brâhmanical brain.” So be it, and may the great
scholars rest in peace! This “figment” is given at the end of the
Commentaries on Stanza II of the Anthropogenesis, in Volume II, with
Esoteric additions.

Let us see, however, what were the three kinds of Pralayas, and what is
the _popular_ belief about them. For once it agrees with Esotericism.

Of the Pralaya, before which fourteen Manvantaras elapse, having over them
as many presiding Manus, and at whose close occurs the Incidental, or
Brahmâ’s Dissolution, it is said in _Vishnu Purâna_, in condensed
paraphrase:


    At the end of a thousand Periods of Four Ages, which complete a
    day of Brahmâ, the earth is almost exhausted. The Eternal (Avyaya)
    Vishnu then assumes the character of Rudra, the Destroyer (Shiva),
    and reünites all his creatures to himself. He enters the Seven
    Rays of the Sun and drinks up all the Waters of the Globe; he
    causes the moisture to evaporate, thus drying up the whole Earth.
    Oceans and rivers, torrents and small streams, are all exhaled.
    Thus fed with abundant moisture the Seven Solar Rays become Seven
    Suns, by dilation, and they finally set the World on fire. Hari,
    the destroyer of all things, who is the Flame of Time, Kâlâgni,
    finally consumes the Earth. Then Rudra, becoming Janârdana,
    breathes clouds and rain.(587)


There are many kinds of Pralaya, but three chief periods are specially
mentioned in old Hindû books. The first of these, as Wilson shows, is
called Naimittika,(588) “Occasional” or “Incidental,” caused by the
intervals of Brahmâ’s Days; it is the destruction of creatures, of all
that lives and has a form, but not of the substance, which remains in
_statu quo_ till the new Dawn after that Night. The second is called
Prâkritika, and occurs at the end of the Age or Life of Brahmâ, when
everything that exists is resolved into the Primal Element, to be
remodelled at the end of that longer Night. The third, Âtyantika, does not
concern the Worlds, or the Universe, but only the Individualities of some
people. It is thus the Individual Pralaya, or Nirvâna, after having
reached which, there is no more future existence possible, no rebirth till
after the Mahâ Pralaya. The latter Night—lasting as it does
311,040,000,000,000 years, with the possibility also of being almost
doubled in the case of the lucky Jîvanmukta who reaches Nirvâna at an
early period of a Manvantara—is long enough to be regarded as _eternal_,
if not endless. The _Bhâgavata Purâna_(589) speaks of a fourth kind of
Pralaya, the Nitya, or Constant Dissolution, and explains it as the change
which takes place imperceptibly in everything in this Universe from the
globe down to the atom, without cessation. It is growth and decay—life and
death.

When the Mahâ Pralaya arrives, the inhabitants of Svar‐loka, the Upper
Sphere, disturbed by the conflagration, seek refuge “with the Pitris,
their Progenitors, the Manus, the Seven Rishis, the various orders of
Celestial Spirits and the Gods, in Mahar‐loka.” When the latter is reached
also, the whole of the above enumerated beings migrate in their turn from
Mahar‐loka, and repair to Jana‐loka, “_in their subtile forms, destined to
become reëmbodied, in similar capacities as their former, when the world
is renewed at the beginning of the succeeding Kalpa_.”(590)


    Clouds, mighty in size, and loud in thunder, fill up all Space
    [Nabhas‐tala]. Showering down torrents of water, these clouds
    quench the dreadful fires, ... and then they rain uninterruptedly
    for a hundred [divine] Years, and deluge the whole World [Solar
    System]. Pouring down, in drops as large as dice, these rains
    overspread the Earth, and fill the Middle Region (Bhuvo‐loka) and
    inundate Heaven. The World is now enveloped in darkness; and all
    things, animate or inanimate, having perished, the clouds continue
    to pour down their Waters, ... and the Night of Brahmâ reigns
    supreme over the scene of desolation.(591)


This is what we call in the Esoteric Doctrine a Solar Pralaya. When the
Waters have reached the region of the Seven Rishis, and the World, our
Solar System, is one Ocean, they stop. The Breath of Vishnu becomes a
strong Wind, which blows for another hundred Divine Years until all clouds
are dispersed. The wind is then reäbsorbed: and That—


    Of which all things are made, the Lord by whom all things exist,
    He who is inconceivable, without beginning, the beginning of the
    Universe, reposes, sleeping upon Shesha [the Serpent of Infinity]
    in the midst of the Deep. The Creator [(?) Âdikrit] Hari, sleeps
    upon the Ocean [of Space] in the form of Brahmâ—glorified by
    Sanaka(592) and the Saints (Siddhas) of Jana‐loka, and
    contemplated by the holy denizens of Brahma‐loka, anxious for
    final liberation—involved in mystic slumber, the celestial
    personification of his own illusions.... This is the Dissolution
    [(?) Pratisanchara] termed Incidental because Hari is its
    Incidental [Ideal] Cause.(593) When the Universal Spirit wakes,
    the World revives; when he closes his eyes, all things fall upon
    the bed of mystic slumber. In like manner, as a thousand Great
    Ages constitute a Day of Brahmâ [in the original it is Padmayoni,
    the same as Abjayoni, “Lotus‐born,” not Brahmâ], so his Night
    consists of the same period.... Awaking at the end of his Night,
    the Unborn ... creates the Universe anew.(594)


This is “Incidental” Pralaya; what is the Elemental (Prâkritika)
Dissolution? Parâshara describes it to Maitreya as follows:


    When, by dearth and fire all the Worlds and Pâtâlas [Hells] are
    withered up(595) ... the progress of Elemental Dissolution is
    begun. Then, first, the Waters swallow up the property of Earth
    (which is the rudiment of Smell), and Earth deprived of this
    property proceeds to destruction ... and becomes one with
    Water.... When the Universe is, thus, pervaded by the waves of the
    watery Element, its rudimentary flavour is licked up by the
    Element of Fire ... and the Waters themselves are destroyed ...
    and become one with Fire; and the Universe is, therefore, entirely
    filled with [ethereal] Flame, which ... gradually overspreads the
    whole World. While Space is [one] Flame, ... the Element of Wind
    seizes upon the rudimental property, or form, which is the Cause
    of Light, and that being withdrawn (pralîna), all becomes of the
    nature of Air. The rudiment of form being destroyed, and Fire [(?)
    Vibhâvasu] deprived of its rudiment, Air extinguishes Fire and
    spreads ... over Space, which is deprived of Light, when Fire
    merges into Air. Air, then, accompanied by Sound, which is the
    source of Ether, extends everywhere throughout the ten regions ...
    until Ether seizes upon Contact [(?) Sparsha, Cohesion—Touch?],
    its rudimental property, by the loss of which, Air is destroyed,
    and Ether [(?) Kha] remains unmodified; devoid of Form, Flavour,
    Touch (Sparsha), and Smell, it exists [un]embodied [mûrttimat] and
    vast, and pervades the whole of Space. Ether [Âkâsha], whose
    characteristic property and rudiment is Sound [the “Word”] exists
    alone, occupying all the vacuity of Space [or rather, occupying
    the whole containment of Space]. Then the Origin [Noumenon?] of
    the Elements (Bhûtâdi) devours Sound [the collective Demiurgos];
    [and the hosts of Dhyân Chohans] and all the [existing]
    Elements(596) are, at once, merged into their original. This
    Primary Element is Consciousness, combined with the Property of
    Darkness [Tâmasa—Spiritual Darkness rather], and is, itself,
    swallowed up [disintegrated] by Mahat [the Universal Intellect],
    whose characteristic property is Intelligence [Buddhi], and Earth
    and Mahat are the inner and outer boundaries of the Universe. In
    this manner, as [in the Beginning] were the seven forms of Nature
    [Prakriti] reckoned from Mahat to Earth, so ... _these seven_
    successively reënter into each other.(597)

    The Egg of Brahmâ (Sarva‐mandala) is dissolved in the Waters that
    surround it, with its seven zones (dvîpas), seven oceans, seven
    regions, and their mountains. The investure of Water is drunk by
    Fire; the (stratum of) Fire is absorbed by (that of) Air; Air
    blends itself with Ether [Âkâsha]; the Primary Element [Bhûtâdi,
    the origin, or rather the _cause_, of the Primary Element] devours
    the Ether, and is (itself) destroyed by Intellect [Mahat, the
    Great, the Universal Mind], which, along with all these, is seized
    upon by Nature [Prakriti] and disappears. This Prakriti is,
    essentially, the same, whether discrete or indiscrete; only that
    which is discrete is, finally, lost or absorbed in the indiscrete.
    Spirit [Pums] also, which is one, pure, imperishable, eternal,
    all‐pervading, is a portion of that Supreme Spirit which is all
    things. That Spirit [Sarvesha] which is other than (embodied)
    Spirit, and in which there are no attributes of name, species
    [nâman and jâti, or rûpa, hence body rather than species], or the
    like ... [remains] as the (sole) Existence [Sattâ]. Nature
    [Prakriti] and Spirit [Purusha] both resolve [finally] into
    Supreme Spirit.(598)


This is the final Pralaya(599)—the Death of Kosmos; after which its Spirit
rests in Nirvâna, or in _That_ for which there is neither Day nor Night.
All the other Pralayas are periodical, and follow the Manvantaras in
regular succession, as the night follows the day of every human creature,
animal, and plant. The Cycle of Creation of the Lives of Kosmos is run
down; the energy of the Manifested “Word” having its growth, culmination,
and decrease, as have all things temporary, however long their duration.
The Creative Force is Eternal as noumenal; as a phenomenal manifestation,
in its aspects, it has a beginning and must, therefore, have an end.
During that interval, it has its Periods of Activity and its Periods of
Rest. And these are the Days and Nights of Brahmâ. But Brahman, the
Noumenon, never rests, as _It_ never changes, but ever _is_, though It
cannot be said to be anywhere.

The Jewish Kabalists felt the necessity of this _immutability_ in an
eternal, infinite Deity, and therefore applied the same thought to the
anthropomorphic God. The idea is poetical, and very appropriate in its
application. In the _Zohar_ we read as follows:


    As Moses was keeping a vigil on Mount Sinai, in company with the
    Deity, who was concealed from his sight by a cloud, he felt a
    great fear overcome him, and suddenly asked: “Lord, where art thou
    ... sleepest thou, O Lord? ...” And the Spirit answered him; “I
    never sleep: were I to fall asleep for a moment _before my time_,
    all the creation would crumble into dissolution in one instant.”


“Before my time” is very suggestive. It shows the God of Moses to be only
a temporary substitute, like Brahmâ, the male, a substitute and an aspect
of THAT which is immutable, and which, therefore, can take no part in the
Days, or Nights, nor have any concern whatever with reäction or
dissolution.

While the Eastern Occultists have seven modes of interpretation, the Jews
have only four; namely, the real‐mystical, the allegorical, the moral, and
the literal or Pashut. The latter is the key of the exoteric Churches and
not worth discussion. Here are several sentences, which, read in the
first, or mystical key, show the identity of the foundations of
construction in every Scripture. They are given in Isaac Myer’s excellent
book on the Kabalistic works, which he seems to have well studied. I quote
_verbatim_.


    “_B’raisheeth barah elohim ath hashama’ yem v’ath haa’retz_,
    _i.e._, ‘In the beginning the God(s) created the heavens and the
    earth’; (the meaning of which is;) the six (Sephiroth of
    Construction),(600) over which _B’raisheeth_ stands, _all belong
    Below_. It created six, (and) on these stand (exist) all Things.
    And those depend upon the _seven forms of the Cranium_ up to the
    Dignity of all Dignities. And the second ’Earth’ does not come
    into calculation, therefore it has been said: ‘And from it (that
    Earth) which underwent the curse; came it forth.’ ... ‘It (the
    Earth) was without form and void; and darkness was over the face
    of the Abyss, and the Spirit of Elohim ... was breathing
    (_me’racha’pheth_, _i.e._, hovering, brooding over, moving, ...)
    over the waters.’ Thirteen depend on thirteen (forms) of the most
    worthy Dignity. Six thousand years hang (are referred to) in the
    first six words. The seventh (thousand, the millennium) above it
    (the cursed Earth) is that which is strong by Itself. And it was
    rendered entirely desolate during twelve hours (one ... day ...).
    In the thirteenth, It (the Deity) shall restore them ... and
    everything shall be renewed as before; and all those six shall
    continue.”(601)


The “Sephiroth of Construction” are the six Dhyân Chohans, or Manus, or
Prajâpatis, synthesized by the seventh “B’raisheeth,” the First Emanation,
or Logos, and who are called, therefore, the Builders of the Lower or
Physical Universe, all belonging Below. These Six [6‐pointed star with
middle dot], whose essence is of the _Seventh_, are the Upâdhi, the Base
or Fundamental Stone, on which the Objective Universe is built, the
Noumenoi of all things. Hence they are, at the same time, the Forces of
Nature; the Seven Angels of the Presence; the Sixth and Seventh Principles
in Man; the spirito‐psycho‐physical Spheres of the Septenary Chain, the
Root Races, etc. They all “depend upon the Seven Forms of the Cranium” up
to the Highest. The “_Second_ ‘Earth’ does not come into calculation,”
because it is _no Earth_, but the Chaos, or Abyss of Space, in which
rested the Paradigmatic, or Model Universe, in the Ideation of the Over‐
Soul, brooding over it. The term “Curse” is here very misleading, for it
means simply Doom or Destiny, or _that fatality which sent it forth_ into
the objective state. This is shown by that “Earth,” under the “Curse,”
being described as “without form and void,” in whose abysmal depths the
“Breath” of the Elohim, or collective Logoi, produced, or so to say
photographed, the first Divine Ideation of the _things to be_. This
process is repeated after every Pralaya before the beginnings of a new
Manvantara, or Period of sentient individual Being. “Thirteen depend on
thirteen Forms,” refers to the thirteen Periods, personified by the
thirteen Manus, with Svâyambhuva, the fourteenth—13, instead of 14, being
an additional veil—those fourteen Manus who reign within the term of a
Mahâ Yuga, a Day of Brahmâ. These thirteen‐fourteen of the objective
Universe depend on the thirteen‐fourteen paradigmatic, ideal Forms. The
meaning of the “six thousand Years” which “hang in the first six Words,”
has again to be sought in the Indian Wisdom. They refer to the primordial
six (seven) “Kings of Edom,” who typify the Worlds, or Spheres, of our
Chain, during the First Round, as well as the primordial men of this
Round. They are the septenary pre‐Adamic First Root‐Race, or they who
existed before the Third, _Separated_ Race. As they were Shadows, and
senseless, for they had not yet eaten of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, they could not see the Parzuphim, or “Face could not see Face”;
that is to say, primeval men were “unconscious.” “Therefore, the
primordial (seven) Kings died,” _i.e._, were destroyed.(602) Now, who are
these Kings? They are the Kings who are the “Seven Rishis, certain
(secondary) divinities, Indra [Shakra], Manu, and the Kings his Sons [who]
_are created and perish at one period_” as _Vishnu Purâna_ tells us.(603)
For the seventh “thousand,” which is not the millennium of exoteric
Christianity, but that of Anthropogenesis, represents both the “Seventh
Period of Creation,” that of physical man, according to _Vishnu Purâna_,
and the Seventh Principle, both macrocosmic and microcosmic, and also the
Pralaya after the Seventh Period, the Night, which has the same duration
as the Day, of Brahmâ. “It was rendered entirely desolate during twelve
hours.” It is in the Thirteenth (twice six and the synthesis) that
everything shall be restored, and the “_six_ shall continue.”

Thus, the author of the _Qabbalah_ remarks quite truly that:


    Long before his [Ibn Gebirol’s] time ... many centuries before the
    Christian era, there was in Central Asia a “Wisdom Religion”,
    fragments of which subsequently existed among the learned men of
    the archaic Egyptians, the ancient Chinese, Hindûs, etc.... [And
    that] the _Qabbalah_ most likely originally came from Âryan
    sources, through Central Asia, Persia, India and Mesopotamia, for
    from Ur and Haran came Abraham and many others, into
    Palestine.(604)


Such was also the firm conviction of C. W. King, the author of _The
Gnostics and Their Remains_.

Vâmadeva Modelyar describes the coming Night most poetically. Though it is
given in _Isis Unveiled_, it is worthy of repetition.


    Strange noises are heard, proceeding from every point.... These
    are the precursors of the Night of Brahmâ; _dusk rises at the
    horizon_, and the Sun passes away behind the thirteenth degree of
    Makara [the tenth sign of the Zodiac], and will reach no more the
    sign of the Mîna [the Zodiacal sign Pisces, or the Fish]. The
    Gurus of the Pagodas, appointed to watch the Râshichakram
    [Zodiac], may now break their circle and instruments, for they are
    henceforth useless.

    Gradually light pales, heat diminishes, uninhabited spots multiply
    on the earth, the air becomes more and more rarefied; the springs
    of waters dry up, the great rivers see their waves exhausted, the
    ocean shows its sandy bottom and plants die. Men and animals
    decrease in size daily. Life and motion lose their force, planets
    can hardly gravitate in space; they are extinguished one by one,
    like a lamp which the hand of the Chokra [servant] neglects to
    replenish. Sûrya [the Sun] flickers and goes out, matter falls
    into Dissolution [Pralaya], and Brahmâ merges back into Dyaus, the
    Unrevealed God, and, his task being accomplished, he falls asleep.
    Another Day is passed, Night sets in, and continues until the
    future Dawn.

    And now again reënter into the Golden Egg of his Thought the germs
    of all that exist, as the divine Manu tells us. During His
    peaceful rest, the animated beings, endowed with the principles of
    action, cease their functions, and all feeling [Manas] becomes
    dormant. When they are all absorbed in the Supreme Soul, this Soul
    of all the beings sleeps in complete repose, till the Day when it
    resumes its form, and awakes again from its primitive
    darkness.(605)


As the Satya Yuga is always the first in the series of the Four Ages or
Yugas, so the Kali ever comes the last. The Kali Yuga now reigns supreme
in India, and it seems to coincide with that of the Western Age. Anyhow,
it is curious to see how prophetic in almost all things was the writer of
_Vishnu Purâna_, when foretelling to Maitreya some of the dark influences
and sins of this Kali Yuga. For after saying that the “barbarians” will be
masters of the banks of the Indus, of Chandrabhâgâ and Kâshmîra, he adds:


    There will be contemporary monarchs, reigning over the earth,
    kings of churlish spirit, violent temper, and ever addicted to
    falsehood and wickedness. They will inflict death on women,
    children, and cows; they will seize upon the property of their
    subjects [or, according to another reading, _be intent upon the
    wives of others_]; they will be of limited power ... their lives
    will be short, their desires insatiable.... People of various
    countries intermingling with them will follow their example; and,
    the barbarians being powerful [in India] in the patronage of the
    princes, whilst pure tribes are neglected, the people will perish
    [or, as the Commentator has it: “the Mlechchhas will be in the
    centre, and the Âryas in the end”].(606) Wealth and piety will
    decrease day by day, until the world will be wholly depraved....
    Property alone will confer rank; wealth will be the only source of
    devotion; passion will be the sole bond of union between the
    sexes; falsehood will be the only means of success in litigation;
    and women will be objects merely of sensual gratification....
    _External types will be the only distinction of the several orders
    of life_; dishonesty [anyâya] will be the (universal) means of
    subsistence; weakness the cause of dependence; menace and
    presumption will be substituted for learning; liberality will be
    devotion; a man if rich will be reputed pure; mutual assent will
    be marriage; fine clothes will be dignity.... He who is the
    strongest will reign ... the people, unable to bear the heavy
    burthens [khara‐bhâra, load of taxes], will take refuge among the
    valleys.... Thus, in the Kali Age, will decay constantly proceed,
    until the human race approaches its annihilation [pralaya]. When
    ... the close of the Kali age shall be nigh, a portion of that
    divine Being which exists, of its own spiritual nature [Kalkî
    Avatâra] ... shall descend upon Earth, ... endowed with the eight
    superhuman faculties.... He will reëstablish righteousness upon
    earth; and the minds of those who live at the end of Kali Yuga
    shall be awakened, and shall be as pellucid as crystal. The men
    who are, thus, changed ... shall be as _the seeds of human
    beings_, and shall give birth to a race who shall follow the laws
    of the Krita Age (or Age of Purity). As it is said: “When the Sun
    and Moon and (the Lunar Asterism) Tishya, and the planet Jupiter
    are in one mansion, the Krita [or Satya] Age shall
    return....”(607)


Two persons, Devâpi, of the race of Kuru, and Maru [Moru], of the family
of Ikshvâku, ... continue alive throughout the Four Ages, residing at ...
Kalâpa.(608) They will return hither, in the beginning of the Krita
Age(609) ... Maru [Moru](610) the son of Shîghra, through the power of
devotion (Yoga) is still living ... and will be the restorer of the
Kshattriya race of the Solar Dynasty.(611)

Whether right or wrong with regard to the latter prophecy, the “blessings”
of Kali Yuga are well described, and fit in admirably even with that which
one sees and hears in Europe and other civilized and Christian lands in
the full XIXth, and at the dawn of the XXth century of our great “Era of
Enlightenment.”




Section VIII. The Lotus, as a Universal Symbol.


There are no ancient symbols without a deep and philosophical meaning
attached to them, their importance and significance increasing with their
antiquity. Such is the Lotus. It is the flower sacred to Nature and her
Gods, and represents the Abstract and the Concrete Universes, standing as
the emblem of the productive powers of both Spiritual and Physical Nature.
It was held as sacred from the remotest antiquity by the Âryan Hindûs, the
Egyptians, and by the Buddhists after them. It was revered in China and
Japan, and adopted as a Christian emblem by the Greek and Latin Churches,
who made of it a messenger, as do now the Christians, who have replaced it
with the water‐lily.

In the Christian religion, in every picture of the Annunciation, Gabriel,
the Archangel, appears to the Virgin Mary, holding in his hand a spray of
water‐lilies. This spray, typifying Fire and Water, or the idea of
creation and generation, symbolizes _precisely the same idea_ as the
Lotus, in the hand of the Bodhisattva who announces to Mahâ‐Mâyâ,
Gautama’s mother, the birth of Buddha, the world’s Saviour. Thus also,
were Osiris and Horus constantly represented by the Egyptians in
association with the Lotus‐flower, both being Sun‐Gods or Gods of Fire;
just as the Holy Ghost is still typified by “tongues of fire,” in the
_Acts_.

It had, and still has, its mystic meaning, which is identical in every
nation on earth. We refer the reader to Sir William Jones.(612) With the
Hindûs, the Lotus is the emblem of the productive power of Nature, through
the agency of Fire and Water, or Spirit and Matter. “O Thou Eternal! I see
Brahm, the Creator, enthroned in thee above the Lotus!” says a verse in
the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_. And Sir W. Jones shows, as already noted in the
Stanzas, that the seeds of the Lotus, even before they germinate, contain
perfectly‐formed leaves, the miniature shapes of what they will become one
day, as perfected plants. The Lotus, in India, is the symbol of prolific
Earth and, what is more, of Mount Meru. The four Angels or Genii of the
four quarters of Heaven, the Mahârâjahs of the Stanzas, stand each on a
Lotus. The Lotus is the two‐fold type of the Divine and Human
Hermaphrodite, being so to say, of dual sex.

With the Hindûs, the Spirit of Fire or Heat—which stirs up, fructifies,
and develops into concrete form, from its ideal prototype, everything
which is born of Water, or Primordial Earth—evolved Brahmâ. The Lotus‐
flower, represented as growing out of Vishnu’s navel, the God who rests in
the Waters of Space on the Serpent of Infinity, is the most graphic symbol
ever yet made. It is the Universe evolving from the Central Sun, the
Point, the ever‐concealed Germ. Lakshmî, who is the female aspect of
Vishnu, and who is also called Padma, the Lotus, in the _Râmâyana_, is
likewise shown floating on a Lotus‐flower, at the “Creation,” and during
the “Churning of the Ocean” of Space, as also springing from the “Sea of
Milk,” like Venus‐Aphrodite from the Foam of the Ocean.


    ... Then, seated on a lotus,
    Beauty’s bright Goddess, peerless Shrî, arose
    Out of the waves ...


sings an English Orientalist and poet, Sir Monier Williams.

The underlying idea, in this symbol, is very beautiful, and, furthermore,
shows an identical parentage in all the religious systems. Whether as the
Lotus or water‐lily, it signifies one and the same philosophical idea;
namely, the Emanation of the Objective from the Subjective, Divine
Ideation passing from the abstract into the concrete, or visible form.
For, as soon as Darkness, or rather that which is “Darkness” for
ignorance, has disappeared in its own realm of Eternal Light, leaving
behind itself only its Divine Manifested Ideation, the Creative Logoi have
their understanding opened, and they see in the Ideal World, hitherto
concealed in the Divine Thought, the archetypal forms of all, and proceed
to copy and build, or fashion, upon these models, forms evanescent and
transcendent.

At this stage of Action, the Demiurge is not yet the Architect. Born in
the Twilight of Action, he has yet to first perceive the Plan, to realize
the Ideal Forms, which lie buried in the Bosom of Eternal Ideation, just
as the future lotus‐leaves, the immaculate petals, are concealed within
the seed of that plant.

In Esoteric Philosophy the Demiurge, or Logos, regarded as the Creator, is
simply an abstract term, an idea, like the word “army.” As the latter is
the all‐embracing term for a body of active forces, or working
units—soldiers, so is the Demiurge the qualitative compound of a multitude
of Creators or Builders. Burnouf, the great Orientalist, seized the idea
perfectly, when he said that Brahmâ does _not_ create the Earth, any more
than the rest of the Universe.


    Having evolved himself from the Soul of the World, once separated
    from the First Cause, he evaporates with, and emanates, all Nature
    out of himself. He does not stand above it, but is mixed up with
    it; Brahmâ and the Universe form one Being, each particle of which
    is in its essence Brahmâ himself, who proceeded out of himself.


In a chapter of the _Book of the Dead_, called “Transformation into the
Lotus,” the God, figured as a head emerging from this flower, exclaims:


    I am the pure Lotus, emerging from the Luminous Ones.... I carry
    the messages of Horus. I am the pure Lotus which comes from the
    Solar Fields.(613)


The lotus‐idea may be traced even in the Elohistic first chapter of
_Genesis_, as stated in _Isis Unveiled_. It is to this idea that we must
look for the origin and explanation of the verse in the Jewish Cosmogony
which reads: “And God said, Let the earth bring forth ... the fruit‐tree
yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself.”(614) In all the
primitive religions, the Creative God is the “Son of the Father,” that is
to say, his Thought made visible; and before the Christian era, from the
Trimûrti of the Hindûs down to the three Kabalistic Heads of the
scriptures, as explained by the Jews, the Triune Godhead of each nation
was fully defined and substantiated, in its allegories.

Such is the cosmic and ideal significance of this great symbol with the
Eastern peoples. But when applied to practical and exoteric worship, which
had also its esoteric symbology, the Lotus, in time, became the carrier
and container of a more terrestrial idea. No dogmatic religion has ever
escaped having the sexual element in it; and to this day it soils the
moral beauty of the root idea of symbology. The following is quoted from
the same Kabalistic MS. which we have already cited on several occasions:


    Pointing to like signification was the Lotus growing in the waters
    of the Nile. Its mode of growth peculiarly fitted it as a symbol
    of the generative activities. The flower of the Lotus, which is
    the bearer of the seed for reproduction, as the result of its
    maturing, is connected by its placenta‐like attachment to mother‐
    earth, or the womb of Isis, through the water of the womb, that
    is, the river Nile, by the long cord‐like stalk, the umbilicus.
    Nothing can be plainer than the symbol, and to make it perfect in
    its intended signification, a child is sometimes represented as
    seated in or issuing from the flower.(615) Thus Osiris and Isis,
    the children of Cronus, or time without end, in the development of
    their nature‐forces, in this picture become the parents of man
    under the name Horus.

    We cannot lay too great stress upon the use of this generative
    function as a basis for a symbolical language, and a scientific
    art‐speech. Thought upon the idea leads at once to reflection upon
    the subject of creative cause. In its workings Nature is observed
    to have fashioned a wonderful piece of living mechanism, governed
    by an added living soul; the life development and history of which
    soul, as to its whence, its present, and its whither, surpass all
    efforts of the human intellect.(616) The new‐born is an ever‐
    recurring miracle, an evidence that within the workshop of the
    womb an intelligent creative power has intervened to fasten a
    living soul to a physical machine. The amazing wonderfulness of
    the fact attaches a holy sacredness to all connected with the
    organs of reproduction, as the dwelling and place of evident
    constructive intervention of deity.


This is a correct rendering of the underlying ideas of old, of the purely
pantheistic conceptions, _impersonal_ and reverential, of the archaic
philosophers of the prehistoric ages. It is not so, however, when applied
to sinful humanity, to the gross ideas attached to _personality_.
Therefore, no pantheistic philosopher would fail to find the remarks that
follow the above, and which represent the anthropomorphism of Judean
symbology, other than dangerous for the sacredness of true religion, and
fitting only for our materialistic age, which is the direct outcome and
result of that anthropomorphic character. For this is the key‐note to the
entire spirit and essence of the _Old __ Testament_, as the MS. states,
treating of the symbolism of the art‐speech of the _Bible_:


    Therefore the locality of the womb is to be taken as the Most Holy
    Place, the Sanctum Sanctorum, and the veritable Temple of the
    Living God.(617) With man, the possession of the woman has always
    been considered as an essential part of himself, to make one out
    of two, and jealously guarded as sacred. Even the part of the
    ordinary house or home consecrated to the dwelling of the wife was
    called the _penetralia_, the secret or sacred, and hence the
    metaphor of the Holy of Holies, of sacred constructions taken from
    the idea of the sacredness of the organs of generation. Carried to
    the extreme of description(618) by metaphor, this part of the
    house is described in the Sacred Books as the “between the thighs
    of the house,” and sometimes the idea is carried out
    constructively in the great door‐opening of Churches placed inward
    between flanking buttresses.


No such thought, “carried to the extreme,” ever existed among the old
primitive Âryans. This is proven by the fact that, in the Vedic period,
their women were not placed apart from men in _penetralia_, or Zenanas.
This seclusion began when the Mahommedans—the next heirs to Hebrew
symbolism, after Christian ecclesiasticism—had conquered the land and
gradually enforced their ways and customs upon the Hindûs. The pre‐ and
post‐Vedic woman was as free as man; and no impure terrestrial thought was
ever mixed with the religious symbology of the early Âryans. The idea and
application are purely Semitic. This is corroborated by the writer of the
said intensely learned and Kabalistic revelation, when he closes the
above‐quoted passages by adding:


    If to these organs as symbols of creative cosmic agencies the idea
    of the origin of measures as well as of time‐periods can be
    attached, then indeed, in the constructions of the Temples as
    Dwellings of Deity, or of Jehovah, that part designated as the
    Holy of Holies, or the Most Holy Place, should borrow its title
    from the recognized sacredness of the generative organs,
    considered as symbols of measures as well as of creative cause.
    With the ancient _wise, there was no name, and no idea, and no
    symbol_ of a First Cause.


Most decidedly not. Rather never give a thought to it and leave it for
ever nameless, as the early Pantheists did, than degrade the sacredness of
that Ideal of Ideals, by dragging down its symbols into such
anthropomorphic forms! Here again one perceives the immense chasm between
Âryan and Semitic religious thought, the two opposite poles, Sincerity and
Concealment. With the Brâhmans, who have never invested the natural
procreative functions of mankind with an “original sin” element, it is a
_religious duty_ to have a son. A Brâhman, in days of old, having
accomplished his mission of human creator, retired to the jungle, and
passed the rest of his days in religious meditation. He had accomplished
his duty to nature, as mortal man and its co‐worker, and henceforth gave
all his thoughts to the spiritual and immortal portion of himself,
regarding the terrestrial as a mere illusion, an evanescent dream—which,
indeed it is. With the Semite, it was different. He invented a temptation
of flesh in a garden of Eden, and showed his God—esoterically, the Tempter
and the Ruler of Nature—_cursing for ever_ an act, which was in the
logical programme of that Nature.(619) All this exoterically, as in the
_cloak_ and dead‐letter of _Genesis_ and the rest. At the same time,
_esoterically_, he regarded the supposed _sin_ and _fall_ as an act so
sacred, as to choose the organ, the perpetrator of the _original sin_, as
the fittest and most sacred symbol to represent that God, who is shown as
branding its entering into function as disobedience and everlasting _sin!_

Who can ever fathom the paradoxical depths of the Semitic mind! And this
paradoxical element, _minus_ its innermost significance, has now passed
entirely into Christian theology and dogma!

Whether the early Fathers of the Church knew the esoteric meaning of the
Hebrew _Testament_, or whether only a few of them were aware of it, while
the others remained ignorant of the secret, is for posterity to decide.
One thing, at any rate, is certain. As the Esotericism of the _New
Testament_ agrees perfectly with that of the Hebrew Mosaic Books; and
since, at the same time, a number of purely Egyptian symbols and Pagan
dogmas in general—the Trinity, for example—have been copied by, and
incorporated into, the Synoptics and St. John, it becomes evident that the
identity of those symbols was known to the writers of the _New Testament_,
whoever they may have been. They must have been also aware of the priority
of the Egyptian Esotericism, since they have adopted several symbols which
typify purely Egyptian conceptions and beliefs, in their outward and
inward meaning, and which are not to be found in the Jewish Canon. One of
these is the water‐lily in the hands of the Archangel, in the early
representations of his appearance to the Virgin Mary; and these symbolical
images are preserved to this day in the iconography of the Greek and Roman
Churches. Thus Water, Fire and the Cross, as well as the Dove, the Lamb
and other Sacred Animals, with all their combinations, esoterically yield
an identical meaning, and must have been accepted as an improvement upon
Judaism pure and simple.

For the Lotus and Water are among the oldest symbols, and in their origin
are purely Âryan, though they became common property during the branching
off of the Fifth Race. To give an example; letters, as well as numbers,
were all mystic, whether in combination, or taken separately. The most
sacred of all is the letter M. It is both feminine and masculine, or
androgyne, and is made to symbolize Water in its origin, the Great Deep.
It is a mystic letter in all languages, Eastern and Western, and stands as
a glyph for the waves, thus [three triangles]. In the Âryan Esotericism,
as in the Semitic, this letter has always stood for the Waters. In
Sanskrit, for instance, Makara, the tenth sign of the Zodiac, means a
Crocodile, or rather an aquatic monster associated always with Water. The
