PART III. ADDENDA. ON OCCULT AND MODERN SCIENCE.


The knowledge of this nether world—
  Say, friend, what is it, false or true?
The false, what mortal cares to know?
  The true, what mortal ever knew?




Section I. Reasons for These Addenda.


Many of the doctrines contained in the foregoing seven Stanzas and
Commentaries having been studied and critically examined by some Western
Theosophists, certain of the Occult Teachings have been found wanting from
the ordinary stand‐point of modern scientific knowledge. They seemed to
encounter insuperable difficulties in the way of their acceptance, and to
require reconsideration in view of scientific criticism. Some friends have
already been tempted to regret the necessity of so often calling in
question the assertions of Modern Science. It appeared to them—and I here
repeat only their arguments—that “to run counter to the teachings of its
most eminent exponents, was to court a premature discomfiture in the eyes
of the Western World.”

It is, therefore, desirable to define, once and for all, the position
which the writer, who does not in this agree with her friends, intends to
maintain. So far as Science remains what in the words of Prof. Huxley it
is, viz., “organized common sense”; so far as its inferences are drawn
from accurate premisses, its generalizations resting on a purely inductive
basis, every Theosophist and Occultist welcomes respectfully and with due
admiration its contributions to the domain of cosmological law. There can
be no possible conflict between the teachings of Occult and so‐called
exact Science, wherever the conclusions of the latter are grounded on a
substratum of unassailable fact. It is only when its more ardent
exponents, over‐stepping the limits of observed phenomena in order to
penetrate into the arcana of Being, attempt to wrench the formation of
Kosmos and its _living_ Forces from Spirit, and to attribute all to blind
Matter, that the Occultists claim the right of disputing and calling in
question their theories. Science cannot, owing to the very nature of
things, unveil the mystery of the Universe around us. Science can, it is
true, collect, classify, and generalize upon phenomena; but the Occultist,
arguing from admitted metaphysical data, declares that the daring
explorer, who would probe the inmost secrets of Nature, must transcend the
narrow limitations of sense, and transfer his consciousness into the
region of Noumena and the sphere of Primal Causes. To effect this, he must
develop faculties which, save in a few rare and exceptional cases, are
absolutely dormant, in the constitution of the off‐shoots of our present
Fifth Root‐Race in Europe and America. He can in no other conceivable
manner collect the facts on which to base his speculations. Is this not
apparent on the principles of Inductive Logic and Metaphysics alike?

On the other hand, whatever the writer may do, she will never be able to
satisfy both Truth and Science. To offer the reader a systematic and
uninterrupted version of the Archaic Stanzas is impossible. A gap of 43
verses or shlokas has to be left between the 7th, already given, and the
51st, which is the subject of Book II, though the latter are made to run
as from 1 onwards, for easier reading and reference. The mere appearance
of man on Earth occupies an equal number of Stanzas, which minutely
describe his primal evolution from the human Dhyân Chohans, the state of
the Globe at that time, etc., etc. A great number of names referring to
chemical substances and other compounds, which have now ceased to combine
together, and are therefore unknown to the later offshoots of our Fifth
Race, occupy a considerable space. As they are simply untranslatable, and
would remain in every case inexplicable, they are omitted, along with
those which cannot be made public. Nevertheless, even the little that is
given will irritate every follower and defender of dogmatic materialistic
Science who happens to read it.

In view of the criticism offered, it is proposed, before proceeding to the
remaining Stanzas, to defend those already given. That they are not in
perfect accord or harmony with Modern Science, we all know. But had they
been as much in agreement with the views of modern knowledge as is a
lecture by Sir William Thomson, they would have been rejected all the
same. For they teach belief in conscious Powers and Spiritual Entities; in
terrestrial, semi‐intelligent, and highly intellectual Forces on other
planes;(790) and in Beings that dwell around us in spheres imperceptible,
whether through telescope or microscope. Hence the necessity of examining
the beliefs of materialistic Science, of comparing its views about the
“Elements” with the opinions of the Ancients, and of analysing the
physical Forces as they exist in modern conceptions, before the Occultists
admit themselves to be in the wrong. We shall touch upon the constitution
of the Sun and planets, and the Occult characteristics of what are called
Devas and Genii, and are now termed by Science, Forces, or “modes of
motion,” and see whether Esoteric belief is defensible or not.
Notwithstanding the efforts made to the contrary, an unprejudiced mind
will discover that under Newton’s “agent, material or immaterial,”(791)
the agent which _causes gravity_, and in his personal _working_ God, there
is just as much of the metaphysical Devas and Genii, as there is in
Kepler’s Angelus Rector conducting each planet, and in the _species
immateriata_ by which the celestial bodies were carried along in their
courses, according to that Astronomer.

In Volume II, we shall have to openly approach dangerous subjects. We must
bravely face Science and declare, in the teeth of materialistic learning,
of Idealism, Hylo‐Idealism, Positivism and all‐denying modern Psychology,
that the true Occultist believes in “Lords of Light”; that he believes in
a Sun, which—far from being simply a “lamp of day” moving in accordance
with physical law, and far from being merely one of those Suns, which,
according to Richter, “are sun‐flowers of a higher light”—is, like
milliards of other Suns, the dwelling or the vehicle of a God, and of a
host of Gods.

In this dispute, of course, it is the Occultists who will be worsted. They
will be considered, on the _primâ facie_ aspect of the question, to be
ignoramuses, and will be labelled with more than one of the usual epithets
given to those whom the superficially judging public, itself ignorant of
the great underlying truths in Nature, accuses of believing in mediæval
superstitions. Let it be so. Submitting beforehand to every criticism in
order to go on with their task, they only claim the privilege of showing
that the Physicists are as much at loggerheads among themselves in their
speculations, as these speculations are with the teachings of Occultism.

The Sun is Matter, and the Sun is Spirit. Our ancestors, the “Heathen,”
like their modern successors, the Parsîs, were, and are, wise enough in
their generation to see in it the symbol of Divinity, and at the same time
to sense within, concealed by the physical symbol, the bright God of
Spiritual and Terrestrial Light. Such belief can be regarded as a
superstition only by rank Materialism, which denies Deity, Spirit, Soul,
and admits no intelligence outside the mind of man. But if too much wrong
superstition bred by “Churchianity,” as Laurence Oliphant calls it,
“renders a man a fool,” too much scepticism makes him mad. We prefer the
charge of folly in believing too much, to that of a madness which denies
everything, as do Materialism and Hylo‐Idealism. Hence, the Occultists are
fully prepared to receive their dues from Materialism, and to meet the
adverse criticism which will be poured on the author of this work, not for
writing it, but for believing in that which it contains.

Therefore the discoveries, hypotheses, and unavoidable objections which
will be brought forward by the scientific critics must be anticipated and
disposed of. It has also to be shown how far the Occult Teachings depart
from Modern Science, and whether the ancient or the modern theories are
the more logically and philosophically correct. The unity and mutual
relations of all parts of Kosmos were known to the Ancients, before they
became evident to modern Astronomers and Philosophers. And even if the
external and visible portions of the Universe, and their mutual relations,
cannot be explained in Physical Science, in any other terms than those
used by the adherents of the mechanical theory of the Universe, it does
not follow that the Materialist, who denies that the Soul of Kosmos (which
appertains to Metaphysical Philosophy) exists, has the right to trespass
upon that metaphysical domain. That Physical Science is trying to, and
actually does, encroach upon it, is only one more proof that “might is
right”; it does not justify the intrusion.

Another good reason for these Addenda is this. Since only a certain
portion of the Secret Teachings can be given out in the present age, the
doctrines would never be understood even by Theosophists, if they were
published without any explanations or commentary. Therefore they must be
contrasted with the speculations of Modern Science. Archaic Axioms must be
placed side by side with Modern Hypotheses, and the comparison of their
value must be left to the sagacious reader.

On the question of the “Seven Governors”—as Hermes calls the “Seven
Builders,” the Spirits which guide the operations of Nature, the animated
atoms of which are the shadows, in their own world, of their Primaries in
the Astral Realms—this work will, of course, have every Materialist
against it, as well as the men of Science. But this opposition can, at
most, be only temporary. People have laughed at everything unusual, and
have scouted every unpopular idea at first, and have then ended by
accepting it. Materialism and Scepticism are evils that must remain in the
world so long as man has not quitted his present gross form to don the one
he had during the First and Second Races of this Round. Unless Scepticism
and our present natural ignorance are equilibrated by Intuition and a
natural Spirituality, every being afflicted with such feelings will see in
himself nothing better than a bundle of flesh, bones, and muscles, with an
empty garret inside, which serves the purpose of storing his sensations
and feelings. Sir Humphrey Davy was a great Scientist, as deeply versed in
Physics as any theorist of our day, yet he loathed Materialism. He says:


    I heard with disgust, in the dissecting‐rooms, the plan of the
    Physiologist, of the gradual secretion of matter, and its becoming
    endued with irritability, ripening into sensibility, and acquiring
    such organs as were necessary, by its own inherent forces, and at
    last rising into intellectual existence.


Nevertheless, Physiologists are not those who should be most blamed for
speaking of that only which they can see by, and estimate on the evidence
of, their physical senses. Astronomers and Physicists are, we consider,
far more illogical in their materialistic views than are even
Physiologists, and this has to be proved. Milton’s


    ... Light
    Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure,


has become with the Materialists only


    ... Prime cheerer, light,
    Of all material beings, first and best.


For the Occultists it is both Spirit and Matter. Behind the “mode of
motion,” now regarded as the “property of matter” and nothing more, they
perceive the radiant Noumenon. It is the “Spirit of Light,” the first‐born
of the Eternal pure Element, whose energy, or emanation, is stored in the
Sun, the great Life‐Giver of the Physical World, as the hidden concealed
Spiritual Sun is the Light‐ and Life‐Giver of the Spiritual and Psychic
Realms. Bacon was one of the first to strike the key‐note of Materialism,
not only by his inductive method—renovated from ill‐digested Aristotle—but
by the general tenor of his writings. He inverts the order of mental
Evolution when saying:


    The first creation of God was the light of the sense; the last was
    the light of the reason; and his Sabbath work ever since is the
    illumination of the Spirit.


It is just the reverse. The light of Spirit is the eternal Sabbath of the
Mystic or Occultist, and he pays little attention to that of mere sense.
That which is meant by the allegorical sentence, “_Fiat Lux_,” is, when
esoterically rendered, “Let there be the ‘Sons of Light’,” or the Noumena
of all phenomena. Thus the Roman Catholics rightly interpret the passage
as referring to Angels, but wrongly as meaning Powers created by an
anthropomorphic God, whom they personify in the ever thundering and
punishing Jehovah.

These beings are the “Sons of Light,” because they emanate from, and are
self‐generated in, that infinite Ocean of Light, whose one pole is pure
_Spirit_ lost in the absoluteness of Non‐Being, and the other pole, the
_Matter_ in which it condenses, “crystallizing” into a more and more gross
type as it descends into manifestation. Therefore Matter, though it is, in
one sense, but the illusive dregs of that Light whose Rays are the
Creative Forces, yet has in it the full presence of the Soul thereof, of
that Principle, which none—not even the “Sons of Light,” evolved from its
ABSOLUTE DARKNESS—will ever know. The idea is as beautifully, as it is
truthfully, expressed by Milton, who hails the holy Light, which is the


    ... Offspring of Heaven, first‐born,
    Or of th’ Eternal coëternal beam;
    ... Since God is Light,
    And never but in unapproached Light
    Dwelt from Eternity, dwelt then in thee,
    Bright effluence of bright essence increate.




Section II. Modern Physicists are Playing at Blind Man’s Buff.


And now Occultism puts to Science the question: Is light a body, or is it
not? Whatever the answer of the latter, the former is prepared to show
that, to this day, the most eminent Physicists have no real knowledge on
the subject. To know what light is, and whether it is an actual substance
or a mere undulation of the “ethereal medium,” Science has first to learn
what Matter, Atom, Ether, Force, are in reality. Now, the truth is, that
it knows nothing of any of these, and admits its ignorance. It has not
even agreed what to believe in, as dozens of hypotheses on the same
subject, emanating from various and very eminent Scientists, are
antagonistic to each other and often self‐contradictory. Thus their
learned speculations may, with a stretch of good‐will, be accepted as
“working hypotheses” in a secondary sense, as Stallo puts it. But being
radically inconsistent with each other, they must finally end by mutually
destroying themselves. As declared by the author of _Concepts of Modem
Physics_:


    It must not be forgotten that the several departments of science
    are simply arbitrary divisions of science at large. In these
    several departments the same physical object may be considered
    under different aspects. The physicist may study its molecular
    relations, while the chemist determines its atomic constitution.
    But when they both deal with the same element or agent, it cannot
    have one set of properties in physics, and another set
    contradictory of them, in chemistry. If the physicist and chemist
    alike assume the existence of ultimate atoms absolutely invariable
    in bulk and weight, the atom cannot be a cube or oblate spheroid
    for physical, and a sphere for chemical purposes. A group of
    constant atoms cannot be an aggregate of extended and absolutely
    inert and impenetrable masses in a crucible or retort, and a
    system of mere centres of force as part of a magnet or of a
    Clamond battery. The universal æther cannot be soft and mobile to
    please the chemist, and rigid‐elastic to satisfy the physicist; it
    cannot be continuous at the command of Sir William Thomson and
    discontinuous on the suggestion of Cauchy or Fresnel.(792)


The eminent Physicist, G. A. Hirn, may likewise be quoted as saying the
same thing in the 43rd Volume of the _Mémoires de l’Académie Royale de
Belgique_, which we translate from the French, as cited:


    When one sees the assurance with which to‐day are affirmed
    doctrines which attribute the collectivity, the universality of
    the phenomena to the motions alone of the atom, one has a right to
    expect to find likewise unanimity in the qualities assigned to
    this unique being, the foundation of all that exists. Now, from
    the first examination of the particular systems proposed, one
    finds the strangest deception; one perceives that the atom of the
    chemist, the atom of the physicist, that of the metaphysician, and
    that of the mathematician ... have absolutely nothing in common
    but the name! The inevitable result is the existing subdivision of
    our sciences, each of which, in its own little pigeon‐hole,
    constructs an atom which satisfies the requirements of the
    phenomena it studies, without troubling itself in the least about
    the requirements proper to the phenomena of the neighbouring
    pigeon‐hole. The metaphysician banishes the principles of
    attraction and repulsion as dreams; the mathematician, who
    analyses the laws of elasticity and those of the propagation of
    light, admits them implicitly, without even naming them.... The
    chemist cannot explain the grouping of the atoms, in his often
    complicated molecules, without attributing to his atoms specific
    distinguishing qualities; _for the physicist and the
    metaphysician, partisans of the modern doctrines, the atom is, on
    the contrary, always and everywhere the same_. What am I saying?
    There is no agreement even in one and the same science as to the
    properties of the atom. Each constructs an atom to suit his own
    fancy, in order to explain some special phenomenon with which he
    is particularly concerned.(793)


The above is the photographically correct image of Modern Science and
Physics. The “pre‐requisite of that incessant play of the ’scientific
imagination’,” which is so often found in Professor Tyndall’s eloquent
discourses, is vivid indeed, as is shown by Stallo, and for contradictory
variety it leaves far behind it any “phantasies” of Occultism. However
that may be, if physical theories are confessedly “mere formal,
explanatory, didactic devices,” and if, to use the words of a critic of
Stallo, “atomism is only a symbolical graphic system,”(794) then the
Occultist can hardly be regarded as assuming too much, when he places
alongside of these “devices” and “symbolical systems” of Modern Science,
the symbols and devices of Archaic Teachings.



“An Lumen Sit Corpus, Nec Non?”


Most decidedly light is not a body, we are told. Physical Sciences say
light is a force, a vibration, the undulation of Ether. It is the property
or quality of Matter, or even an affection thereof—never _a body_!

Just so. For this discovery, the knowledge, whatever it may be worth, that
light or caloric is not a motion of _material particles_, Science is
chiefly, if not solely indebted, to Sir William Grove. It was he who in a
lecture at the London Institution, in 1842, was the first to show that
“heat, light,(795) may be considered as affections of matter itself, and
not of a distinct ethereal, ‘imponderable,’ fluid [a state of matter
_now_] permeating it.”(796) Yet, perhaps, for some Physicists—as for
Œrsted, a very eminent Scientist—Force and Forces were tacitly “Spirit
[and hence Spirits] in Nature.” What several rather mystical Scientists
taught was that light, heat, magnetism, electricity and gravity, etc.,
were not the final Causes of the visible phenomena, including planetary
motion, but were themselves the secondary _effects of other Causes_, for
which Science in our day cares very little, but in which Occultism
believes; for the Occultists have exhibited proofs of the validity of
their claims in every age. And in what age were there no Occultists and no
Adepts?

Sir Isaac Newton held to the Pythagorean corpuscular theory, and was also
inclined to admit its consequences; which made the Comte de Maistre hope,
at one time, that Newton would ultimately lead Science back to the
recognition of the fact that Forces and the Celestial Bodies _were
propelled and guided by Intelligences_.(797) But de Maistre counted
without his host. The innermost thoughts and ideas of Newton were
perverted, and of his great mathematical learning only the mere physical
husk was turned to account.

According to one atheistic Idealist, Dr. Lewins:


    When Sir Isaac, in 1687 ... showed mass and atom acted upon ... by
    innate activity ... he effectually disposed of Spirit, Anima, or
    Divinity, as supererogatory.


Had poor Sir Isaac foreseen to what use his successors and followers would
apply his “gravity,” that pious and religious man would surely have
quietly eaten his apple, and never have breathed a word about any
mechanical ideas connected with its fall.

Great contempt is shown by Scientists for Metaphysics generally and for
Ontological Metaphysics especially. But whenever the Occultists are bold
enough to raise their diminished heads, we see that Materialistic,
Physical Science is honey‐combed with Metaphysics;(798) that its most
fundamental principles, while inseparably wedded to transcendentalism, are
nevertheless, in order to show Modern Science divorced from such “dreams,”
tortured and often ignored in the maze of contradictory theories and
hypotheses. A very good corroboration of this charge lies in the fact that
Science finds itself absolutely compelled to accept the “hypothetical”
Ether, and to try to explain it on the materialistic grounds of atomo‐
mechanical laws. This attempt has led directly to the most fatal
discrepancies and radical inconsistencies between the assumed nature of
Ether and its physical behaviour. A second proof is found in the many
contradictory statements made about the Atom—the most metaphysical object
in creation.

Now, what does the modern science of Physics know of Ether, the first
concept of which belongs undeniably to ancient Philosophers, the Greeks
having borrowed it from the Âryans, and the origin of modern Ether being
found in, and disfigured from, Âkâsha? This disfigurement is claimed as a
modification and refinement of the idea of Lucretius. Let us then examine
the modern concept, from several scientific volumes containing the
admissions of the Physicists themselves.

As Stallo shows, the existence of Ether is accepted in Physical Astronomy,
in ordinary Physics, and in Chemistry.


    By the astronomers, this æther was originally regarded as a fluid
    of extreme tenuity and mobility, offering no sensible resistance
    to the motions of celestial bodies, and the question of its
    continuity or discontinuity was not seriously mooted. Its main
    function in modern astronomy has been to serve as a basis for
    hydro‐dynamical theories of gravitation. In physics this fluid
    appeared for some time in several _rôles_ in connection with the
    “imponderables” [so cruelly put to death by Sir William Grove],
    some physicists going so far as to identify it with one or more of
    them.(799)


Stallo then points out the change caused by the kinetic theories; that
from the date of the dynamical theory of heat, Ether was chosen in Optics
as a substratum for luminous undulations. Next, in order to explain the
dispersion and polarization of light, Physicists had to resort once more
to their “scientific imagination,” and forthwith endowed the Ether with
(_a_) atomic or molecular structure, and (_b_) with an enormous
elasticity, “so that its resistance to deformation far exceeded that of
the most rigid elastic bodies.” This necessitated the _theory of the
essential discontinuity of Matter_, hence of Ether. After having accepted
this discontinuity, in order to account for dispersion and polarization,
theoretical impossibilities were discovered with regard to such
dispersion. Cauchy’s “scientific imagination” saw in Atoms “material
points without extension,” and he proposed, in order to obviate the most
formidable obstacles to the undulatory theory (namely, some well‐known
mechanical theorems which stood in the way), to assume that the ethereal
medium of propagation, instead of being continuous, should consist of
particles separated by sensible distances. Fresnel rendered the same
service to the phenomena of polarization. E. B. Hunt upset the theories of
both.(800) There are now men of Science who proclaim them “materially
fallacious,” while others—the “atomo‐mechanicalists”—cling to them with
desperate tenacity. The supposition of an _atomic_ or _molecular
constitution_ of Ether is upset, moreover, by thermo‐dynamics, for Clerk
Maxwell showed that such a medium would be simply _gas_.(801) The
hypothesis of “finite intervals” is thus proven of no avail as a
supplement to the undulatory theory. Besides, eclipses fail to reveal any
such variation of colour as is supposed by Cauchy, on the assumption that
the chromatic rays are propagated with different velocities. Astronomy has
pointed out more than one phenomenon absolutely at variance with this
doctrine.

Thus, while in one department of Physics the atomo‐molecular constitution
of the Ether is accepted in order to account for one special set of
phenomena, in another department such a constitution is found to be quite
subversive of a number of well‐ascertained facts; and Hirn’s charges are
thus justified. Chemistry deemed it


    Impossible to concede the enormous elasticity of the æther without
    depriving it of those properties, upon which its serviceableness
    in the construction of chemical theories mainly depended.


This ended in a final transformation of Ether.


    The exigencies of the atomo‐mechanical theory have led
    distinguished mathematicians and physicists to attempt a
    substitution for the traditional atoms of matter, of peculiar
    forms of vortical motion in a universal, homogeneous,
    incompressible, and _continuous_ material medium [Ether].(802)


The present writer—claiming no great scientific education, but only a
tolerable acquaintance with modern theories, and a better one with Occult
Sciences—picks up weapons against the detractors of the Esoteric Teaching
in the very arsenal of Modern Science. The glaring contradictions, the
mutually‐destructive hypotheses of world‐renowned Scientists, their
disputes, their accusations and denunciations of each other, show plainly
that, whether accepted or not, the Occult Theories have as much right to a
hearing as any of the so‐called learned and academical hypotheses. Thus,
whether the followers of the Royal Society choose to accept Ether as a
_continuous_ or as a _discontinuous_ fluid matters little, and is
indifferent for the present purpose. It simply points to one certainty:
Official Science _knows nothing to this day of the constitution of Ether_.
Let Science call it Matter, if it likes; only neither as Âkâsha, nor as
the one sacred Æther of the Greeks, is it to be found in any of the states
of Matter known to modern Physics. It is Matter on quite another plane of
perception and being, and it can neither be analyzed by scientific
apparatus, nor appreciated or even conceived by the “scientific
imagination,” unless the possessors thereof study the Occult Sciences.
That which follows proves this statement.

It is clearly demonstrated by Stallo as regards the crucial problems of
modern Physics, as was done by De Quatrefages and several others in those
of Anthropology, Biology, etc., that, in their efforts to support their
individual hypotheses and systems, most of the eminent and learned
Materialists very often utter the greatest fallacies. Let us take the
following case. Most of them reject _actio in distans_—one of the
fundamental principles in the question of Æther or Âkâsha in
Occultism—while, as Stallo justly observes, there is no physical action
“which, on close examination, does not resolve itself into _actio in
distans_”; and he proves it.

Now, metaphysical arguments, according to Professor Lodge,(803) are
“unconscious appeals to experience.” And he adds that if such an
experience _is not conceivable_, then it does not exist. In his own words:


    If a highly‐developed mind or set of minds, find a doctrine about
    some comparatively simple and fundamental matter absolutely
    unthinkable, it is an evidence ... that the unthinkable state of
    things has no existence.


And thereupon, toward the end of his lecture, the Professor indicates that
the explanation of cohesion, as well as of gravity, “is to be looked for
in the vortex‐atom theory of Sir William Thomson.”

It is needless to stop to inquire whether it is to this vortex‐atom
theory, also, that we have to look for the dropping down on earth of the
first life‐germ by a passing meteor or comet—Sir William Thomson’s
hypothesis. But Prof. Lodge might be reminded of the wise criticism on his
lecture in Stallo’s _Concepts of Modem Physics_. Noticing the above‐quoted
declaration by the Professor, the author asks


    Whether ... the elements of the vortex‐atom theory are familiar,
    or even possible, facts of experience? For, if they are not,
    clearly that theory is obnoxious to the same criticism which is
    said to invalidate the assumption of _actio in distans_.(804)


And then the able critic shows clearly what the Ether is not, nor can ever
be, notwithstanding all scientific claims to the contrary. And thus he
opens widely, if unconsciously, the entrance door to our Occult Teachings.
For, as he says:


    The medium in which the vortex‐movements arise is, according to
    Professor Lodge’s own express statement (_Nature_, vol. xxvii. p.
    305), “a perfectly homogeneous, incompressible, continuous body,
    incapable of being resolved into simple elements or atoms; it is,
    in fact, continuous, not molecular.” And after making this
    statement Professor Lodge adds: “_There is no other body of which
    we can say this, and hence the properties of the æther must be
    somewhat different from those of ordinary matter_.” It appears,
    then, that the whole vortex‐atom theory, which is offered to us as
    a substitute for the “metaphysical theory” of _actio in distans_,
    rests upon the hypothesis of the existence of a material medium
    which is utterly unknown to experience, and which has properties
    _somewhat_ different(805) from those of ordinary matter. Hence
    this theory, instead of being, as is claimed, a reduction of an
    unfamiliar fact of experience to a familiar fact, is, on the
    contrary, a reduction of a fact which is perfectly familiar, to a
    fact which is not only unfamiliar, but wholly unknown, unobserved
    and unobservable. Furthermore, the alleged vortical motion of, or
    rather in, the assumed ethereal medium is ... _impossible_,
    because “motion in a perfectly homogeneous, incompressible, and
    therefore continuous fluid, is not sensible motion.”... It is
    manifest, therefore ... that, wherever the vortex‐atom theory may
    land us, it certainly does not land us anywhere in the region of
    physics, or in the domain of _veræ causæ_.(806) And I may add
    that, inasmuch as the hypothetical undifferentiated(807) and
    undifferentiable medium is clearly an involuntary reïfication of
    the old ontological concept _pure being_, the theory under
    discussion has all the attributes of an inapprehensible
    metaphysical phantom.(808)


A “phantom,” indeed, which can be made apprehensible only by Occultism.
From such scientific Metaphysics to Occultism there is hardly one step.
Those Physicists who hold the view that the atomic constitution of Matter
is consistent with its penetrability, need not go far out of their way to
be able to account for the greatest phenomena of Occultism, now so derided
by Physical Scientists and Materialists. Cauchy’s “material points without
extension” are Leibnitz’s Monads, and at the same time are the materials
out of which the “Gods” and other invisible Powers clothe themselves in
bodies. The disintegration and reïntegration of “material” particles
without extension, as a chief factor in phenomenal manifestations, ought
to suggest themselves very easily as a clear possibility, at any rate to
those few scientific minds which accept M. Cauchy’s views. For, disposing
of that property of Matter which they call impenetrability, by simply
regarding the Atoms as “material points exerting on each other attractions
and repulsions which vary with the distances that separate them,” the
French theorist explains that:


    From this it follows that, if it pleased the author of nature
    simply to modify the laws according to which the atoms attract or
    repel each other, we might instantly see the hardest bodies
    penetrating each other, the smallest particles of matter occupying
    immense spaces, or the largest masses reducing themselves to the
    smallest volumes, the entire universe concentrating itself, as it
    were, in a single point.(809)


And that “point,” _invisible on our plane of perception and matter_, is
quite visible to the eye of the Adept who can follow and see it present on
other planes. For the Occultists, who say that the author of Nature _is
Nature itself_, something indistinct and inseparable from the Deity, it
follows that those who are conversant with the Occult laws of Nature, and
know how to change and provoke new conditions in Ether, may—_not_ modify
the laws, but work and do the same in accordance with these immutable
laws.




Section III. Is Gravitation a Law?


The corpuscular theory has been unceremoniously put aside; but
gravitation—the principle that all bodies attract each other with a force
proportional directly to their masses, and inversely to the squares of the
distances between them—survives to this day and reigns, supreme as ever,
in the alleged ethereal waves of Space. As a hypothesis, it had been
threatened with death for its inadequacy to embrace all the facts
presented to it; as a physical law, it is the King of the late and once
all‐potent “Imponderables.” “It is little short of blasphemy ... an insult
to Newton’s grand memory to doubt it!”—is the exclamation of an American
reviewer of _Isis Unveiled_. Well; what is finally that invisible and
intangible God in whom we should believe on blind faith? Astronomers who
see in gravitation an easy‐going solution for many things, and a universal
force which allows them to calculate planetary motions, care little about
the Cause of Attraction. They call Gravity a law, a cause in itself. We
call the forces acting under that name effects, and very secondary
effects, too. One day it will be found that the scientific hypothesis does
not answer after all; and then it will follow the corpuscular theory of
light, and be consigned to rest for many scientific æons in the archives
of all exploded speculations. Has not Newton himself expressed grave
doubts about the nature of Force and the corporeality of the “Agents,” as
they were then called? So has Cuvier, another scientific light shining in
the night of research. He warns his readers, in the _Révolution du Globe_,
about the doubtful nature of the so‐called Forces, saying that “it is not
so sure whether those agents were not after all Spiritual Powers [_des
agents spirituels_].” At the outset of his _Principia_, Sir Isaac Newton
took the greatest care to impress upon his school that he did not use the
word “attraction,” with regard to the mutual action of bodies in a
physical sense. To him it was, he said, a purely mathematical conception,
involving no consideration of real and primary physical causes. In a
passage of his _Principia_,(810) he tells us plainly that, physically
considered, attractions are rather impulses. In Section xi (Introduction),
he expresses the opinion that “there is some subtle spirit by the force
and action of which all movements of matter are determined”;(811) and in
his _Third Letter_ to Bentley he says:


    It is inconceivable that inanimate brute matter should, without
    the mediation of something else _which is not material_, operate
    upon and affect other matter, without mutual contact, as it must
    do if gravitation, in the sense of Epicurus, be essential and
    inherent in it.... That gravity should be innate, inherent and
    essential to matter, so that one body may act upon another at a
    distance, through a vacuum, without the mediation of anything else
    by and through which their action may be conveyed from one to
    another, is to me so great an absurdity that I believe no man, who
    has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking, can
    ever fall into it. Gravity must be caused by an agent acting
    constantly according to certain laws; but _whether this agent be
    material or immaterial_ I have left to the consideration of my
    readers.


At this, even Newton’s contemporaries got frightened—at the apparent
return of Occult Causes into the domain of Physics. Leibnitz called his
principle of attraction “an incorporeal and inexplicable power.” The
supposition of an attractive faculty and a perfect void was characterized
by Bernoulli as “revolting,” the principle of _actio in distans_ finding
then no more favour than it does now. Euler, on the other hand, thought
the action of gravity was due to either a _Spirit_ or some subtle medium.
And yet Newton knew of, if he did not accept, the Ether of the Ancients.
He regarded the intermediate space between the sidereal bodies as vacuum.
Therefore he believed in “subtle Spirit” and Spirits as we do, guiding the
so‐called attraction. The above‐quoted words of the great man have
produced poor results. The “absurdity” has now become a dogma in the case
of pure Materialism, which repeats: “No Matter without Force, no Force
without Matter; Matter and Force are inseparable, eternal and
indestructible [_true_]; there can be no independent Force, since all
Force is an inherent and necessary property of Matter [_false_];
consequently, there is no immaterial Creative Power.” Oh, poor Sir Isaac!

If, leaving aside all the other eminent men of Science who agreed in
opinion with Euler and Leibnitz, the Occultists claim as their authorities
and supporters Sir Isaac Newton and Cuvier only, as above cited, they need
fear little from Modern Science, and may loudly and proudly proclaim their
beliefs. But the hesitation and doubts of the above cited authorities, and
of many others, too, whom we could name, did not in the least prevent
scientific speculation from wool‐gathering in the fields of brute matter
just as before. First it was matter and an imponderable fluid distinct
from it; then came the imponderable fluid so much criticized by Grove;
then Ether, which was at first discontinuous and then became continuous;
after which came the “mechanical” Forces. These have now settled in life
as “modes of motion,” and the Ether has become more mysterious and
problematical than ever. More than one man of Science objects to such
crude materialistic views. But then, from the days of Plato, who
repeatedly asks his readers not to confuse _incorporeal_ Elements with
their Principles—the transcendental or spiritual Elements; from those of
the great Alchemists, who, like Paracelsus, made a great difference
between a phenomenon and its cause, or the Noumenon; to Grove, who, though
he sees “no reason to divest universally diffused matter of the functions
common to all matter,” yet uses the term Forces where his critics, “who do
not attach to the word any idea of a specific action,” say Force; from
those days to this, nothing has proved competent to stem the tide of
brutal Materialism. Gravitation is the sole cause, the acting God, and
Matter is its prophet, said the men of Science only a few years ago.

They have changed their views several times since then. But do the men of
Science understand the innermost thought of Newton, one of the most
spiritual‐minded and religious men of his day, any better now than they
did then? It is certainly to be doubted. Newton is credited with having
given the death‐blow to the Elemental Vortices of Descartes—the idea of
Anaxagoras, resurrected, by the bye—though the last modern “vortical
atoms” of Sir William Thomson do not, in truth, differ much from the
former. Nevertheless, when his disciple Forbes wrote in the Preface to the
chief work of his master a sentence declaring that “attraction was the
cause of the system,” Newton was the first to solemnly protest. That which
in the mind of the great mathematician assumed the shadowy, but firmly
rooted image of God, as the Noumenon of all,(812) was called more
philosophically by ancient and modern Philosophers and Occultists—“Gods,”
or the creative fashioning Powers. The modes of expression may have been
different, and the ideas more or less philosophically enunciated by all
sacred and profane Antiquity; but the fundamental thought was the
same.(813) For Pythagoras the Forces were Spiritual Entities, Gods,
independent of planets and Matter as we see and know them on Earth, who
are the rulers of the Sidereal Heaven. Plato represented the planets as
moved by an intrinsic Rector, one with his dwelling, like “a boatman in
his boat.” As for Aristotle, he called those rulers “_immaterial_
substances”;(814) though as one who had never been initiated, he rejected
the Gods as Entities.(815) But this did not prevent him from recognizing
the fact that the stars and planets “were not inanimate masses but acting
and living bodies indeed.” As if sidereal spirits were the “diviner
portions of their phenomena (τὰ θειότερα τῶν φανερῶν).”(816)

If we look for corroboration in more modern and scientific times, we find
Tycho Brahe recognizing in the stars a triple force, divine, spiritual and
vital. Kepler, putting together the Pythagorean sentence, “the Sun,
guardian of Jupiter,” and the verses of David, “He placed his throne in
the Sun,” and “the Lord is the Sun,” etc., said that he understood
perfectly how the Pythagoreans could believe that all the Globes
disseminated through Space were rational Intelligences (_facultates
ratiocinativæ_), circulating round the Sun, “in which resides a pure
spirit of fire; the source of the general harmony.”(817)

When an Occultist speaks of Fohat, the energizing and guiding Intelligence
in the Universal Electric or Vital Fluid, he is laughed at. Withal, as now
shown, the nature neither of electricity, nor of life, nor even of light,
is to this day understood. The Occultist sees in the manifestation of
every force in Nature, the action of the quality, or the special
characteristic of its Noumenon; which Noumenon is a distinct and
intelligent Individuality _on the other side of the manifested mechanical
Universe_. Now the Occultist does not deny—on the contrary he will support
the view—that light, heat, electricity and so on are affections, not
properties or qualities, of Matter. To put it more clearly: Matter is the
condition, the necessary basis or vehicle, a _sine quâ non_, for the
manifestation of these Forces, or Agents, on this plane.

But in order to gain the point, the Occultists have to examine the
credentials of the law of gravity, first of all, of “Gravitation, the King
and Ruler of Matter,” under every form. To do so effectually, the
hypothesis, in its earliest appearance, has to be recalled to mind. To
begin with, is it Newton who was the first to discover it? The _Athenæum_
of Jan. 26, 1867, has some curious information upon this subject. It says:


    Positive evidence can be adduced that Newton derived all his
    knowledge of Gravitation and its laws from Bœhme, with whom
    Gravitation or Attraction is the first property of Nature.... For
    with him, his [Bœhme’s] system shows us the inside of things,
    while modern physical science is content with looking at the
    outside.


Then again:


    The science of electricity, which was not yet in existence when he
    [Bœhme] wrote, is there anticipated [in his writings]; and not
    only does Bœhme describe all the now known phenomena of that
    force, but he even gives us the origin, generation, and birth of
    electricity, itself.


Thus Newton, whose profound mind easily read between the lines, and
fathomed the spiritual thought of the great Seer, in its mystic rendering,
owes his great discovery to Jacob Bœhme, the nursling of the Genii,
Nirmânakâyas who watched over and guided him, of whom the author of the
article in question so truly remarks:


    Every new scientific discovery goes to prove his profound and
    intuitive insight into the most secret workings of Nature.


And having _discovered_ gravity, Newton, in order to render possible the
action of attraction in space, had, so to speak, to annihilate every
physical obstacle capable of impeding its free action; Ether among others,
though he had more than a presentiment of its existence. Advocating the
corpuscular theory, he made an _absolute vacuum_ between the heavenly
bodies. Whatever may have been his suspicions and inner convictions about
Ether; however many friends he may have unbosomed himself to—as in the
case of his correspondence with Bentley—his teachings never showed that he
had any such belief. If he was “persuaded that the power of attraction
could not be exerted by matter across a vacuum,”(818) how is it that so
late as 1860, French astronomers, Le Couturier, for instance, combated
“the _disastrous_ results of the theory of vacuum established by the great
man”? Le Couturier says:


    Il n’est plus possible aujourd’hui, de soutenir comme Newton, que
    les corps célestes se mouvent au milieu du vide immense des
    espaces.... Parmi les conséquences de la théorie du vide établie
    par Newton, il ne reste plus debout que le mot “attraction.”...
    Nous voyous venir le jour ou le mot attraction disparaîtra du
    vocabulaire scientifique.(819)


Professor Winchell writes:


    These passages [Letter to Bentley] show what were his views
    respecting the nature of the interplanetary medium of
    communication. Though declaring that the heavens “are void of
    sensible matter,” he elsewhere excepted “perhaps some very thin
    vapours, steams, and effluvia, arising from the atmospheres of the
    earth, planets, and comets, and from such an exceedingly rare
    ethereal medium as we have elsewhere described.”(820)


This only shows that even such great men as Newton have not always the
courage of their opinions. Dr. T. S. Hunt


    Called attention to some long‐neglected passages in Newton’s
    works, from which it appears that a belief in such universal,
    intercosmical medium gradually took root in his mind.(821)


But such attention was never called to the said passages before Nov. 28,
1881, when Dr. Hunt read his “Celestial Chemistry, from the time of
Newton.” As Le Couturier says:


    Till then the idea was universal, even among the men of Science,
    that Newton had, while advocating the corpuscular theory, preached
    a _void_.


The passages had been “long neglected,” no doubt because they contradicted
and clashed with the preconceived pet theories of the day, till finally
the undulatory theory imperiously required the presence of an “ethereal
medium” to explain it. This is the whole secret.

Anyhow, it is from this theory of Newton of a universal void, taught, if
not believed in by himself, that dates the immense scorn now shown by
modern Physics for ancient. The old sages had maintained that “Nature
abhorred a vacuum,” and the greatest mathematicians of the world—read of
the Western races—had discovered the antiquated “fallacy” and exposed it.
And now Modern Science, however ungracefully, vindicates Archaic
Knowledge, and has, moreover, to vindicate Newton’s character and powers
of observation at this late hour, after having neglected, for one century
and a half, to pay any attention to such very important
passages—perchance, because it was wiser not to attract any notice to
them. Better late than never!

And now Father Æther is _re‐welcomed_ with open arms and wedded to
gravitation, linked to it for weal or woe, until the day when it, or both,
shall be replaced by something else. Three hundred years ago it was
_plenum_ everywhere, then it became one dismal _vacuity_; later still the
sidereal ocean‐beds, dried up by Science, rolled onward once more their
ethereal waves. _Recede ut procedas_ must become the motto of exact
Science—“exact,” chiefly, in finding itself inexact every leap‐year.

But we will not quarrel with the great men. They had to go back to the
earliest “Gods of Pythagoras and old Kanâda” for the very backbone and
marrow of their correlations and “newest” discoveries, and this may well
afford good hope to the Occultists for their minor Gods. For we believe in
Le Couturier’s prophecy about gravitation. We know the day is approaching
when an absolute reform will be demanded in the present modes of Science
by the Scientists themselves, as was done by Sir William Grove, F.R.S.
Till that day there is nothing to be done. For if gravitation were
dethroned to‐morrow, the Scientists would discover some other new mode of
mechanical motion the day after.(822) Rough and up‐hill is the path of
true Science, and its days are full of vexation of spirit. But in the face
of its “thousand” contradictory hypotheses offered as explanations of
physical phenomena, there has been no better hypothesis than
“motion”—however paradoxically interpreted by Materialism. As may be found
in the first pages of this Volume, Occultists have nothing to say against
Motion,(823) the Great Breath of Mr. Herbert Spencer’s “Unknowable.” But,
believing that everything on Earth is the shadow of something in Space,
they believe in smaller “Breaths,” which, living, intelligent and
independent of all but Law, blow in every direction during manvantaric
periods. These Science will reject. But whatever may be made to replace
attraction, _alias_ gravitation, the result will be the same. Science will
be as far then from the solution of its difficulties as it is now, unless
it comes to some compromise with Occultism, and even with Alchemy—a
supposition which will be regarded as an impertinence, but remains,
nevertheless, a fact. As Faye says:


    Il manque quelque chose aux géologues pour faire la géologie de la
    Lune; c’est d’être astronomes. À la vérité, il manque aussi
    quelque chose aux astronomes pour aborder avec fruit cette étude,
    c’est d’être géologues.(824)


But he might have added, with still more pointedness:


    Ce qui manque à tous les deux, c’est l’intuition du mystique.


Let us remember Sir William Grove’s wise “concluding remarks,” on the
ultimate structure of Matter, or the minutiæ of molecular actions, which,
he thought, man will never know.


    Much harm has already been done by attempting hypothetically to
    dissect matter and to discuss the shapes, sizes, and numbers of
    atoms, and their atmospheres of heat, ether, or electricity.
    Whether the regarding electricity, light, magnetism, etc., as
    simply motions of ordinary matter, be or be not admissible,
    certain it is that all past theories have resolved, and all
    existing theories do resolve, the action of these forces into
    motion. Whether it be that, on account of our familiarity with
    motion, we refer other affections to it, as to a language which is
    most easily construed, and most capable of explaining them, or
    whether it be that it is in reality the only mode in which our
    minds, as contra‐distinguished from our senses, are able to
    conceive material agencies, certain it is that since the period at
    which the mystic notions of spiritual or preternatural powers were
    applied to account for physical phenomena, all hypotheses framed
    to explain them have resolved them into motion.


And then the learned gentleman states a purely Occult tenet:


    The term perpetual motion, which I have not infrequently used in
    these pages, is itself equivocal. If the doctrines here advanced
    be well founded, all motion is, in one sense, perpetual. In
    masses, whose motion is stopped by mutual concussion, heat or
    motion of the particles is generated; and thus the motion
    continues, so that if we could venture to extend such thoughts to
    the universe, we should assume the same amount of motion affecting
    the same amount of matter for ever.(825)


This is precisely what Occultism maintains, and on the same principle,
that:


    Where force is made to oppose force, and produce static
    equilibrium, the balance of preëxisting equilibrium is affected,
    and fresh motion is started equivalent to that which is withdrawn
    into a state of abeyance.


This process finds intervals in the Pralaya, but is eternal and ceaseless
as the “Breath,” even when the manifested Kosmos rests.

Thus, supposing attraction or gravitation should be given up in favour of
the Sun being a huge magnet—a theory already accepted by some Physicists—a
magnet that acts on the planets as attraction is now supposed to do,
whereto, or how much farther, would it lead the Astronomers from where
they are now? Not an inch farther. Kepler came to this “curious
hypothesis” nearly 300 years ago. He had not discovered the theory of
attraction and repulsion in Kosmos, for it was known from the days of
Empedocles, by whom the two opposite forces were called “love” and
“hate”—words implying the same idea. But Kepler gave a pretty fair
description of cosmic magnetism. That such magnetism exists in Nature, is
as certain as that gravitation does not; not at any rate, in the way in
which it is taught by Science, which has never taken into consideration
the different modes in which the dual Force, that Occultism calls
attraction and repulsion, may act within our Solar System, the Earth’s
atmosphere and beyond in the Kosmos.

As the great Humboldt writes:


    Trans‐solar space has not hitherto shown any phenomenon analogous
    to our solar system. It is a peculiarity of _our_ system, that
    matter should have condensed within it in nebulous rings, the
    nuclei of which condense into earths and moons. I say again,
    heretofore, _nothing of the kind has ever been observed beyond our
    planetary system_.(826)


True, that since 1860 the Nebular Theory has sprung up, and being better
known, a few identical phenomena were supposed to be observed beyond the
Solar System. Yet the great man is quite right; and no _earths_ or _moons_
can be found, _except in appearance_, beyond, or of the same order of
Matter as found in, our System. Such is the Occult Teaching.

This was proven by Newton himself; for there are many phenomena in our
Solar System, which he confessed his inability to explain by the law of
gravitation; “such were the uniformity in the directions of planetary
movements, the nearly circular forms of the orbits, and their remarkable
conformity to one plane.”(827) And if there is one single exception, then
the law of gravitation has no right to be referred to as a universal law.
“These adjustments,” we are told, “Newton, in his general Scholium,
pronounces to be ‘the work of an intelligent and all‐powerful Being’.”
Intelligent that “Being” may be; as to “all‐powerful,” there would be
every reason to doubt the claim. A poor “God” he, who would work upon
minor details and leave the most important to secondary forces! The
poverty of this argument and logic is surpassed only by that of Laplace,
who, seeking very correctly to substitute Motion for Newton’s “all‐
powerful Being,” and ignorant of the true nature of that Eternal Motion,
saw in it a blind physical law. “Might not those arrangements be an effect
of the laws of motion?” he asks, forgetting, as do all our modern
Scientists, that this law and this motion are a vicious circle, so long as
the _nature of both_ remains unexplained. His famous answer to Napoleon:
“_Dieu est devenu une hypothèse inutile_,” could be correctly made only by
one who adhered to the philosophy of the Vedântins. It becomes a pure
fallacy, if we exclude the interference of operating, intelligent,
powerful (never “all‐powerful”) Beings, who are called “Gods.”

But we would ask the critics of the mediæval Astronomers, why should
Kepler be denounced as most unscientific, for offering just the same
solution as did Newton, only showing himself more sincere, more consistent
and even more logical? Where may be the difference between Newton’s “all‐
powerful Being” and Kepler’s Rectores, his Sidereal and Cosmic Forces, or
Angels? Kepler again is criticized for his “curious hypothesis which made
use of a vortical movement within the solar system,” for his theories in
general, and for favouring Empedocles’ idea of attraction and repulsion,
and “solar magnetism” in particular. Yet several modern men of Science, as
will be shown—Hunt, if Metcalfe is to be excluded, Dr. Richardson,
etc.—very strongly favour the same idea. He is half excused, however, on
the plea that:


    To the time of Kepler no interaction between masses of matter had
    been distinctly recognized which was generically different from
    magnetism.(828)


Is it _distinctly_ recognized now? Does Professor Winchell claim for
Science any serious knowledge whatever of the nature of either electricity
or magnetism—except that both seem to be the effects of some result
arising from an undetermined cause.

The ideas of Kepler, when their theological tendencies are weeded out, are
purely Occult. He saw that:

(I) The Sun is a great Magnet.(829) This is what some eminent modern
Scientists and also the Occultists believe in.

(II) The Solar substance is immaterial.(830) In the sense, of course, of
Matter existing in states unknown to Science.

(III) For the constant motion and restoration of the Sun’s energy and
planetary motion, he provided the perpetual care of a Spirit, or Spirits.
The whole of Antiquity believed in this idea. The Occultists do not use
the word Spirit, but say Creative Forces, which they endow with
intelligence. But we may call them Spirits also. We shall be taken to task
for contradiction. It will be said that while we deny God, we admit Souls
and operative Spirits, and quote from bigoted Roman Catholic writers in
support of our argument. To this we reply: We deny the anthropomorphic God
of the Monotheists, but never the Divine Principle in Nature. We combat
Protestants and Roman Catholics on a number of dogmatic theological
beliefs of human and sectarian origin. We agree with them in their belief
in Spirits and intelligent operative Powers, though we do not worship
“Angels” as the Roman Latinists do.

This theory is tabooed a great deal more on account of the “Spirit” that
is given room in it, than of anything else. Herschell, the elder, believed
in it likewise, and so do several modern Scientists. Nevertheless
Professor Winchell declares that “a hypothesis more fanciful, and less in
accord with the requirements of physical principles, has not been offered
in ancient or modern times.”(831)

The same was said, once upon a time, of the universal Ether, and now it is
not only accepted perforce, but is advocated as the only possible theory
to explain certain mysteries.

Grove’s ideas, when he first enunciated them in London about 1840, were
denounced as unscientific; nevertheless, his views on the Correlation of
Forces are now universally accepted. It would, very likely, require one
more conversant with Science than is the writer, to combat with any
success some of the now prevailing ideas about gravitation and other
similar “solutions” of cosmic mysteries. But, let us recall a few
objections that came from recognized men of Science; from Astronomers and
Physicists of eminence, who rejected the theory of rotation, as well as
that of gravitation. Thus one reads in the _French Encyclopædia_ that
“Science agrees, in the face of all its representatives, that it is
_impossible_ to explain the _physical_ origin of the rotatory motion of
the solar system.”

If the question is asked: “What causes rotation?” We are answered: “It is
the centrifugal force.” “And this force, what is it that produces it?”
“The force of rotation,” is the grave answer.(832) It will be well,
perhaps, to examine both these theories as being directly or indirectly
connected.




Section IV. The Theories of Rotation in Science.


Considering that “final cause is pronounced a chimera, and the First Great
Cause is remanded to the sphere of the Unknown,” as a reverend gentleman
justly complains, the number of hypotheses put forward, a nebula of them,
is most remarkable. The profane student is perplexed, and does not know in
which of the theories of _exact_ Science he has to believe. We give below
hypotheses enough for every taste and power of brain. They are all
extracted from a number of scientific volumes.



Current Hypotheses explaining the Origin of Rotation.


Rotation has originated:

(_a_) By the collision of nebular masses wandering aimlessly in Space; or
by attraction, “in cases where no actual impact takes place.”

(_b_) By the tangential action of currents of nebulous matter (in the case
of an amorphous nebula) descending from higher to lower levels,(833) or
simply by the action of the central gravity of the mass.(834)

“It is a fundamental principle in physics that _no rotation could be
generated in such a mass by the action of its own parts_. As well attempt
to change the course of a steamer by pulling at the deck railing,” remarks
on this Prof. Winchell in _World‐Life_.(835)



Hypotheses of the Origin of Planets and Comets.


(_a_) We owe the birth of the planets (1) to an explosion of the Sun—a
parturition of its central mass;(836) or (2) to some kind of disruption of
the nebular rings.

(_b_) “The comets are strangers to the planetary system.”(837) “The comets
are undeniably generated in our solar system.”(838)

(_c_) The “_fixed_ stars are motionless,” says one authority. “All the
stars are actually in motion,” answers another authority. “Undoubtedly
every star is in motion.”(839)

(_d_) “For over 350,000,000 years, the slow and majestic movement of the
sun around its axis has never for a moment ceased.”(840)

(_e_) “Maedler believes that ... our sun has Alcyone in the Pleiades for
the centre of its orbit, and consumes 180,000,000 of years in completing a
single revolution.”(841)

(_f_) “The sun has existed no more than 15,000,000 of years, and will emit
heat for no longer than 10,000,000 years more.”(842)

A few years ago this eminent Scientist was telling the world that the time
required for the Earth to cool from incipient incrustation to its present
state, could not exceed 80,000,000 years.(843) the encrusted age of the
world is only 40,000,000, or half the duration once allowed, and the Sun’s
age is only 15,000,000, have we to understand that the Earth was at one
time independent of the Sun?

Since the ages of the Sun, of the planets, and of the Earth, as they are
stated in the various scientific hypotheses of the Astronomers and
Physicists, are given elsewhere below, we have said enough to show the
disagreement between the ministers of Modern Science. Whether we accept
the _fifteen_ million years of Sir William Thomson or the _thousand_
millions of Mr. Huxley, for the rotational evolution of our Solar System,
it will always come to this; that by accepting self‐generated rotation for
the heavenly bodies composed of inert Matter and yet moved by their own
internal motion, for millions of years, this teaching of Science amounts
to:

(_a_) An evident denial of that fundamental physical law, which states
that “a body in motion tends constantly to inertia, _i.e._, to continue in
the same state of motion or rest, unless it is stimulated into further
action by a superior active force.”

(_b_) An original impulse, which culminates in an unalterable motion,
within a resisting Ether that Newton had declared incompatible with that
motion.

(_c_) Universal gravity, which, we are taught, always tends to a centre in
rectilinear descent—alone the cause of the revolution of the whole Solar
System, which is performing an eternal double gyration, each body around
its axis and orbit. Another occasional version is:

(_d_) A magnet in the Sun; or, that the said revolution is due to a
magnetic force, which acts, just as gravitation does, in a straight line,
and varies inversely as the square of the distance.(844)

(_e_) The whole acting under invariable and changeless laws, which are,
nevertheless, often shown variable, as during some well‐known freaks of
planets and other bodies, as also when the comets approach or recede from
the Sun.

(_f_) A Motor Force always proportionate to the mass it is acting upon;
but independent of the specific nature of that mass, to which it is
proportionate; which amounts to saying, as Le Couturier does, that:


    Without that force independent from, and of quite another nature
    than, the said mass, the latter, were it as huge as Saturn, or as
    tiny as Ceres, would always fall with the same rapidity.(845)


A mass, furthermore, which derives its weight from the body on which it
weighs.

Thus neither Laplace’s perceptions of a solar atmospheric fluid, which
would extend beyond the orbits of the planets, nor Le Couturier’s
electricity, nor Foucault’s heat,(846) nor this, nor the other, can ever
help any of the numerous hypotheses about the origin and permanency of
rotation to escape from this squirrel’s wheel, any more than can the
theory of gravity itself. This mystery is the Procrustean bed of Physical
Science. If Matter is passive, as we are now taught, the simplest movement
cannot be said to be an essential property of Matter—the latter being
considered simply as an inert mass. How, then, can such a complicated
movement, compound and multiple, harmonious and equilibrated, lasting in
the eternities for millions and millions of years, be attributed simply to
its own inherent force, unless the latter is an Intelligence? A physical
will is something new—a conception that the Ancients would never have
entertained, indeed! For over a century all distinction between body and
force has been made away with. “Force is but the property of a body in
motion,” say the Physicists; “life—the property of our animal organs—is
but the result of their molecular arrangement,” answer the Physiologists.
As Littré teaches:


    In the bosom of that aggregate which is named planet, are
    developed all the forces immanent in matter ... _i.e._, that
    matter possesses _in itself_ and _through itself_ the forces that
    are proper to it ... and which are _primary_, not _secondary_.
    Such forces are the property of weight, the property of
    electricity, of terrestrial magnetism, the property of life....
    Every planet can develop life ... as earth, for instance, which
    had not always mankind on it, and now bears (_produit_) men.(847)


An Astronomer says:


    We talk of the weight of the heavenly bodies, but since it is
    recognized that weight decreases in proportion to the distance
    from the centre, it becomes evident that, at a certain distance,
    that weight must be forcibly reduced to zero. Were there any
    _attraction_ there would be equilibrium.... And since the modern
    school recognizes neither a _beneath_ nor an _above_ in universal
    space, it is not clear what should cause the earth to fall, were
    there even no gravitation, nor attraction.(848)


Methinks the Count de Maistre was right in solving the question in his own
theological way. He cuts the Gordian knot by saying:—“The planets rotate
because they are made to rotate ... and the modern physical system of the
universe is a physical impossibility.”(849) For did not Herschell say the
same thing when he remarked that there is a Will needed to impart a
circular motion, and another Will to restrain it?(850) This shows and
explains how a retarded planet is cunning enough to calculate its time so
well as to hit off its arrival at the fixed minute. For, if Science
sometimes succeeds, with great ingenuity, in explaining some of such
stoppages, retrograde motions, angles outside the orbits, etc., by
appearances resulting from the inequality of their progress and ours in
the course of our mutual and respective orbits, we still know that there
are others, and “very real and considerable deviations,” according to
Herschell, “which cannot be explained except by the mutual and irregular
action of those planets and by the perturbing influence of the sun.”

We understand, however, that there are, besides those little and
accidental perturbations, continuous perturbations called
“secular”—because of the extreme slowness with which the irregularity
increases and affects the relations of the elliptic movement—and that
these perturbations can be corrected. From Newton, who found that this
world needed repairing very often, down to Reynaud, all say the same. In
his _Ciel et Terre_, the latter says:


    The orbits described by the planets are far from immutable, and
    are, on the contrary, subject to a perpetual mutation in their
    position and form.(851)


Proving gravitation and the peripatetic laws to be as negligent as they
are quick to repair their mistakes. The charge as it stands seems to be
that:


    These orbits are alternately widening and narrowing, their great
    axis lengthens and diminishes, or oscillates at the same time from
    right to left around the sun, the plane itself, in which they are
    situated, raising and lowering itself periodically while pivoting
    around itself with a kind of tremor.


To this, De Mirville, who believes in intelligent “workmen” invisibly
ruling the Solar System—as we do—observes very wittily:


    _Voilà, certes_, a voyage which has little in it of mechanical
    precision; at the utmost, one could compare it to a steamer,
    pulled to and fro and tossed on the waves, retarded or
    accelerated, all and each of which impediments might put off its
    arrival indefinitely, were there not the intelligence of a pilot
    and engineers to catch up the time lost, and to repair the
    damages.(852)


The law of gravity, however, seems to be becoming an obsolete law in
starry heaven. At any rate those long‐haired sidereal Radicals, called
comets, appear to be very poor respecters of the majesty of that law, and
to beard it quite impudently. Nevertheless, and though presenting in
nearly every respect “phenomena not yet fully understood,” comets and
meteors are credited by the believers in Modern Science with obeying the
same laws and consisting of the same Matter, “as the suns, stars and
nebulæ,” and even “the earth and its inhabitants.”(853)

This is what one might call taking things on trust, aye, even to blind
faith. But exact Science is not to be questioned, and he who rejects the
hypotheses imagined by her students—gravitation, for instance—would be
regarded as an ignorant fool for his pains; yet we are told by the just
cited author a queer legend from the scientific annals.


    The comet of 1811 had a tail 120 millions of miles in length and
    25 millions of miles in diameter at the widest part, while the
    diameter of the nucleus was about 127,000 miles, more than ten
    times that of the earth.


He tells us that:


    In order that bodies of this magnitude, passing near the earth,
    should not affect its motion or change the length of the year by
    even a single second, their actual substance must be inconceivably
    rare.


It must be so indeed, yet:


    The extreme tenuity of a comet’s mass is also proved by the
    phenomenon of the tail, which, as the comet approaches the sun, is
    thrown out sometimes to a length of 90 millions of miles in a few
    hours. And what is remarkable, this tail is thrown out against the
    force of gravity by some repulsive force, probably electrical, so
    that it always points away from the sun [!!!].... And yet, thin as
    the matter of comets must be, it obeys the common Law of Gravity
    [!?], and whether the comet revolves in an orbit within that of
    the outer planets, or shoots off into the abysses of space, and
    returns only after hundreds of years, its path is, at each
    instant, regulated by the same force as that which causes an apple
    to fall to the ground.(854)


Science is like Cæsar’s wife, and must not be suspected—this is evident.
But it can be respectfully criticized, nevertheless, and at all events, it
may be reminded that the “apple” is a dangerous fruit. For the second time
in the history of mankind, it may become the cause of the Fall—this time,
of “exact” Science. A comet whose tail defies the law of gravity right in
the Sun’s face can hardly be credited with obeying that law.

In a series of scientific works on Astronomy and the Nebular Theory,
written between 1865 and 1866, the present writer, a poor tyro in Science,
has counted in a few hours, no less than thirty‐nine contradictory
hypotheses offered as explanations for the self‐generated, primitive
rotatory motion of the heavenly bodies. The writer is no Astronomer, no
Mathematician, no Scientist; but she was obliged to examine these errors
in defence of Occultism, in general, and what is still more important, in
order to support the Occult Teachings concerning Astronomy and Cosmology.
Occultists were threatened with terrible penalties for questioning
scientific truths. But now they feel braver; Science is less secure in its
“impregnable” position than they were led to expect, and many of its
strongholds are built on very shifting sands.

Thus, even this poor and unscientific examination of it has been useful,
and it has certainly been very instructive. We have learned a good many
things, in fact, having especially studied with particular care those
astronomical data, that would be the most likely to clash with our
heterodox and “superstitious” beliefs.

Thus, for instance, we have found there, concerning gravitation, the axial
and orbital motions, that synchronous movement having been once overcome,
in the early stage, this was enough to originate a rotatory motion till
the end of Manvantara. We have also come to know, in all the aforesaid
combinations of possibilities with regard to incipient rotation, most
complicated in every case, some of the causes to which it may have been
due, as well as some others to which it ought and should have been due,
but, in some way or other, was not. Among other things, we are informed
that incipient rotation may be provoked with equal ease in a mass in
igneous fusion, and in one that is characterized by glacial opacity.(855)
That gravitation is a law which nothing can overcome, but which is,
nevertheless, overcome, in and out of season, by the most ordinary
celestial or terrestrial bodies—the tails of impudent comets, for
instance. That we owe the universe to the holy Creative Trinity, called
Inert Matter, Senseless Force and Blind Chance. Of the real essence and
nature of any of these three, Science knows nothing, but this is a
trifling detail. Ergo, we are told that, when a mass of cosmic or nebular
Matter—whose nature is entirely unknown, and which may be in a state of
fusion (Laplace), or dark and cold (Thomson), for “this intervention of
heat is itself a pure hypothesis” (Faye)—decides to exhibit its mechanical
energy under the form of rotation, it acts in this wise. It (the mass)
either bursts into spontaneous conflagration, or it remains inert,
tenebrous, and frigid, both states being equally capable of sending it,
without any adequate cause, spinning through Space for millions of years.
Its movements may be retrograde, or they may be direct, about a hundred
various reasons being offered for both motions, in about as many
hypotheses; anyhow, it joins the maze of stars, whose origin belongs to
the same miraculous and spontaneous order—for:


    _The nebular theory does not profess to discover the_ ORIGIN _of
    things, but only a stadium in material history._(856)


Those millions of suns, planets, and satellites, composed of inert matter,
will whirl on in most impressive and majestic symmetry round the
firmament, moved and guided only, notwithstanding their inertia, “by their
own internal motion.”

Shall we wonder, after this, if learned Mystics, pious Roman Catholics,
and even such learned Astronomers as were Chaubard and Godefroy,(857) have
preferred the _Kabalah_ and the ancient systems to the modern dreary and
contradictory exposition of the Universe? The _Zohar_ makes a distinction,
at any rate, between “the Hajaschar [the ‘Light Forces’], the Hachoser
[‘Reflected Lights’], and the simple _phenomenal exteriority_ of their
spiritual types.”(858)

The question of “gravity” may now be dismissed, and other hypotheses
examined. That Physical Science knows nothing of “Forces” is clear. We may
close the argument, however, by calling to our help one more man of
Science—Professor Jaumes, Member of the Academy of Medicine at
Montpellier. Says this learned man, speaking of Forces:


    A cause is that which is essentially acting in the genealogy of
    phenomena, in every production as in every modification. I said
    that activity (or force) was invisible.... To suppose it corporeal
    and _residing in the properties of matter_ would be a gratuitous
    hypothesis.... To reduce all the causes to God, ... would amount
    to embarrassing oneself with a hypothesis hostile to many
    verities. But to speak of _a plurality of forces_ proceeding from
    the Deity and possessing inherent powers of their own, is not
    unreasonable, ... and I am disposed to admit phenomena produced by
    intermediate agents called Forces or Secondary Agents. The
    _distinction_ of Forces is the principle of the division of
    Sciences; so many real and separate Forces, so many mother‐
    Sciences.... No; Forces are not suppositions and abstractions, but
    realities, and the only acting realities whose attributes can be
    determined with the help of direct observation and induction.(859)




Section V. The Masks of Science. Physics Or Metaphysics?


If there is anything like progress on earth, Science will some day have to
give up, _nolens volens_, such monstrous ideas as her physical, self‐
guiding laws, void of Soul and Spirit, and will then have to turn to the
Occult Teachings. It has already done so, however altered may be the
title‐pages and revised editions of the Scientific Catechism. It is now
over half a century since, in comparing modern with ancient thought, it
was found that, however different our Philosophy may appear from that of
our ancestors, it is, nevertheless, composed only of additions and
subtractions taken from the old Philosophy and transmitted drop by drop
through the filter of antecedents.

This fact was well known to Faraday, and to other eminent men of Science.
Atoms, Ether, Evolution itself—all come to Modern Science from ancient
notions, all are based on the conceptions of the archaic nations.
“Conceptions” for the profane, under the shape of allegories; plain truths
taught during the Initiations to the Elect, which truths have been
partially divulged through Greek writers and have descended to us. This
does not mean that Occultism has ever had the same views on Matter, Atoms
and Ether as may be found in the exotericism of the classical Greek
writers. Yet, if we may believe Mr. Tyndall, even Faraday was an
Aristotelean, and was more an Agnostic than a Materialist. In his
_Faraday, as a Discoverer_,(860) the author shows the great Physicist
using “old reflections of Aristotle” which are “concisely found in some of
his works.” Faraday, Boscovitch, and all others, however, who see, in the
Atoms and molecules, “centres of force,” and in the corresponding element,
Force, an Entity by itself, are far nearer the truth, perchance, than
those, who, denouncing them, denounce at the same time the “old
corpuscular Pythagorean theory”—one, by the way, which never passed to
posterity as the great Philosopher really taught it—on the ground of its
“delusion that the conceptual elements of matter can be grasped as
separate and real entities.”

The chief and most fatal mistake and fallacy made by Science, in the view
of the Occultists, lies in the idea of the possibility of such a thing
existing in Nature as inorganic, or dead Matter. Is anything dead or
inorganic which is capable of transformation or change?—Occultism asks.
And is there anything under the sun which remains immutable or changeless?

For a thing to be _dead_ implies that it had been at some time _living_.
When, at what period of cosmogony? Occultism says that in all cases Matter
is the most active, when it appears inert. A wooden or a stone block is
motionless and impenetrable to all intents and purposes. Nevertheless, and
_de facto_, its particles are in ceaseless eternal vibration which is so
rapid that to the physical eye the body seems absolutely devoid of motion;
and the spacial distance between those particles in their vibratory motion
is—considered from another plane of being and perception—as great as that
which separates snow flakes or drops of rain. But to Physical Science this
will be an absurdity.

This fallacy is nowhere better illustrated than in the scientific work of
a German _savant_, Professor Philip Spiller. In this cosmological
treatise, the author attempts to prove that:


    No material constituent of a body, no atom, is in itself
    originally endowed with force, but that every such atom is
    absolutely dead, and without any inherent power to act at a
    distance.(861)


This statement, however, does not prevent Spiller from enunciating an
Occult doctrine and principle. He asserts _the independent substantiality
of Force_, and shows it as an “incorporeal stuff” (_unkörperlicher Stoff_)
or Substance. Now _Substance_ is not _Matter_ in Metaphysics, and for
argument’s sake it may be granted that it is a wrong expression to use.
But this is due to the poverty of European languages, and especially to
the paucity of scientific terms. Then this “stuff” is identified and
connected by Spiller with the Æther. Expressed in Occult language it might
be said with more correctness that this “Force‐Substance” is the ever‐
active phenomenal positive Ether—Prakriti; while the omnipresent all‐
pervading Æther is the Noumenon of the former, the substratum of all, or
Âkâsha. Nevertheless, Stallo falls foul of Spiller, as he does of the
Materialists. He is accused of “utter disregard of the fundamental
correlation of Force and Matter,” of neither of which Science knows
anything certain. For this “hypostasized half‐concept” is, in the view of
all other Physicists, not only _imponderable_, but destitute of cohesive,
chemical, thermal, electric, and magnetic forces, of all of which
forces—according to Occultism—Æther is the Source and Cause.

Therefore Spiller, with all his mistakes, exhibits more intuition than
does any other modern Scientist, with the exception, perhaps, of Dr.
Richardson, the theorist on “Nerve‐Force,” or Nervous Ether, also on “Sun‐
Force and Earth‐Force.”(862) For Æther, in Esotericism, is the very
quintessence of all possible energy, and it is certainly to this Universal
Agent (composed of many agents) that are due all the manifestations of
energy in the material, psychic and spiritual worlds.

What, in fact, are electricity and light? How can Science know that one is
a fluid and the other a “mode of motion”? Why is no reason given why a
difference should be made between them, since both are considered as
force‐correlations? Electricity is a fluid, we are told, immaterial and
lion‐molecular—though Helmholtz thinks otherwise—and the proof of it is
that we can bottle it up, accumulate it and store it away. Then, it must
be simply Matter, and no peculiar “fluid.” Nor is it only “a mode of
motion,” for motion could hardly be stored in a Leyden jar. As for light,
it is a still more extraordinary “mode of motion”; since, “marvellous as
it may appear, light [also] can _actually be stored up for use_,” as was
demonstrated by Grove nearly half a century ago.


    Take an engraving which has been kept for some days in the dark,
    expose it to full sunshine—that is, insulate it for 15 minutes;
    lay it on sensitive paper in a dark place, and at the end of 24
    hours it will have left an impression of itself on the sensitive
    paper, the whites coming out as blacks.... There seems to be no
    limit for the reproduction of engravings.(863)


What is it that remains fixed, nailed, so to say, on the paper? It is a
Force certainly that fixed the thing, but what is _that thing_, the
residue of which remains on the paper?

Our learned men will get out of this by some scientific technicality; but
what is it that is intercepted, so as to imprison a certain quantity of it
on glass, paper, or wood? Is it “Motion” or is it “Force”? Or shall we be
told that what remains behind is only the effect of the Force or Motion?
Then what is this Force? Force or Energy is a quality; but every quality
must belong to a something, or a somebody. In Physics, Force is defined as
“that which changes or tends to change any physical relation between
bodies, whether mechanical, thermal, chemical, electrical, magnetic, etc.”
But it is not that Force or that Motion which remains behind on the paper,
when the Force or Motion has ceased to act; and yet something, which our
physical senses cannot perceive, has been left there, to become a cause in
its turn and to produce effects. What is it? It is not Matter, as defined
by Science—_i.e._, Matter in any of its known states. An Alchemist would
say it was a spiritual secretion—and he would be laughed at. But yet, when
the Physicist said that electricity, stored up, is a fluid, or that light
fixed on paper is still sunlight—that was _Science_. The newest
authorities have, indeed, rejected these explanations as “exploded
theories,” and have now deified “Motion” as their sole idol. But, surely,
they and their idol will one day share the fate of their predecessors! An
experienced Occultist, one who has verified the whole series of Nidânas,
of causes and effects, that finally project their last effect on to this
our plane of manifestations, one who has traced Matter back to its
Noumenon, holds the opinion that the explanation of the Physicist is like
calling anger, or its effects—the exclamation provoked by it—a secretion
or a fluid, and man, the cause of it, its _material_ conductor. But, as
Grove prophetically remarked, the day is fast approaching when it will be
confessed that the Forces we know are but the phenomenal manifestations of
Realities we know nothing about—but which were known to the Ancients, and
by them worshipped.

He made one still more suggestive remark which ought to have become the
motto of Science, but has not. Sir William Grove said that: “_Science
should have neither desires nor prejudices. Truth should be her sole
aim_.”

Meanwhile, in our days, Scientists are more self‐opinionated and bigoted
than even the Clergy. For they minister to, if they do not actually
worship, “Force‐Matter,” which is their _Unknown God_. And how unknown it
is, may be inferred from the many confessions of the most eminent
Physicists and Biologists, with Faraday at their head. Not only, he said,
could he never presume to pronounce whether Force was a property or
function of Matter, but he actually did not know what was meant by the
word Matter.

There was a time, he added, when he believed he knew something of Matter.
But the more he lived, and the more carefully he studied it, the more he
became convinced of his utter ignorance of the nature of Matter.(864)

This ominous confession was made, we believe, at a Scientific Congress at
Swansea. Faraday held a similar opinion, however, as stated by Tyndall:


    What do we know of the atom apart from its force? You imagine a
    nucleus which maybe called _a_ and surround it by forces which may
    be called _m_; to my mind the _a_ or nucleus vanishes and the
    substance consists of the powers _m_. And, indeed, what notion can
    we form of the nucleus independent of its powers? What thought
    remains on which to hang the imagination of an _a_ independent of
    the acknowledged forces?


The Occultists are often misunderstood because, for lack of better terms,
they apply to the Essence of Force, _under certain aspects_, the
descriptive epithet of _Substance_. Now the names for the varieties of
Substance on different planes of perception and being are legion. Eastern
Occultism has a special appellation for each kind; but Science—like
England, in the recollection of a witty Frenchman, blessed with thirty‐six
religions and only one fish‐sauce—has but one name for all, namely
“Substance.” Moreover, neither the orthodox Physicists nor their critics
seem to be very certain of their premisses, and are as apt to confuse the
effects as they are the causes. It is incorrect, for instance, to say, as
Stallo does, that “Matter can no more be realized or conceived as mere
positive spatial presence than as a concretion of forces,” or that “Force
is nothing without mass, and mass is nothing without force”—for one is the
Noumenon and the other the phenomenon. Again; Schelling, when saying that


    It is a mere delusion of the phantasy that something, we know not
    what, remains after we have denuded an object of all the
    predicates belonging to it,(865)


could never have applied the remark to the realm of transcendental
Metaphysics. It is true that pure Force is _nothing_ in the world of
Physics; it is All in the domain of Spirit. Says Stallo:


    If we reduce the mass upon which a given force, however small,
    acts to its limit zero—or, mathematically expressed, until it
    becomes infinitely small—the consequence is that the velocity of
    the resulting motion is infinitely great, and that the “thing” ...
    is at any given moment neither here nor there, but everywhere—that
    there is no real presence; it is impossible, therefore, to
    construct matter by a synthesis of forces.(866)


This may be true in the phenomenal world, inasmuch as the illusive
reflection of the One Reality of the supersensual world may appear true to
the dwarfed conceptions of a Materialist. It is absolutely incorrect when
the argument is applied to things in what the Kabalists call the
supermundane spheres. Inertia, so‐called, is Force, according to
Newton,(867) and for the student of Esoteric Sciences the greatest of the
Occult Forces. A body can only conceptually, only on this plane of
illusion, be considered divorced from its relations with other
bodies—which, according to the physical and mechanical sciences, give rise
to its attributes. In fact, it can never be so detached; death itself
being unable to detach it from its relation with the Universal Forces, of
which the One Force, or Life, is the synthesis: the inter‐relation simply
continues on another plane. But what, if Stallo is right, can Dr. James
Croll mean when, in speaking “On the Transformation of Gravity,” he brings
forward the views advocated by Faraday, Waterston, and others? For he says
very plainly that gravity


    Is a force pervading Space external to bodies, and that, on the
    mutual approach of the bodies, the force is not increased, as is
    generally supposed, but the bodies merely pass into a place where
    the force exists with greater intensity.(868)


No one will deny that a Force, whether gravity, electricity, or any other
Force, which exists _outside_ bodies and in open Space—be it Ether or a
vacuum—must be _something_, and not a pure _nothing_, when conceived apart
from a mass. Otherwise it could hardly exist in one place with a greater
and in another with reduced “intensity.” G. A. Hirn declares the same in
his _Théorie Mécanique de l’Univers_. He tries to demonstrate:


    That the atom of the chemists is not an entity of pure convention,
    or simply an explicative device, but that it exists really, that
    its volume is unalterable, and that consequently it is _not_
    elastic [!!]. Force, therefore, is not in the atom; it is _in the
    space_ which separates the atoms from each other.


The above‐cited views, expressed by two men of Science of great eminence
in their respective countries, show that it is not in the least
_unscientific_ to speak of the substantiality of the so‐called Forces.
Subject to some future specific name, this Force is Substance of some
kind, and can be nothing else; and perhaps one day Science will be the
first to reädopt the derided name of phlogiston. Whatever may be the
future name given to it, to maintain that Force does not reside in the
Atoms, but only in the “space between them,” may be scientific enough;
nevertheless it is not true. To the mind of an Occultist it is like saying
that water does not reside in the drops of which the ocean is composed,
but only in the space between those drops!

The objection that there are two distinct schools of Physicists, by one of
which


    This force is assumed to be an independent substantial entity,
    which is not a property of matter nor essentially related to
    matter,(869)


is hardly likely to help the profane to any clearer understanding. It is,
on the contrary, more calculated to throw the question into still greater
confusion than ever. For Force is, then, neither this nor the other. By
viewing it as “an independent substantial entity,” the theory extends the
right hand of fellowship to Occultism, while the strange contradictory
idea that it is not “related to Matter otherwise than by its power to act
upon it,”(870) leads Physical Science to the most absurd contradictory
hypotheses. Whether “Force” or “Motion” (Occultism, seeing no difference
between the two, never attempts to separate them), it cannot act for the
adherents of the atomo‐mechanical theory in one way, and for those of the
rival school in another. Nor can the Atoms be, in one case, absolutely
uniform in size and weight, and in another, vary in their weight
(Avogadro’s law). For, in the words of the same able critic:


    While the absolute equality of the primordial units of mass is
    thus an essential part of the very foundations of the mechanical
    theory, the whole modern science of chemistry is based upon a
    principle directly subversive of it—a principle of which it has
    recently been said that “it holds the same place in chemistry that
    the law of gravitation does in astronomy.”(871) This principle is
    known as the law of Avogadro or Ampère.(872)


This shows that either modern Chemistry, or modern Physics, is entirely
wrong in the respective fundamental principles. For if the assumption of
Atoms of different specific gravities is deemed absurd, on the basis of
the atomic theory in Physics; and if Chemistry, nevertheless, on this very
assumption, meets with “unfailing experimental verification,” in the
formation and transformation of chemical compounds; then it becomes
apparent that it is the atomo‐mechanical theory which is untenable. The
explanation of the latter, that “the differences of weight are only
differences of density, and differences of density are differences of
distance between the particles contained in a given space,” is not really
valid, because, before a Physicist can argue in his defence that “as in
the atom there is no multiplicity of particles and no void space, hence
differences of density or weight are impossible in the case of atoms,” he
must first know what an Atom is, in reality, and that is just what he
cannot know. He must bring it under the observation of at least one of his
physical senses—and that he cannot do: for the simple reason that no one
has ever seen, smelt, heard, touched or tasted an Atom. The Atom belongs
wholly to the domain of Metaphysics. It is an entified abstraction—at any
rate for Physical Science—and has nought to do with Physics, strictly
speaking, as it can never be brought to the test of retort or balance. The
mechanical conception, therefore, becomes a jumble of the most conflicting
theories and dilemmas, in the minds of the many Scientists who disagree on
this, as on other subjects; and its evolution is beheld with the greatest
bewilderment by the Eastern Occultist, who follows this scientific strife.

To conclude, on the question of gravity. How can Science presume to know
anything certain of it? How can it maintain its position and its
hypotheses against those of the Occultists, who see in gravity only
sympathy and antipathy, or attraction and repulsion, caused by physical
polarity on our terrestrial plane, and by spiritual causes outside its
influence? How can they disagree with the Occultists before they agree
among themselves? Indeed one hears of the Conservation of Energy, and in
the same breath of the perfect hardness and inelasticity of the Atoms; of
the kinetic theory of gases being identical with “potential energy,” so
called, and, at the same time, of the elementary units of mass being
absolutely hard and inelastic! An Occultist opens a scientific work and
reads as follows:


    Physical atomism derives all the qualitative properties of matter
    from the forms of atomic motion. The _atoms themselves remain as
    elements utterly devoid of quality_.(873)


And further:


    Chemistry in its ultimate form must be atomic mechanics.(874)


And a moment after he is told that:


    Gases consist of atoms which behave like solid, _perfectly
    elastic_ spheres.(875)


Finally, to crown all, Sir W. Thomson is found declaring that:


    We are forbidden by the modern theory of the conservation of
    energy to assume inelasticity, or anything short of perfect
    elasticity of the ultimate molecules whether of ultra‐mundane or
    mundane matter.(876)


But what do the men of true Science say to all this? By the “men of true
Science” we mean those who care too much for truth and too little for
personal vanity to dogmatize on anything, as do the majority. There are
several among them—perhaps more than dare openly publish their secret
conclusions, for fear of the cry “Stone him to death!”—men, whose
intuitions have made them span the abyss that lies between the terrestrial
aspect of Matter, and the, to us, on our plane of illusion, subjective,
_i.e._, transcendentally objective Substance, and have led them to
proclaim the existence of the latter. Matter, to the Occultist, it must be
remembered, is that totality of existences in the Kosmos, which falls
within any of the planes of possible perception. We are but too well aware
that the orthodox theories of sound, heat and light, are against the
Occult Doctrines. But, it is not enough for the men of Science, or their
defenders, to say that they do not deny dynamic power to light and heat,
and to urge, as a proof, the fact that Mr. Crookes’ radiometer has
unsettled no views. If they would fathom the ultimate nature of these
Forces, they have first to admit their _substantial_ nature, however
_supersensuous_ that nature may be. Neither do the Occultists deny the
correctness of the vibratory theory.(877) Only they limit its functions to
our Earth—declaring its inadequacy on other planes than ours, since
Masters in the Occult Sciences perceive the Causes that produce ethereal
vibrations. Were all these only the fictions of the Alchemists, or dreams
of the Mystics, such men as Paracelsus, Philalethes, Van Helmont, and so
many others, would have to be regarded as worse than visionaries; they
would become impostors and deliberate mystificators.

The Occultists are taken to task for calling the Cause of light, heat,
sound, cohesion, magnetism, etc., etc., a Substance.(878) Mr. Clerk
Maxwell has stated that the pressure of strong sunlight on a square mile
is about 3‐¼ lbs. It is, they are told, “the energy of the myriad ether
waves”; and when they call it a Substance impinging on that area, their
explanation is proclaimed unscientific.

There is no justification for such an accusation. In no way—as already
more than once stated—do the Occultists dispute the explanations of
Science, as affording a solution of the immediate objective agencies at
work. Science only errs in believing that, because it has detected in
vibratory waves the _proximate_ cause of these phenomena, it has,
therefore, revealed _all_ that lies beyond the threshold of Sense. It
merely traces the sequence of phenomena on a plane of effects, illusory
projections from the region that Occultism has long since penetrated. And
the latter maintains that those etheric tremors are not set up, as
asserted by Science, by the vibrations of the molecules of known bodies,
the Matter of our terrestrial objective consciousness, but that we must
seek for the ultimate Causes of light, heat, etc., in Matter existing in
supersensuous states—states, however, as fully objective to the spiritual
eye of man, as a horse or a tree is to the ordinary mortal. Light and heat
are the ghost or shadow of Matter in motion. Such states can be perceived
by the Seer or the Adept during the hours of trance, under the Sushumnâ
Ray—the first of the Seven Mystic Rays of the Sun.(879)

Thus, we put forward the Occult teaching which maintains the reality of a
supersubstantial and supersensible essence of that Âkâsha—not Ether, which
is only an aspect of the latter—the nature of which cannot be inferred
from its remoter manifestations, its merely phenomenal phalanx of effects,
on this terrene plane. Science, on the contrary, informs us that heat can
never be regarded as Matter in any conceivable state. To cite a most
impartial critic, one whose authority no one can call in question, as a
reminder to Western dogmatists, that the question cannot be in any way
considered as settled:


    There is no fundamental difference between light and heat ... each
    is merely a metamorphosis of the other.... Heat is light in
    complete repose. Light is heat in rapid motion. Directly light is
    combined with a body, it becomes heat; but when it is thrown off
    from that body it again becomes light.(880)


Whether this is true or false we cannot tell, and many years, perhaps many
generations, will have to elapse before we shall be able to tell.(881) We
are also told that the two great obstacles to the fluid (?) theory of heat
undoubtedly are:

(1) The production of heat by friction—excitation of molecular motion.

(2) The conversion of heat into mechanical motion.

The answer given is: There are fluids of various kinds. Electricity is
called a fluid, and so was heat quite recently, but it was on the
supposition that heat was some imponderable substance. This was during the
supreme and autocratic reign of Matter. When Matter was dethroned, and
Motion was proclaimed the sole sovereign ruler of the Universe, heat
became a “mode of motion.” We need not despair; it may become something
else to‐morrow. Like the Universe itself, Science is ever becoming, and
can never say, “I am that I am.” On the other hand, Occult Science has its
changeless traditions from prehistoric times. It may err in particulars;
it can never become guilty of a mistake in questions of Universal Law,
simply because that Science, justly referred to by Philosophy as the
Divine, was born on higher planes, and was brought to Earth by Beings who
were wiser than man will be, even in the Seventh Race of his Seventh
Round. And _that_ Science maintains that Forces are not what modern
learning would have them; _e.g._, magnetism is not a “mode of motion”;
and, in this particular case, at least, exact Modern Science is sure to
come to grief some day. Nothing, at the first blush, can appear more
ridiculous, more outrageously absurd than to say, for instance: The Hindû
initiated Yogî knows really ten times more than the greatest European
Physicist of the ultimate nature and constitution of light, both solar and
lunar. Yet why is the Sushumnâ Ray believed to be that Ray which furnishes
the Moon with its borrowed light? Why is it “the Ray cherished by the
initiated Yogî”? Why is the Moon considered as the Deity of the Mind, by
those Yogîs? We say, because light, or rather all its Occult properties,
every combination and correlation of it with other forces, mental,
psychic, and spiritual, was perfectly known to the old Adepts.

Therefore, although Occult Science may be less well‐informed than modern
Chemistry as to the behaviour of compound elements in various cases of
physical correlation, yet it is immeasurably higher in its knowledge of
the ultimate Occult states of Matter, and of the true nature of Matter,
than all the Physicists and Chemists of our modern day put together.

Now, if we state the truth openly and in full sincerity, namely, that the
ancient Initiates had a far wider knowledge of Physics, as a Science of
Nature, than is possessed by our Academies of Science, all taken together,
the statement will be characterized as an impertinence and an absurdity;
for Physical Sciences are considered to have been carried in our age to
the apex of perfection. Hence, the twitting query: Can the Occultists meet
successfully the two points, namely (_a_) the production of heat by
friction—excitation of molecular motion; and (_b_) the conversion of heat
into mechanical force, if they hold to the old exploded theory of heat
being a substance or a fluid?

To answer the question, it must first be observed that the Occult Sciences
do not regard either electricity, or any of the Forces supposed to be
generated by it, as Matter in any of the states known to Physical Science;
to put it more clearly, none of these Forces, so‐called, is a solid, gas,
or fluid. If it did not look pedantic, an Occultist would even object to
electricity being called a fluid—as it is an effect and not a cause. But
its Noumenon, he would say, is a Conscious Cause. The same in the cases of
“Force” and the “Atom.” Let us see what an eminent Academician, Butlerof,
the Chemist, had to say about these two abstractions. This great man of
Science argues:


    What is Force? What is it from a strictly scientific stand‐point,
    and as warranted by the law of conservation of energy? Conceptions
    of Force are resumed by our conceptions of this, that, or another
    mode of motion. Force is thus simply the passage of one state of
    motion into another state of the same; of electricity into heat
    and light, of heat into sound or some mechanical function, and so
    on.(882) The first time electric fluid was produced by man on
    earth it must have been by friction; hence, as well known, it is
    heat that produces it by disturbing its zero state,(883) and
    electricity exists no more on earth _per se_ than heat or light,
    or any other force. They are all correlations, as Science says.
    When a given quantity of heat, assisted by a steam engine, is
    transformed into mechanical work, we speak of steam power (or
    force). When a falling body strikes an obstacle in its way,
    thereby generating heat and sound—we call it the power of
    collision. When electricity decomposes water or heats a platinum
    wire, we speak of the force of the electric fluid. When the rays
    of the sun are intercepted by the thermometer bulb and its
    quicksilver expands, we speak of the calorific energy of the sun.
    In short, when one state of a determined quantity of motion
    ceases, another state of motion equivalent to the preceding takes
    its place, and the result of such a transformation or correlation
    is—Force. In all cases where such a transformation, or the passage
    of one state of motion into another, is entirely absent, there no
    force is possible. Let us admit for a moment an absolutely
    homogeneous state of the Universe, and our conception of Force
    falls down to nought.

    Therefore it becomes evident that the Force, which Materialism
    considers as the cause of the diversity that surrounds us, is in
    sober reality only an effect, a result of that diversity. From
    such point of view Force is not the cause of motion, but a result,
    while the cause of that Force, or forces, is not the Substance or
    Matter, but Motion itself. Matter thus must be laid aside, and
    with it the basic principle of Materialism, which has become
    unnecessary, as Force brought down to a state of motion can give
    no idea of the Substance. If Force is the result of motion, then
    it becomes incomprehensible why that motion should become witness
    to Matter and not to Spirit or a Spiritual essence. True, our
    reason cannot conceive of a motion minus something moving (and our
    reason is right); but the nature or _esse_ of that something
    moving remains to Science entirely unknown; and the Spiritualist,
    in such case, has as much right to attribute it to a “Spirit,” as
    a Materialist to creative and all‐potential Matter. A Materialist
    has no special privileges in this instance, nor can he claim any.
    The law of the conservation of energy, as thus seen, is shown to
    be illegitimate in its pretensions and claims in this case. The
    “great dogma”—_no force without matter and no matter without
    force_—falls to the ground, and loses entirely the solemn
    significance with which Materialism has tried to invest it. The
    conception of Force still gives no idea of Matter, and compels us
    in no way to see in it “the origin of all origins.”(884)


We are assured that Modern Science is not Materialistic; and our own
conviction tells us that it cannot be so, when its learning is real. There
is good reason for this, well defined by some Physicists and Chemists
themselves. Natural Sciences cannot go hand in hand with Materialism. To
be at the height of their calling, men of Science have to reject the very
possibility of Materialistic doctrines having aught to do with the Atomic
Theory; and we find that Lange, Butlerof, Du Bois Reymond—the last
probably unconsciously—and several others, have proved it. And this is,
furthermore, demonstrated by the fact, that Kanâda in India, and Leucippus
and Democritus in Greece, and after them Epicurus—the earliest Atomists in
Europe—while propagating their doctrine of definite proportions, believed
in Gods or supersensuous Entities, at the same time. Their ideas upon
Matter thus differed from those now prevalent. We must be allowed to make
our statement clearer by a short synopsis of the ancient and modern views
of Philosophy upon Atoms, and thus prove that the Atomic Theory kills
Materialism.

From the standpoint of Materialism, which reduces the beginnings of all to
Matter, the Universe consists, in its fulness, of Atoms and vacuity. Even
leaving aside the axiom taught by the Ancients, and now absolutely
demonstrated by telescope and microscope, that Nature abhors a vacuum,
what is an Atom? Professor Butlerof writes:


    It is, we are answered by Science, the limited division of
    Substance, the indivisible particle of Matter. To admit the
    divisibility of the atom, amounts to an admission of an infinite
    divisibility of Substance, which is equivalent to reducing
    Substance to _nihil_, or nothingness. Owing to a feeling of self‐
    preservation alone, Materialism cannot admit infinite
    divisibility; otherwise, it would have to bid farewell for ever to
    its basic principle and thus sign its own death‐warrant.(885)


Büchner, for instance, like a true dogmatist in Materialism declares that:


    To accept infinite divisibility is absurd, and amounts to doubting
    the very existence of Matter.


The Atom is indivisible then, saith Materialism? Very well. Butlerof
answers:


    See now what a curious contradiction this fundamental principle of
    the Materialists is leading them into. The atom is _indivisible_,
    and at the same time we know it to be _elastic_. An attempt to
    deprive it of elasticity is unthinkable; it would amount to an
    absurdity. Absolutely non‐elastic atoms could never exhibit a
    single one of those numerous phenomena that are attributed to
    their correlations. Without any elasticity, the atoms could not
    manifest their energy, and the Substance of the Materialists would
    remain weeded of every force. Therefore, if the Universe is
    composed of atoms, then those atoms must be elastic. It is here
    that we meet with an insuperable obstacle. For, what are the
    conditions requisite for the manifestation of elasticity? An
    elastic ball, when striking against an obstacle, is flattened and
    contracts, which it would be impossible for it to do, were not
    that ball to consist of particles, the relative position of which
    experiences at the time of the blow a temporary change. This may
    be said of elasticity in general; no elasticity is possible
    without change with respect to the position of the compound
    particles of an elastic body. This means that the elastic body is
    changeful and consists of particles, or, in other words, that
    elasticity can pertain only to those bodies that are divisible.
    And the atom _is_ elastic.(886)


This is sufficient to show how absurd are the simultaneous admissions of
the non‐divisibility and of the elasticity of the Atom. The Atom is
elastic, _ergo_, the Atom is divisible, and must consist of particles, or
of sub‐atoms. And these sub‐atoms? They are either non‐elastic, and in
such case they represent no dynamic importance, or, they are elastic also;
and in that case, they, too, are subject to divisibility. And thus _ad
infinitum_. But infinite divisibility of Atoms resolves Matter into simple
centres of Force, _i.e._, precludes the possibility of conceiving Matter
as an objective substance.

This vicious circle is fatal to Materialism. It finds itself caught in its
own nets, and no issue out of the dilemma is possible for it. If it says
that the Atom is indivisible, then it will have Mechanics asking it the
awkward question:


    How does the Universe move in this case, and how do its forces
    correlate? A world built on absolutely non‐elastic atoms, is like
    an engine without steam, it is doomed to eternal inertia.(887)


Accept the explanations and teachings of Occultism, and—the blind inertia
of Physical Science being replaced by the intelligent active Powers behind
the veil of Matter—motion and inertia become subservient to those Powers.
It is on the doctrine of the illusive nature of Matter, and the infinite
divisibility of the Atom, that the whole Science of Occultism is built. It
opens limitless horizons to Substance, informed by the divine breath of
its Soul in every possible state of tenuity, states still undreamed of by
the most spiritually disposed Chemists and Physicists.

The above views were enunciated by an Academician, the greatest Chemist in
Russia, and a recognized authority even in Europe, the late Professor
Butlerof. True, he was defending the phenomena of the Spiritualists, the
materializations, so‐called, in which he believed, as Professors Zöllner
and Hare did, as Mr. A. Russel Wallace, Mr. W. Crookes, and many another
Fellow of the Royal Society, do still, whether openly or secretly. But his
argument with regard to the nature of the Essence that acts behind the
physical phenomena of light, heat, electricity, etc., is no less
scientific and authoritative for all that, and applies admirably to the
case in hand. Science has no right to deny to the Occultists their claim
to a more profound knowledge of the so‐called Forces, which, they say, are
only the effects of causes generated by Powers, substantial, yet
supersensuous, and beyond any kind of Matter with which Scientists have
hitherto become acquainted. The most Science can do is to assume and to
maintain the attitude of Agnosticism. Then it can say: Your case is no
more proven than is ours; but we confess to knowing nothing in reality
either about Force or Matter, or about that which lies at the bottom of
the so‐called correlation of Forces. Therefore, time alone can prove who
is right and who is wrong. Let us wait patiently, and meanwhile show
mutual courtesy, instead of scoffing at each other.

But to do this requires a boundless love of truth and the surrender of
that prestige—however false—of infallibility, which the men of Science
have acquired among the ignorant and flippant, though cultured, masses of
the profane. The blending of the two Sciences, the Archaic and the Modern,
requires first of all the abandonment of the actual Materialistic lines.
It necessitates a kind of religious Mysticism and even the study of old
Magic, which our Academicians will never take up. The necessity is easily
explained. Just as in old Alchemical works the real meaning of the
Substances and Elements mentioned is concealed under the most ridiculous
metaphors, so are the physical, psychic, and spiritual natures of the
Elements (say of Fire) concealed in the _Vedas_;, and especially in the
_Purânas_, under allegories comprehensible only to the Initiates. Had they
no meaning, then indeed all these long legends and allegories about the
sacredness of the three types of Fire, and the _Forty‐Nine original
Fires_—personified by the Sons of Daksha’s Daughters and the Rishis, their
Husbands, “who with the first Son of Brahmâ and his three descendants
constitute the Forty‐nine Fires”—would be idiotic verbiage and no more.
But it is not so. Every Fire has a distinct function and meaning in the
worlds of the physical and the spiritual. It has, moreover, in its
essential nature a corresponding relation to one of the human psychic
faculties, besides its well determined chemical and physical potencies
when coming in contact with terrestrially differentiated Matter. Science
has no speculations to offer upon Fire _per se_; Occultism and ancient
religious Science have. This is shown even in the meagre and purposely
veiled phraseology of the _Purânas_, where, as in the _Vâyu Purâna_, many
of the qualities of the personified Fires are explained. Thus, Pâvaka is
Electric Fire, or Vaidyuta; Pavamâna, the Fire produced by Friction, or
Nirmathya: and Shuchi is Solar Fire, or Saura(888)—all these three being
the sons of Abhimânin, the Agni (Fire), eldest son of Brahmâ and of Svâhâ.
Pâvaka, moreover, is made parent to Kavyavâhana, the Fire of the Pitris:
Shuchi to Havyaváhana, the Fire of the Gods; and Pavamâna to Saharaksha,
the Fire of the Asuras. Now all this shows that the writers of the
_Purânas_ were perfectly conversant with the Forces of Science and their
correlations, as well as with the various qualities of the latter in their
bearing upon those psychic and physical phenomena which receive no credit
and are now unknown to Physical Science. Very naturally, when an
Orientalist, especially one with materialistic tendencies, reads that
these are only appellations of Fire employed in the invocations and
rituals, he calls this “Tântrika superstition and mystification”; and he
becomes more careful to avoid errors in spelling than to give attention to
the secret meaning attached to the personifications, or to seek their
explanation in the physical correlations of Forces, so far as these are
known. So little credit, indeed, is given to the ancient Âryans for
knowledge, that even such glaring passages as that in _Vishnu Purâna_, are
left without any notice. Nevertheless, what can this sentence mean?


    Then ether, air, light, water, and earth, severally united with
    the properties of sound and the rest, existed as distinguishable
    according to their qualities, ... but, possessing many and various
    energies and being unconnected, they could not, without
    combination, create living beings, not having blended with each
    other. Having combined therefore with one another, they assumed
    through their mutual association, the character of one mass of
    entire unity; and, from the direction of Spirit, etc.(889)


This means, of course, that the writers were perfectly acquainted with
correlation, and were well posted about the origin of Kosmos from the
“Indiscrete Principle,” Avyaktânugrahena, as applied to Parabrahman and
Mûlaprakriti conjointly, and not to “Avyakta, either First Cause, or
Matter,” as Wilson gives it. The old Initiates knew of no “miraculous
creation,” but taught the evolution of Atoms, on our physical plane, and
their first differentiation from Laya into Protyle, as Mr. Crookes has
suggestively named Matter, or primordial substance, _beyond_ the zero‐
line—there where we place Mûlaprakriti, the Root‐Principle of the World‐
Stuff and of all in the World.

This can be easily demonstrated. Take, for instance, the newly‐published
catechism of the Vishishthâdvaita Vedântins, an orthodox and exoteric
system, yet fully enunciated and taught in the XIth century(890) at a time
when European “Science” still believed in the squareness and flatness of
the Earth of Cosmas Indicopleustes of the VIth century. It teaches that
before Evolution began, Prakriti, Nature, was in a condition of Laya, or
of absolute homogeneity, as “Matter exists in two conditions, the Sûkshma,
or latent and undifferentiated, and the Sthûla, or differentiated,
condition.” Then it became Anu, atomic. It teaches of Suddasattva—“a
substance not subject to the qualities of Matter, from which it is quite
different,” and adds that out of that Substance the bodies of the Gods,
the inhabitants of Vaikunthaloka, the Heaven of Vishnu, are formed. That
every particle or atom of Prakriti contains Jîva (divine life), and is the
Sharîra (body) of that Jîva which it contains, while every Jîva is in its
turn the Sharîra of the Supreme Spirit, as “Parabrahman pervades every
Jîva, as well as every particle of Matter.” Dualistic and anthropomorphic
as may be the philosophy of the Vishishthâdvaita, when compared with that
of the Advaita—the non‐dualists—it is yet supremely higher in logic and
philosophy than the Cosmogony accepted either by Christianity or by its
great opponent, Modern Science. The followers of one of the greatest minds
that ever appeared on Earth, the Advaita Vedântins are called Atheists,
because they regard all save Parabrahman, the Secondless, or the Absolute
Reality as an illusion. Yet the wisest Initiates came from their ranks, as
also the greatest Yogîs. The _Upanishads_ show that they most assuredly
knew not only what is the causal substance in the effects of friction, and
that their forefathers were acquainted with the conversion of heat into
mechanical force, but that they were also acquainted with the Noumenon of
every spiritual as well as of every cosmic phenomenon.

Truly the young Brâhman who graduates in the Universities and Colleges of
India with the highest honours; who starts in life as an M.A. and an
LL.B., with a tail initialed from Alpha to Omega after his name, and a
contempt for his national Gods proportioned to the honours received in his
education in Physical Science; truly he has but to read in the light of
the latter, and with an eye to the correlation of physical Forces, certain
passages in his _Purânas_, if he would learn how much more his ancestors
knew than he will ever know—unless he becomes an Occultist. Let him turn
to the allegory of Purûravas and the celestial Gandharva,(891) who
furnished the former with a vessel full of heavenly fire. The primeval
mode of obtaining fire by friction has its scientific explanation in the
_Vedas_, and is pregnant with meaning for him who reads between the lines.
The Tretâgni (sacred triad of fires) obtained by the attrition of sticks
made of the wood of the Ashvattha tree, the Bo‐tree of Wisdom and
Knowledge, sticks “as many finger‐breadths long as there are syllables in
the Gâyatrî,” must have a secret meaning, or else the writers of the
_Vedas_ and _Purânas_ were no sacred writers but mystificators. That it
has such a meaning, the Hindu Occultists are a proof, and they alone are
able to enlighten Science, as to why and how the Fire, that was primevally
One, was made three‐fold (tretâ) in our present Manvantara, by the Son of
Ilâ (Vâch), the Primeval Woman after the Deluge, the wife and daughter of
Vaivasvata Manu. The allegory is suggestive, in whatever _Purâna_ it may
be read and studied.




Section VI. An Attack on the Scientific Theory of Force by a Man of
Science.


The wise words of several English men of Science have now to be quoted in
our favour. Ostracized for “principle’s sake” by the few, they are tacitly
approved of by the many. That one of them preaches almost Occult
doctrines—in some things identical with, and often amounting to a public
recognition of, our “Fohat and his seven Sons,” the Occult Gandharva of
the _Vedas_—will be recognized by every Occultist, and even by some
profane readers.

If such readers will open Volume V of the _Popular Science Review_,(892)
they will find in it an article on “Sun‐Force and Earth‐Force,” by Dr. E.
W. Richardson, F.R.S., which reads as follows:


    At this moment, when the theory of mere motion as the origin of
    all varieties of force is again becoming the prevailing thought,
    it were almost heresy to reöpen a debate, which for a period
    appears, by general consent, to be virtually closed; but I accept
    the risk, and shall state, therefore, what were the precise views
    of the immortal heretic, whose name I have whispered to the
    readers, (Samuel Metcalfe,) respecting Sun‐Force. Starting with
    the argument on which nearly all physicists are agreed, that there
    exist in nature two agencies—matter which is ponderable, visible,
    and tangible, and a something which is imponderable, invisible,
    and appreciable only by its influence on matter—Metcalfe maintains
    that the imponderable and active agency which he calls “caloric”
    is _not a mere form of motion_, not a vibration amongst the
    particles of ponderable matter, but _itself a material substance
    flowing from the sun_ through space,(893) filling the voids
    between the particles of solid bodies, and conveying by sensation
    the property called heat. The nature of caloric, or Sun‐Force, is
    contended for by him on the following grounds:

    (i) That it may be added to, and abstracted from other bodies and
    measured with mathematical precision.

    (ii) That it augments the volume of bodies, which are again
    reduced in size by its abstraction.

    (iii) That it modifies the forms, properties, and conditions of
    all other bodies.

    (iv) That _it passes by radiation through the most perfect
    vacuum_(894) that can be formed, in which it produces the same
    effects on the thermometer as in the atmosphere.

    (v) That it exerts mechanical and chemical forces which nothing
    can restrain, as in volcanoes, the explosion of gunpowder, and
    other fulminating compounds.

    (vi) That it operates in a sensible manner on the nervous system,
    producing intense pain; and when in excess, disorganization of the
    tissues.

    As against the vibratory theory, Metcalfe further argues that if
    caloric were a _mere property or quality_, it could not augment
    the volume of other bodies; for this purpose it must itself have
    volume, it must occupy space, and it must, therefore, be a
    material agent. If caloric were _only the effect of vibratory
    motion_ amongst the particles of ponderable matter, _it could not
    radiate from hot bodies_ without the simultaneous transition of
    the vibrating particles; but the fact stands out that heat can
    radiate from material ponderable substance without loss of weight
    of such substance.... With this view as to the material nature of
    caloric or sun‐force; with the impression firmly fixed on his mind
    that “everything in Nature is composed of two descriptions of
    matter, the one essentially active and ethereal, the other passive
    and motionless,”(895) Metcalfe based the hypothesis that the sun‐
    force, or caloric, is a self‐active principle. For its own
    particles, he holds, it has repulsion; for the particles of all
    ponderable matter it has affinity; it attracts the particles of
    ponderable matter with forces which vary inversely as the squares
    of the distance. It thus acts _through_ ponderable matter. If
    universal space were filled with caloric, sun‐force, alone
    (without ponderable matter), caloric would also be inactive and
    would constitute a boundless ocean of powerless or quiescent
    ether, because it would then have nothing on which to act, while
    ponderable matter, however inactive of itself, has “certain
    properties by which it modifies and controls the actions of
    caloric, both of which are governed by immutable laws that have
    their origin in the mutual relations and specific properties of
    each.”

    And he lays down a law which he believes is absolute, and which is
    thus expressed:

    “By the attraction of caloric for ponderable matter, it unites and
    holds together all things; by its self‐repulsive energy it
    separates and expands all things.”


This, of course, is almost the Occult explanation of cohesion. Dr.
Richardson continues:


    As I have already said, _the tendency of modern teaching is to
    rest upon the hypothesis __ ... that heat is motion_, or, as it
    would, perhaps, be better stated, a specific force or form of
    motion.(896)

    But this hypothesis, popular as it is, is not one that ought to be
    accepted to the exclusion of the simpler views of the material
    nature of sun‐force, and of its influence in modifying the
    conditions of matter. _We do not yet know sufficient to be
    dogmatic._(897)

    The hypothesis of Metcalfe respecting sun‐force and earth‐force is
    not only very simple, but most fascinating.... Here are two
    elements in the universe, the one is ponderable matter.... The
    second element is the all‐pervading ether, solar fire. It is
    _without weight, substance, form, or colour; it is matter
    infinitely divisible_, and its particles repel each other; its
    rarity is such that we have no word, except ether,(898) by which
    to express it. It pervades and fills space, but alone it too is
    quiescent—dead.(899) We bring together the two elements, the inert
    matter, the self‐repulsive ether [?] and thereupon dead [?]
    ponderable matter is vivified; [_Ponderable matter may be inert
    but never dead—this is Occult Law._] ... through the particles of
    the ponderable substance the ether [_Ether’s second principle_]
    penetrates, and, so penetrating, it combines with the ponderable
    particles and holds them in mass, holds them together in bond of
    union; they are dissolved in the ether.

    This distribution of solid ponderable matter through ether
    extends, according to the theory before us, to everything that
    exists at this moment. The ether is all‐pervading. The human body
    itself is charged with the ether [_Astral Light rather_]; its
    minute particles are held together by it; the plant is in the same
    condition; the most solid earth, rock, adamant, crystal, metal,
    all are the same. But there are differences in the capacities of
    different kinds of ponderable matter to receive sun‐force, and
    upon this depends the various changing conditions of matter; the
    solid, the liquid, the gaseous condition. Solid bodies have
    attracted caloric in excess over fluid bodies, and hence their
    firm _cohesion_; when a portion of molten zinc is poured upon a
    plate of solid zinc, the molten zinc becomes as solid because
    there is a rush of caloric from the liquid to the solid, and in
    the equalization the particles, previously loose or liquid, are
    more closely brought together.... Metcalfe himself, dwelling on
    the above‐named phenomena, and accounting for them by the unity of
    principle of action, which has already been explained, sums up his
    argument in very clear terms, in a comment on the densities of
    various bodies. “Hardness and softness,” he says, “solidity and
    liquidity, are not essential conditions of bodies, but depend on
    the relative proportions of ethereal and ponderable matter of
    which they are composed. The most elastic gas may be reduced to
    the liquid form by the abstraction of caloric, and again converted
    into a firm solid, the particles of which would cling together
    with a force proportional to their augmented affinity for caloric.
    On the other hand, by adding a sufficient quantity of the same
    principle to the densest metals, their attraction for it is
    diminished when they are expanded into the gaseous state, and
    their cohesion is destroyed.”


Having thus quoted at length the heterodox views of the great
“heretic”—views that to be correct, need only a little alteration of terms
here and there—Dr. Richardson, undeniably an original and liberal thinker,
proceeds to sum up these views, and continues:


    I shall not dwell at great length on this unity of sun‐force and
    earth‐force, which this theory implies. But I may add that out of
    it, or out of the hypothesis of mere motion as force, and of
    virtue without substance, we may gather, as the nearest possible
    approach to the truth on this, the most complex and profound of
    all subjects, the following inferences:

    (_a_) Space, inter‐stellary, inter‐planetary, inter‐material,
    inter‐organic, is not a vacuum, but is filled with a subtle fluid
    or gas, which for want of a better term(900) we may still call, as
    the ancients did, _Aith‐ur_—Solar Fire—Æther. This fluid,
    unchangeable in composition, indestructible, invisible,(901)
    pervades everything and all [_ponderable_] matter,(902) the pebble
    in the running brook, the tree overhanging, the man looking on, is
    charged with the ether in various degrees; the pebble less than
    the tree, the tree less than man. All in the planet is in like
    manner so charged! A world is built up in ethereal fluid, and
    moving through a sea of it.

    (_b_) The ether, whatever its nature is, is from the sun and from
    the suns:(903) the suns are the generators of it, the store‐houses
    of it, the diffusers of it.(904)

    (_c_) Without the ether there could be no motion; without it
    particles of ponderable matter could not glide over each other;
    without it there could be no impulse to excite those particles
    into action.

    (_d_) Ether determines the constitution of bodies. Were there no
    ether there could be no change of constitution in substance;
    water, for instance, could only exist as a substance, compact and
    insoluble beyond any conception we could form of it. It could
    never even be ice, never fluid, never vapour, except for ether.

    (_e_) Ether connects sun with planet, planet with planet, man with
    planet, man with man. Without ether there could be no
    communication in the Universe; no light, no heat, no phenomenon of
    motion.


Thus we find that Ether and elastic Atoms are, in the alleged mechanical
conception of the Universe, the Spirit and Soul of Kosmos, and that the
theory—put it in any way and under any disguise—always leaves a more
widely opened issue for men of Science to speculate upon beyond the line
of modern Materialism(905) than the majority avails itself of. Atoms,
Ether, or both, modern speculation cannot get out of the circle of ancient
thought; and the latter was soaked through with archaic Occultism.
Undulatory or corpuscular theory—it is all one. It is speculation from the
aspects of phenomena, not from the knowledge of the essential nature of
the cause and causes. When Modern Science has explained to its audience
the late achievements of Bunsen and Kirchoff; when it has shown the seven
colours, the primary of a ray which is decomposed in a fixed order on a
screen; and has described the respective lengths of luminous waves, what
has it proved? It has justified its reputation for exactness in
mathematical achievement by measuring even the length of a luminous
wave—“varying from about seven hundred and sixty millionths of a
millimètre at the red end of the spectrum to about three hundred and
ninety‐three millionths of a millimètre at the violet end.” But when the
exactness of the calculation with regard to the effect on the light‐wave
is thus vindicated, Science is forced to admit that the Force, which is
the supposed cause, is _believed_ to produce “inconceivably minute
undulations” in some medium—“generally regarded as identical with the
ethereal medium”(906)—and that medium itself is still only—a “hypothetical
agent”!

Auguste Comte’s pessimism with respect to the possibility of knowing some
day the chemical composition of the Sun, has not, as has been averred,
been belied thirty years later by Kirchoff. The spectroscope has helped us
to see that the elements, with which the modern Chemist is familiar, must
in all probability be present in the Sun’s outward “robes”—_not in the Sun
itself_; and, taking these “robes,” the solar cosmic veil, for the Sun
itself, the Physicists have declared its luminosity to be due to
combustion and flame, and mistaking the vital principle of that luminary
for a purely material thing, have called it “chromosphere.”(907) We have
only hypotheses and theories so far, not law—by any means.




Section VII. Life, Force, or Gravity.


The imponderable fluids have had their day; mechanical Forces are less
talked about; Science has put on a new face for this last quarter of a
century; but gravitation has remained, owing its life to new combinations
after the old ones had nearly killed it. It may answer scientific
hypotheses very well, but the question is whether it answers as well to
truth, and represents a fact in nature. Attraction by itself is not
sufficient to explain even planetary motion; how can it then presume to
explain the rotatory motion in the infinitudes of Space? Attraction alone
will never fill all the gaps, unless a special impulse is admitted for
every sidereal body, and the rotation of every planet with its satellites
is shown to be due to some one cause combined with attraction. And even
then, says an Astronomer,(908) Science would have to name that cause.

Occultism has named it for ages, and so have all the ancient Philosophers;
but then all such beliefs are now proclaimed exploded superstitions. The
extra‐cosmic God has killed every possibility of belief in intra‐cosmic
intelligent Forces; yet who, or what, is the original “pusher” in that
motion? Says Francœur:(909)


    When we have learned the cause, _unique et speciale_, that pushes,
    we will be ready to combine it with the one which attracts.


And again:


    Attraction between the celestial bodies is only repulsion: it is
    the sun that drives them incessantly onward; for otherwise, their
    motion would stop.


If ever this theory of the Sun‐Force being the primal cause of all life on
earth, and of all motion in heaven, is accepted, and if that other far
bolder theory of Herschell, about certain organisms in the Sun, is
accepted even as a provisional hypothesis, then will our teachings be
vindicated, and Esoteric allegory will be shown to have anticipated Modern
Science by millions of years, probably, for such are the Archaic
Teachings. Mârttânda, the Sun, watches and threatens his seven brothers,
the planets, without abandoning the central position to which his Mother,
Aditi, relegated him. The Commentary(910) says:


    _He pursues them, turning slowly around himself, ... following
    from afar the direction in which his brothers move, on the path
    that encircles their houses_—or the orbit.


It is the sun‐fluids or emanations that impart all motion, and awaken all
into life, in the Solar System. It is attraction and repulsion, but not as
understood by modern Physics or according to the law of gravity, but in
harmony with the laws of _manvantaric motion_ designed from the early
Sandhyâ, the Dawn of the rebuilding and higher reformation of the System.
These laws are immutable; but the motion of all the bodies—which motion is
diverse and alters with every minor Kalpa—is regulated by the Movers, the
Intelligences within the Cosmic Soul. Are we so very wrong in believing
all this? Well, here is a great and modern man of Science who, speaking of
vital electricity, uses language far more akin to Occultism than to modern
Materialistic thought. We refer the sceptical reader to an article on “The
Source of Heat in the Sun,” by Robert Hunt, F.R.S.,(911) who, speaking of
the luminous envelope of the Sun and its “peculiar curdy appearance,”
says:


    Arago proposed that this envelope should be called the
    Photosphere, a name now generally adopted. By the elder Herschell,
    the surface of this photosphere was compared to mother‐of‐
    pearl.... It resembles the ocean on a tranquil summer‐day, when
    its surface is slightly crisped by a gentle breeze.... Mr. Nasmyth
    has discovered a more remarkable condition than any that had
    previously been suspected, ... objects which are peculiarly lens‐
    shaped ... like “willow leaves,” ... different in size ... not
    arranged in any order, ... crossing each other in all directions
    ... with an irregular motion among themselves.... They are seen
    approaching to and receding from each other, and sometimes
    assuming new angular positions, so that the appearance ... has
    been compared to a dense shoal of fish, which, indeed, they
    resemble in shape.... The size of these objects gives a grand idea
    of the gigantic scale upon which physical (?) operations are
    carried out in the sun. They cannot be less than 1,000 miles in
    length, and from two to three hundred miles in breadth. The most
    probable conjecture which has been offered respecting those leaf
    or lens‐like objects, is that the photosphere(912) is an immense
    ocean of gaseous matter [what kind of “matter”?] ... in a state of
    intense [apparent] incandescence, and that they are perspective
    projections of the sheets of flame.


Solar “flames” seen through telescopes are reflections, says Occultism.
But the reader has already seen what Occultists have to say to this.


    Whatever they [those sheets of flame] may be, it is evident they
    are the immediate sources of solar heat and light. Here we have a
    surrounding envelope of photogenic matter,(913) which pendulates
    with mighty energies, and by communicating its motion to the
    ethereal medium in stellar space, produces heat and light in far
    distant worlds. We have said that those forms have been compared
    to certain organisms, and Herschell says, “Though it would be too
    daring to speak of such organizations as _partaking of life_ [why
    not?],(914) yet we do not know that vital action is competent to
    develop heat, light, and electricity.”... Can it be that there is
    truth in this fine thought? May the pulsing of vital matter in the
    central sun of our system be the source of all that life which
    crowds the earth, and without doubt overspreads the other planets,
    to which the sun is the mighty minister?


Occultism answers these queries in the affirmative; and Science will find
this to be the case, one day.

Again, Mr. Hunt writes:


    But regarding Life—Vital Force—as a power far more exalted than
    either light, heat, or electricity, and indeed capable of exerting
    a controlling power over them all [this is absolutely Occult] ...
    we are certainly disposed to view with satisfaction that
    speculation which supposes the photosphere to be the primary seat
    of vital power, and to regard with a poetic pleasure that
    hypothesis which refers the solar energies to Life.(915)


Thus, we have an important scientific corroboration for one of our
fundamental dogmas—namely, that (_a_) the Sun is the store‐house of Vital
Force, which is the Noumenon of Electricity; and (_b_) that it is from its
mysterious, never‐to‐be‐fathomed depths, that issue those life‐currents
which thrill through Space, as through the organisms of every living thing
on Earth. For see what another eminent Physician says, who calls this, our
life‐fluid, “Nervous Ether.” Change a few sentences in the article,
extracts from which now follow, and you have another quasi‐Occult treatise
on Life‐Force. It is again Dr. B. W. Richardson, F.R.S., who gives his
views as follows on “Nervous Ether,” as he has on “Sun‐Force” and “Earth‐
Force”:


    The idea attempted to be conveyed by the theory is, that between
    the molecules of the matter, solid or fluid, of which the nervous
    organisms, and, indeed, of which all the organic parts of a body
    are composed, there exists a refined subtle medium, vaporous or
    gaseous, which holds the molecules in a condition for motion upon
    each other, and for arrangement and reärrangement of form; a
    medium by and through which all motion is conveyed; by and through
    which the one organ or part of the body is held in communion with
    the other parts, by which and through which the outer living world
    communicates with the living man; a medium, which, being present,
    enables the phenomena of life to be demonstrated, and which, being
    universally absent, leaves the body actually dead.


And the whole Solar System falls into Pralaya—the author might have added.
But let us read further:


    I use the word ether in its general sense as meaning a very light,
    vaporous or gaseous matter; I use it, in short, as the astronomer
    uses it when he speaks of the ether of Space, by which he means a
    subtle but material medium.... When I speak of a _nervous_ ether,
    I do not convey that the ether is existent in nervous structure
    only: I believe truly that it is a special part of the nervous
    organization; but, as nerves pass into all structures that have
    capacities for movement and sensibilities, so the nervous ether
    passes into all such parts; and as the nervous ether is, according
    to my view, a direct product from blood, so we may look upon it as
    a part of the atmosphere of the blood.... The evidence in favour
    of the existence of an elastic medium pervading the nervous matter
    and capable of being influenced by simple pressure is all‐
    convincing.... In nervous structure there is, unquestionably, a
    true nervous fluid, as our predecessors taught.(916) The precise
    chemical (?)(917) composition of this fluid is not yet well known;
    the physical characters of it have been little studied. Whether it
    moves in currents, we do not know; whether it circulates, we do
    not know; whether it is formed in the centres and passes from them
    to the nerves, or whether it is formed everywhere where blood
    enters nerve, we do not know. The exact uses of the fluid we do
    not consequently know. It occurs to my mind, however, that the
    veritable fluid of nervous matter is not of itself sufficient to
    act as the subtle medium that connects the outer with the inner
    universe of man and animal. I think—and this is the modification I
    suggest to the older theory—there must be another form of matter
    present during life; a matter which exists in the condition of
    vapour or gas, which pervades the whole nervous organism,
    surrounds as an enveloping atmosphere(918) each molecule of
    nervous structure, and is the medium of all motion, communicated
    to and from the nervous centres.... When it is once fairly
    presented to the mind that during life _there is in the animal
    body a finely diffused form of matter_, a vapour filling every
    part—and even stored in some parts; a matter constantly renewed by
    the vital chemistry; a matter as easily disposed of as the breath,
    after it has served its purpose—a new flood of light breaks on the
    intelligence.(919)


A new flood of light is certainly thrown on the wisdom of ancient and
mediæval Occultism and its votaries. For Paracelsus wrote the same thing
more than three hundred years ago, in the sixteenth century, as follows:


    The whole of the Microcosm is potentially contained in the Liquor
    Vitæ, a nerve fluid ... in which is contained the nature, quality,
    character, and essence of beings.(920)

    The Archæus is an essence that is equally distributed in all parts
    of the human body.... The Spiritus Vitæ takes its origin from the
    Spiritus Mundi. Being an emanation of the latter, it contains the
    elements of all cosmic influences, and is therefore the cause by
    which the action of the stars [cosmic forces] upon the invisible
    body of man [his vital _Linga Sharîra_] may be explained.(921)


Had Dr. Richardson studied all the secret works of Paracelsus, he would
not have been obliged to confess so often, “we do not know,” “it is not
known to us,” etc. Nor would he ever have written the following sentence,
recanting the best portions of his independent rediscovery.


    It may be urged that in this line of thought is included no more
    than the theory of the existence of the ether ... supposed to
    pervade space.... It may be said that this universal ether
    pervades all the organism of the animal body as from without, and
    as part of every organization. This view would be Pantheism
    physically discovered, _if it were true_ [!!]. It fails to be true
    because it would destroy the individuality of every individual
    sense.(922)


We fail to see this, and we _know_ it is not so. Pantheism _may_ be
“physically rediscovered.” It was known, seen, and felt by the whole of
antiquity. Pantheism manifests itself in the vast expanse of the starry
heavens, in the breathing of the seas and oceans, and in the quiver of
life of the smallest blade of grass. Philosophy rejects one _finite_ and
_imperfect_ God in the universe, the anthropomorphic deity of the
Monotheist as represented by his followers. It repudiates, in its name of
_Philo‐theo‐sophia_, the grotesque idea that Infinite, Absolute Deity
should, or rather could, have any direct or indirect relation to finite
illusive evolutions of Matter, and therefore it cannot imagine a universe
_outside_ that Deity, or the absence of that Deity from the smallest speck
of animate or inanimate Substance. This does not mean that every bush,
tree or stone is God or _a_ God; but only that every speck of the
manifested material of Kosmos belongs to, and is the Substance of, God,
however low it may have fallen in its cyclic gyration through the
Eternities of the Ever‐Becoming; and also that every such speck
individually, and Kosmos collectively, is an aspect and a reminder of that
universal One Soul—which Philosophy refuses to call God, thus limiting the
eternal and ever‐present Root and Essence.

Why either the Ether of Space or “Nervous Ether” should “destroy the
individuality of every sense,” seems incomprehensible to one acquainted
with the real nature of that “Nervous Ether” under its Sanskrit, or rather
Esoteric and Kabalistic name. Dr. Richardson agrees that:


    If we did not individually produce the medium of communication
    between ourselves and the outer world, if it were produced from
    without and adapted to one kind of vibration alone, there were
    fewer senses required than we possess: for, taking two
    illustrations only—ether of light is not adapted for sound, and
    yet we hear as well and see; while air, the medium of motion of
    sound, is not the medium of light, and yet we see and hear.


This is not so. The opinion that Pantheism “fails to be true because it
would destroy the individuality of every individual sense” shows that all
the conclusions of the learned doctor are based on the modern physical
theories, though he would fain reform them. But he will find it impossible
to do this unless he allows the existence of spiritual senses to replace
the gradual atrophy of the physical. “We see and hear,” in accordance (of
course, in Dr. Richardson’s mind) with the explanations of the phenomena
of sight and hearing, afforded by that same Materialistic Science which
postulates that we cannot see and hear otherwise. The Occultists and
Mystics know better. The Vedic Âryans were as familiar with the mysteries
of sound and colour on the physical plane as are our Physiologists, but
they had also mastered the secrets of both on planes inaccessible to the
Materialist. They knew of a double set of senses; spiritual and material.
In a man who is deprived of one or more senses, the remaining senses
become the more developed; for instance, the blind man will recover his
sight through the senses of touch, of hearing, etc., and he who is deaf
will be able to hear through sight, by seeing _audibly_ the words uttered
by the lips and mouth of the speaker. But these are cases that belong to
the world of Matter still. The spiritual senses, those that act on a
higher plane of consciousness, are rejected _à priori_ by Physiology,
because the latter is ignorant of the Sacred Science. It limits the action
of Ether to vibrations, and, dividing it from air—though air is simply
differentiated and compound Ether—makes it assume functions to fit in with
the special theories of the Physiologist. But there is more real Science
in the teachings of the _Upanishads_, when these are correctly understood,
than the Orientalists, who do not understand them at all, are ready to
admit. Mental as well as physical correlations of the seven senses—seven
on the physical and seven on the mental planes—are clearly explained and
defined in the _Vedas_, and especially in the _Upanishad_ called
_Anugîtâ_:


    The indestructible and the destructible, such is the double
    manifestation of the Self. Of these the indestructible is the
    existent [the true essence or nature of Self, the underlying
    principles], the manifestation as an individual (entity) is called
    the destructible.(923)


Thus speaks the Ascetic in the _Anugîtâ_, and also:


    Every one who is twice‐born [initiated] knows such is the teaching
    of the ancients.... Space is the first entity.... Now Space
    [Âkâsha, or the Noumenon of Ether] has one quality ... and that is
    stated to be sound only ... [and the] qualities of sound [are]
    Shadja, Rishabha, together with Gândhâra, Madhyama, Panchama, and
    beyond these [should be understood to be] Nishâda and Dhaivata
    [the Hindû gamut].(924)


These seven notes of the scale are the principles of sound. The qualities
of every Element, as of every sense, are septenary, and to judge and
dogmatize on them from their manifestation on the material or objective
plane—likewise sevenfold in itself—is quite arbitrary. For it is only by
the SELF emancipating itself from these seven causes of illusion, that we
can acquire the knowledge (Secret Wisdom) of the qualities of objects of
sense on their dual plane of manifestation, the visible and the invisible.
Thus it is said:


    Hear me ... state this wonderful mystery.... Hear also the
    assignment of causes exhaustively. The nose, and the tongue, and
    the eye, and the skin, and the ear as the fifth [organ of sense]
    mind and understanding,(925) these seven [senses] should be
    understood to be the causes of (the knowledge of) qualities.
    Smell, and taste, and colour, sound, and touch as the fifth, the
    object of the mental operation, and the object of the
    understanding [the highest spiritual sense or perception], these
    seven are causes of action. He who smells, he who eats, he who
    sees, he who speaks, and he who hears as the fifth, he who thinks,
    and he who understands, these seven should be understood to be the
    causes of the agents. These [the agents] being possessed of
    qualities (sattva, rajas, tamas), enjoy their own qualities,
    agreeable and disagreeable.(926)


The modern commentators, failing to comprehend the subtle meaning of the
ancient Scholiasts, take the sentence, “causes of the agents,” to mean
“that the powers of smelling, etc., when attributed to the Self, make him
appear as an agent, as an active principle” (!), which is entirely
fanciful. These “seven” are understood to be the causes of the agents,
because “the objects are causes, as their enjoyment causes an impression.”
It means esoterically that they, these seven senses, are caused by the
agents, which are the “deities,” for otherwise what does, or can, the
following sentence mean? “Thus,” it is said, “these seven [senses] are the
causes of emancipation”—_i.e._, when these causes are made ineffectual.
And, again, the sentence, “among the learned [the wise Initiates] who
understand everything, the qualities _which are in the position_ [in the
nature, rather] _of the deities_, each in its place,” etc., means simply
that the “learned” understand the nature of the Noumena of the various
phenomena; and that “qualities,” in this instance, mean the qualities of
the high Planetary or Elementary Gods or Intelligences, which rule the
elements and their products, and not at all the “senses,” as the modern
commentator thinks. For the learned do not suppose their senses to have
aught to do with them, any more than with their SELF.

Then we read in the _Bhagavadgîtâ_ of _Krishna_, the Deity, saying:


    Only some know me truly. Earth, water, fire, air, space [or
    Âkâsha, Æther], mind, understanding and egoism [or the perception
    of all the former on the illusive plane], ... this is a lower form
    of my nature. Know (that there is) another (form of my) nature,
    and higher than this, which is animate, O you of mighty arms! and
    by which this universe is upheld.... All this is woven upon me,
    like numbers of pearls upon a thread.(927) I am the taste in the
    water, O son of Kuntî! I am the light of the sun and moon. I am
    ... sound (“_i.e._, the occult essence which underlies all these
    and the other qualities of the various things mentioned”—Transl.),
    in space ... the fragrant smell in the earth, refulgence in the
    fire ... etc.(928)


Truly, then, one should study Occult Philosophy before one begins to seek
for and verify the mysteries of Nature on its surface alone, as he alone
“who knows the truth about the qualities of Nature, who understands the
creation of all entities ... is emancipated” from error. Says the
Preceptor:


    Accurately understanding the great (tree) of which the unperceived
    [Occult Nature, the root of all] is the sprout from the seed
    [Parabrahman], which consists of the understanding [Mahat, or the
    Universal Intelligent Soul] as its trunk, the branches of which
    are the great egoism,(929) in the holes of which are the sprouts,
    namely, the senses, of which the great [occult, or invisible]
    elements are the flower‐bunches,(930) the gross elements [the
    gross objective matter], the smaller boughs, which are always
    possessed of leaves, always possessed of flowers ... which is
    eternal and the seed of which is the Brahman [the Deity]; and
    cutting it with that excellent sword—knowledge [Secret Wisdom]—one
    attains immortality and casts off birth and death.(931)


This is the Tree of Life, the Ashvattha tree, after the cutting of which
only, Man, the slave of life and death, can be emancipated.

But the men of Science know nought, nor will they hear of the “Sword of
Knowledge” used by the Adepts and Ascetics. Hence the one‐sided remarks of
even the most liberal among them, based on and flowing from undue
importance given to the arbitrary divisions and classification of Physical
Science. Occultism heeds them very little, and Nature heeds them still
less. The whole range of physical phenomena proceeds from the Primary of
Æther—Âkâsha, as dual‐natured Âkâsha proceeds from undifferentiated Chaos,
so‐called, the latter being the primary aspect of Mûlaprakriti, the Root‐
Matter and the first abstract Idea one can form of Parabrahman. Modern
Science may divide its hypothetically conceived Ether in as many ways as
it likes; the real Æther of Space will remain as it is throughout. It has
its seven “principles,” as all the rest of Nature has, and where there was
no Æther there would be _no_ “sound,” as it is the vibrating sounding‐
board in Nature in all its seven differentiations. This is the first
mystery the Initiates of old have learned. Our present normal physical
senses were, from our present point of view, abnormal in those days of
slow and progressive downward evolution and fall into Matter. And there
was a day when all that in our modern times is regarded as exceptional, so
puzzling to the Physiologists now compelled to believe in them—such as
thought‐transference, clairvoyance, clairaudience, etc.; in short, all
that is now called “wonderful and abnormal”—when all that and much more
belonged to the senses and faculties common to all humanity. We are,
however, cycling back and cycling forward; that is to say, that having
lost in spirituality what we acquired in physical development until almost
the end of the Fourth Race, we are now as gradually and imperceptibly
losing in the physical all that we regain once more in the spiritual
reëvolution. This process must go on, until the period which will bring
the Sixth Root‐Race on a line parallel with the spirituality of the Second
Race, a long extinct mankind.

But this will hardly be understood at present. We must return to Dr.
Richardson’s hopeful, though somewhat incorrect hypothesis about “Nervous
Ether.” Under the misleading translation of the word as “Space,” Âkâsha
has just been shown in the ancient Hindû system as the “first born” of the
One, having but one quality, “Sound,” which is septenary. In Esoteric
language this One is the Father‐Deity, and Sound is synonymous with the
Logos, Verbum, or Son. Whether consciously or otherwise, it must be the
latter; and Dr. Richardson, while preaching an Occult doctrine, chooses
the lowest form of the septenary nature of that Sound, and speculates upon
it, adding:


    The theory, I offer, is that the nervous ether is an _animal
    product_. In different classes of animals it may differ in
    physical quality so as to be adapted to the special wants of the
    animal, but essentially it plays one part in all animals, and is
    produced, in all, in the same way.


Herein lies the nucleus of error leading to all the resultant mistaken
views. This “Nervous Ether” is the lowest principle of the Primordial
Essence which is Life. It is Animal Vitality diffused in all Nature, and
acting according to the conditions it finds for its activity. It is not an
“animal product,” but the living animal, the living flower and plant, are
its products. The animal tissues only absorb it according to their more or
less morbid or healthy state—as do physical materials and structures (in
their primogenial state, _nota bene_)—and, from the moment of the birth of
the Entity, are regulated, strengthened, and fed by it. It descends in a
larger supply to vegetation in the Sushumnâ Sun‐Ray which lights and feeds
the Moon, and it is through her beams that it pours its light upon, and
penetrates man and animal, more during their sleep and rest, than when
they are in full activity. Therefore Dr. Richardson errs again in stating
that:


    The nervous ether is not, according to my idea of it, _in itself
    active, nor an excitant of animal motion in the sense of a force_;
    but it is essential as supplying the conditions by which the
    motion is rendered possible. [It is _just the reverse_.].... It is
    the conductor of all vibrations of heat, of light, of sound, of
    electrical action, of mechanical friction.(932) It holds the
    nervous system throughout in perfect tension, during states of
    life [true]. By exercise it is disposed of [_rather generated_]
    ... and when demand for it is greater than the supply, its
    deficiency is indicated by nervous collapse or exhaustion.(933) It
    accumulates in the nervous centres during sleep, bringing them, if
    I may so speak, to their due tone, and therewith raising the
    muscles to awakening and renewed life.


Just so; this is quite correct and comprehensible. Therefore:


    The body fully renewed by it, presents capacity for motion,
    fulness of form, _life_. The body bereft of it presents inertia,
    the configuration of shrunken death, _the evidence of having lost
    something physical that was in it when it lived_.


Modern Science denies the existence of a “vital principle.” This extract
is a clear proof of its grand mistake. But this “physical something,” that
we call life‐fluid—the Liquor Vitæ of Paracelsus—has not deserted the
body, as Dr. Richardson thinks. It has only changed its state from
activity to passivity, and has become latent, owing to the too morbid
state of the tissues, on which it has hold no longer. Once the _rigor
mortis_ is absolute, the Liquor Vitæ will reäwaken into action, and will
begin its work on the atoms _chemically_. Brahmâ‐Vishnu, the Creator and
the Preserver of Life, will have transformed himself into Shiva the
Destroyer.

Lastly Dr. Richardson writes:


    The nervous ether may be poisoned; it may, I mean, have diffused
    through it, by simple gaseous diffusion, other gases or vapours
    derived from without; it may derive from within products of
    substances swallowed and ingested, or gases of decomposition
    produced during disease in the body itself.(934)


And the learned gentleman might have added on the same Occult principle:
That the “Nervous Ether” of one person can be poisoned by the “Nervous
Ether” of another person or by his “auric emanations.” But see what
Paracelsus said of this “Nervous Ether”:


    The Archæus is of a magnetic nature, and attracts or repulses
    other sympathetic or antipathetic forces belonging to the same
    plane. The less power of resistance for astral influences a person
    possesses, the more will he be subject to such influences. The
    vital force is not enclosed in man, but radiates [within and]
    around him like a luminous sphere [aura] and it may be made to act
    at a distance.... It may poison the essence of life [_blood_] and
    cause diseases, or it may purify it after it has been made impure,
    and restore the health.(935)


That the two, “Archæus” and “Nervous Ether,” are identical, is shown by
the English Scientist, who says that _generally_ the tension of it may be
too high or too low; that it may be so:


    Owing to local changes in the nervous matter it invests.... Under
    sharp excitation it may vibrate as if in a storm and plunge every
    muscle under cerebral or spinal control into uncontrolled
    motion—unconscious convulsions.


This is called nervous excitation, but no one, except the Occultist, knows
the reason of such nervous perturbation, or explains the primary causes of
it. The principle of Life may kill when too exuberant, as much as when
there is too little of it. But this “principle” on the manifested plane,
that is to say, our plane, is but the effect and the result of the
intelligent action of the “Host,” or collective Principle, the manifesting
Life and Light. It is itself subordinate to, and emanates from, the ever‐
invisible, eternal and Absolute One Life, in a descending and reäscending
scale of hierarchic degrees, a true septenary ladder, with Sound, the
Logos, at the upper end, and the Vidyâdharas(936), the inferior Pitris, at
the lower.

Of course, the Occultists are fully aware of the fact that the vitalist
“fallacy,” so derided by Vogt and Huxley, is, nevertheless, still
countenanced in very high scientific quarters, and, therefore, they are
happy to feel that they do not stand alone. Thus, Professor de Quatrefages
writes:


    It is very true that we do not know _what_ life _is_; but no more
    do we know _what_ the force _is_ that set the stars in motion....
    Living beings are heavy, and therefore subject to gravitation;
    they are the seat of numerous and various physico‐chemical
    phenomena which are indispensable to their existence, and which
    must be referred to the action of etherodynamy [electricity, heat,
    etc.]. But these phenomena are here manifested under the influence
    of another force.... Life is not antagonistic to the inanimate
    forces, but it governs and rules their action by its laws.(937)




Section VIII. The Solar Theory.


    A SHORT ANALYSIS OF THE COMPOUND AND SINGLE ELEMENTS OF SCIENCE AS
    AGAINST THE OCCULT TEACHINGS. HOW FAR THIS THEORY, AS GENERALLY
    ACCEPTED, IS SCIENTIFIC.


In his reply to Dr. Gull’s attack on the theory of Vitality, which is
inseparably connected with the Elements of the Ancients in the Occult
Philosophy, Professor Beale, the great Physiologist, has a few words as
suggestive as they are beautiful:


    There is a mystery in life—a mystery which has never been
    fathomed, and which appears greater, the more deeply the phenomena
    of life are studied and contemplated. In living centres—far more
    central than the centres seen by the highest magnifying powers, in
    centres of living matter, where the eye cannot penetrate, but
    towards which the understanding may tend—proceed changes of the
    nature of which the most advanced physicists and chemists fail to
    afford us the conception: nor is there the slightest reason to
    think that the nature of these changes will ever be ascertained by
    physical investigation, inasmuch as they are certainly of an order
    or nature totally distinct from that to which any other phenomenon
    known to us can be relegated.


This “mystery,” or the origin of the Life Essence, Occultism locates in
the same Centre as the nucleus of _prima materia_ of our Solar System, for
they are one.

As says the Commentary:

_The Sun is the heart of the Solar World [System] and its brain is hidden
behind the [visible] Sun. Thence, sensation is radiated into every nerve‐
centre of the great body, and the waves of the life‐essence flow into each
artery and vein.... The planets are its limbs and pulses._

It has been stated elsewhere(938) that Occult philosophy denies that the
Sun is a globe in combustion, but defines it simply as a world, a glowing
sphere, the real Sun being hidden behind, and the visible Sun being only
its reflection, its shell. The Nasmyth willow leaves, mistaken by Sir John
Herschell for “solar inhabitants,” are the reservoirs of solar vital
energy; “the vital electricity that feeds the whole system; the sun _in
abscondito_ being thus the storehouse of our little Cosmos, self‐
generating its vital fluid, and ever receiving as much as it gives out,”
and the visible Sun only a window cut into the real solar palace and
presence, which, however, shews without distortion the interior work.

Thus, during the manvantaric solar period, or life, there is a regular
circulation of the vital fluid throughout our System, of which the Sun is
the heart—like the circulation of the blood in the human body; the Sun
contracting as rhythmically as the human heart does at every return of it.
Only, instead of performing the round in a second or so, it takes the
solar blood ten of its years to circulate, and a whole year to pass
through its auricle and ventricle before it washes the lungs, and passes
thence back to the great arteries and veins of the System.

This, Science will not deny, since Astronomy knows of the fixed cycle of
eleven years when the number of solar spots increases,(939) the increase
being due to the contraction of the Solar Heart. The Universe, our World
in this case, breathes, just as man and every living creature, plant, and
even mineral does upon the Earth; and as our Globe itself breathes every
twenty‐four hours. The dark region is not due to the “absorption exerted
by the vapours issuing from the bosom of the sun, and interposed between
the observer and the photosphere,” as Father Secchi would have it,(940)
nor are the spots formed “by the matter [heated gaseous matter] itself
which the irruption projects upon the solar disk.” The phenomenon is
similar to the regular and healthy pulsation of the heart, as the life
fluid passes through its hollow muscles. Could the human heart be made
luminous, and the living and throbbing organ made visible, so as to have
it reflected upon a screen, such as is used by lecturers on Astronomy to
show the moon, for instance, then every one would see the sun‐spot
phenomena repeated every second, and that they were due to contraction and
the rushing of the blood.

We read in a work on Geology that it is the dream of Science that:


    All the recognized chemical elements will one day be found but
    modifications of a single material element.(941)


Occult Philosophy has taught this since the existence of human speech and
language, adding, however, on the principle of the immutable law of
analogy, “as it is above, so it is below,” another of its axioms, that
there is neither Spirit nor Matter, in reality, but only numberless
aspects of the One ever‐hidden Is, or Sat. The homogeneous primordial
Element is simple and single, _only on the terrestrial plane_ of
consciousness and sensation, since Matter, after all, is nothing more than
the sequence of our own states of consciousness, and Spirit an idea of
psychic intuition. Even on the next higher plane, that single element
which is defined on our Earth by current Science, as the ultimate
undecomposable constituent of some kind of Matter, would be pronounced in
the world of a higher spiritual perception to be something very complex
indeed. Our purest water would be found to yield, instead of its two
declared simple elements of oxygen and hydrogen, many other constituents,
undreamed of by our modern terrestrial Chemistry. As in the realm of
Matter, so in the realm of Spirit, the shadow of that which is cognized on
the plane of objectivity exists on that of pure subjectivity. The speck of
the perfectly homogeneous Substance, the sarcode of the Hæckelian Moneron,
is now viewed as the archebiosis of terrestrial existence (Mr. Huxley’s
protoplasm)(942); and Bathybius Hæckelii has to be traced to its pre‐
terrestrial archebiosis. This is first perceived by the Astronomers at its
third stage of evolution, and in the “secondary creation,” so‐called. But
the students of Esoteric Philosophy understand well the secret meaning of
the Stanza:


    Brahmâ ... has essentially the _aspect of_ Prakriti, both evolved
    and unevolved.... Spirit, O Twice‐born [Initiate], is the leading
    _aspect_ of Brahmâ. The next is a two‐fold aspect [of Prakriti and
    Purusha] ... both evolved and unevolved; and Time is the
    last!(943)


Anu is one of the names of Brahmâ, as distinct from Brahman, and it means
“atom”; anîyâmsam anîyasâm, “the most atomic of the atomic,” the
“immutable and imperishable (achyuta) Purushottama.”

Surely, then, the elements now known to us—be their number whatever it
may—as they are understood and defined at present, are not, nor can they
be, the _primordial_ Elements. Those were formed from “the _curds of the
cold radiant Mother_” and “_the fire‐seed of the hot Father_,” who “are
one,” or, to express it in the plainer language of Modern Science, those
Elements had their genesis in the depths of the primordial Fire‐mist, the
masses of incandescent vapour of the irresolvable nebulæ; for, as
Professor Newcomb shows,(944) resolvable nebulæ do not constitute a class
of proper nebulæ. More than half of those, he thinks, which were at first
mistaken for nebulæ, are what he calls “starry clusters.”

The elements now known have arrived at their state of permanency in this
Fourth Round and Fifth Race. They have a short period of rest before they
are propelled once more on their upward spiritual evolution, when the
“living fire of Orcus” will dissociate the most irresolvable, and scatter
them again into the primordial One.

Meanwhile the Occultist goes further, as has been shown in the
Commentaries on the Seven Stanzas. Hence he can hardly hope for any help
or recognition from Science, which will reject both his “anîyâmsam
anîyasâm,” the absolutely spiritual Atom, and his Mânasaputras or Mind‐
born Men. In resolving the “single material element” into one absolute
irresolvable Element, Spirit, or Root‐Matter, thus placing it at once
outside the reach and province of Physical Philosophy—he has, of course
but little in common with the orthodox men of Science. He maintains that
Spirit and Matter are two Facets of the unknowable Unity, their apparently
contrasted aspects depending, (_a_) on the various degrees of
differentiation of Matter, and (_b_) on the grades of consciousness
attained by man himself. This is, however, Metaphysics, and has little to
do with Physics—however great in its own terrestrial limitation that
physical Philosophy may now be.

Nevertheless, once that Science admits, if not the actual existence, at
any rate, the possibility of the existence, of a Universe with its
numberless forms, conditions, and aspects built out of a “single
Substance,”(945) it has to go further. Unless it also admits the
possibility of One Element, or the One Life of the Occultists, it will
have to hang up that “single Substance,” especially if limited to only the
solar nebulæ, in mid air, like the coffin of Mahomet, though minus the
attractive magnet that sustained that coffin. Fortunately for the
speculative Physicists, if we are unable to state with any degree of
precision what the nebular theory does imply, we have, thanks to Professor
Winchell, and several dissident Astronomers, been able to learn what it
does not imply.

Unfortunately, this is far from clearing even the most simple of the
problems that have vexed, and do still vex, the men of learning in their
search after truth. We have to proceed with our enquiries, starting with
the earliest hypotheses of Modern Science, if we would discover _where_
and _why_ it sins. Perchance it may be found that Stallo is right, after
all, and that the blunders, contradictions and fallacies made by the most
eminent men of learning are simply due to their abnormal attitude. They
are, and want to remain Materialistic _quand même_, and yet “the general
principles of the atomo‐mechanical theory—the basis of modern Physics—are
substantially identical with the cardinal doctrines of ontological
Metaphysics.” Thus, “the fundamental errors of ontology become apparent in
proportion to the advance of physical science.”(946) Science is
honeycombed with metaphysical conceptions, but the Scientists will not
admit the charge, and fight desperately to put atomo‐mechanical masks on
purely incorporeal and spiritual laws in Nature, on our plane—refusing to
admit their substantiality even on other planes, the bare existence of
which they reject _à priori_.

It is easy to show, however, how Scientists, wedded to their materialistic
views, have, ever since the days of Newton, endeavoured to put false masks
on fact and truth. But their task is becoming every year more difficult;
and every year also, Chemistry, beyond all the other sciences, approaches
nearer and nearer the realm of the Occult in Nature. It is assimilating
the very truths taught by the Occult Sciences for ages, but hitherto
bitterly derided. “Matter is eternal,” says the Esoteric Doctrine. But the
Matter the Occultists conceive of in its _laya_, or _zero_ state, is not
the matter of Modern Science, not even in its most rarefied gaseous state.
Mr. Crookes’ “radiant matter” would appear Matter of the grossest kind in
the realm of the beginnings, as it becomes pure Spirit before it returns
back even to its first point of differentiation. Therefore, when the Adept
or Alchemist adds that, though Matter is eternal, for it is Pradhâna, yet
Atoms are born at every new Manvantara, or reconstruction of the universe,
it is no such contradiction as a Materialist, who believes in nothing
beyond the Atom, might think. There is a difference between _manifested_
and _unmanifested_ Matter, between Pradhâna, the beginningless and endless
cause, and Prakriti, or the manifested effect. Says the Shloka:


    That which is the unevolved cause is emphatically called by the
    most eminent sages, Pradhâna, original base, which is subtile
    Prakriti, _viz._, that which is eternal and which at once is, and
    is not, a mere process.(947)


That which in modern phraseology is referred to as Spirit and Matter, is
ONE in eternity as the Perpetual Cause, and it is neither Spirit nor
Matter, but IT—rendered in Sanskrit by TAD, “that”—all that is, was, or
will be, all that the imagination of man is capable of conceiving. Even
the exoteric Pantheism of Hindûism renders it as no monotheistic
Philosophy ever did, for in superb phraseology its Cosmogony begins with
the well‐known words:


    There was neither day nor night, neither heaven nor earth, neither
    darkness nor light. And there was not aught else apprehensible by
    the senses or by the mental faculties. There was then, however,
    one Brahma, essentially Prakriti [Nature] and Spirit. For the two
    aspects of Vishnu which are other than his supreme essential
    aspect are Prakriti and Spirit, O Brâhman. _When_ these two other
    _aspects_ of his no longer subsist, but are dissolved, _then_ that
    _aspect_ whence form and the rest, _i.e._, _creation_, proceed
    _anew_, is denominated time, O twice‐born.


It is that which is dissolved, or the illusionary _dual_ aspect of That,
the essence of which is eternally One, that we call Eternal Matter, or
Substance, formless, sexless, inconceivable, even to our sixth sense or
mind,(948) in which, therefore, we refuse to see that which Monotheists
call a personal, anthropomorphic God.

How are these two propositions—that “Matter is eternal,” and that “the
Atom is periodical, and not eternal”—viewed by exact Modern Science? The
materialistic Physicist will criticize and laugh them to scorn. The
liberal and progressive man of Science, however, the true and earnest
scientific searcher after truth, such as the eminent Chemist, Mr. Crookes,
will corroborate the probability of the two statements. For hardly had the
echo of his lecture on the “Genesis of the Elements” died away—the lecture
which, delivered by him before the Chemical Section of the British
Association, at the Birmingham meeting in 1887, so startled every
evolutionist who heard or read it—than there came another in March, 1888.
Once more the President of the Chemical Society brought before the world
of Science and the public the fruits of some new discoveries in the realm
of Atoms, and these discoveries justified the Occult Teachings in every
way. They are more startling even than the statements made by him in the
first lecture, and well deserve the attention of every Occultist,
Theosophist, and Metaphysician. This is what he says in his “Elements and
_Meta_‐Elements,” thus justifying Stallo’s charges and prevision, with the
fearlessness of a scientific mind which loves Science for truth’s sake,
regardless of any consequences to his own glory and reputation. We quote
his own words:


    Permit me, gentlemen, now to draw your attention for a short time
    to a subject which concerns the fundamental principles of
    chemistry, a subject which may lead us to admit the possible
    existence of bodies which, though neither compounds nor mixtures,
    are not elements in the strictest sense of the word—bodies which I
    venture to call “meta‐elements.” To explain my meaning it is
    necessary for me to revert to our conception of an element. What
    is the criterion of an element? Where are we to draw the line
    between distinct existence and identity? No one doubts that
    oxygen, sodium, chlorine, sulphur are separate elements; and when
    we come to such groups as chlorine, bromine, iodine, etc., we
    still feel no doubt, although were degrees of “elementicity”
    admissible—and to that we may ultimately have to come—it might be
    allowed that chlorine approximates much more closely to bromine
    than to oxygen, sodium, or sulphur. Again, nickel and cobalt are
    near to each other, very near, though no one questions their claim
    to rank as distinct elements. Still I cannot help asking what
    would have been the prevalent opinion among chemists had the
    respective solutions of these bodies and their compounds presented
    identical colours, instead of colours which, approximately
    speaking, are mutually complementary. Would their distinct nature
    have even now been recognized? When we pass further and come to
    the so‐called rare earths the ground is less secure under our
    feet. Perhaps we may admit scandium, ytterbium, and others of the
    like sort to elemental rank; but what are we to say in the case of
    praseo‐ and neo‐dymium, between which there may be said to exist
    no well‐marked chemical difference, their chief claim to separate
    individuality being slight differences in basicity and
    crystallizing powers, though their physical distinctions, as shown
    by spectrum observations, are very strongly marked? Even here we
    may imagine the disposition of the majority of chemists would
    incline toward the side of leniency, so that they would admit
    these two bodies within the charmed circle. Whether in so doing
    they would be able to appeal to any broad principle is an open
    question. If we admit these candidates how in justice are we to
    exclude the series of elemental bodies or meta‐elements made known
    to us by Krüss and Nilson? Here the spectral differences are well
    marked, while my own researches on didymium show also a slight
    difference in basicity between some at least of these doubtful
    bodies. In the same category must be included the numerous
    separate “elements”—commonly so‐called—have been and are being
    split up. Where then are we to draw the line? The different
    groupings shade off so imperceptibly the one into the other that
    it is impossible to erect a definite boundary between any two
    adjacent bodies and to say that the body on this side of the line
    is an element, while the one on the other side is non‐elementary,
    or merely something which simulates or approximates to an element.
    Wherever an apparently reasonable line might be drawn it would no
    doubt be easy at once to assign most bodies to their proper side,
    as in all cases of classification the real difficulty comes in
    when the border‐line is approached. Slight chemical differences,
    of course, are admitted, and, up to a certain point, so are well‐
    marked physical differences. What are we to say, however, when the
    only chemical difference is an almost imperceptible tendency for
    the one body—of a couple or of a group—to precipitate before the
    other? Again, there are cases where the chemical differences reach
    the vanishing point, although well‐marked physical differences
    still remain. Here we stumble on a new difficulty: in such
    obscurities what is chemical and what is physical? Are we not
    entitled to call a slight tendency of a nascent amorphous
    precipitate to fall down in advance of another a “physical
    difference”? And may we not call coloured reactions depending on
    the amount of some particular acid present and varying, according
    to the concentration of the solution and to the solvent employed,
    “chemical differences”? I do not see how we can deny elementary
    character to a body which differs from another by well‐marked
    colour, or spectrum‐reactions, while we accord it to another body
    whose only claim is a very minute difference in basic powers.
    Having once opened the door wide enough to admit some spectrum
    differences, we have to inquire how minute a difference qualifies
    the candidate to pass? I will give instances from my own
    experience of some of these doubtful candidates.


Here the great Chemist gives several cases of the very extraordinary
behaviour of molecules and earths, apparently the same, but which yet,
when examined very closely, were found to exhibit differences which,
however minute, still show that none of them are simple bodies, and that
the 60 or 70 elements accepted in chemistry can no longer cover the
ground. Their name, apparently, is legion, but as the so‐called “periodic
theory” stands in the way of an unlimited multiplication of elements, Mr.
Crookes is obliged to find some means of reconciling the new discovery
with the old theory. “That theory,” he says:


    Has received such abundant verification that we cannot lightly
    accept any interpretation of phenomena which fails to be in
    accordance with it. But if we suppose the elements reïnforced by a
    vast number of bodies slightly differing from each other in their
    properties, and forming, if I may use the expression, aggregations
    of nebulæ where we formerly saw, or believed we saw, separate
    stars, the periodic arrangement can no longer be definitely
    grasped. No longer, that is, if we retain our usual conception of
    an element. Let us, then, modify this conception. For “element”
    read “elementary group”—such elementary groups taking the place of
    the old elements in the periodic scheme—and the difficulty falls
    away. In defining an element, let us take not an external
    boundary, but an internal type. Let us say, _e.g._, the smallest
    ponderable quantity of yttrium is an assemblage of ultimate atoms
    almost infinitely more like each other than they are to the atoms
    of any other approximating element. It does not necessarily follow
    that the atoms shall all be absolutely alike among themselves. The
    atomic weight which we ascribed to yttrium, therefore, merely
    represents a mean value around which the actual weights of the
    individual atoms of the “element” range within certain limits. But
    if my conjecture is tenable, could we separate atom from atom, we
    should find them varying within narrow limits on each side of the
    mean. The very process of fractionation implies the existence of
    such differences in certain bodies.


Thus fact and truth have once more forced the hand of “exact” Science, and
compelled it to enlarge its views and change its terms, which, masking the
multitude, reduced them to one body—like the Septenary Elohim and their
hosts transformed by the materialistic religionists into one Jehovah.
Replace the chemical terms “molecule,” “atom,” “particle,” etc., by the
words “Hosts,” “Monads,” “Devas,” etc., and one might think the genesis of
Gods, the primeval evolution of manvantaric _intelligent_ Forces, was
being described. But the learned lecturer adds to his descriptive remarks
something still more suggestive; whether consciously or unconsciously, who
knoweth? For he says:


    Until lately such bodies passed muster as elements. They had
    definite properties, chemical and physical; they had recognized
    atomic weights. If we take a pure dilute solution of such a body,
    yttrium for instance, and if we add to it an excess of strong
    ammonia, we obtain a precipitate which appears perfectly
    homogeneous. But if instead we add very dilute ammonia in quantity
    sufficient only to precipitate one‐half of the base present, we
    obtain no immediate precipitate. If we stir up the whole
    thoroughly so as to insure a uniform mixture of the solution and
    the ammonia, and set the vessel aside for an hour, carefully
    excluding dust, we may still find the liquid clear and bright,
    without any vestige of turbidity. After three or four hours,
    however, an opalescence will declare itself, and the next morning
    a precipitate will have appeared. Now let us ask ourselves, What
    can be the meaning of this phenomenon? The quantity of precipitant
    added was insufficient to throw down more than half the yttria
    present, therefore a process akin to selection has been going on
    for several hours. The precipitation has _evidently not been
    effected at random_, those molecules of the base being decomposed
    which happened to come in contact with a corresponding molecule of
    ammonia, for we have taken care that the liquids should be
    uniformly mixed, so that one molecule of the original salt would
    not be more exposed to decomposition than any other. If, further,
    we consider the time which elapses before the appearance of a
    precipitate, we _cannot avoid coming to the conclusion that the
    action which has been going on for the first few hours is of a
    selective character_. The problem is not why a precipitate is
    produced, but what determines or directs some atoms to fall down
    and others to remain in solution. Out of the multitude of atoms
    present, _what power is it that directs each atom to choose the
    proper path? We may picture to ourselves some directive force
    passing the atoms one by one in review, selecting one for
    precipitation and another for solution till all have been
    adjusted._


The italics in the above passage are ours. Well may a man of Science ask
himself: What power is it that directs each Atom? and what is the meaning
of its character being _selective_? Theists would solve the question by
answering “God”; and would thereby solve nothing philosophically.
Occultism answers on its own Pantheistic grounds, and teaches the student
about Gods, Monads, and Atoms. The learned lecturer sees in it that which
is his chief concern: the finger‐posts and the traces of a path which may
lead to the discovery, and the full and complete demonstration, of an
homogeneous element in Nature. He remarks:


    In order that such a selection can be effected there evidently
    must be some slight differences between which it is possible to
    select, and this difference almost certainly must be one of
    basicity, so slight as to be imperceptible by any test at present
    known, but susceptible of being nursed and encouraged to a point
    when the difference can be appreciated by ordinary tests.


Occultism, which knows of the existence and presence in Nature of the One
Eternal Element, at the first differentiation of which the roots of the
Tree of Life are periodically struck, needs no scientific proofs. It says:
Ancient Wisdom has solved the problem ages ago. Aye; earnest, as well as
mocking reader, Science is slowly but surely approaching our domains of
the Occult. It is forced by its own discoveries to adopt _nolens volens_
our phraseology and symbols. Chemical Science is now compelled, by the
very force of things, to accept even our illustration of the evolution of
the Gods and Atoms, so suggestively and undeniably figured in the Caduceus
of Mercury, the God of Wisdom, and in the allegorical language of the
Archaic Sages. Says a Commentary in the Esoteric Doctrine:

_The trunk of the_ ASVATTHA (the tree of Life and Being, the ROD of the
Caduceus) _grows from and descends at every Beginning_ (every new
Manvantara) _from the two dark wings of the Swan_ (HANSA) _of Life. The
two Serpents, the ever‐living and its illusion_ (Spirit and matter) _whose
two heads grow from the one head between the wings, descend along the
trunks interlaced in close embrace. The two tails join on earth_ (the
manifested Universe) _into one, and this is the great illusion, O Lanoo!_

Every one knows what the Caduceus is, modified considerably by the Greeks.
The original symbol—with the triple head of the serpent—became altered
into a rod with a knob, and the two lower heads were separated, thus
disfiguring somewhat the original meaning. Yet it is as good an
illustration as can be for our purpose, this laya rod, entwined by two
serpents. Verily the wonderful powers of the magic Caduceus were sung by
all the ancient poets, with a very good reason for those who understood
the secret meaning.

Now what says the learned President of the Chemical Society of Great
Britain, in that same lecture, which has any reference to, or bearing
upon, our above‐mentioned doctrine? Very little; only this—and nothing
more:


    In the Birmingham address already referred to I asked my audience
    to picture the action of two forces on the original protyle—one
    being time, accompanied by a lowering of temperature; the other,
    swinging to and fro like a mighty pendulum, having periodic cycles
    of ebb and swell, rest and activity, being intimately connected
    with the imponderable matter, essence, or source of energy we call
    electricity. Now, a simile like this effects its object if it
    fixes in the mind the particular fact it is intended to emphasize,
    but it must not be expected necessarily to run parallel with all
    the facts. Besides the lowering of temperature with the periodic
    ebb and flow of electricity, positive or negative, requisite to
    confer on the newly‐born elements their particular atomicity, it
    is evident that a third factor must be taken into account. Nature
    does not act on a flat plane; she demands space for her cosmogenic
    operations, and if we introduce space as the third factor, all
    appears clear. Instead of a pendulum, which, though to a certain
    extent a good illustration, is impossible as a fact, let us seek
    some more satisfactory way of representing what I conceive may
    have taken place. Let us suppose the zigzag diagram not drawn upon
    a plane, but projected in space of three dimensions. What figure
    can we best select to meet all the conditions involved? Many of
    the facts can be well explained by supposing the projection in
    space of Professor Emerson Reynolds’ zigzag curve to be a spiral.
    This figure is, however, inadmissible, inasmuch as the curve has
    to pass through a point neutral as to electricity and chemical
    energy twice in each cycle. We must, therefore, adopt some other
    figure. A figure of eight (8), or lemniscate, will foreshorten
    into a zigzag just as well as a spiral, and it fulfils every
    condition of the problem.


A lemniscate for the evolution downward, from Spirit into Matter; another
form of a spiral, perhaps, in its reinvolutionary path onward, from Matter
into Spirit; and the necessary gradual and final reabsorption into the
_laya_ state, that which Science calls, in her own way, “the point neutral
as to electricity,” or the _zero_ point. Such are the Occult facts and
statement. They may be left with the greatest security and confidence to
Science, to be justified some day. Let us hear some more, however, about
this primordial genetic type of the symbolical Caduceus.


    Such a figure will result from three very simple simultaneous
    motions. First, a simple oscillation backwards and forwards
    (suppose east and west); secondly, a simple oscillation at right
    angles to the former (suppose north and south) of half the
    periodic time—_i.e._, twice as fast; and thirdly, a motion at
    right angles to these two (suppose downwards), which, in its
    simplest form, would be with unvarying velocity. If we project
    this figure in space we find on examination that the points of the
    curves, where chlorine, bromine, and iodine are formed, come close
    under each other; so also will sulphur, selenium, and tellurium;
    again, phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony; and in like manner other
    series of analogous bodies. It may be asked whether this scheme
    explains how and why the elements appear in this order? Let us
    imagine a cyclical translation in space, each evolution witnessing
    the genesis of the group of elements which I previously
    represented as produced during one complete vibration of the
    pendulum. Let us suppose that one cycle has thus been completed,
    the centre of the unknown creative force in its mighty journey
    through space having scattered along its track the primitive
    atoms—the seeds, if I may use the expression—which presently are
    to coalesce and develop into the groupings now known as lithium,
    beryllium, boron, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, sodium,
    magnesium, aluminium, silicon, phosphorus, sulphur, and chlorine.
    What is most probably the form of track now pursued? Were it
    strictly confined to the same plane of temperature and time, the
    next elementary groupings to appear would again have been those of
    lithium, and the original cycle would have been eternally
    repeated, producing again and again the same 14 elements. The
    conditions, however, are not quite the same. Space and electricity
    are as at first, but temperature has altered, and thus, instead of
    the atoms of lithium being supplemented with atoms in all respects
    analogous with themselves, the atomic groupings which come into
    being when the second cycle commences form, not lithium, but its
    lineal descendant, potassium. Suppose, therefore, the _vis
    generatrix_ travelling to and fro in cycles along a lemniscate
    path, as above suggested, while simultaneously temperature is
    declining and time is flowing on—variations which I have
    endeavoured to represent by the downward sink—each coil of the
    lemniscate track crosses the same vertical line at lower and lower
    points. Projected in space, the curve shows a central line neutral
    as far as electricity is concerned, and neutral in chemical
    properties—positive electricity on the north, negative on the
    south. Dominant atomicities are governed by the distance east and
    west from the neutral centre line, monatomic elements being one
    remove from it, diatomic two removes, and so on. In every
    successive coil the same law holds good.


And, as if to prove the postulate of Occult Science and Hindû philosophy,
that, at the hour of the Pralaya, the two aspects of the Unknowable Deity,
“the Swan in darkness,” Prakriti and Purusha, Nature or Matter in all its
forms and Spirit, no longer subsist but are absolutely dissolved, we learn
the conclusive scientific opinion of the great English Chemist, who caps
his proofs by saying:


    We have now traced the formation of the chemical elements from
    knots and voids in a primitive, formless fluid. We have shown the
    possibility, nay, the probability that the atoms are not eternal
    in existence, but share with all other created beings the
    attributes of decay and death.


Occultism says _amen_ to this, as the scientific “possibility” and
“probability” are for it facts, demonstrated beyond the necessity for
further proof, or for any extraneous physical evidence. Nevertheless, it
repeats with as much assurance as ever: “MATTER IS ETERNAL, becoming
atomic (its aspect) only periodically.” This is as sure as that the other
proposition, which is almost unanimously accepted by Astronomers and
Physicists—namely, that the wear and tear of the body of the Universe is
steadily going on, and that it will finally lead to the extinction of the
Solar Fires and the destruction of the Universe—is quite erroneous on the
lines traced by men of Science. There will be, as there ever were in time
and eternity, periodical dissolutions of the manifested Universe, such as
a partial Pralaya after every Day of Brahmâ; and a Universal Pralaya—the
Mahâ‐Pralaya—only after the lapse of every Age of Brahmâ. But the
scientific causes for such dissolution, as brought forward by exact
Science, have nothing to do with the true causes. However that may be,
Occultism is once more justified by Science, for Mr. Crookes said:


    We have shown, from arguments drawn from the chemical laboratory,
    that in matter which has responded to every test of an element,
    there are minute shades of difference which may admit of
    selection. We have seen that the time‐honoured distinction between
    elements and compounds no longer keeps pace with the developments
    of chemical science, but must be modified to include a vast array
    of intermediate bodies—“meta‐elements.” We have shown how the
    objections of Clerk‐Maxwell, weighty as they are, may be met; and
    finally, we have adduced reasons for believing that primitive
    matter was formed by the act of a generative force, throwing off
    at intervals of time atoms endowed with varying quantities of
    primitive forms of energy. If we may hazard any conjectures as to
    the source of energy embodied in a chemical atom, we may, I think,
    premise that the heat radiations propagated outwards through the
    ether from the ponderable matter of the universe, by some process
    of nature not yet known to us, are transformed at the confines of
    the universe into the primary—the essential—motions of chemical
    atoms, which, the instant they are formed, gravitate inwards, and
    thus restore to the universe the energy which otherwise would be
    lost to it through radiant heat. If this conjecture be well
    founded, Sir William Thomson’s startling prediction of the final
    decrepitude of the universe through the dissipation of its energy
    falls to the ground. In this fashion, gentlemen, it seems to me
    that the question of the elements may be provisionally treated.
    Our slender knowledge of these first mysteries is extending
    steadily, surely, though slowly.


By a strange and curious coincidence even our Septenary doctrine seems to
force the hand of Science. If we understand rightly, Chemistry speaks of
fourteen groupings of primitive atoms—lithium, beryllium, boron, carbon,
nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, sodium, magnesium, aluminium, silicon,
phosphorus, sulphur and chlorine; and Mr. Crookes, speaking of the
“dominant atomicities,” enumerates seven groups of these, for he says:


    As the mighty focus of creative energy goes round, we see it in
    successive cycles sowing in one tract of space seeds of lithium,
    potassium, rubidium, and cæsium; in another tract, chlorine,
    bromine, and iodine; in a third, sodium, copper, silver, and gold;
    in a fourth, sulphur, selenium, and tellurium; in a fifth,
    beryllium, calcium, strontium, and barium; in a sixth, magnesium,
    zinc, cadmium, and mercury; in a seventh, phosphorus, arsenic,
    antimony, and bismuth [which makes seven groupings on the one
    hand. And after showing] ... in other tracts the other
    elements—namely, aluminium, gallium, indium, and thallium;
    silicon, germanium, and tin; carbon, titanium, and zirconium ...
    [he adds] while a natural position near the neutral axis is found
    for the three groups of elements relegated by Professor Mendeleeff
    to a sort of Hospital for Incurables—his eighth family.


It might be interesting to compare these seven, and the eighth family of
“incurables,” with the allegories concerning the seven primitive sons of
“Mother, Infinite Space,” or Aditi, and the eighth son rejected by her.
Many a strange coincidence may thus be found between “those intermediate
links ... named meta‐elements” or elementoids, and those whom Occult
Science names their Noumenoi, the intelligent Minds and Rulers of those
groupings of Monads and Atoms. But this would lead us too far. Let us be
content with finding the confession of the fact that:


    This deviation from absolute homogeneity should mark the
    constitution of these molecules or aggregations of matter which we
    designate elements and will perhaps be clearer if we return in
    imagination to the earliest dawn of our material universe, and,
    face to face with the Great Secret, try to consider the processes
    of elemental evolution.


Thus finally Science, in the person of its highest representatives, in
order to make itself clearer to the profane, adopts the phraseology of
such old Adepts as Roger Bacon, and returns to the “protyle.” All this is
hopeful and suggestive of the “signs of the times.”

Indeed these “signs” are many and multiply daily; but none are more
important than those just quoted. For now the chasm between the Occult
“superstitious and unscientific” teachings and those of “exact” Science is
completely bridged, and one, at least, of the few eminent Chemists of the
day is in the realm of the infinite possibilities of Occultism. Every new
step he will take will bring him nearer and nearer to that mysterious
Centre, from which radiate the innumerable paths that lead down Spirit
into Matter, and which transform the Gods and the living Monads into man
and sentient Nature.

But we have something more to say on this subject in the following
Section.




Section IX. The Coming Force. Its Possibilities And Impossibilities.


Shall we say that Force is “moving Matter,” or “Matter in motion,” and a
manifestation of Energy; or that Matter and Force are the phenomenal
differentiated aspects of the one primary, undifferentiated Cosmic
Substance?

This query is made with regard to that Stanza which treats of FOHAT and
his “Seven brothers or Sons,” in other words, of the _cause_ and the
_effects_ of Cosmic Electricity, the Brothers or Sons of Occult parlance
being the seven primary forces of Electricity, whose purely phenomenal,
and hence grossest, effects are alone cognizable by Physicists on the
cosmic and especially on the terrestrial plane. These include, among other
things, Sound, Light, Colour, etc. Now what does Physical Science tell us
of these “Forces”? SOUND, it says, is a sensation produced by the impact
of atmospheric molecules on the tympanum, which, by setting up delicate
tremors in the auditory apparatus, thus communicate their vibrations to
the brain. LIGHT is the sensation caused by the impact of inconceivably
minute vibrations of ether on the retina of the eye.

So, too, say we. But these are simply the effects produced in our
atmosphere and its immediate surroundings, all, in fact, which falls
within the range of our terrestrial consciousness. Jupiter Pluvius sent
his symbol in drops of rain, of water composed, as is believed, of two
“elements,” which Chemistry dissociates and recombines. The compound
molecules are in its power, but their atoms still elude its grasp.
Occultism sees in all these Forces and manifestations a ladder, the lower
rungs of which belong to exoteric Physics, and the higher are traced to a
living, intelligent, invisible Power, which is, as a rule, the
unconcerned, but, exceptionally, the conscious, Cause of the sense‐born
phenomena designated as this or that natural law.

We say and maintain that SOUND, for one thing, is a tremendous Occult
power; that it is a stupendous force, of which the electricity generated
by a million of Niagaras could never counteract the smallest potentiality
when directed with Occult Knowledge. Sound may be produced of such a
nature that the pyramid of Cheops would be raised in the air, or that a
dying man, nay, one at his last breath, would be revived and filled with
new energy and vigour.

For Sound generates, or rather attracts together, the elements that
produce an _ozone_ the fabrication of which is beyond Chemistry, but is
within the limits of Alchemy. It may even _resurrect_ a man or an animal
whose astral “vital body” has not been irreparably separated from the
physical body by the severance of the magnetic or odic chord. _As one
saved thrice from death_ by that power, the writer ought to be credited
with personally knowing something about it.

And if all this appears too _unscientific_ to be even noticed, let Science
explain to what mechanical and physical laws, known to it, are due the
recently produced phenomena of the so‐called Keely motor. What is it that
acts as the formidable generator of invisible but tremendous force, of
that power which is not only capable of driving an engine of 25 horse‐
power, but has even been employed to bodily lift the machinery? Yet this
is done simply by drawing a fiddle‐bow across a tuning fork, as has been
repeatedly proven. For the Etheric Force, discovered by John Worrell
Keely, of Philadelphia, well‐known in America and Europe, is no
hallucination. Notwithstanding his failure to utilize it—a failure
prognosticated and maintained by some Occultists from the first—the
phenomena exhibited by the discoverer during the last few years have been
wonderful, almost miraculous, not in the sense of the _supernatural_(949)
but of the _superhuman_. Had Keely been permitted to succeed, he might
have reduced a whole army to atoms in the space of a few seconds, as
easily as he reduced a dead ox to that condition.

The reader is now asked to give serious attention to that newly‐discovered
potency, which the discoverer has named Inter‐Etheric Force, and Forces.

In the humble opinion of the Occultists, as of his immediate friends, Mr.
Keely was, and still is, at the threshold of some of the greatest secrets
of the Universe; of that chiefly on which is built the whole mystery of
physical Forces, and the Esoteric significance of the “Mundane Egg”
symbolism. Occult Philosophy, viewing the manifested and the unmanifested
Kosmos as a UNITY, symbolizes the ideal conception of the former by that
“Golden Egg” with two poles in it. It is the positive pole that acts in
the manifested World of Matter, while the negative loses itself in the
unknowable Absoluteness of SAT—_Be‐ness_.(950) Whether this agrees with
the philosophy of Mr. Keely, we cannot tell, nor does it really much
matter. Nevertheless, his ideas about the ethero‐material construction of
the Universe look strangely like our own, being _in this respect_ nearly
identical. This is what we find him saying in an able pamphlet compiled by
Mrs. Bloomfield‐Moore, an American lady of wealth and position, whose
incessant efforts in the pursuit of truth can never be too highly
appreciated:


    Mr. Keely, in explanation of the working of his engine, says: “In
    the conception of any machine heretofore constructed, the medium
    for inducing a neutral centre has never been found. If it had, the
    difficulties of perpetual‐motion seekers would have ended, and
    this problem would have become an established and operating fact.
    It would only require an introductory impulse of a few pounds, on
    such a device, to cause it to run for centuries. In the conception
    of my vibratory engine, I did not seek to attain perpetual motion;
    but a circuit is formed that actually has _a neutral centre_,
    which is in a condition to be vivified by my vibratory ether, and,
    while under operation by said substance, is really a machine that
    is virtually independent of the mass (or globe),(951) and it is
    the wonderful velocity of the vibratory circuit which makes it so.
    Still, with all its perfection, it requires to be fed with the
    vibratory ether to make it an independent motor.... All structures
    require a foundation in strength according to the weight of the
    mass they have to carry, but the foundations of the universe rest
    on a vacuous point far more minute than a molecule; in fact, to
    express this truth properly, on an _inter‐etheric point_, which
    requires an infinite mind to understand it. To look down into the
    depths of an etheric centre is precisely the same as it would be
    to search into the broad space of heaven’s ether to find the end,
    with this difference: that one is the positive field, while the
    other is the negative field.”


This is, as may easily be seen, precisely the Eastern Doctrine. Mr.
Keely’s inter‐etheric point is the laya‐point of the Occultists; this,
however, does not require “an infinite mind to understand it,” but only a
specific intuition and ability to trace its hiding‐place in this World of
Matter. Of course, the _laya centre_ cannot be produced, but an _inter‐
etheric vacuum_ can be—as is proved by the production of bell‐sounds in
space. Mr. Keely speaks as an unconscious Occultist, nevertheless, when he
remarks, in his theory of planetary suspension:


    As regards planetary volume, we would ask in a scientific point of
    view, How can the immense difference of volume in the planets
    exist without disorganizing the harmonious action that has always
    characterized them? I can only answer this question properly by
    entering into a progressive analysis, starting on the rotating
    etheric centres that were fixed by the Creator(952) with their
    attractive or accumulative power. If you ask what power it is that
    gives to each etheric atom its inconceivable velocity of rotation
    (or introductory impulse), I must answer that no finite mind will
    ever be able to conceive what it is. The philosophy of
    accumulation is the only proof that such a power has been given.
    The area, if we can so speak, of such an atom presents to the
    attractive or magnetic, the elective or propulsive, all the
    receptive force and all the antagonistic force that characterize a
    planet of the largest magnitude; consequently, as the accumulation
    goes on, the perfect equation remains the same. When this minute
    centre has once been fixed, the power to rend it from its position
    would necessarily have to be so great as to displace the most
    immense planet that exists. When this atomic neutral centre is
    displaced, the planet must go with it. The neutral centre carries
    the full load of any accumulation from the start, and remains the
    same, for ever balanced in the eternal space.


Mr. Keely illustrates his idea of “a neutral centre” in this way:


    We will imagine that, after an accumulation of a planet of any
    diameter, say, 20,000 miles, more or less, for the size has
    nothing to do with the problem, there should be a displacement of
    all the material, with the exception of a crust 5,000 miles thick,
    leaving an intervening void between this crust and a centre of the
    size of an ordinary billiard ball, it would then require a force
    as great to move this small central mass as it would to move the
    shell of 5,000 miles thickness. Moreover, this small central mass
    would carry the load of this crust for ever, keeping it
    equidistant; and there could be no opposing power, however great,
    that could bring them together. The imagination staggers in
    contemplating the immense load which bears upon this point of
    centre, where weight ceases.... This is what we understand by a
    neutral centre.


And this is what Occultists understand by a laya centre.

The above is pronounced to be “unscientific” by many. But so is everything
that is not sanctioned and kept on the strictly orthodox lines of Physical
Science. Unless the explanation given by the inventor himself is
accepted—and his explanations, being quite _orthodox_ from the Spiritual
and the Occult standpoints, if not from that of materialistic speculative
Science, called _exact_, are therefore ours in this particular—what can
Science answer to facts already seen, which it is no longer possible for
anyone to deny? Occult Philosophy divulges few of its most important vital
mysteries. It drops them like precious pearls, one by one, far and wide
apart, and even this only when forced to do so by the evolutionary tidal
wave that carries on Humanity slowly, silently, but steadily, toward the
dawn of the Sixth Race mankind. For once out of the safe custody of their
legitimate heirs and keepers, those mysteries cease to be Occult: they
fall into the public domain, and have to run the risk of becoming curses
more often than blessings in the hands of the selfish—of the Cains of the
human race. Nevertheless, whenever such individuals as the discoverer of
Etheric Force are born, men with peculiar psychic and mental
capacities,(953) they are generally and more frequently helped, than
allowed to go unassisted, groping on their way; if left to their own
resources, they very soon fall victims to martyrdom or become the prey of
unscrupulous speculators. But they are helped only on the condition that
they should not become, whether consciously or unconsciously, an
additional peril to their age: _a danger to the poor_, now offered in
daily holocaust by the less wealthy to the very wealthy.(954) This
necessitates a short digression and an explanation.

Some twelve years back, during the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition, the
writer, in answering the earnest queries of a Theosophist, one of the
earliest admirers of Mr. Keely, repeated to him what she had heard in
quarters, information from which she could never doubt.

It had been stated that the inventor of the “Self‐Motor” was what is
called, in the jargon of the Kabalists, a “_natural‐born_ magician.” That
he was and would remain unconscious of the full range of his powers, and
would work out merely those which he had found out and ascertained in his
own nature—_firstly_, because, attributing them to a wrong source, he
could never give them full sway; and _secondly_, because it was beyond his
power to pass to others that which was _a capacity inherent in his own
special nature_. Hence, the whole secret could not be made over
permanently to anyone, for practical purposes or use.(955)

Individuals born with such a capacity are not very rare. That they are not
heard of more frequently is due to the fact that they live and die, in
almost every case, in utter ignorance that they are possessed of abnormal
powers. Mr. Keely possesses powers which are called abnormal, just because
they happen to be as little known, in our day, as was the circulation of
the blood before Harvey’s time. Blood existed, and it behaved as it does
at present in the first man born from woman; and so exists and has existed
in man that _principle_ which can control and guide etheric vibratory
Force. At any rate, it exists in all those mortals whose _Inner Selves_
are _primordially connected, by reason of their direct descent, with that
group of Dhyân‐Chohans_ who are called “the first‐born of Æther.” Mankind,
psychically considered, is divided into various groups, each group being
connected with one of the Dhyânic Groups that first formed _psychic_ man
(see paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 in the Commentary to Stanza VII.). Mr.
Keely—being greatly favoured in this respect, and besides his psychic
temperament, being, moreover, intellectually a genius in mechanics—may
achieve most wonderful results. He has achieved some already—more than any
mortal man, _not initiated into the final Mysteries_, has achieved in this
age up to the present day. What he has done is—as his friends justly say
of him—certainly quite sufficient “to demolish with the hammer of Science
the idols of Science”—the idols of matter with the feet of clay. Nor would
the writer for a moment think of contradicting Mrs. Bloomfield‐Moore,
when, in her paper on “Psychic Force and Etheric Force,” she states that
Mr. Keely, as a Philosopher:


    Is great enough in soul, wise enough in mind, and sublime enough
    in courage to overcome all difficulties, and to stand at last
    before the world as the greatest discoverer and inventor in the
    world.


And again she writes:


    Should Keely do no more than lead scientists from the dreary
    realms where they are groping into the open field of elemental
    force, where gravity and cohesion are disturbed in their haunts
    and diverted to use; where, from unity of origin, emanates
    infinite energy in diversified forms, he will achieve immortal
    fame. Should he demonstrate, to the destruction of materialism,
    that the universe is animated by a mysterious principle to which
    matter, however perfectly organized, is absolutely subservient, he
    will be a greater spiritual benefactor to our race than the modern
    world has yet found in any man. Should he be able to substitute,
    in the treatment of disease, the finer forces of nature for the
    grossly material agencies which have sent more human beings to
    their graves than war, pestilence and famine combined, he will
    merit and receive the gratitude of mankind. All this and more will
    he do, if he and those who have watched his progress, day by day
    for years, are not too sanguine in their expectations.


The same lady, in her pamphlet, _Keely’s Secrets_,(956) brings forward the
following passage from an article, written in the _Theosophist_ a few
years ago, by the writer of the present volume:


    The author of No. 5 of the pamphlets issued by the Theosophical
    Publication Society, _What is Matter and What is Force_, says
    therein: “The men of science have just found out ‘a fourth state
    of matter,’ whereas the Occultists have penetrated years ago
    beyond the sixth, and therefore do not infer, but know of, the
    existence of the seventh, the last.” This knowledge comprises one
    of the secrets of Keely’s so‐called “compound secret.” It is
    already known to many that his secret includes “the augmentation
    of energy,” the insulation of the ether, and the adaptation of
    dynaspheric force to machinery.


It is just because Keely’s discovery would lead to a knowledge of one of
the most Occult secrets, a secret which can never be allowed to fall into
the hands of the masses, that his failure to push his discoveries to their
logical end seems certain to Occultists. But of this more presently. Even
in its limitations this discovery may prove of the greatest benefit. For:


    Step by step, with a patient perseverance which some day the world
    will honour, this man of genius has made his researches,
    overcoming the colossal difficulties which again and again raised
    up in his path what seemed to be (to all but himself)
    insurmountable barriers to further progress: but never has the
    world’s index finger so pointed to an hour when all is making
    ready for the advent of the new form of force that mankind is
    waiting for. Nature, always reluctant to yield her secrets, is
    listening to the demands made upon her by her master, necessity.
    The coal mines of the world cannot long afford the increasing
    drain made upon them. Steam has reached its utmost limits of
    power, and does not fulfil the requirements of the age. It knows
    that its days are numbered. Electricity holds back, with bated
    breath, dependent upon the approach of her sister colleague. Air
    ships are riding at anchor, as it were, waiting for the force
    which is to make aërial navigation something more than a dream. As
    easily as men communicate with their offices from their homes by
    means of the telephone, so will the inhabitants of separate
    continents talk across the ocean. Imagination is palsied when
    seeking to foresee the grand results of this marvellous discovery,
    when once it is applied to art and mechanics. In taking the throne
    which it will force steam to abdicate, dynaspheric force will rule
    the world with a power so mighty in the interests of civilization,
    that no finite mind can conjecture the results. Laurence Oliphant,
    in his preface to _Scientific Religion_, says: “A new moral future
    is dawning upon the human race—one, certainly, of which it stands
    much in need.” In no way could this new moral future be so widely,
    so universally, commenced as by the utilizing of dynaspheric force
    to beneficial purposes in life.


The Occultists are ready to admit all this with the eloquent writer.
Molecular vibration is, undeniably, “Keely’s legitimate field of
research,” and the discoveries made by him will prove wonderful—yet _only
in his hands_ and _through himself_. The world so far will get but that
with which it can be safely entrusted. The truth of this assertion has,
perhaps, not yet quite dawned upon the discoverer himself, since he writes
that he is absolutely certain that he will accomplish all that he has
promised, and that he will then give it out to the world; but it must dawn
upon him, and at no very far distant date. And what he says in reference
to his work is a good proof of it:


    In considering the operation of my engine, the visitor, in order
    to have even an approximate conception of its _modus operandi_,
    must discard _all thought of engines that are operated upon the
    principle of pressure and exhaustion, by the expansion of steam or
    other analogous gas which impinges upon an abutment, such as the
    piston of a steam‐engine_. My engine has neither piston nor
    eccentrics, nor is there one grain of pressure exerted in the
    engine, whatever may be the size or capacity of it. My system, in
    every part and detail, both in the developing of my power and in
    every branch of its utilization, _is based and founded on
    sympathetic vibration_. In no other way would it be possible to
    awaken or develop my force, and equally impossible would it be to
    operate my engine upon any other principle.... This, however, is
    the true system; and henceforth all my operations will be
    conducted in this manner—that is to say, my power will be
    generated, my engines run, my cannon operated, _through a wire_.
    It has been only after years of incessant labour, and the making
    of almost innumerable experiments, involving not only the
    construction of a great many most peculiar mechanical structures,
    and the closest investigation and study of the phenomenal
    properties of the substance “ether,” _per se_, produced, that I
    have been able to dispense with complicated mechanism, and to
    obtain, as I claim, _mastery over the subtle and strange force
    with which I am dealing_.


The passages underlined by us, are those which bear directly on the Occult
side of the application of the vibratory Force, that which Mr. Keely calls
“sympathetic vibration.” The “wire” is already a step below, or downward
from the pure Etheric plane into the Terrestrial. The discoverer has
produced marvels—the word “miracle” is not too strong—when acting through
the inter‐etheric Force alone, the fifth and sixth principles of Âkâsha.
From a generator six feet long, he has come down to one “no larger than an
old‐fashioned silver watch”; and this by itself is a miracle of
_mechanical_, but not of spiritual, genius. As was well said by his great
patroness and defender, Mrs. Bloomfield‐Moore:


    The two forms of force which he has been experimenting with, and
    the phenomena attending them, are the very antithesis of each
    other.


One was generated and acted upon by and through himself. No one, who
should have repeated the thing done by himself, _could have produced the
same results_. It was truly Keely’s Ether that acted, while Smith’s or
Brown’s Ether would have remained for ever barren of results. For Keely’s
difficulty has hitherto been to produce a machine which would develop and
regulate the Force without the intervention of any “will power” or
personal influence of the operator, whether conscious or unconscious. In
this he has failed, so far as others were concerned, for _no one but
himself_ could operate on his “machines.” Occultly this was a far more
advanced achievement than the “success” which he anticipates from his
wire, but the results obtained from the fifth and sixth planes of the
Etheric, or Astral, Force, _will never be permitted to serve for purposes
of commerce and traffic_. That Keely’s organism is directly connected with
the production of his marvellous results is proven by the following
statement, emanating from one who knows the great discoverer intimately.


    At one time the shareholders of the “Keely Motor Co.” put a man in
    his workshop for the express purpose of discovering his secret.
    After six months of close watching, he said to J. W. Keely one
    day: “I know how it is done, now.” They had been setting up a
    machine together, and Keely was manipulating the stop‐cock which
    turned the force on and off. “Try it, then,” was the answer. The
    man turned the cock, and nothing came. “Let me see you do it
    again,” the man said to Keely. The latter complied, and the
    machinery operated at once. Again the other tried, but without
    success. Then Keely put his hand on his shoulder and told him to
    try once more. He did so, with the result of an instantaneous
    production of the current.


This fact, if true, settles the question.

We are told that Mr. Keely defines electricity “as a certain form of
atomic vibration.” In this he is quite right; but this is Electricity on
the terrestrial plane, and through terrestrial correlations. He estimates—

Molecular vibrations at 100,000,000 per second.
Inter‐molecular vibrations at 300,000,000 per second.
Atomic vibrations at 900,000,000 per second.
Inter‐atomic vibrations at 2,700,000,000 per second.
Ætheric vibrations at 8,100,000,000 per second.
Inter‐Ætheric vibrations at 24,300,000,000 per second.

This proves our point. There are no vibrations that could be counted or
even estimated at an _approximate_ rate beyond “the realm of the fourth
Son of Fohat,” to use an Occult phrase, or that motion which corresponds
to the formation of Mr. Crookes’ radiant matter, lightly called some years
ago the “fourth state of matter”—_on this our plane_.

If the question is asked why Mr. Keely was not allowed to pass a certain
limit, the answer is easy; it was because that, which he has unconsciously
discovered, is the terrible sidereal Force, known to, and named by the
Atlanteans Mash‐mak, and by the Âryan Rishis in their Astra Vidyâ by a
name that we do not like to give. It is the Vril of Bulwer Lytton’s
_Coming Race_, and of the coming Races of our mankind. The name Vril may
be a fiction; the Force itself is a fact, as little doubted in India as is
the existence of the Rishis, since it is mentioned in all the secret
books.

It is this vibratory Force, which, when aimed at an army from an Agni‐
ratha, fixed on a flying vessel, a balloon, according to the instructions
found in Astra Vidyâ, would reduce to ashes 100,000 men and elephants, as
easily as it would a dead rat. It is allegorized in the _Vishnu Purâna_,
in the _Râmâyana_ and other works, in the fable about the sage Kapila
whose “glance made a mountain of ashes of King Sagara’s 60,000 sons,” and
which is explained in the Esoteric Works, and referred to as the
Kapilâksha—Kapila’s Eye.

And is it this Satanic Force that our generations are to be allowed to add
to their stock of Anarchist’s baby‐toys, known as melenite, dynamite
clock‐work, explosive oranges, “flower baskets,” and such other innocent
names? Is it this destructive agency, which, once in the hands of some
modern Attila, a bloodthirsty Anarchist, for instance, would in a few days
reduce Europe to its primitive chaotic state, with no man left alive to
tell the tale—is it this Force which is to become the common property of
all men alike?

What Mr. Keely has already done is grand and wonderful in the extreme;
there is enough work before him in the demonstration of his new system to
“humble the pride of those scientists who are materialistic, by revealing
those mysteries which lie behind the world of matter,” without, _nolens
volens_, revealing it to all. For surely Psychics and Spiritualists, of
whom there are a good number in European armies, would be the first to
personally experience the fruits of the revelation of such mysteries.
Thousands of them would speedily find themselves in blue Ether, perhaps
with the populations of whole countries to keep them company, were such a
Force to be even entirely discovered, let alone made publicly known. The
discovery in its completeness is by several thousand—or shall we say
hundred thousand—years too premature. It will be in its appointed place
and time only when the great roaring flood of starvation, misery, and
underpaid labour ebbs back again—as it will when the just demands of the
many are at last happily attended to; when the proletariat exists but in
name, and the pitiful cry for bread, that rings unheeded throughout the
world, has died away. This may be hastened by the spread of learning, and
by new openings for work and emigration, with better prospects than now
exist, _and on some new continent that may appear_. Then only will Keely’s
Motor and Force, as originally contemplated by himself and his friends, be
in demand, because it will then be more needed by the poor than by the
wealthy.

Meanwhile the Force he has discovered will work through wires, and, if he
succeeds, this will be quite sufficient to make of him the greatest
discoverer of the age in the present generation.

What Mr. Keely says of _Sound_ and _Colour_ is also correct from the
Occult standpoint. Hear him talk as though he were the nursling of the
“Gods‐Revealers,” and as if he had gazed all his life into the depths of
Father‐Mother Æther.

In comparing the tenuity of the atmosphere with that of the etheric flows,
obtained by his invention for breaking up the molecules of air by
vibration, Keely says:


    It is as platinum to hydrogen gas. Molecular separation of air
    brings us to the first sub‐division only; inter‐molecular, to the
    second; atomic, to the third; inter‐atomic, to the fourth;
    etheric, to the fifth; and inter‐etheric, to the sixth sub‐
    division, or positive association with luminiferous ether.(957) In
    my introductory argument I have contended that this is the
    vibratory envelope of all atoms. In my definition of atom I do not
    confine myself to the sixth sub‐division where this luminiferous
    ether is developed in its crude form, as far as my researches
    prove.(958) I think this idea will be pronounced by the physicists
    of the present day, a wild freak of the imagination. Possibly, in
    time, a light may fall upon this theory that will bring its
    simplicity forward for scientific research. At present I can only
    compare it to some planet in a dark space, where the light of the
    sun of science has not yet reached it.... I assume that sound,
    like odour, is a real substance of unknown and wonderful tenuity,
    emanating from a body where it has been induced by percussion and
    throwing out absolute corpuscles of matter, inter‐atomic
    particles, with velocity of 1,120 feet per second; _in vacuo_
    20,000. The substance which is thus disseminated is a part and
    parcel of the mass agitated, and, if kept under this agitation
    continuously, would, in the course of a certain cycle of time,
    become thoroughly absorbed by the atmosphere; or, more truly,
    would pass through the atmosphere to an elevated point of tenuity
    corresponding to the condition of sub‐division that governs its
    liberation from its parent body.... The sounds from vibratory
    forks, set so as to produce etheric chords, while disseminating
    their tones (compound), permeate most thoroughly all substances
    that come under the range of their atomic bombardment. The
    clapping of a bell _in vacuo_ liberates these atoms with the same
    velocity and volume as one in the open air; and were the agitation
    of the bell kept up continuously for a few millions of centuries
    it would thoroughly return to its primitive element; and, if the
    chamber were hermetically sealed, and strong enough, the vacuous
    volume surrounding the bell would be brought to a pressure of many
    thousands of pounds to the square inch, by the tenuous substance
    evolved. In my estimation, sound truly defined is the disturbance
    of atomic equilibrium, rupturing actual atomic corpuscles; and the
    substance thus liberated must certainly be a certain order of
    etheric flow. Under these conditions, is it unreasonable to
    suppose that, if this flow were kept up, and the body thus robbed
    of its element, it would in time disappear entirely? All bodies
    are formed primitively from this highly tenuous ether, animal,
    vegetable, and mineral, and they are only returned to their high
    gaseous condition when brought under a state of differential
    equilibrium.... As regards odour, we can only get some definite
    idea of its extreme and wondrous tenuity by taking into
    consideration that a large area of atmosphere can be impregnated
    for a long series of years from a single grain of musk; which, if
    weighed after that long interval, will be found to be not
    appreciably diminished. The great paradox attending the flow of
    odorous particles is that they can be held under confinement in a
    glass vessel! Here is a substance of much higher tenuity than the
    glass that holds it, and yet it cannot escape. It is as a sieve
    with its meshes large enough to pass marbles, and yet holding fine
    sand which cannot pass through; in fact, a molecular vessel
    holding an atomic substance. This is a problem that would confound
    those who stop to recognize it. But infinitely tenuous as odour
    is, it holds a very crude relation to the substance of sub‐
    division that governs a magnetic flow (a flow of sympathy, if you
    please to call it so). This sub‐division comes next to sound, but
    is above sound. The action of the flow of a magnet coincides
    somewhat to the receiving and distributing portion of the human
    brain, giving off at all times a depreciating ratio of the amount
    received. It is a grand illustration of the control of mind over
    matter, which gradually depreciates the physical till dissolution
    takes place. The magnet on the same ratio gradually loses its
    power and becomes inert. If the relations that exist between mind
    and matter could be equated and so held, we would live on in our
    physical state eternally, as there would be no physical
    depreciation. But this physical depreciation leads, at its
    terminus, to the source of a much higher development—viz., the
    liberation of the pure ether from the crude molecular; which, in
    my estimation, is to be much desired.(959)


It may be remarked that, save for a few small divergencies, no Adept nor
Alchemist could have better explained these theories, in the light of
Modern Science, however much the latter may protest against these novel
views. In all its fundamental principles, if not in its details, this is
Occultism pure and simple; and moreover, it is modern Natural Philosophy
as well.

This new Force, or whatever Science may call it, the effects of which are
undeniable—as is admitted by more than one Naturalist and Physicist who
has visited Mr. Keely’s laboratory and personally witnessed its tremendous
effects—what is it? Is it a “mode of motion,” also, _in vacuo_, since
there is no Matter to generate it except Sound—another “mode of motion,”
no doubt, a _sensation_ caused, like Colour, by vibrations? Fully as we
believe in these vibrations as the proximate, the immediate, cause of such
sensations, we as absolutely reject the one‐sided scientific theory that
there is _no factor_ to be considered as external to us, other than
etheric or atmospheric vibrations.

In this case the American Substantialists are not wrong, though they are
too anthropomorphic and material in their views for these to be accepted
by Occultists, when they argue through Mrs. M. S. Organ, M.D., that:


    There must be positive entitative properties in objects which have
    a constitutional relation to the nerves of animal sensations, or
    there can be no perception. No impression of any kind can be made
    upon brain, nerve, or mind—no stimulus to action—unless there is
    an actual and direct communication of a substantial force.
    [“Substantial” as far as it appears, in the usual sense of the
    word, in this universe of Illusion and Mâyâ, of course; not in
    reality.] That force may be the most refined and sublimated
    immaterial Entity [?]. Yet it must exist; for no sense, element,
    or faculty of the human being can have a perception, or be
    stimulated into action, without some substantial force coming in
    contact with it. This is the fundamental law pervading the whole
    organic and mental world. In the true philosophical sense there is
    no such thing as independent action: for every force or substance
    is correlated to some other force or substance. We can with just
    as much truth and reason assert that no substance possesses any
    inherent gustatory property or any olfactory property—that taste
    and odour are simply sensations caused by vibrations; and hence
    mere illusions of animal perceptions.


There _is_ a transcendental set of causes put in motion, so to speak, in
the occurrence of these phenomena, which, _not being in relation to our
narrow range of cognition_, can only be understood and traced to their
source and their nature, by the spiritual faculties of the Adept. They
are, as Asclepios puts it to the King, “incorporeal corporealities,” such
as “appear in the mirror,” and “abstract forms” that we see, hear, and
smell, in our dreams and visions. What have the “modes of motion,” light,
and ether to do with these? Yet we see, hear, smell and touch them, _ergo_
they are as much _realities_ to us in our dreams, as any other thing on
this plane of Mâyâ.




Section X. On the Elements and Atoms.


When the Occultist speaks of Elements, and of human Beings who lived
during those geological ages, the duration of which it is found as
impossible to determine—according to the opinion of one of the best
English Geologists(960)—as the nature of Matter, it is because he knows
what he is talking about. When he says Man and Elements, he means neither
man in his present physiological and anthropological form, nor the
elemental Atoms, those hypothetical conceptions, existing at present in
scientific minds, the entitative abstractions of Matter in its highly
attenuated state; nor, again, does he mean the compound Elements of
Antiquity. In Occultism the word Element in every case means _Rudiment_.
When we say “Elementary Man,” we mean either the proëmial, incipient
sketch of man, in its unfinished and undeveloped condition, hence in that
form which now lies latent in physical man during his life‐time, and takes
shape only occasionally and under certain conditions; or, that form which
for a time survives the material body, and which is better known as an
Elementary.(961) With regard to Element, when the term is used
metaphysically, it means, in distinction to the mortal, the incipient
Divine Man; and, in its physical usage, it means inchoate Matter in its
first undifferentiated condition, or in the Laya state, the eternal and
normal condition of Substance, which differentiates only periodically;
during that differentiation, Substance is really in an abnormal state—in
other words, it is but a transitory illusion of the senses.

As to the Elemental Atoms, so‐called, the Occultists refer to them by that
name with a meaning analogous to that which is given by the Hindû to
Brahmâ, when he calls him Anu, the Atom. Every Elemental Atom, in search
of which more than one Chemist has followed the path indicated by the
Alchemists, is, in their firm belief, when not _knowledge_, a Soul; not
necessarily a disembodied Soul, but a Jîva, as the Hindûs call it, a
centre of Potential Vitality, with latent intelligence in it, and, in the
case of compound Souls, an intelligent active Existence, from the highest
to the lowest order, a form composed of more or less differentiations. It
requires a Metaphysician—and an Eastern Metaphysician—to understand our
meaning. All those Atom‐Souls are differentiations from the One, and are
in the same relation to it as is the Divine Soul, Buddhi, to its informing
and inseparable Spirit, Âtmâ.

Modern Physics, in borrowing from the Ancients their Atomic Theory, forgot
one point, the most important point of the doctrine; hence they have got
only the husks and will never be able to get the kernel. In adopting
physical Atoms, they omitted the suggestive fact that, from Anaxagoras to
Epicurus, to the Roman Lucretius, and finally even to Galileo, all these
Philosophers believed more or less in _animated_ Atoms, not in invisible
specks of so‐called “brute” matter. According to them, rotatory motion was
generated by larger (read, more divine and pure) Atoms forcing other Atoms
downwards; the lighter ones being simultaneously thrust upward. The
Esoteric meaning of this is the ever cyclic curve of differentiated
Elements downward and upward through intercyclic phases of existence,
until each again reaches its starting‐point or birthplace. The idea was
metaphysical as well as physical; the hidden interpretation embracing Gods
or Souls, in the shape of Atoms, as the _causes_ of all the _effects_
produced on Earth by the _secretions_ from the divine bodies.(962) No
Ancient Philosopher, not even the Jewish Kabalists, ever dissociated
Spirit from Matter, or Matter from Spirit. Everything originated in the
One, and, proceeding from the One, must finally return to the One.


    Light becomes heat, and consolidates into fiery particles; which,
    from being ignited, become cold, hard particles, round and smooth.
    And this is called Soul, imprisoned in its robe of matter.(963)


Atoms and Souls were synonymous in the language of the Initiates. The
doctrine of “whirling Souls,” Gilgoolem, in which so many learned Jews
have believed,(964) had no other meaning esoterically. The learned Jewish
Initiates never meant Palestine alone by the Promised Land, but they meant
the same Nirvâna as do the learned Buddhist and Brahman—the bosom of the
Eternal ONE, symbolized by that of Abraham, and by Palestine as its
substitute on Earth.

Surely no educated Jew ever believed this allegory in its literal sense,
that the bodies of Jews contain within them a principle of Soul which
cannot rest, if the bodies are deposited in a foreign land, until, by a
process called the “whirling of the Soul” the immortal particle reaches
once more the sacred soil of the “Promised Land.”(965) The meaning of this
is evident to an Occultist. The process was supposed to be accomplished by
a kind of metempsychosis, the psychic spark being conveyed through bird,
beast, fish, and the most minute insect.(966) The allegory relates to the
_Atoms of the body_, each of which has to pass through every form, before
all reach the final state, which is the first starting‐point of the
departure of every Atom—its primitive Laya state. But the primitive
meaning of Gilgoolem, or the “Revolution of Souls,” was the idea of the
reïncarnating Souls or Egos. “All the Souls go into the Gilgoolah,” into a
cyclic or revolving process; _i.e._, they all proceed on the cyclic path
of re‐births. Some Kabalists interpret this doctrine to mean only a kind
of purgatory for the souls of the wicked. But this is not so.

The passage of the Soul‐Atom “through the seven Planetary Chambers” had
the same metaphysical and physical meaning. It had the latter when it was
said to dissolve into Ether. Even Epicurus, the model Atheist and
Materialist, knew so much and believed so much in the ancient Wisdom, that
he taught that the Soul—entirely distinct from immortal Spirit, when the
former is enshrined _latent_ in it, as it is in every atomic speck—was
composed of a fine, tender essence, formed from the _smoothest, roundest,
and finest atoms_.(967)

And this shows that the ancient Initiates, who were followed more or less
closely by all profane Antiquity, meant by the term Atom, a Soul, a Genius
or Angel, the first‐born of the ever‐concealed Cause of all causes; and in
this sense their teachings become comprehensible. They asserted, as do
their successors, the existence of Gods and Genii, Angels or Demons, not
outside, nor independent of, the Universal Plenum, but within it. Only
this Plenum, during the life‐cycles, is infinite. They admitted and taught
a good deal of that which modern Science now teaches—namely, the existence
of a primordial World‐Stuff or Cosmic Substance, eternally homogeneous,
except during its periodic existence; then, universally diffused
throughout infinite Space, it differentiates, and gradually forms sidereal
bodies from itself. They taught the revolution of the Heavens, the Earth’s
rotation, the Heliocentric System, and the Atomic Vortices—Atoms being in
reality Souls and Intelligences. These “Atomists” were spiritual, most
transcendental, and philosophical Pantheists. It is not they who would
have ever conceived or dreamed that monstrous contrasted progeny, the
nightmare of our modern civilized race: inanimate material and self‐
guiding Atoms, on the one hand, and an extra‐cosmic God on the other.

It may be useful to show what the Monad was, and what its origin, in the
teachings of the old Initiates.

Modern exact Science, as soon as it began to grow out of its teens,
perceived the great, and to it hitherto esoteric, axiom, that nothing,
whether in the spiritual, psychic, or physical realm of Being, could come
into existence out of nothing. There is no cause in the manifested
Universe without its adequate effects, whether in Space or Time; nor can
there be an effect without its primal cause, which itself owes its
existence to a still higher one—the final and absolute Cause having to
remain to man for ever an incomprehensible Causeless Cause. But even this
is no solution, and must be viewed, if at all, from the highest
philosophical and metaphysical standpoints, otherwise the problem had
better be left unapproached. It is an abstraction, on the verge of which
human reason—however trained in metaphysical subtleties—trembles,
threatening to collapse. This may be demonstrated to any European, who
would undertake to solve the problem of existence, by the articles of
faith of the true Vedântin for instance. Let him read and study the
sublime teachings of Shankarâchârya, on the subject of Soul and Spirit,
and the reader will realize what is now said.(968)

While the Christian is taught that the human Soul is a breath of God,
being created by him for sempiternal existence, having a beginning, but no
end—and therefore never to be called eternal—the Occult Teaching says:
Nothing is created, it is only transformed. Nothing can manifest itself in
this Universe—from a globe down to a vague, rapid thought—that was not in
the Universe already; everything on the subjective plane is an eternal
_is_; as everything on the objective plane is an _ever‐becoming_—because
all is transitory.

The Monad—a truly “indivisible thing,” as defined by Good, who did not
give it the sense we now do—is here rendered as the Âtmâ, in conjunction
with Buddhi and the higher Manas. This trinity is one and eternal, the
latter being absorbed in the former at the termination of all conditioned
and illusive life. The Monad, then, can be traced through the course of
its pilgrimage and in its changes of transitory vehicles, only from the
incipient stage of the manifested Universe. In Pralaya, the intermediate
period between two Manvantaras, it loses its name, as it loses it when the
real One Self of man merges into Brahman, in cases of high Samâdhi (the
Turîya state), or final Nirvâna; in the words of Shankara:


    When the disciple having attained that primeval consciousness,
    absolute bliss, of which the nature is truth, which is without
    form and action, abandons this illusive body that has been assumed
    by the _Âtmâ_ just as an actor (abandons) the dress (put on).


For Buddhi, the Anandamaya Sheath, is but a mirror which reflects absolute
bliss; and, moreover, that reflection itself is yet not free from
ignorance, and is _not_ the Supreme Spirit, since it is subject to
conditions, is a spiritual modification of Prakriti, and is an effect;
Âtmâ alone is the one real and eternal substratum of all, the Essence and
Absolute Knowledge, the Kshetrajña. Now that the Revised Version of the
Gospels has been published and the most glaring mistranslations of the old
versions are corrected, one can understand better the words in 1 _John_ v.
6: “It is the Spirit that beareth witness because the Spirit is truth.”
The words that follow in the mistranslated version about the “three
witnesses,” hitherto supposed to stand for “the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost,” show the real meaning of the writer very clearly, thus still
more forcibly identifying his teaching in this respect with that of
Shankarâchârya. For what can the sentence mean, “there are three that bear
witness ... the Spirit and the Water and the Blood”—if it bears no
relation to, nor connection with, the more philosophical statement of the
great Vedântin teacher, who, speaking of the Sheaths—the principles in
man—Jîva, Vijñânamaya, etc., which _are_, in their physical manifestation,
“Water and Blood” or Life, adds that Âtmâ, Spirit, alone is what remains
after the subtraction of the Sheaths and that it is the Only Witness, or
synthesized unity. The less spiritual and philosophical school, solely
with an eye to a Trinity, made three witnesses out of “one,” thus
connecting it more with Earth than with Heaven. It is called in Esoteric
Philosophy the “One Witness,” and, while it rests in Devachan, is referred
to as the “Three Witnesses to Karma.”

Âtmâ, our seventh principle, being identical with the Universal Spirit,
and man being one with it in his essence, what is then the Monad proper?
It is that homogeneous spark which radiates in millions of rays from the
primeval Seven;—of which Seven something will be said further on. It is
the EMANATING SPARK FROM THE UNCREATED RAY—a mystery. In the esoteric, and
even exoteric Buddhism of the North, Âdi‐Buddha (Chogi Dangpoi Sangye),
the One Unknown, without beginning or end, identical with Parabrahman and
Ain Suph, emits a bright Ray from its Darkness.

This is the Logos, the First, or Vajradhara, the Supreme Buddha, also
called Dorjechang. As the Lord of all Mysteries he cannot manifest, but
sends into the world of manifestation his Heart—the “Diamond Heart,”
Vajrasattva or Dorjesempa. This is the Second Logos of Creation, from whom
emanate the seven—in the exoteric blind the five—Dhyâni‐Buddhas, called
the Anupâdaka, the “Parentless.” These Buddhas are the primeval Monads
from the World of Incorporeal Being, the Arûpa World, wherein the
Intelligences (on that plane only) have neither shape nor name, in the
exoteric system, but have their distinct seven names in the Esoteric
Philosophy. These Dhyâni‐Buddhas emanate, or create from themselves, by
virtue of Dhyâna, celestial Selves—the super‐human Bodhisattvas. These,
incarnating at the beginning of every human cycle on Earth as mortal men,
become occasionally, owing to their personal merit, Bodhisattvas among the
Sons of Humanity, after which they may reäppear as Mânushi, or Human,
Buddhas. The Anupâdaka, or Dhyâni‐Buddhas, are thus identical with the
Brâhmanical Mânasaputra, Mind‐born Sons—whether of Brahmâ, or of either of
the other two Trimûrtian Hypostases; they are identical also with the
Rishis and Prajâpatis. Thus, a passage is found in _Anugîtâ_, which, read
esoterically, shows plainly, though under another imagery, the same idea
and system. It says:


    Whatever entities there are in this world, moveable or immoveable,
    they are the very first to be dissolved [at Pralaya]; and next the
    developments produced from the elements [from which the visible
    universe is fashioned]; and (after) these developments [evolved
    entities], all the elements. Such is the upward gradation among
    entities. Gods, Men, Gandharvas, Pishâchas, Asuras, Râkshasas, all
    have been created by Nature [Svabhâva, or Prakriti, plastic
    Nature], not by actions, nor by a cause [not by any physical
    cause]. These Brâhmanas [the Rishi Prajâpati?], the creators of
    the world, are born here (on earth) again and again. And whatever
    is produced from them is dissolved in due time in those very five
    great elements [the five, or rather seven, Dhyâni‐Buddhas, also
    called “Elements” of Mankind], like billows in the ocean. These
    great elements are in every way (beyond) the elements that make up
    the world [the gross elements]. And he who is released, even from
    these five elements [the Tanmâtras],(969) goes to the highest
    goal. The Lord Prajâpati [Brahmâ] created all this by the mind
    only [by Dhyâna, or abstract meditation and mystic powers, like
    the Dhyâni‐Buddhas].(970)


Evidently then, these Brâhmanas are identical with the terrestrial
Bodhisattvas of the heavenly Dhyâni‐Buddhas. Both, as primordial,
intelligent “Elements,” become the Creators or the Emanators of the Monads
destined to become human in that cycle; after which they evolve
themselves, or, so to say, expand into their own Selves as Bodhisattvas or
Brâhmanas, in heaven and earth, to become at last simple men. “The
creators of the world are born here, on earth again and again”—truly. In
the Northern Buddhist system, or the popular exoteric religion, it is
taught that every Buddha, while preaching the Good Law on Earth, manifests
himself simultaneously in three Worlds: in the Formless World as a Dhyâni‐
Buddha, in the World of Forms as a Bodhisattva, and in the World of
Desire, the lowest or our World, as a man. Esoterically the teaching
differs. The divine, purely Âdi‐Buddhic Monad manifests as the universal
Buddhi, the Mahâ‐Buddhi or Mahat, in Hindû philosophies, the spiritual,
omniscient and omnipotent Root of divine Intelligence, the highest Anima
Mundi or the Logos. This descends “like a flame spreading from the eternal
Fire, immoveable, without increase or decrease, ever the same to the end”
of the cycle of existence, and becomes Universal Life on the Mundane
Plane. From this Plane of conscious Life shoot out, like seven fiery
tongues, the Sons of Light, the Logoi of Life; then the Dhyâni‐Buddhas of
contemplation, the concrete forms of their formless Fathers, the Seven
Sons of Light, _still themselves_, to whom maybe applied the Brâhmanical
mystic phrase: “Thou art THAT”—Brahman. It is from these Dhyâni‐Buddhas
that emanate their Chhâyâs or Shadows, the Bodhisattvas of the celestial
realms, the prototypes of the super‐terrestrial Bodhisattvas, and of the
terrestrial Buddhas, and finally of men. The Seven Sons of Light are also
called Stars.

The star under which a human Entity is born, says the Occult Teaching,
will remain for ever its star, throughout the whole cycle of its
incarnations in one Manvantara. _But this is not his astrological star._
The latter is concerned and connected with the _Personality_; the former
with the _Individuality_. The Angel of that Star, or the Dhyâni‐Buddha
connected with it, will be either the guiding, or simply the presiding,
Angel, so to say, in every new rebirth of the Monad, _which is part of his
own essence_, though his vehicle, man, may remain for ever ignorant of
this fact. The Adepts have each their Dhyâni‐Buddha, their elder “Twin‐
Soul,” and they know it, calling it “Father‐Soul,” and “Father‐Fire.” It
is only at the last and supreme Initiation, however, when placed face to
face with the bright “Image” that they learn to recognize it. How much did
Bulwer Lytton know of this mystic fact, when describing, in one of his
highest inspirational moods, Zanoni face to face with his Augoeides?

The Logos, or both the unmanifested and the manifested Word, is called by
the Hindûs, Îshvara, the Lord, though the Occultists give it another name.
Îshvara, say the Vedântins, is the highest consciousness in Nature. “This
highest consciousness,” answer the Occultists, “is only a synthetic unit
in the World of the manifested Logos—or on the plane of illusion; for it
is the sum total of Dhyân Chohanic consciousness.” “O wise man, remove the
conception that _Not‐Spirit is Spirit_”—says Shankarâchârya. Âtmâ is Not‐
Spirit in its final Parabrahmic state; Îshvara, or Logos, is Spirit; or,
as Occultism explains, it is a compound unity of manifested living
Spirits, the parent‐source and nursery of all the mundane and terrestrial
Monads, _plus_ their divine Reflection, which emanate from, and return
into, the Logos, each in the culmination of its time. There are seven
chief Groups of such Dhyân Chohans, which groups will be found and
recognized in every religion, for they are the primeval Seven Rays.
Humanity, Occultism teaches us, is divided into seven distinct Groups,
with their sub‐divisions, mental, spiritual, and physical. Hence there are
seven chief planets, the spheres of the indwelling seven Spirits, under
each of which is born one of the human Groups which is guided and
influenced thereby. There are only seven planets _specially_ connected
with Earth, and twelve houses, but the possible combinations of their
aspects are countless. As each planet can stand to each of the others in
twelve different aspects, their combinations must be almost infinite; as
infinite, in fact, as the spiritual, psychic, mental, and physical
capacities in the numberless varieties of the _genus homo_, each of which
varieties is born under one of the seven planets and one of the said
countless planetary combinations.(971)

The Monad, then, viewed as One, is above the seventh principle in Kosmos
and man; and as a Triad, it is the direct radiant progeny of the said
compound Unit, not the Breath of “God,” as that Unit is called, nor
creating out of _nihil_; for such an idea is quite unphilosophical, and
degrades Deity, dragging It down to a finite, attributive condition. As
well expressed by the translator of the _Crest‐Jewel of Wisdom_—though
Îshvara is “God.”


    Unchanged in the profoundest depths of Pralayas and in the
    intensest activity of Manvantaras, [still] beyond [him] is ÂTMÂ,
    round whose pavilion is the darkness of eternal MÂYÂ.(972)


The “Triads” born under the same Parent‐Planet, or rather the Radiations
of one and the same Planetary Spirit or Dhyâni‐Buddha are, in all their
after lives and rebirths, sister, or “twin” souls, on this Earth. The idea
is the same as that of the Christian Trinity, the “Three in One,” only it
is still more metaphysical: the Universal “Over‐Spirit,” manifesting on
the two higher planes, those of Buddhi and Mahat. These are the three
Hypostases, metaphysical, but never personal.

This was known to every high Initiate in every age and in every country:
“I and my Father are one,” said Jesus.(973) When he is made to say,
elsewhere: “I ascend to _my_ Father and _your_ Father,”(974) it meant that
which has just been stated. The identity, and at the same time the
illusive differentiation of the _Angel_‐Monad and the _Human_‐Monad is
shown in the sentences: “My Father is _greater_ than I”;(975) “Glorify
_your_ Father _which is in Heaven_”;(976) “Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of _their_ Father” (not _our_
Father).(977) So again Paul asks: “Know ye not ye are the _temple_ of God,
and that the _Spirit of God dwelleth_ in you?”(978) All this was simply
meant to show that the group of disciples and followers attracted to him
belonged to the same Dhyâni‐Buddha, Star, or Father, and that this again
belonged to the same planetary realm and division as he did. It is the
_knowledge_ of this Occult Doctrine that found expression in the review of
_The Idyll of the White Lotus_, when T. Subba Row wrote:


    Every Buddha meets at his last Initiation all the great Adepts who
    reached Buddhahood during the preceding ages ... every class of
    Adepts has its own bond of spiritual communion which knits them
    together.... The only possible and effectual way of entering into
    such brotherhood ... is by bringing oneself within the influence
    of the Spiritual light which radiates from one’s own Logos. I may
    further point out here ... that such communion is only possible
    between persons whose souls derive their life and sustenance from
    the same divine Ray, and that, as seven distinct Rays radiate from
    the “Central Spiritual Sun,” all Adepts and Dhyân Chohans are
    divisible into seven classes, each of which is guided, controlled,
    and overshadowed by one of the seven forms or manifestations of
    the divine Wisdom.(979)


It is then the Seven Sons of Light,—called after their planets and often
identified with them by the rabble, namely, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury,
Mars, Venus, and _presumably_ the Sun and Moon, for the modern critic, who
goes no deeper than the surface of old religions(980)—which are, according
to the Occult Teachings, our heavenly Parents, or synthetically our
“Father.” Hence, as already remarked, Polytheism is really more
philosophical and correct, as to fact and Nature, than is anthropomorphic
Monotheism. Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus, the four exoteric
planets, and the three others, which must remain unnamed, were the
heavenly bodies in direct astral and psychic communication, morally and
physically, with the Earth, its Guides, and Watchers; the visible orbs
furnishing our Humanity with its outward and inward characteristics, and
their Regents or Rectors with our Monads and spiritual faculties. In order
to avoid creating new misconceptions, let it be stated that among the
three Secret Orbs, or Star‐Angels, neither Uranus nor Neptune were
included; not only because they were unknown under these names to the
ancient Sages, but because they, like all other planets, however many
there may be, are the Gods and Guardians of other septenary Chains of
Globes within our System.

Nor do the two great planets last discovered depend entirely on the Sun,
as do the rest of the planets. Otherwise, how can we explain the fact that
Uranus receives 1/390th part of the light received by our Earth, while
Neptune receives only 1/900th part; and that their satellites show a
peculiarity of inverse rotation found in no other planets of the Solar
System? At any rate, what we say applies to Uranus, though the fact has
again been disputed recently.

This subject will, of course, be considered as a mere vagary, by all those
who confuse the universal order of Being with their own systems of
classification. Here, however, simple facts from Occult Teachings are
stated, to be either accepted or rejected, as the case may be. There are
details which, on account of their great metaphysical abstraction,
_cannot_ be entered upon. Hence, we merely state that only seven of our
planets are as intimately related to our Globe, as the Sun is to all the
bodies subject to him in his System. Of these bodies the poor little
number of _primary_ and _secondary_ planets known to Astronomy, looks
wretched enough, in truth.(981) Therefore, it stands to reason that there
are a great number of planets, small and large, that have not been
discovered yet, but of the existence of which ancient Astronomers—all of
them initiated Adepts—must certainly have been aware. But, as the relation
of these to the Gods was sacred, it had to remain arcane, as did also the
names of various other planets and stars.

Besides this, even the Roman Catholic Theology speaks of “_seventy_
planets that preside over the destinies of the nations of this globe;”
and, save the erroneous application, there is more truth in this tradition
than in exact modern Astronomy. The seventy planets are connected with the
seventy elders of the people of Israel,(982) and the Regents of these
planets are meant, not the orbs themselves; the word seventy is a play and
a blind upon the 7 × 7 of the subdivisions. Each people and nation, as we
have already said, has its _direct_ Watcher, Guardian and Father in
Heaven—a Planetary Spirit. We are willing to leave their own national God,
Jehovah, to the descendants of Israel, the worshippers of Sabaoth or
Saturn; for, indeed, the Monads of the people chosen by him are his own,
and the _Bible_ has never made any secret of it. Only the text of the
Protestant English _Bible_ is, as usual, in disagreement with those of the
Septuagint and the Vulgate. Thus, while in the former we read:


    When the Most High [not Jehovah] divided to the nations their
    inheritance ... he set the bounds of the people according to the
    number of the children of Israel.(983)


In the _Septuagint_ the text reads “according to the number of the
Angels,” Planet‐Angels, a version more concordant with truth and fact.
Moreover, all the texts agree that “the Lord’s [Jehovah’s] portion is his
people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance”;(984) and this settles the
question. The “Lord” Jehovah took Israel _for his portion_; what have
other nations to do with that particular national Deity? Let then, the
“Angel Gabriel” watch over Iran and “Mikael‐Jehovah” over the Hebrews.
These are not the Gods of other nations, and it is difficult to see why
Christians should have selected a God against whose commandments Jesus was
the first to rise in rebellion.

The planetary origin of the Monad, or Soul, and of its faculties was
taught by the Gnostics. On its way to the Earth, as on its way back from
the Earth, each soul born in, and from, the “Boundless Light,”(985) had to
pass through the seven planetary regions either way. The pure Dhyâni and
Devas of the oldest religions had become, in course of time, with the
Zoroastrians, the Seven Devs, the ministers of Ahriman, “each chained to
his planet”;(986) with the Brâhmans, the Asuras and some of the
Rishis—good, bad and indifferent; among the Egyptian Gnostics it was
Thoth, or Hermes, who was the chief of the Seven whose names are given by
Origen as Adonai, genius of the Sun; Tao, of the Moon; Eloi, of Jupiter;
Sabaoth, of Mars; Orai, of Venus; Astaphai, of Mercury; and Ildabaoth
(Jehovah), of Saturn. Finally, the _Pistis‐Sophia_, which the greatest
modern authority on exoteric Gnostic beliefs, the late Mr. C. W. King,
refers to as “that precious monument of Gnosticism”—this old document
echoes the archaic belief of the ages, while distorting it to suit
sectarian purposes. The Astral Rulers of the Spheres, the planets, create
the Monads, or Souls, from their own substance out of “the tears of their
eyes, and the sweat of their torments,” endowing the Monads with a spark
of their substance which is the Divine Light. It will be shown in Volume
II why these “Lords of the Zodiac and Spheres” have been transformed by
sectarian Theology into the Rebellious Angels of the Christians, who took
them from the Seven Devs of the Magi, without understanding the
significance of the allegory.(987)

As usual, that which _is_, and _was_ from its beginning, divine, pure, and
spiritual in its earliest unity, became—by reason of its differentiation
through the distorted prism of man’s conceptions—human and impure, as
reflecting man’s own sinful nature. Thus, in time, the planet Saturn
became reviled by the worshippers of other Gods. The nations born under
Saturn—the Jewish, for instance, with whom he became Jehovah, after being
considered as a son of Saturn, or Ilda‐Baoth, by the Ophites, and in the
Book of Jasher—were eternally fighting with those born under Jupiter,
Mercury, or any other planet, except Saturn‐Jehovah; genealogies and
prophecies notwithstanding, Jesus _the Initiate_ (or Jehoshua)—the type
from whom the “historical” Jesus was copied—was not of pure Jewish blood,
and thus recognized no Jehovah; nor did he worship any planetary God
beside his own “Father,” whom he knew, and with whom he communed, as every
high Initiate does, “Spirit to Spirit and Soul to Soul.” This can hardly
be taken exception to, unless the critic explains to every one’s
satisfaction the strange sentences put into the mouth of Jesus during his
disputes with the Pharisees by the author of the Fourth Gospel:


    I know that ye are Abraham’s seed(988).... I speak that which I
    have seen with my Father; and ye do that which ye have seen with
    your Father.... Ye do the deeds of your Father.... Ye are of your
    Father, the Devil.... He was a murderer from the beginning, and
    abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he
    speaketh a lie he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar and the
    father of it.(989)


This “Father” of the Pharisees was Jehovah, for he was identical with
Cain, Saturn, Vulcan, etc.—the planet under which they were born, and the
God whom they worshipped. Evidently there must be an Occult meaning sought
in these words and admonitions, however mistranslated, since they are
pronounced by one who threatened with hell‐fire anyone who says to his
brother simply Raca, fool.(990) And evidently, again, the planets are not
merely spheres, twinkling in Space, and made to shine for no purpose, but
they are the domains of various Beings with whom the uninitiated are so
far unacquainted, but who have, nevertheless, a mysterious, unbroken, and
powerful connection with men and globes. Every heavenly body is the temple
of a God, and these Gods themselves are the temples of God, the Unknown
“_Not_ Spirit.” There is nothing profane in the Universe. All Nature is a
consecrated place, as Young says:


    Each of these Stars is a religious house.


Thus can all exoteric religions be shown to be the falsified copies of the
Esoteric Teaching. It is the priesthood which has to be held responsible
for the reaction of our day in favour of Materialism. It is by worshipping
and enforcing on the masses the worship of the shells of pagan
ideals—personified for purposes of allegory—that the latest exoteric
religion has made of Western lands a Pandemonium, in which the higher
classes worship the golden calf, and the lower and ignorant masses are
made to worship an idol with feet of clay.




Section XI. Ancient Thought in Modern Dress.


Modern _Science is Ancient Thought distorted_, and no more. We have seen,
however, what intuitional Scientists think, and are busy about; and now
the reader shall be given a few more proofs of the fact that more than one
F.R.S. is unconsciously approaching the derided Secret Sciences.

With regard to Cosmogony and primeval matter, modern speculations are
undeniably ancient thought, “improved” by contradictory theories of recent
origin. The whole foundation belongs to Grecian and Indian Archaic
Astronomy and Physics, in those days called always Philosophy. In all the
Âryan and Greek speculations, we meet with the conception of an all‐
pervading, unorganized, and homogeneous Matter, or Chaos, re‐named by
modern Scientists “nebular condition of the world‐stuff.” What Anaxagoras
called Chaos in his _Homoiomeria_ is now called “primitive fluid” by Sir
William Thomson. The Hindû and Greek Atomists—Kanâda, Leucippus,
Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius, etc.—are now reflected, as in a clear
mirror, in the supporters of the Atomic Theory of our modern days,
beginning with Leibnitz’s Monads, and ending with the Vortical Atoms of
Sir William Thomson.(991) True, the corpuscular theory of old is rejected,
and the undulatory theory has taken its place. But the question is,
whether the latter is so firmly established as not to be liable to be
dethroned like its predecessor? Light, from its metaphysical aspect, has
been fully treated in _Isis Unveiled_:


    Light is the first begotten, and the first emanation of the
    Supreme, and Light is Life, says the Evangelist [and the
    Kabalist]. Both are electricity—the life principle, the Anima
    Mundi—pervading the Universe, the electric vivifier of all things.
    Light is the great Protean magician, and under the divine Will of
    the Architect(992) [or rather the _Architects_, the “Builders,”
    called _One_ collectively], its multifarious, omnipotent waves
    gave birth to every form as well as to every living being. From
    its swelling electric bosom, spring _Matter_ and _Spirit_. Within
    its beams lie the beginnings of all physical and chemical action,
    and of all cosmic and spiritual phenomena; it vitalizes and
    disorganizes; it gives life and produces death, and from its
    Primordial Point gradually emerged into existence the myriads of
    worlds, visible and invisible celestial bodies. It was at the ray
    of this First Mother, one in three, that “God,” according to
    Plato, “lighted a Fire which we now call the Sun,”(993) and which
    is _not_ the cause of either light or heat, but merely the focus,
    or, as we might say, the lens, by which the Rays of the Primordial
    Light become materialized, are concentrated upon our Solar System,
    and produce all the correlations of forces.(994)


This is the Ether, as just explained in the views of Metcalfe, repeated by
Dr. Richardson, save for the submission of the former to some details of
the modern undulatory theory. We do not say that we deny the theory; we
assert only that it needs completion and reärrangement. But the Occultists
are by no means the only heretics in this respect; for Mr. Robert Hunt,
F.R.S. finds that:


    The undulatory theory does not account for the results of his
    experiments.(995) Sir David Brewster, in his _Treatise on Optics_,
    showing “that the colours of vegetable life arise ... from a
    specific attraction which the particles of these bodies exercise
    over the differently‐coloured rays of light,” and that “it is by
    the light of the sun that the coloured juices of plants are
    elaborated, that the colours of bodies are changed, etc.,” remarks
    that it is not easy to allow “that such effects can be produced by
    the mere vibration of an ethereal medium.” And he is _forced_, he
    says, “by this class of facts, to reason as if light was
    _material_” [?]. Professor Josiah P. Cooke, of Harvard University,
    says that he “cannot agree ... with those who regard the wave‐
    theory of light as an established principle of science.”(996)
    Herschell’s doctrine, that the intensity of light, in effect of
    each undulation, “is inversely as the square of the distance from
    the luminous body,” if correct, damages a good deal, if it does
    not kill, the undulatory theory. That he is right, was proved
    repeatedly by experiments with photometers; and though it begins
    to be much doubted, the undulatory theory is still alive.(997)


To this remark of Sir David Brewster—“forced to reason as if light was
material”—there is a good deal to reply. Light, in one sense, is certainly
as material as is electricity itself. And if electricity is not material,
if it is only a “mode of motion,” how is it that it can be _stored up_ in
Faure’s accumulators? Helmholtz says that electricity must be as atomic as
matter; and Mr. W. Crookes, F.R.S., supported the view in his address at
Birmingham, in 1886, to the Chemical Section of the British Association,
of which he was President. This is what Helmholtz says:


    If we accept the hypothesis that the elementary substances are
    composed of atoms, we cannot avoid concluding that electricity
    also, positive as well as negative, is divided into definite
    elementary portions, which behave like atoms of electricity.(998)


Here we have to repeat that which was already said in Section VIII, that
there is but one science that can henceforth direct modern research into
the one path which will lead to the discovery of the whole, hitherto
Occult, truth, and it is the youngest of all—Chemistry, as it now stands
reformed. There is no other, not excluding Astronomy, that can so
unerringly guide scientific intuition, as can Chemistry. Two proofs of
this are to be found in the world of Science—two great Chemists, each
among the greatest in his own country, namely, Mr. Crookes and the late
Professor Butlerof: the one is a thorough believer in abnormal phenomena;
the other was as fervid a Spiritualist, as he was great in the natural
sciences. It becomes evident that, while pondering over the ultimate
divisibility of Matter, and in the hitherto fruitless chase after the
element of negative atomic weight, the scientifically trained mind of the
Chemist must feel irresistibly drawn towards those ever‐shrouded worlds,
to that mysterious Beyond, whose measureless depths seem to close against
the approach of the too materialistic hand that would fain draw aside its
veil. “It is the unknown and the ever‐unknowable,” warns the Monist‐
Agnostic. “Not so,” answers the persevering Chemist. “We are on the track
and we are not daunted, and fain would we enter the mysterious region
which ignorance tickets unknown.”

In his Presidential Address at Birmingham Mr. Crookes said:


    There is but one unknown—the ultimate substratum of Spirit
    [Space]. That which is not the Absolute and the One is, in virtue
    of that very differentiation, however far removed from the
    physical senses, always accessible to the spiritual human mind,
    which is a coruscation of the undifferentiable Integral.


Two or three sentences, at the very close of his lecture on the _Genesis
of the Elements_, showed the eminent Scientist to be on the royal road to
the greatest discoveries. He has been for some time overshadowing “the
original protyle,” and he has come to the conclusion that “he who grasps
the Key will be permitted to unlock some of the deepest mysteries of
creation.” Protyle, as the great Chemist explains:


    ... is a word analogous to protoplasm, to express the idea of the
    original primal matter existing before the evolution of the
    chemical elements. The word I have ventured to use for this
    purpose is compounded of πρὸ (earlier than) and ὕλη (the stuff of
    which things are made). The word is scarcely a new coinage, for
    600 years ago Roger Bacon wrote in his _Arte Chymiae_, “The
    elements are made out of ὕλη and every element is converted into
    the nature of another element.”


The _knowledge_ of Roger Bacon did not come to this wonderful old
magician(999) by inspiration, but because he studied ancient works on
Magic and Alchemy, and had a key to the real meaning of their language.
But see what Mr. Crookes says of Protyle, next neighbour to the
unconscious Mûlaprakriti of the Occultists:


    Let us start at the moment when the first element came into
    existence. Before this time, matter, as we know it, was not. It is
    equally impossible to conceive of matter without energy, as of
    energy without matter; from one point of view both are convertible
    terms. Before the birth of atoms, all those forms of energy, which
    become evident when matter acts upon matter, could not have
    existed(1000)—they were locked up in the protyle as latent
    potentialities only. Coincident with the creation of atoms, all
    those attributes and properties, which form the means of
    discriminating one chemical element from another, start into
    existence fully endowed with energy.(1001)


With every respect due to the great knowledge of the lecturer, the
Occultist would put it otherwise. He would say that no Atom is ever
“created,” for the Atoms are eternal within the bosom of the One Atom—“the
Atom of Atoms”—viewed during Manvantara as the Jagad‐Yoni, the material
causative womb of the World. Pradhâna, unmodified Matter—that which is the
first form of Prakriti, or material, visible, as well as invisible
Nature—and Purusha, Spirit, are eternally one; and they are Nirupâdhi,
without adventitious qualities or attributes, only during Pralaya, and
when beyond any of the planes of consciousness of existence. The Atom, as
known to modern science, is inseparable from Purusha, which is Spirit, but
is now called “energy” in Science. The Protyle Atom has not been
comminuted or subtilized: it has simply passed into that plane, which is
no plane, but the eternal state of everything beyond the planes of
illusion. Both Purusha and Pradhâna are immutable and unconsumable, or
Aparinâmin and Avyaya, in eternity; and both may be referred to during the
Mâyâvic periods as Vyaya and Parinâmin, or that which can expand, pass
away and disappear, and which is “modifiable.” In this sense Purusha,
must, of course, be held distinct in our conceptions from Parabrahman.
Nevertheless that, which is called “energy” or “force” in Science, and
which has been explained as a dual force by Metcalfe, is never, in fact,
and cannot be, energy alone; for it is the Substance of the World, its
Soul, the All‐permeant, Sarvaga, in conjunction with Kâla, Time. The three
are the trinity in one, during Manvantara, the all‐potential Unity, which
acts as three distinct things on Mâyâ, the plane of illusion. In the
Orphic philosophy of ancient Greece they were called Phanes, Chaos, and
Chronos—the triad of the Occult Philosophers of that period.

But see how closely Mr. Crookes brushes the “Unknowable,” and what
potentialities there are for the acceptance of Occult truths in his
discoveries. He continues, speaking of the evolution of Atoms:


    Let us pause at the end of the first complete vibration and
    examine the result. We have already found the elements of water,
    ammonia, carbonic acid, the atmosphere, plant and animal life,
    phosphorus for the brain, salt for the seas, clay for the solid
    earth ... phosphates and silicates sufficient for a world and
    inhabitants not so very different from what we enjoy at the
    present day. True the human inhabitants would have to live in a
    state of more than Arcadian simplicity, and the absence of calcic
    phosphate would be awkward as far as the bone is
    concerned.(1002)... At the lower end of our curve ... we see a
    great hiatus.... This oasis, and the blanks which precede and
    follow it, may be referred with much probability to the particular
    way in which our earth developed into a member of our solar
    system. If this be so, it may be that on our earth only these
    blanks occur, and not generally throughout the universe.


This justifies several assertions in the Occult works.

Firstly, that neither the stars nor the Sun can be said to be constituted
of those terrestrial elements with which the Chemist is familiar, though
they are all present in the Sun’s outward robes—as well as a host more of
elements so far unknown to Science.

Secondly, that our globe has its own special laboratory on the far‐away
outskirts of its atmosphere, crossing which, every Atom and molecule
changes and differentiates from its primordial nature.

And thirdly, that though no element present on our Earth could ever
possibly be found wanting in the Sun, there are many others there which
have either not reached, or not as yet been discovered on our globe.


    Some may be missing in certain stars and heavenly bodies in the
    process of formation; or, though present in them, these elements,
    on account of their present state, may not respond as yet to the
    usual scientific tests.(1003)


Mr. Crookes speaks of helium, an element of still lower atomic weight than
hydrogen, an _element purely hypothetical_ as far as our earth is
concerned, though existing in abundance in the chromosphere of the Sun.
Occult Science adds that not one of the elements regarded as such by
Chemistry really deserves the name.

Again we find Mr. Crookes speaking with approbation of


    Dr. Carnelly’s weighty argument in favour of the compound nature
    of the so‐called elements, from their analogy to the compound
    radicles.


Hitherto, Alchemy alone, within the historical period, and in the so‐
called civilized countries, has succeeded in obtaining a real _element_,
or a particle of homogeneous Matter, the _Mysterium Magnum_ of Paracelsus.
But then that was before Lord Bacon’s day.(1004)


    ... Let us now turn to the upper portion of the scheme. With
    hydrogen of atomic weight = 1, there is little room for other
    elements, save, perhaps, for hypothetical _Helium_. But what if we
    get “through the looking‐glass,” and cross the zero line in search
    of new principles—what shall we find on the other side of zero?
    Dr. Carnelly asks for an element of negative atomic weight; here
    is ample room and verge enough for a shadow series of such
    unsubstantialities. Helmholtz says that electricity is probably as
    atomic as matter; is electricity one of the negative elements, and
    the luminiferous ether another? Matter, as we now know it, does
    not here exist; the forms of energy which are apparent in the
    motions of matter are as yet only latent possibilities. _A
    substance of negative weight is not inconceivable._(1005) But can
    we form a clear conception of a body which combines with other
    bodies in proportions expressible by negative qualities?(1006)

    A genesis of the elements such as is here sketched out would not
    be confined to our little solar system, but would probably follow
    the same general sequence of events in every centre of energy now
    visible as a star.

    Before the birth of atoms to gravitate towards one another, no
    pressure could be exercised; but at the outskirts of the fire‐mist
    sphere, within which all is protyle—at the shell on which the
    tremendous forces involved in the birth of a chemical element
    exert full sway—the fierce heat would be accompanied by
    gravitation sufficient to keep the newly‐born elements from flying
    off into space. As temperature increases, expansion and molecular
    motion increase, molecules tend to fly asunder, and their chemical
    affinities become deadened; but the enormous: pressure of the
    gravitation of the mass of atomic matter, outside what I may for
    brevity call the birth‐shell, would counteract the action of heat.

    Beyond the birth‐shell would be a space in which no chemical
    action could take place, owing to the temperature there being
    above what is called the dissociation‐point for compounds. In this
    space the lion and the lamb would lie down together: phosphorus
    and oxygen would mix without union; hydrogen and chlorine would
    show no tendency to closer bonds; and even fluorine, that
    energetic gas which chemists have only isolated within the last
    month or two, would float about free and uncombined.

    Outside this space of free atomic matter would be another shell,
    in which the formed chemical elements would have cooled down to
    the combination point, and the sequence of events so graphically
    described by Mr. Mattieu Williams in _The Fuel of the Sun_ would
    now take place, culminating in the solid earth and the
    commencement of geological time (p. 19).


This is, in strictly scientific, but beautiful language, the description
of the evolution of the differentiated Universe in the Secret Teachings.
The learned gentleman closes his address in words, every sentence of which
is like a flash of light from beyond the dark veil of materiality,
hitherto thrown upon the exact sciences, and is a step forward towards the
_Sanctum Sanctorum_ of the Occult. Thus he says:


    We have glanced at the difficulty of defining an element; we have
    noticed, too, the revolt of many leading physicists and chemists
    against the ordinary acceptation of the term element; we have
    weighed the improbability of their eternal existence,(1007) or
    _their origination by chance_. As a remaining alternative, we have
    suggested their origin by a process of evolution like that of the
    heavenly bodies according to Laplace, and the plants and animals
    of our globe according to Lamarck, Darwin, and Wallace.(1008) In
    the general array of the elements, as known to us, we have seen a
    striking approximation to that of the organic world.(1009) In lack
    of direct evidence of the decomposition of any element, we have
    sought and found indirect evidence.... We have next glanced at the
    view of the genesis of the elements; and lastly we have reviewed a
    scheme of their origin suggested by Professor Reynolds’ method of
    illustrating the periodic classification(1010).... Summing up all
    the above considerations we cannot, indeed, venture to assert
    positively _that our so‐called elements have been evolved from one
    primordial matter; but we may contend that the balance of
    evidence, I think, fairly weighs in favour of this speculation_.


Thus inductive Science, in its branches of Astronomy, Physics, and
Chemistry, while advancing timidly towards the conquest of Nature’s
secrets in her final effects on our terrestrial plane, recedes to the days
of Anaxagoras and the Chaldees in its discoveries of (_a_) the origin of
our phenomenal world, and (_b_) the modes of formation of the bodies that
compose the Universe. And having, for their cosmogonical hypotheses to
turn back to the beliefs of the earliest philosophers, and the systems of
the latter—systems that were all based on the teachings of a universal
Secret Doctrine with regard to primeval Matter, with its properties,
functions, and laws—have we not the right to hope that the day is not far
off when Science will show a better appreciation of the Wisdom of the
Ancients than it has hitherto done?

No doubt Occult Philosophy could learn a good deal from exact Modern
Science; but the latter, on the other hand, might profit by ancient
learning in more than one way, and chiefly in Cosmogony. It might learn,
for instance, the mystical signification, alchemical and transcendental,
of the many _imponderable_ substances that fill interplanetary space, and
which, interpenetrating each, are the direct cause, at the lower end, of
the production of natural phenomena manifesting through so‐called
vibration. The knowledge of the _real_, not the hypothetical, nature of
Ether, or rather of the Âkâsha, and other mysteries, in short, can alone
lead to the knowledge of Forces. It is that Substance against which the
Materialistic school of the Physicists rebels with such fury, especially
in France,(1011) and which exact Science has to advocate notwithstanding.
They cannot make away with it without incurring the risk of pulling down
the pillars of the Temple of Science, like a modern Samson, and of getting
buried under its roof.

The theories built upon the rejection of Force, outside and independent of
Matter pure and simple, have all been shown to be fallacious. They do not,
and cannot, cover the ground, and many of the scientific data are thus
proved to be unscientific. “Ether produced Sound” is said in the
_Purânas_, and the statement is laughed at. Sound is the result of the
vibrations of the _air_, we are corrected. And what is air? Could it exist
if there were no etheric medium in Space to buoy up its molecules? The
case stands simply thus. Materialism cannot admit the existence of
anything outside Matter, because with the acceptance of an imponderable
Force—the source and head of all the physical Forces—other _intelligent_
Forces would have to be virtually admitted, and that would lead Science
very far. For it would have to accept as a sequel the presence in Man of a
still more spiritual power—entirely independent, for once, of any kind of
Matter about which Physicists know anything. Hence, apart from a
hypothetical Ether of Space and gross physical bodies, the whole sidereal
and unseen Space is, in the sight of Materialists, one boundless _void_ in
Nature—blind, unintelligent, useless.

And now the next question is: What is that Cosmic Substance, and how far
can one go in suspecting its nature or in wrenching from it its secrets,
thus feeling justified in giving it a name? How far, especially, has
Modern Science gone in the direction of those secrets, and what is it
doing to solve them? The latest hobby of Science, the Nebular Theory, may
afford us some answer to this question. Let us then examine the
credentials of this Nebular Theory.




Section XII. Scientific and Esoteric Evidence for, and Objections to, the
Modern Nebular Theory.


Of late, Esoteric Cosmogony has been frequently opposed by the phantom of
this theory and its ensuing hypotheses. “Can this most scientific teaching
be denied by your Adepts?” it is asked. “Not entirely,” is the reply, “but
the admissions of the men of Science themselves _kill_ it; and there
remains nothing for the Adepts to deny.”

To make of Science an integral _whole_ necessitates, indeed, the study of
spiritual and psychic, as well as of physical, Nature. Otherwise it will
ever be like the anatomy of man, discussed of old by the profane from the
point of view of his shell‐side, and in ignorance of the interior work.
Even Plato, the greatest Philosopher of his country, was guilty, before
his Initiation, of such statements as that liquids pass into the stomach
through the lungs. Without metaphysics, as Mr. H. J. Slack says, _real_
Science is inadmissible.

The nebulæ exist; yet the Nebular Theory is wrong. A nebula exists in a
state of entire elemental dissociation. It is gaseous and—something else
besides, which can hardly be connected with gases as these are known to
Physical Science; and it is self‐luminous. But that is all. The sixty‐two
“coincidences” enumerated by Professor Stephen Alexander,(1012) confirming
the Nebular Theory, may all be explained by Esoteric Science; though, as
this is not an astronomical work, the refutations are not attempted at
present. Laplace and Faye come nearer to the correct theory than any; but
of the speculations of Laplace there remains little in the present theory
beyond its general features.

Nevertheless, says John Stuart Mill:


    There is in Laplace’s theory nothing hypothetical; it is an
    example of legitimate reasoning from present effect to its past
    cause; it assumes nothing more than that objects which really
    exist obey the laws which are known to be obeyed by all
    terrestrial objects resembling them.(1013)


From such an eminent logician as was Mill, this would be valuable, if it
could only be proved that “terrestrial objects resembling” celestial
objects at such a distance as are the nebulæ, _resemble those objects in
reality, and not only in appearance_.

Another of the fallacies, from the Occult standpoint, embodied in the
modern theory as it now stands, is the hypothesis that the Planets were
all detached from the Sun; that they are bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh; whereas the Sun and the Planets are only co‐uterine brothers,
having the same nebular origin, but in a different mode from that
postulated by modern Astronomy.

The many objections raised by some opponents of the modern Nebular Theory
against the homogeneity of original diffuse Matter, on the ground of the
uniformity in the composition of the fixed Stars, do not affect the
question of that homogeneity at all, but only the theory itself. Our solar
nebula may not be completely homogeneous, or, rather, it may fail to
reveal itself as such to the Astronomers, and yet be _de facto_
homogeneous. The Stars do differ in their constituent materials, and even
exhibit elements quite unknown on Earth; nevertheless, this does not
affect the point that Primeval Matter—Matter as it appeared even in its
first differentiation from its laya‐condition(1014)—is yet to this day
homogeneous, at immense distances, in the depths of infinitude, and
likewise at points not far removed from the outskirts of our Solar System.

Finally, there does not exist one single fact brought forward by the
learned objectors against the Nebular Theory (false as it is, and hence,
illogically enough, fatal to the hypothesis of the homogeneity of Matter),
that can withstand criticism. One error leads to another. A false premiss
will naturally lead to a false conclusion, although an inadmissible
inference does not necessarily affect the validity of the major
proposition of the syllogism. Thus, one may leave every side‐issue and
inference from the evidence of spectra and lines, as simply provisional
for the present, and abandon all matters of detail to Physical Science.
The duty of the Occultist lies with the _Soul_ and _Spirit_ of Cosmic
Space, not merely with its illusive appearance and behaviour. That of
official Physical Science is to analyze and study its _shell_—the Ultima
Thule of the Universe and Man, in the opinion of Materialism.

With the latter, Occultism has nought to do. It is only with the theories
of such men of learning as Kepler, Kant, Oersted, and Sir William
Herschell, who believed in a Spiritual World, that Occult Cosmogony might
treat, and attempt a satisfactory compromise. But the views of those
Physicists differed vastly from the latest modern speculations. Kant and
Herschell had in their mind’s eye speculations upon the origin and the
final destiny, as well as upon the present aspect, of the Universe, from a
far more philosophical and psychic standpoint; whereas modern Cosmology
and Astronomy now repudiate anything like research into the mysteries of
Being. The result is what might be expected: complete failure and
inextricable contradictions in the thousand and one varieties of so‐called
Scientific Theories, and in this Theory as in all others.

The nebular hypothesis, involving the theory of the existence of a
Primeval Matter, diffused in a nebulous condition, is of no modern date in
Astronomy, as everyone knows. Anaximenes, of the Ionian school, had
already taught that the sidereal bodies were formed through the
progressive condensation of a primordial _pregenetic_ Matter, which had
almost a negative weight, and was spread out through Space in an extremely
sublimated condition.

Tycho Brahé, who viewed the Milky Way as an ethereal substance, thought
the new star that appeared in Cassiopeia, in 1572, had been formed out of
that Matter.(1015) Kepler believed that the star of 1606 had likewise been
formed out of the ethereal substance that fills the universe.(1016) He
attributed to that same Ether the apparition of a luminous ring round the
Moon, during the total eclipse of the Sun observed at Naples in
1605.(1017) Still later, in 1714 the existence of a self‐luminous Matter
was recognized by Halley in the _Philosophical Transactions_. Finally, the
journal of this name published in 1811 the famous hypothesis of the
eminent Astronomer, Sir William Herschell, on the transformation of the
nebulæ into Stars,(1018) and after this the Nebular Theory was accepted by
the Royal Academies.

In _Five Years of Theosophy_, on p. 245, may be read an article headed,
“Do the Adepts deny the Nebular Theory?” The answer there given is:

_No; they do not deny its general propositions, nor the approximative
truth of the scientific hypotheses. They only deny the completeness of the
present, as well as the entire error of the many so‐called
__“__exploded__”__ old theories, which, during the last century, have
followed each other in such rapid succession._

This was asserted at the time to be “an evasive answer.” Such disrespect
to official Science, it was argued, must be justified by the replacement
of the _orthodox_ speculation by another theory more complete, and having
a firmer ground to stand upon. To this there is but one reply: It is
useless to give out isolated theories with regard to things embodied in a
complete and consecutive system, for, when separated from the main body of
the teaching, they would necessarily lose their vital coherence and would
thus do no good when studied independently. To be able to appreciate and
accept the Occult views on the Nebular Theory, we must study the whole
Esoteric cosmogonical system. And the time has hardly arrived for the
Astronomers to be asked to accept Fohat and the Divine Builders. Even the
undeniably correct surmises of Sir William Herschell, which had nothing
“supernatural” in them, as to the Sun’s being called a “globe of fire,”
perhaps metaphorically, and his early speculations about the nature of
that which is now called the Nasmyth Willow‐leaf Theory, only caused that
most eminent of all Astronomers to be smiled at by other, far less
eminent, colleagues, who saw and now see in his ideas purely “imaginative
and fanciful theories.” Before the whole Esoteric System could be given
out and appreciated by the Astronomers, the latter would have to return to
some of those “antiquated ideas,” not only to those of Herschell, but also
to the dreams of the oldest Hindû Astronomers, and thus abandon their own
theories, which are none the less “fanciful” because they have appeared
nearly eighty years later than the one, and many thousands of years later
than the others. Foremost of all they would have to repudiate their ideas
of the Sun’s solidity and incandescence; the Sun “glowing” most
undeniably, but not “burning.” Then the Occultists state, with regard to
the “willow‐leaves,” that those “objects,” as Sir William Herschell called
them, are the immediate sources of the solar light and heat. And though
the Esoteric Teaching does not regard these as he did—namely, as
“organisms” partaking of the nature of life, for the Solar “Beings” will
hardly place themselves within telescopic focus—yet it asserts that the
whole Universe is full of such “organisms,” conscious and active according
to the proximity or distance of their planes to, or from, our plane of
consciousness; and finally that the great Astronomer was right while
speculating on those supposed “organisms,” in saying that “we do not know
that vital action is incompetent to develop at once heat, light, and
electricity.” For, at the risk of being laughed at by the whole world of
Physicists, the Occultists maintain that all the “Forces” of the
Scientists have their origin in the Vital Principle, the One Life
collectively of our Solar System—that “Life” being a portion, or rather
one of the _aspects_, of the One Universal LIFE.

We may, therefore—as in the article under consideration, wherein, on the
authority of the Adepts, it was maintained that it is “sufficient to make
a _résumé_ of what the solar Physicists do not know”—we may, we maintain,
define our position with regard to the modern Nebular Theory and its
evident incorrectness, by simply pointing out facts diametrically opposed
to it in its present form. And to begin with, what does it teach?

Summarizing the aforesaid hypotheses, it becomes plain that Laplace’s
theory—now made quite unrecognizable, moreover—was an unfortunate one. He
postulates in the first place Cosmic Matter, existing in a state of
diffuse nebulosity “so fine that its presence could hardly have been
suspected.” No attempt is made by him to penetrate into the Arcana of
Being, except as regards the immediate evolution of our small Solar
System.

Consequently, whether one accepts or rejects his theory in its bearing
upon the immediate cosmological problems presented for solution, he can
only be said to have thrown back the mystery a little further. To the
eternal query: “Whence Matter itself; whence the evolutionary impetus
determining its cyclic aggregations and dissolutions; whence the exquisite
symmetry and order into which the primeval Atoms arrange and group
themselves?” no answer is attempted by Laplace. All we are confronted
with, is a sketch of the _probable_ broad principles on which the actual
process is assumed to be based. Well, and what is this now celebrated note
on the said process? What has he given so wonderfully new and original,
that its ground‐work, at any rate, should have served as a basis for the
modern Nebular Theory? The following is what one gathers from various
astronomical works.

Laplace thought that, in consequence of the condensation of the atoms of
the primeval nebula, according to the “law” of gravity, the now gaseous,
or perhaps, partially liquid mass, acquired a rotatory motion. As the
velocity of this rotation increased, it assumed the form of a thin disc;
finally, the centrifugal force overpowering that of cohesion, huge rings
were detached from the edge of the whirling incandescent masses, and these
rings contracted necessarily by gravitation (as accepted) into spheroidal
bodies, which would necessarily still continue to preserve the orbit
previously occupied by the outer zone from which they were
separated.(1019) The velocity of the outer edge of each nascent planet, he
said, exceeding that of the inner, there results a rotation on its axis.
The more dense bodies would be thrown off last; and finally, during the
preliminary state of their formation, the newly‐segregated orbs in their
turn throw off one or more satellites. In formulating the history of the
rupture and planetation of rings Laplace says:


    Almost always each ring of vapours must have broken up into
    numerous masses, which, moving with a nearly uniform velocity,
    must have continued to circulate at the same distance around the
    sun. These masses must have taken a spheroidal form with a motion
    of rotation in the same direction as their revolution, since the
    inner molecules (those nearest the sun) would have less actual
    velocity than the exterior ones. They must then have formed as
    many planets in a state of vapour. But, if one of them was
    sufficiently powerful to unite successively, by its attraction,
    all the others around its centre, the ring of vapours must have
    been thus transformed into a single spheroidal mass of vapours
    circulating around the sun with a rotation in the same direction
    as its revolution. The latter case has been the more common, but
    the solar system presents us the first case, in the four small
    planets which move between Jupiter and Mars.


While few will be found to deny the “magnificent audacity of this
hypothesis,” it is impossible not to recognize the insurmountable
difficulties with which it is attended. Why, for instance, do we find that
the satellites of Neptune and Uranus display a retrograde motion? Why, in
spite of its closer proximity to the Sun, is Venus less dense than the
Earth? Why, again, is the more distant Uranus denser than Saturn? How is
it that there are so many variations in the inclination of their axes and
orbits in the supposed progeny of the central orb; that such startling
variations in the size of the Planets are noticeable; that the satellites
of Jupiter are more dense by ·288 than their primary; that the phenomena
of meteoric and cometary systems still remain unaccounted for? To quote
the words of a Master:

_They_ [the Adepts] _find that the centrifugal theory of Western birth is
unable to cover all the ground. That, unaided, it can neither account for
every oblate spheroid, nor explain away such evident difficulties as are
presented by the relative density of some planets. How, indeed, can any
calculation of centrifugal force explain to us, for instance, why Mercury,
whose rotation is, we are told, only __“__about one‐third that of the
Earth, and its density only about one‐fourth greater than the Earth,__”__
should have a polar compression more than ten times greater than the
latter? And again, why Jupiter, whose equatorial rotation is said to be
__“__twenty‐seven times greater, and its density only about one‐fifth that
of the Earth__”__ should have its polar compression seventeen times
greater than that of the Earth? Or why Saturn, with an equatorial velocity
fifty‐five times greater than Mercury for centripetal force to contend
with, should have its polar compression only three times greater than
Mercury’s? To crown the above contradictions, we are asked to believe in
the Central Forces, as taught by Modern Science, even when told that the
equatorial matter of the Sun, with more than four times the centrifugal
velocity of the Earth’s equatorial surface, and only about one‐fourth part
of the gravitation of the equatorial matter, has not manifested any
tendency to bulge at the solar equator, nor shown the least flattening at
the poles of the solar axis. In other and clearer words, the Sun, with
only one‐fourth of our Earth’s density for the centrifugal force to work
upon, has no polar compression at all! We find this objection made by more
than one astronomer, yet never explained away satisfactorily, so far as
the __“__Adepts__”__ are aware._

_Therefore, do they_ [the Adepts] _say, that the great men of Science of
the West, knowing ... next to nothing either about cometary matter,
centrifugal and centripetal forces, the nature of the nebulæ, or the
physical constitution of the Sun, the Stars, or even the Moon, are
imprudent to speak so confidently as they do about the __“__central mass
of the Sun,__”__ whirling out into space planets, comets, and what not....
We maintain that it_ [the Sun] _evolves out only the life‐principle, the
Soul of these __ bodies, giving and receiving it back, in our little Solar
System, as the __“__Universal Life‐Giver__”__ ... in the Infinitude and
Eternity; that the Solar System is as much the Microcosm of the One
Macrocosm as man is the former when compared with his own little Solar
Cosmos._(1020)

The essential power of all the cosmic and terrestrial Elements to generate
within themselves a regular and harmonious series of results, a
concatenation of causes and effects, is an irrefutable proof that they are
either animated by an _Intelligence_, _ab extrâ_ or _ab intrâ_, or conceal
such within or behind the “manifested veil.” Occultism does not deny the
certainty of the mechanical origin of the Universe; it only claims the
absolute necessity of mechanicians of some sort behind or within those
Elements—a dogma with us. It is not the fortuitous assistance of the Atoms
of Lucretius, as he himself knew well, that built the Kosmos and all in
it. Nature herself contradicts such a theory. Celestial Space, containing
Matter so attenuated as Ether, cannot be called on, with or without
attraction, to explain the common motion of the sidereal hosts. Although
the perfect accord of their inter‐revolution indicates clearly the
presence of a mechanical cause in Nature, Newton, who of all men had most
right to trust to his deductions, was nevertheless forced to abandon the
idea of ever explaining the original impulse given to the millions of
orbs, by merely the laws of _known_ Nature and its material Forces. He
recognized fully the limits that separate the action of natural Forces
from that of the _Intelligences_ that set the immutable laws in order and
action. And if a Newton had to renounce such hope, which of the modern
materialistic pigmies has the right of saying: “I know better?”

A cosmogonical theory, to become complete and comprehensible, has to start
with a Primordial Substance diffused throughout boundless Space, _of an
intellectual and divine nature_. That Substance must be the Soul and
Spirit, the Synthesis and Seventh Principle of the manifested Kosmos, and,
to serve as a spiritual Upâdhi to this, there must be the sixth, its
vehicle—Primordial Physical Matter, so to speak, though its nature must
escape for ever our limited _normal_ senses. It is easy for an Astronomer,
if endowed with an imaginative faculty, to build a theory of the emergence
of the Universe out of Chaos, by simply applying to it the principles of
mechanics. But such a Universe will always prove a Frankenstein’s monster
with respect to its scientific human creator; it will lead him into
endless perplexities. The application of mechanical laws only can never
carry the speculator beyond the objective world; nor will it unveil to men
the origin and final destiny of Kosmos. This is whither the Nebular Theory
has led Science. In sober fact and truth this Theory is twin sister to
that of Ether, and both are the offspring of necessity; one is as
indispensable to account for the transmission of light, as is the other to
explain the problem of the origin of the Solar Systems. The question with
Science is, how the same homogeneous Matter(1021) could, obeying the laws
of Newton, give birth to bodies—Sun, Planets, and their satellites—subject
to conditions of identity of motion, and formed of such heterogeneous
elements.

Has the Nebular Theory helped to solve the problem, even if applied solely
to bodies considered as inanimate and material? We say: most decidedly
not. What progress has it made since 1811, when first Sir William
Herschell’s paper, with its facts based on observation and showing the
existence of nebular matter, made the sons of the Royal Society “shout for
joy”? Since then a still greater discovery, through spectrum analysis, has
permitted the verification and corroboration of Sir William Herschell’s
conjecture. Laplace demanded some kind of primitive “world‐stuff” to prove
the idea of progressive world‐evolution and growth. Here it is, as offered
two millenniums ago.

The “world‐stuff,” now called nebulæ, was known from the highest
antiquity. Anaxagoras taught that, upon differentiation, the resulting
commixture of heterogeneous substances remained motionless and
unorganized, until finally the “Mind”—the collective body of Dhyân
Chohans, we say—began to work upon, and communicated to, them motion and
order.(1022) This theory is now taken up, so far as concerns its first
portion; the last, that of any “Mind” interfering, being rejected.
Spectrum analysis reveals the existence of nebulæ formed entirely of gases
and luminous vapours. Is this the primitive nebular Matter? The spectra
reveal, it is said, the physical conditions of the Matter which emits
cosmic light. The spectra of the resolvable and the irresolvable nebulæ
are shown to be entirely different, the spectra of the latter showing
their physical state to be that of glowing gas or vapour. The bright lines
of one nebula reveal the existence of hydrogen, and of other material
substances known and unknown. The same as to the atmospheres of the Sun
and Stars. This leads to the direct inference that a Star is formed by the
condensation of a nebula; hence that even the metals themselves are formed
on earth by the condensation of hydrogen or of some other primitive
matter, some ancestral cousin to helium, perhaps, or some yet unknown
stuff. _This does not clash with the Occult Teachings._ And this is the
problem that Chemistry is trying to solve; and it must succeed sooner or
later in the task, accepting _nolens volens_, when it does, the Esoteric
Teaching. But when this does happen, it will kill the Nebular Theory as it
now stands.

Meanwhile Astronomy cannot accept in any way, if it is to be regarded as
an _exact_ Science, the present theory of the filiation of Stars—even if
Occultism does so in its own way, seeing that it explains this filiation
differently—because Astronomy has _not one single physical datum_ to show
for it. Astronomy could anticipate Chemistry in proving the existence of
the fact, if it could show a planetary nebula exhibiting a spectrum of
three or four bright lines, gradually condensing and transforming into a
Star, with a spectrum all covered with a number of dark lines. But


    The question of the variability of the nebulæ, even as to their
    form, is yet one of the mysteries of Astronomy. The data of
    observation possessed so far are of too recent an origin, too
    uncertain, to permit us to affirm anything.(1023)


Since its discovery, the magic power of the spectroscope has revealed to
its adepts only one single transformation of a Star of this kind; and even
that showed directly the reverse of what is needed as proof in favour of
the Nebular Theory; for it revealed _a Star transforming itself into a
planetary nebula_. As related in _The Observatory_,(1024) the temporary
Star, discovered by J. F. J. Schmidt in the constellation Cygnus, in
November, 1876, exhibited a spectrum broken by very brilliant lines.
Gradually, the continuous spectrum and most of the lines disappeared,
leaving finally one single brilliant line, which appeared to coincide with
the green line of the nebula.

Though this metamorphosis is not irreconcileable with the hypothesis of
the nebular origin of the Stars, nevertheless this single solitary case
rests on no observation whatever, least of all on direct observation. The
occurrence may have been due to several other causes. Since Astronomers
are inclined to think our Planets are tending toward precipitation into
the Sun, why should not that Star have blazed up owing to a collision of
such precipitated Planets, or, as many suggest, the appulse of a Comet? Be
that as it may, the only known instance of star‐transformation since 1811
is not favourable to the Nebular Theory. Moreover, on the question of this
Theory, as on all others, Astronomers disagree.

In our own age, and before Laplace ever thought of it, Buffon, being very
much struck by the identity of motion in the Planets, was the first to
propose the hypothesis that the Planets and their satellites originated in
the bosom of the Sun. Forthwith and for this purpose, he invented a
special Comet, supposed to have torn out, by a powerful oblique blow, the
quantity of matter necessary for their formation. Laplace gave its dues to
the “Comet” in his _Exposition du Système du Monde_.(1025) But the idea
was seized and even improved upon by a conception of the alternate
evolution, from the Sun’s central mass, of Planets _apparently_ without
weight or influence on the motion of the visible Planets—and as evidently
without any more existence than the likeness of Moses in the Moon.

But the modern theory is also a variation on the systems elaborated by
Kant and Laplace. The idea of both was that, at the origin of things, all
that Matter which now enters into the composition of the planetary bodies
was spread over all the space comprized in the Solar System—and even
beyond. It was a nebula of extremely small density, and its condensation
gradually gave birth, by a mechanism that has hitherto never been
explained, to the various bodies of our System. This is the original
Nebular Theory, an _incomplete_ yet faithful repetition—a short chapter
out of the large volume of universal Esoteric Cosmogony—of the teachings
of the Secret Doctrine. And both systems, Kant’s and Laplace’s, differ
greatly from the modern Theory, redundant with conflicting _sub_‐theories
and fanciful hypotheses. Say the Teachers:


    _The essence of cometary matter_ [and of that which composes the
    Stars] ... _is totally different from any of the chemical or
    physical characteristics with which the greatest Chemists and
    Physicists of the earth are familiar.... While the spectroscope
    has shown the probable similarity_ [owing to the chemical action
    of terrestrial light upon the intercepted rays] _of terrestrial
    and sidereal substance, the chemical actions peculiar to the
    variously progressed orbs of space, have not been detected, nor
    proven to be identical with those observed on our own
    planet._(1026)


Mr. Crookes says almost the same in the fragment quoted from his lecture,
_Elements and Meta‐Elements_. C. Wolf, Member of the Institute, Astronomer
of the Observatory, Paris, observes:


    At the utmost the nebular hypothesis can only show in its favour,
    with W. Herschell, the existence of planetary nebulæ in various
    degrees of condensation, and of spiral nebulæ, with nuclei of
    condensation on the branches and centre.(1027) But, in fact, the
    knowledge of the bond that unites the nebulæ to the stars is yet
    denied to us; and lacking as we do direct observation, we are even
    debarred from establishing it on the analogy of chemical
    composition.(1028)


Even if the men of Science—leaving aside the difficulty arising out of
such undeniable variety and heterogeneity of matter in the constitution of
nebulæ—did admit, with the Ancients, that the origin of all the visible
and invisible heavenly bodies must be sought for in one primordial
homogeneous world‐stuff, in a kind of _Pre_‐Protyle,(1029) it is evident
that this would not put an end to their perplexities. Unless they admit
also that our actual visible Universe is merely the Sthûla Sharîra, the
gross body, of the sevenfold Kosmos, they will have to face another
problem; especially if they venture to maintain that its now visible
bodies are the result of the condensation of that one and single
Primordial Matter. For mere observation shows them that the operations
which produced the actual Universe are far more complex than could ever be
embraced in that theory.

First of all, there are two distinct classes of “irresolvable” nebulæ, as
Science itself teaches.

The telescope is unable to distinguish between these two classes, but the
spectroscope can do so, and notices an essential difference between their
physical constitutions.


    The question of the resolvability of the nebulæ has been often
    presented in too affirmative a manner and quite contrary to the
    ideas expressed by the illustrious experimenter with the spectra
    of these constellations—Mr. Huggins. Every nebula whose spectrum
    contains only bright lines is gaseous, it is said, and hence is
    irresolvable; every nebula with a continuous spectrum must end by
    resolving into stars with an instrument of sufficient power. This
    assumption is contrary at once to the results obtained, and to
    spectroscopic theory. The “Lyra” nebula, the “Dumb‐bell” nebula,
    the central region of the nebula of Orion, appear resolvable, and
    show a spectrum of bright lines; the nebula of Canes Venatici is
    not resolvable, and gives a continuous spectrum. Because, indeed,
    the spectroscope informs us of the physical state of the
    constituent matter of the stars, but affords us no notions of
    their modes of aggregation. A nebula formed of gaseous globes (or
    even of nuclei, faintly luminous, surrounded by a powerful
    atmosphere) would give a spectrum of lines and be still
    resolvable; such seems to be the state of Huggins’ region in the
    Orion nebula. A nebula formed of solid or fluidic particles in a
    state of incandescence, a true cloud, will give a continuous
    spectrum and will be irresolvable.


Some of these nebulæ, Wolf tells us,


    Have a spectrum of three or four bright lines, others a continuous
    spectrum. The first are gaseous, the others formed of a
    pulverulent matter. The former must constitute a veritable
    atmosphere: it is among these that the solar nebula of Laplace has
    to be placed. The latter form an _ensemble_ of particles that may
    be considered as independent, and the rotation of which obeys the
    laws of internal weight: such are the nebulæ adopted by Kant and
    Faye. Observation allows us to place the one as the other at the
    very origin of the planetary world. But when we try to go beyond
    and ascend to the primitive chaos which has produced the totality
    of the heavenly bodies, we have first to account for the actual
    existence of these two classes of nebulæ. If the primitive chaos
    were a cold luminous gas,(1030) one could understand how the
    contraction resulting from attraction could have heated it and
    made it luminous. We have to explain the condensation of this gas
    to the state of incandescent particles, the presence of which is
    revealed to us in certain nebulæ by the spectroscope. If the
    original chaos was composed of such particles, how did certain of
    their portions pass into the gaseous state, while others have
    preserved their primitive condition?


Such is the synopsis of the objections and difficulties in the way of the
acceptance of the Nebular Theory, brought forward by the French _savant_,
who concludes this interesting argument by declaring that:


    The first part of the cosmogonical problem—what is the primitive
    matter of chaos; and how did that matter give birth to the sun and
    stars?—thus remains to this day in the domain of romance and of
    mere imagination.(1031)


If this is the last word of Science upon the subject, whither then should
we turn in order to learn what the Nebular Theory is supposed to teach?
What, in fact, is this theory? What it _is_, no one seems to know for
certain. What it is not—we learn from the erudite author of _World‐Life_.
He tells us that it:


    i. Is not a theory of the evolution of the Universe. It is
    primarily a genetic explanation of the phenomena of the solar
    system, and accessorily a co‐ordination in a common conception of
    the principal phenomena in the stellar and nebular firmament, as
    far as human vision has been able to penetrate.

    ii. It does not regard the comets as involved in that particular
    evolution which has produced the Solar System. [The Esoteric
    Doctrine does, because it, too, “recognizes the comets as forms of
    cosmic existence co‐ordinated with earlier stages of nebular
    evolution”; and it actually assigns _to them chiefly_ the
    formation of all worlds.]

    iii. _It does not deny an antecedent history of the luminous fire
    mist_—[the _secondary_ stage of evolution in the Secret Doctrine]
    [and] ... makes no claim to having reached an absolute beginning.
    [And even it allows that this] fire mist may have previously
    existed in a cold, non‐luminous and invisible condition.

    iv. [And that finally] _it does not profess to discover the_
    ORIGIN _of things, but only a stadium in material history_....
    [leaving] the philosopher and the theologian as free as they ever
    were to seek the origin of the modes of being.(1032)


But this is not all. Even the greatest philosopher of England—Mr. Herbert
Spencer—arrayed himself against this fantastic theory by saying that (_a_)
“The problem of existence is not resolved” by it; (_b_) the nebular
hypothesis “throws no light upon the origin of diffused matter”; and (_c_)
that “the nebular hypothesis (as it now stands) implies a First
Cause.”(1033)

The latter, we are afraid, is more than our modern Physicists have
bargained for. Thus, it seems that the poor “hypothesis” can hardly expect
to find help or corroboration even in the world of the Metaphysicians.

Considering all this, the Occultists believe they have a right to present
_their_ Philosophy, however misunderstood and ostracized it may be at
present. And they maintain that this failure of the Scientists to discover
the truth is entirely due to their Materialism and their contempt for
transcendental Sciences. Yet although the scientific minds in our century
are as far from the true and correct doctrine of Evolution as ever, there
may be still some hope left for the future, for even now we find another
Scientist giving us a faint glimmer of it.

In an article in the _Popular Science Review_ on “Recent Researches in
Minute Life,” we find Mr. H. J. Slack, F.C.S., Sec. R.M.S., saying:


    There is an evident convergence of all sciences, from physics to
    chemistry and physiology, toward some doctrine of evolution and
    development, of which the facts of Darwinism will form part, but
    what ultimate aspect this doctrine will take, there is little, if
    any, evidence to show, and perhaps it will not be shaped by the
    human mind until metaphysical as well as physical inquiries are
    much more advanced.(1034)


This is a happy forecast indeed. The day _may_ come, then, when “Natural
Selection,” as taught by Mr. Darwin and Mr. Herbert Spencer, will, in its
ultimate modification, form only _a part_ of our Eastern doctrine of
Evolution, which will be Manu and Kapila _Esoterically explained_.




Section XIII. Forces—Modes of Motion or Intelligences?


This is, then, the last word of Physical Science up to the present year,
1888. Mechanical laws will never be able to prove the homogeneity of
Primeval Matter, except inferentially and as a desperate necessity, when
there will remain no other issue—as in the case of Ether. Modern Science
is secure only in its own domain and region; within the physical
boundaries of our Solar System, beyond which everything, every particle of
Matter, is different from the Matter it knows, and where Matter exists in
states of which Science can form no idea. _This_ Matter, which is truly
homogeneous, is beyond human perception, if perception is tied down merely
to the five senses. We feel its effects through those INTELLIGENCES which
are the results of its primeval differentiation, whom we name Dhyân
Chohans, called in the Hermetic works the “Seven Governors”; those to whom
Pymander, the “Thought Divine,” refers as the “Building Powers,” and whom
Asklepios calls the “Supernal Gods.” This Matter—the real Primordial
Substance, the Noumenon of all the “matter” we know of—some of our
Astronomers even have been led to believe in, for they despair of the
possibility of ever accounting for rotation, gravitation, and the origin
of any mechanical physical laws, unless these INTELLIGENCES be admitted by
Science. In the above‐quoted work upon Astronomy by Wolf,(1035) the author
endorses fully the theory of Kant, and the latter theory, if not in its
general aspect, at any rate in some of its features, reminds one strongly
of certain Esoteric Teachings. Here we have the world’s system “reborn
from its ashes,” through a nebula—the emanation from the bodies, dead and
dissolved in Space, resultant of the _incandescence_ of the Solar
Centre—reänimated by the combustible matter of the Planets. In this
theory, generated and developed in the brain of a young man hardly twenty‐
five years of age, who had never left his native place, Königsberg, a
small town of Northern Prussia, one can hardly fail to recognize either
the presence of an inspiring external power, or an evidence of the
_reïncarnation_ which the Occultists see in it. It fills a gap which
Newton, with all his genius, failed to bridge. And surely it is our
Primeval Matter, Âkâsha, that Kant had in view, when he postulated a
universally pervading primordial Substance, in order to solve Newton’s
difficulty, and his failure to explain, by natural forces alone, the
primitive impulse imparted to the Planets. For, as he remarks in Chapter
viii, if it is once admitted that the perfect harmony of the Stars and
Planets and the coincidence of their orbital planes prove the existence of
a natural Cause, which would thus be the Primal Cause, “that Cause cannot
really be the matter which fills to‐day the heavenly spaces.” It must be
that which filled Space—was Space—originally, whose motion in
differentiated Matter was the origin of the actual movements of the
sidereal bodies; and which, “in condensing itself in those very bodies,
thus abandoned the space that is to‐day found void.” In other words, it is
of that same Matter that are now composed the Planets, Comets, and the Sun
himself, and that Matter, having originally formed itself into those
bodies, has preserved its inherent quality of motion; which quality, now
centred in their nuclei, directs all motion. A very slight alteration of
words in this is needed, and a few additions, to make of it our Esoteric
Doctrine.

The latter teaches that it is this original, primordial Prima Materia,
divine and intelligent, the direct emanation of the Universal Mind, the
Daiviprakriti—the Divine Light(1036) emanating from the Logos—which formed
the nuclei of all the “self‐moving” orbs in Kosmos. It is the informing,
ever‐present moving‐power and life‐principle, the Vital Soul of the Suns,
Moons, Planets, and even of our Earth; the former latent, the latter
active—the invisible Ruler and Guide of the gross body attached to, and
connected with, its Soul, which is the spiritual emanation, after all, of
these respective Planetary Spirits.

Another quite Occult Doctrine is the theory of Kant, that the Matter of
which the inhabitants and the animals of other Planets are formed is of _a
lighter and more subtle nature and of a more perfect conformation, in
proportion to their distance from the Sun_. The latter is too full of
Vital Electricity, of the physical, life‐giving principle. Therefore, the
men on Mars are more ethereal than we are, while those on Venus are more
gross, though far more intelligent, if less spiritual.

The last doctrine is not quite ours—yet these Kantian theories are as
metaphysical, and as transcendental as any Occult Doctrines; and more than
one man of Science would, if he but _dared_ speak his mind, accept them as
Wolf does. From this Kantian Mind and Soul of the Suns and Stars to the
Mahat (Mind) and Prakriti of the _Purânas_ there is but a step. After all,
the admission of this by Science would be only the admission of a natural
cause, whether it would or would not stretch its belief to such
metaphysical heights. But then Mahat, the Mind, is a “God,” and Physiology
admits “mind” only as a temporary function of the material brain, and no
more.

The Satan of Materialism now laughs at all alike, and denies the visible
as well as the invisible. Seeing in light, heat, electricity, and even in
the phenomenon of _life_, only properties inherent in Matter, it laughs
whenever life is called the _Vital Principle_, and derides the idea of its
being independent of and distinct from the organism.

But here again scientific opinions differ as in everything else, and there
are several men of Science who accept views very similar to ours.
Consider, for instance, what Dr. Richardson, F.R.S. (elsewhere quoted at
length) says of that “Vital Principle,” which he calls “Nervous Ether”:


    I speak only of a veritable _material agent_, refined, it may be,
    to the world at large, but _actual and substantial_: an agent
    having quality of weight and of volume, an agent susceptible of
    chemical combination, and thereby of change of physical state and
    condition, an agent passive in its action, moved always, that is
    to say, by influences apart from itself,(1037) obeying other
    influences, an agent possessing no initiative power, no _vis_ or
    _energeia naturæ_,(1038) but still playing a most important, if
    not a primary part in the production of the phenomena resulting
    from the action of the _energeia_ upon visible matter.(1039)


As Biology and Physiology now deny, _in toto_, the existence of a Vital
Principle, this extract, together with De Quatrefages’ admission, is a
clear confirmation that there are men of Science who take the same views
about “things Occult” as do Theosophists and Occultists. These recognize a
distinct Vital Principle independent of the organism—material, of course,
_as physical Force cannot be divorced from Matter_, but of a Substance
existing in a state unknown to Science. _Life for them is something more
than the mere interaction of molecules and atoms._ There is a Vital
Principle without which no molecular combinations could ever have resulted
in a living organism, least of all in the so‐called “inorganic” Matter of
our plane of consciousness.

By “molecular combinations” are meant, of course, those of the Matter of
our present illusive perceptions, which Matter energizes only on this, our
plane. And this is the chief point at issue.(1040)

Thus the Occultists are not alone in their beliefs. Nor are they so
foolish, after all, in rejecting even the “gravity” of Modern Science
along with other _physical_ laws, and in accepting instead _attraction_
and _repulsion_. They see, moreover, in these two opposite Forces only the
two _aspects_ of the Universal Unit, called _Manifesting Mind_; in which
aspects, Occultism, through its great Seers, perceives an innumerable Host
of operative Beings: cosmic Dhyân Chohans, Entities, whose essence, in its
_dual_ nature, is the Cause of all terrestrial phenomena. For that essence
is con‐substantial with the universal Electric Ocean, which is LIFE; and
being dual, as said—positive and negative—it is the emanations of that
duality that act now on Earth under the name of “modes of motion”; even
Force having now become objectionable as a word, for fear it should lead
someone, even in thought, to separate it from Matter! It is, as Occultism
says, the dual _effects_ of that dual essence, which have now been called
centripetal and centrifugal forces, now negative and positive poles, or
polarity, heat and cold, light and darkness, etc.

And it is further maintained that even the Greek and Roman Catholic
Christians are wiser in believing, as they do—even if blindly connecting
and tracing them all to an anthropomorphic God—in Angels, Archangels,
Archons, Seraphs, and Morning Stars, in all those theological _deliciæ
humani generis_, in short, that rule the Cosmic Elements, than Science is,
in disbelieving in them altogether, and in advocating its mechanical
Forces. For these act very often with more than human intelligence and
pertinency. Nevertheless, that intelligence is denied and attributed to
blind chance. But, as De Maistre was right in calling the law of
gravitation merely a _word_ which replaced “the thing unknown,” so are we
right in applying the same remark to all the other Forces of Science. And
if it is objected that the Count was an ardent Roman Catholic, then we may
cite Le Couturier, as ardent a Materialist, who said the same thing, as
did also Herschell and many others.(1041)

From Gods to men, from Worlds to atoms, from a Star to a rush‐light, from
the Sun to the vital heat of the meanest organic being—the world of Form
and Existence is an immense chain, the links of which are all connected.
The Law of Analogy is the first key to the world‐problem, and these links
have to be studied coördinately in their Occult relations to each other.

When, therefore, the Secret Doctrine—postulating that conditioned or
limited space (location) has no real being except in this world of
illusion, or, in other words, in our perceptive faculties—teaches that
every one of the higher, as of the lower worlds, is interblended with our
own objective world; that millions of things and beings are, in point of
localization, around and _in_ us, as we are around, with, and in them;
this is no mere metaphysical figure of speech, but a sober fact in Nature,
however incomprehensible to our senses.

But one has to understand the phraseology of Occultism before criticizing
what it asserts. For example, the Doctrine refuses—as Science does, in one
sense—to use the words “above” and “below,” “higher” and “lower,” in
reference to _invisible_ spheres, since here they are without meaning.
Even the terms “East” and “West” are merely conventional, necessary only
to aid our human perceptions. For though the Earth has its two fixed
points in the poles, North and South, yet both East and West are variable
relatively to our own position on the Earth’s surface, and in consequence
of its rotation from West to East. Hence, when “other worlds” are
mentioned—whether better or worse, more spiritual or still more material,
though both invisible—the Occultist does not locate these spheres either
outside or inside our Earth, as the theologians and the poets do; for
their location is nowhere in the space known to, or conceived by, the
profane. They are, as it were, blended with our world—interpenetrating it
and interpenetrated by it. There are millions and millions of worlds and
firmaments visible to us; there are still greater numbers beyond those
visible to the telescope, and many of the latter kind do not belong to our
_objective_ sphere of existence. Although as invisible as if they were
millions of miles beyond our Solar System, they are yet with us, near us,
_within_ our own world, as objective and material to their respective
inhabitants as ours is to us. But, again, the relation of these worlds to
ours is not that of a series of egg‐shaped boxes enclosed one within the
other, like the toys called Chinese nests; each is entirely under its own
special laws and conditions, having no direct relation to our sphere. The
inhabitants of these, as already said, may be, for all we know, or feel,
passing _through_ and _around_ us as if through empty space, their very
habitations and countries being interblended with ours, though not
disturbing our vision, because we have not yet the faculties necessary for
discerning them. Yet by their spiritual sight the Adepts, and even some
seers and sensitives, are always able to discern, whether in a greater or
smaller degree, the presence and close proximity to us of Beings
pertaining to other spheres of life. Those of the spiritually higher
worlds communicate only with those terrestrial mortals who ascend to them,
through individual efforts, on to the higher plane they are occupying.

_The sons of Bhûmi_ [Earth] _regard the Sons of Deva‐lokas_ [Angel‐
spheres] _as their Gods; and the Sons of lower kingdoms look up to the men
of Bhûmi as to their Devas_ [Gods]; _men remaining unaware of it in their
blindness.... They_ [men] _tremble before them while using them_ [for
magical purposes].... _The First Race of Men were the __“__Mind‐born
Sons__”__ of the former. They_ [the Pitris and Devas] _are our
progenitors_.(1042)

“Educated people,” so‐called, deride the idea of Sylphs, Salamanders,
Undines, and Gnomes; the men of Science regard any mention of such
superstitions as an insult; and with a contempt of logic and common good
sense, that is often the prerogative of “accepted authority,” they allow
those, whom it is their duty to instruct, to labour under the absurd
impression that in the whole Kosmos, or at any rate in our own atmosphere,
there are no other conscious, intelligent beings, save ourselves.(1043)
Any other humanity (composed of distinct _human_ beings) save a mankind
with two legs, two arms, and a head with man’s features on it, would not
be called human; though the etymology of the word would seem to have
little to do with the general appearance of a creature. Thus, while
Science sternly rejects even the possibility of there being such (to us,
generally) invisible creatures, Society, while believing in it all
_secretly_, is made to deride the idea openly. It hails with mirth such
works as the _Comte de Gabalis_, and fails to understand that _open satire
is the securest mask_.

Nevertheless, such invisible worlds do exist. Inhabited as thickly as is
our own, they are scattered throughout apparent Space in immense numbers;
some far more material than our own world, others gradually etherealizing
until they become formless and are as “breaths.” The fact that our
physical eye does not see them, is no reason for disbelieving in them.
Physicists cannot see their Ether, Atoms, “modes of motion,” or Forces.
Yet they accept and teach them.

If we find, even in the natural world with which we are acquainted, Matter
affording a partial analogy to the difficult conception of such invisible
worlds, there seems little difficulty in recognizing the possibility of
such a presence. The tail of a Comet, which, though attracting our
attention by virtue of its luminosity, yet does not disturb or impede our
vision of objects, which we perceive through and beyond it, affords the
first stepping‐stone toward a proof of the same. The tail of a Comet
passes rapidly across our horizon, and we should neither feel it, nor be
cognizant of its passage, but for the brilliant coruscation, often
perceived only by a few interested in the phenomenon, while everyone else
remains ignorant of its presence and of its passage _through_, or across,
a portion of our globe. This tail may, or may not, be an integral portion
of the being of the Comet, but its tenuity subserves our purpose as an
illustration. Indeed, it is no question of superstition, but simply a
result of transcendental Science, and of logic still more, to admit the
existence of worlds formed of even far more attenuated Matter than the
tail of a Comet. By denying such a possibility, Science has for the last
century played into the hands of neither Philosophy nor true Religion, but
simply into those of Theology. To be able to dispute the better the
plurality of even material worlds, a belief thought by many churchmen
incompatible with the teachings and doctrines of the _Bible_,(1044)
Maxwell had to calumniate the memory of Newton, and to try and convince
his public that the principles contained in the Newtonian philosophy are
those “which lie at the foundation of all atheistical systems.”(1045)

“Dr. Whewell disputed the plurality of worlds by appeal to scientific
evidence,” writes Professor Winchell.(1046) And if even the habitability
of physical worlds, of Planets, and distant Stars which shine in myriads
over our heads is so disputed, how little chance is there for the
acceptance of invisible worlds within the apparently transparent space of
our own!

But, if we can conceive of a world composed of Matter still more
attenuated to _our_ senses than the tail of a Comet, hence of inhabitants
in it who are as ethereal, in proportion to _their_ Globe, as we are in
comparison with _our_ rocky, hard‐crusted Earth, no wonder if we do not
perceive them, nor sense their presence or even existence. Only, in what
is the idea contrary to Science? Cannot men and animals, plants and rocks,
be supposed to be endowed with quite a different set of senses from those
we possess? Cannot their organisms be born, develop, and exist, under
other laws of being than those that rule our little world? Is it
absolutely necessary that every corporeal being should be clothed in
“coats of skin” like those that Adam and Eve were provided with in the
legend of Genesis? Corporeality, we are told, however, by more than one
man of Science, “may exist under very divergent conditions.” Professor A.
Winchell—arguing upon the plurality of worlds—makes the following remarks:


    It is not at all improbable that substances of a refractory nature
    might be so mixed with other substances, known or unknown to us,
    as to be capable of enduring vastly greater vicissitudes of heat
    and cold than is possible with terrestrial organisms. The tissues
    of terrestrial animals are simply suited to terrestrial
    conditions. Yet even here we find different types and species of
    animals adapted to the trials of extremely dissimilar
    situations.... That an animal should be a quadruped or a biped is
    something not depending on the necessities of organization, or
    instinct, or intelligence. That an animal should possess just five
    senses is not a necessity of percipient existence. There may be
    animals on the earth with neither smell nor taste. There may be
    beings on other worlds, and even on this, who possess more
    numerous senses than we. The possibility of this is apparent when
    we consider the high probability that other properties and other
    modes of existence lie among the resources of the Cosmos, and even
    of terrestrial matter. There are animals which subsist where
    rational man would perish—in the soil, in the river, and the sea
    ... [and why not _human_ beings of different organizations, in
    such case?].... Nor is incorporated rational existence conditioned
    on warm blood, nor on any temperature which does not change the
    forms of matter of which the organism may be composed. There may
    be intelligences corporealized after some concept not involving
    the processes of injection, assimilation, and reproduction. Such
    bodies would not require daily food and warmth. They might be lost
    in the abysses of the ocean, or laid up on a stormy cliff through
    the tempests of an Arctic winter, or plunged in a volcano for a
    hundred years, and yet retain consciousness and thought. It is
    conceivable. Why might not psychic natures be enshrined in
    indestructible flint and platinum? These substances are no further
    from the nature of intelligence than carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
    lime. But, not to carry the thought to such an extreme [?], might
    not high intelligence be embodied in frames as indifferent to
    external conditions as the sage of the western plains, or the
    lichens of Labrador, the rotifers which remain dried for years, or
    the bacteria which pass living through boiling water.... These
    suggestions are made simply to remind the reader how little can be
    argued respecting the necessary conditions of intelligent,
    organized existence, from the standard of corporeal existence
    found upon the earth. Intelligence is, from its nature, as
    universal and as uniform as the laws of the universe. Bodies are
    merely the local fitting of intelligence to particular
    modifications of universal matter or force.(1047)


Do not we know through the discoveries of that same all‐denying Science
that we are surrounded by myriads of invisible lives? If these microbes,
bacteria and the _tutti quanti_ of the infinitesimally small, are
invisible to us by virtue of their minuteness, cannot there be, at the
other pole, beings as invisible owing to the quality of their texture or
matter—to its tenuity, in fact? Conversely, as to the effects of cometary
matter, have we not another example of a half visible form of Life and
Matter? The ray of sunlight entering our apartment reveals in its passage
myriads of tiny beings living their little life and ceasing to be,
independent and heedless of whether they are or are not perceived by our
grosser materiality. And so again, of the microbes and bacteria and such‐
like unseen beings in other elements. We passed them by, during those long
centuries of dreary ignorance, after the lamp of knowledge in the heathen
and highly philosophical systems had ceased to throw its bright light on
the ages of intolerance and bigotry of early Christianity; and we would
fain pass them by again now.

And yet these lives surrounded us _then_ as they do now. They have worked
on, obedient to their own laws, and it is only as they have been gradually
revealed by Science that we have begun to take cognizance of them and of
the effects produced by them.

How long has it taken the world to become what it now is? If it can be
said that even up to the present day cosmic dust, “which has never
belonged to the earth before,”(1048) reaches our Globe, how much more
logical is it to believe—as the Occultists do—that through the countless
millions of years that have rolled away since that dust aggregated and
formed the Globe we live in round its nucleus of _intelligent_ Primeval
Substance, many humanities—differing from our present mankind as greatly
as the humanity which will evolve millions of years hence will differ from
our races—appeared but to disappear from the face of the Earth, as will
our own. These primitive and far‐distant humanities are denied, because,
as Geologists think, they have left no tangible relics of themselves. All
trace of them is swept away, and therefore they have never existed. Yet
their relics—though very few of them, truly—are to be found, and they must
be discovered by geological research. But, even if they were never to be
met with, there would be no reason to say that no men could have ever
lived in the geological periods to which their presence on earth is
assigned. For their organisms needed no warm blood, no atmosphere, no
feeding; the author of _World‐Life_ is right, and there is no extravagance
in believing as we do, that as, on scientific hypotheses, there may be to
this day “psychic natures enshrined in indestructible flint and platinum,”
so there were psychic natures enshrined in forms of equally indestructible
Primeval Matter—the real forefathers of our Fifth Race.

When, therefore, as in Volume II, we speak of men who inhabited this Globe
18,000,000 years ago, we have in mind neither the men of our present
races, nor the present atmospheric laws, thermal conditions, etc. The
Earth and Mankind, like the Sun, Moon, and Planets, all have their growth,
changes, development, and gradual evolution in their life‐periods; they
are born, become infants, then children, adolescent, grown‐up, they grow
old, and finally die. Why should not Mankind be also under this universal
law? Says Uriel to Enoch:


    Behold, I have showed thee all things, O Enoch.... Thou seest the
    sun, the moon, and those which conduct the stars of heaven, which
    cause all their operations, seasons, and arrivals to return. In
    the days of sinners the years shall be shortened ... everything
    done on earth shall be subverted ... the moon shall change its
    laws.(1049)


The “days of sinners” meant the days when Matter would be in its full sway
on Earth, and man would have reached the apex of physical development in
stature and animality. That came to pass during the period of the
Atlanteans, about the middle point of their Race, the Fourth, which was
drowned, as prophesied by Uriel. Since then man has been decreasing in
physical stature, strength, and years, as will be shown in Volume II. But
as we are at the mid‐point of our sub‐race of the Fifth Root‐Race—the acme
of materiality in each—the animal propensities, though more refined, are
none the less developed; and this is most marked in civilized countries.




Section XIV. Gods, Monads and Atoms.


Some years ago we remarked that:


    The Esoteric Doctrine may well be called ... the “Thread
    Doctrine,” since, like Sûtrâtmâ [in the Vedânta Philosophy](1050),
    it passes through and strings together all the ancient
    philosophical religious systems, and ... reconciles and explains
    them.(1051)


We now say it does more. It not only reconciles the various and apparently
conflicting systems, but it checks the discoveries of modern exact
Science, showing some of them to be necessarily correct, since they are
found corroborated in the Ancient Records. All this will, no doubt, be
regarded as terribly impertinent and disrespectful, a veritable crime of
_lèse‐science_; nevertheless, it is a fact.

Science is, undeniably, ultra‐materialistic in our days; but it finds, in
one sense, its justification. Nature behaving ever esoterically _in actu_,
and being, as the Kabalists say, _in abscondito_, can only be judged by
the profane through her appearance, and that appearance is always
deceitful on the physical plane. On the other hand, the Naturalists refuse
to blend Physics with Metaphysics, the Body with its informing Soul and
Spirit. They prefer to ignore the latter. This is a matter of choice with
some, while the minority very sensibly strive to enlarge the domain of
Physical Science by trespassing on the forbidden grounds of Metaphysics,
so distasteful to some Materialists. These Scientists are wise in their
generation. For all their wonderful discoveries will go for nothing, and
remain for ever _headless_ bodies, unless they lift the veil of Matter and
strain their eyes to see _beyond_. Now that they have studied Nature in
the length, breadth, and thickness of her physical frame, it is time to
remove the skeleton to the second plane, and search within the unknown
depths for the living and real entity, for its _sub_‐stance—the noumenon
of evanescent Matter.

It is only by acting along such lines that some truths, now called
“exploded superstitions,” will be discovered to be facts, and the relics
of ancient knowledge and wisdom.

One of such “degrading” beliefs—degrading in the opinion of the all‐
denying Sceptic—is found in the idea that Kosmos, besides its objective
planetary inhabitants, its humanities in other inhabited worlds, is full
of invisible, intelligent _Existences_. The so‐called Arch‐Angels, Angels
and Spirits, of the West, copies of their prototypes, the Dhyân Chohans,
the Devas and Pitris, of the East, are not real Beings, but fictions. On
this point materialistic Science is inexorable. To support its position,
it upsets its own axiomatic law of uniformity and of continuity in the
laws of Nature, and all the logical sequence of analogies in the evolution
of Being. The masses of the profane are asked, and are made to believe
that the accumulated testimony of History—which shows even the “Atheists”
of old, such men as Epicurus and Democritus, as believers in _Gods_—is
false; and that Philosophers like Socrates and Plato, asserting such
existences, were mistaken enthusiasts and fools. If we hold our opinions
merely on historical grounds, on the authority of legions of the most
eminent Sages, Neo‐Platonists, and Mystics in all ages, from Pythagoras
down to the eminent Scientists and Professors of the present century, who,
if they reject “Gods,” believe in “Spirits,” are we to consider such
authorities to be as weak‐minded and foolish as any Roman Catholic
peasant, who believes in and prays to his once human Saint, or the
Archangel St. Michael? But is there no difference between the belief of
the peasant and that of the Western heirs of the Rosicrucians and
Alchemists of the Middle Ages? Is it the Van Helmonts, the Khunraths, the
Paracelsuses and Agrippas, from Roger Bacon down to St. Germain, who were
all blind enthusiasts, hysteriacs or cheats, or is it the handful of
modern Sceptics—the “leaders of thought”—who are struck with the cecity of
negation? The latter is the case, we opine. It would indeed be a
_miracle_, quite an abnormal fact in the realm of probabilities and logic,
were that handful of negators to be the sole custodians of _truth_, while
the million‐strong hosts of believers in Gods, Angels, and Spirits—in
Europe and America alone—namely, Greek and Latin Christians, Theosophists,
Spiritualists, Mystics, etc., should be no better than deluded fanatics
and hallucinated mediums, and often no higher than the victims of
deceivers and impostors! However varying in their external presentations
and dogmas, beliefs in the Hosts of invisible Intelligences of various
grades have all the same foundation. Truth and error are mixed in all. The
exact extent, depth, breadth, and length of the mysteries of Nature are to
be found only in Eastern Esoteric Science. So vast and so profound are
these that scarcely even a few, a very few of the highest Initiates—those
_whose very existence is known but to a small number of Adepts_—are
capable of assimilating the knowledge. Yet it is all there, and one by one
facts and processes in Nature’s workshops are permitted to find their way
into exact Science, while mysterious help is given to rare individuals in
unravelling its arcana. It is at the close of great Cycles, in connection
with racial development, that such events generally take place. We are at
the very close of the cycle of 5,000 years of the present Âryan Kali Yuga;
and between this time and 1897 there will be a large rent made in the Veil
of Nature, and materialistic Science will receive a death‐blow.

Without throwing any discredit upon time‐honoured beliefs, in any
direction, we are forced to draw a marked line between blind faith,
evolved by theologies, and knowledge due to the independent researches of
long generations of Adepts; between, in short, faith and Philosophy. There
have been, in all ages, undeniably learned and good men who, having been
reared in sectarian beliefs, died in their crystallized convictions. For
Protestants, the garden of Eden is the primeval point of departure in the
drama of Humanity, and the solemn tragedy on the summit of Calvary is the
prelude to the hoped‐for Millennium. For Roman Catholics, Satan is at the
foundation of Kosmos, Christ in its centre, and Antichrist at its apex.
For both, the Hierarchy of Being begins and ends within the narrow frames
of their respective theologies: one self‐created _personal_ God, and an
empyrean ringing with the Hallelujas of _created_ Angels; the rest,
_false_ Gods, Satan and fiends.

Theo‐Philosophy proceeds on broader lines. From the very beginning of
æons—in time and space in our Round and Globe—the mysteries of Nature (at
any rate, those which it is lawful for our Races to know) were recorded by
the pupils of those same, now invisible, “Heavenly Men,” in geometrical
figures and symbols. The keys thereto passed from one generation of “Wise
Men” to another. Some of the symbols thus passed from the East to the
West, brought from the Orient by Pythagoras, who was not the inventor of
his famous “Triangle.” The latter figure, along with the square and
circle, are more eloquent and scientific descriptions of the order of the
evolution of the Universe, spiritual and psychic, as well as physical,
than volumes of descriptive Cosmogonies and revealed “Geneses.” The ten
Points inscribed within that “Pythagorean Triangle” are worth all the
theogonies and angelologies ever emanated from the theological brain. For
he who interprets these seventeen points (the seven Mathematical Points
hidden)—on their very face, and in the order given—will find in them the
uninterrupted series of the genealogies from the first Heavenly to
Terrestrial Man. And, as they give the order of Beings, so they reveal the
order in which were evolved the Kosmos, our Earth, and the primordial
Elements by which the latter was generated. Begotten in the invisible
“Depths,” and in the Womb of the same “Mother” as its fellow‐globes—he who
masters the mysteries of our own Earth will have mastered those of all
others.

Whatever ignorance, pride or fanaticism may suggest to the contrary,
Esoteric Cosmology can be shown to be inseparably connected with both
Philosophy and Modern Science. The Gods and Monads of the Ancients—from
Pythagoras down to Leibnitz—and the Atoms of the present materialistic
schools (as borrowed by them from the theories of the old Greek Atomists)
are only a compound unit, or a graduated unity like the human frame, which
begins with body and ends with Spirit. In the Occult Sciences they can be
studied separately, but they can never be mastered unless they are viewed
in their mutual correlations during their life‐cycle, and as a Universal
Unity during Pralayas.

La Pluche shows sincerity, but gives a poor idea of his philosophical
capacities, when declaring his personal views on the Monad or the
Mathematical Point. He says:


    A point is enough to put all the schools in the world in a
    combustion. But what need has man to know that point, since the
    creation of such a small being is beyond his power? _À fortiori_,
    philosophy acts against probability when, from that point which
    absorbs and disconcerts all her meditations, she presumes to pass
    on to the generation of the world.


Philosophy, however, could never have formed its conception of a logical,
universal, and absolute Deity, if it had had no Mathematical Point within
the Circle upon which to base its speculations. It is only the manifested
Point, lost to our senses after its pregenetic appearance in the
infinitude and incognizability of the Circle, that makes a reconciliation
between Philosophy and Theology possible—on condition that the latter
should abandon its crude materialistic dogmas. And it is because Christian
theology has so unwisely rejected the Pythagorean Monad and geometrical
figures, that it has evolved its self‐created human and personal God, the
monstrous Head whence flow in two streams the dogmas of Salvation and
Damnation. This is so true, that even those clergymen who are Masons, and
who would be Philosophers, have, in their arbitrary interpretations,
fathered upon the Ancient Sages the queer idea that:


    The Monad represented [with them] the throne of the Omnipotent
    Deity, placed in the centre of the empyrean to indicate
    T.G.A.O.T.U. [_read_ the “Great Architect of the Universe”].(1052)


A curious explanation this, more Masonic than strictly Pythagorean.

Nor did the “Hierogram within a Circle, or equilateral Triangle,” ever
mean “the exemplification of the unity of the divine Essence”; for this
was exemplified by the plane of the boundless Circle. What it really meant
was the triune coëqual Nature of the first differentiated Substance, or
the con‐substantiality of the (manifested) Spirit, Matter and the
Universe—their “Son”—which proceeds from the Point, the real, Esoteric
Logos, or Pythagorean Monad. For the Greek Monas signifies “Unity” in its
primary sense. Those unable to seize the difference between the Monad—the
Universal Unit—and the Monads or the manifested Unity, as also between the
ever‐hidden and the revealed Logos, or the Word, ought never to meddle
with Philosophy, let alone with the Esoteric Sciences. It is needless to
remind the educated reader of Kant’s Thesis to demonstrate his second
Antinomy.(1053) Those who have read and understood it will see clearly the
line we draw between the _absolutely ideal_ Universe and the invisible
though manifested Kosmos. Our Gods and Monads are not the Elements of
extension itself, but only those of the invisible Reality which is the
basis of the manifested Kosmos. Neither Esoteric Philosophy, nor Kant, to
say nothing of Leibnitz, would ever admit that extension can be composed
of simple or unextended parts. But theologian‐philosophers will not grasp
this. The Circle and the Point—the latter retiring into and merging with
the former, after having emanated the first three Points and connected
them with lines, thus forming the first noumenal basis of the Second
Triangle in the Manifested World—have ever been an insuperable obstacle to
theological flights into dogmatic empyreans. On the authority of this
Archaic Symbol, a male, personal God, the Creator and Father of all,
becomes a third‐rate emanation, the Sephira standing fourth in descent,
and on the left hand of Ain Suph, in the Kabalistic Tree of Life. Hence,
the Monad is degraded into a Vehicle—a “Throne”!

The Monad—the emanation and reflection only of the Point, or Logos, in the
phenomenal World—becomes, as the apex of the manifested equilateral
Triangle, the “Father.” The left side or line is the Duad, the “Mother,”
regarded as the evil, counteracting principle;(1054) the right side
represents the “Son,” “his Mother’s Husband” in _every_ Cosmogony, as
being one with the apex; the base line is the universal plane of
productive Nature, unifying on the phenomenal plane Father‐Mother‐Son, as
these were unified in the apex, in the supersensuous World.(1055) By
mystic transmutation they became the Quaternary—the Triangle became the
Tetraktys.

This transcendental application of geometry to cosmic and divine
theogony—the Alpha and the Omega of mystical conception—was dwarfed after
Pythagoras by Aristotle. By omitting the Point and the Circle, and taking
no account of the apex, he reduced the metaphysical value of the idea, and
thus limited the doctrine of magnitude to a simple Triad—the _line_, the
_surface_, and the _body_. His modern heirs, who play at Idealism, have
interpreted these three geometrical figures as Space, Force, and
Matter—“the potencies of an interacting Unity.” Materialistic Science,
perceiving but the base line of the _manifested_ Triangle—the plane of
Matter—translates it practically as (Father)‐_Matter_, (Mother)‐_Matter_,
and (Son)‐_Matter_, and theoretically as Matter, Force, and Correlation.

But to the average Physicist, as remarked by a Kabalist:


    Space, and Force, and Matter, are what signs in Algebra are to the
    Mathematician, merely conventional symbols, or Force as Force, and
    Matter as Matter, are as absolutely unknowable as is the assumed
    empty space in which they are held to interact.(1056)


Symbols represent abstractions, and on these


    The physicist bases reasoned hypotheses of the origin of things
    ... he sees three needs in what he terms creation: A place wherein
    to create. A medium by which to create. A material from which to
    create. And in giving a logical expression to this hypothesis
    through the terms space, force, matter, he believes he has proved
    the existence of that which each of these represents as he
    conceives it to be.(1057)


The Physicist who regards Space merely as a representation of our mind, or
extension unrelated to things in it, which Locke defined as capable of
neither resistance nor motion; the paradoxical Materialist, who would have
a _void_ there, where he can see no Matter, would reject with the utmost
contempt the proposition that Space is


    A substantial though [apparently an absolutely] unknowable living
    Entity.(1058)


Such is, nevertheless, the Kabalistic teaching, and it is that of Archaic
Philosophy. Space is the _real_ World, while our world is an artificial
one. It is the One Unity throughout its infinitude: in its bottomless
depths as on its illusive surface; a surface studded with countless
phenomenal Universes, Systems and mirage‐like Worlds. Nevertheless, to the
Eastern Occultist, who is an objective Idealist at bottom, in the _real_
World, which is a Unity of Forces, there is “a connection of all Matter in
the Plenum,” as Leibnitz would say. This is symbolized in the Pythagorean
Triangle.

It consists of Ten Points inscribed pyramid‐like (from one to four) within
its three sides, and it symbolizes the Universe in the famous Pythagorean
Decad. The upper single point is a Monad, and represents a Unit‐Point,
which is _the_ Unity whence all proceeds. All is of the same essence with
it. While the ten points within the equilateral Triangle represent the
phenomenal world, the three sides enclosing the pyramid of points are the
barriers of _noumenal_ Matter, or Substance, that separate it from the
world of Thought.


    Pythagoras considered a _point_ to correspond in proportion to
    unity; a _line_ to 2; a _superfice_ to 3; a _solid_ to 4; and he
    defined a point as a monad having position, and the beginning of
    all things; a line was thought to correspond with duality, because
    it was produced by the first motion from indivisible nature, and
    formed the junction of two points. A superfice was compared to the
    number three because it is the first of all causes that are found
    in figures; for a circle, which is the principal of all round
    figures, comprises a triad, in centre—space—circumference. But a
    triangle, which is the first of all rectilineal figures, is
    included in a ternary, and receives its form according to that
    number; and was considered by the Pythagoreans to be the author of
    all sublunary things. The four points at the base of the
    Pythagorean triangle correspond with a solid or cube, which
    combines the principles of length, breadth, and thickness, for no
    solid can have less than four extreme boundary points.(1059)


It is argued that “the human mind cannot conceive an indivisible unit
short of the annihilation of the idea with its subject.” This is an error,
as the Pythagoreans have proved, and a number of Seers before them,
although there is a special training needed for the conception, and
although the profane mind can hardly grasp it. But there are such things
as “_Meta‐mathematics_” and “_Meta‐geometry_.” Even Mathematics pure and
simple proceed from the universal to the particular, from the mathematical
indivisible point to solid figures. The teaching originated in India, and
was taught in Europe by Pythagoras, who, throwing a veil over the Circle
and the Point—which no living man can define except as incomprehensible
abstractions—laid the origin of the differentiated cosmic Matter in the
base of the Triangle. Thus the latter became the earliest of geometrical
figures. The author of _New Aspects of Life_, dealing with the Kabalistic
Mysteries, objects to the objectivization, so to speak, of the Pythagorean
conception and the use of the equilateral triangle, and calls it a
“misnomer.” His argument that a solid equilateral body—


    One whose base, as well as each of its sides, form equal
    triangles—must have four co‐equal sides or surfaces, while a
    triangular plane will as necessarily possess five,(1060)


—demonstrates on the contrary the grandeur of the conception in all its
Esoteric application to the idea of the _pregenesis_, and the genesis of
Kosmos. Granted, that an ideal Triangle, depicted by mathematical,
imaginary lines,


    Can have no sides at all, being simply a phantom of the mind to
    which, if sides be imputed, these must be the sides of the object
    it constructively represents.(1061)


But in such case most of the scientific hypotheses are no better than
“phantoms of the mind”; they are unverifiable, except on inference, and
have been adopted merely to answer scientific necessities. Furthermore,
the ideal Triangle—“as the abstract idea of a triangular body, and,
therefore, as the type of an abstract idea”—accomplished and carried out
to perfection the double symbolism intended. As an emblem applicable to
the objective idea, the simple triangle became a solid. When repeated in
stone, facing the four cardinal points, it assumed the shape of the
Pyramid—the symbol of the phenomenal merging into the noumenal Universe of
thought, at the apex of the four triangles; and, as an “imaginary figure
constructed of three mathematical lines,” it symbolized the subjective
spheres—these lines “enclosing a mathematical space—which is equal to
nothing enclosing nothing.” And this because, to the senses and the
untrained consciousness of the Profane and the Scientist, everything
beyond the line of differentiated Matter—_i.e._, outside of, and beyond
the realm of even the most Spiritual _Substance_—has to remain for ever
_equal to nothing_. It is the Ain Suph—the _No Thing_.

Yet these “phantoms of the mind” are in truth no greater abstractions than
the abstract ideas in general as to evolution and physical
development—_e.g._, Gravity, Matter, Force, etc.—on which the exact
Sciences are based. Our most eminent Chemists and Physicists are earnestly
pursuing the not hopeless attempt of finally tracing to its hiding‐place
the Protyle, or the basic line of the Pythagorean Triangle. The latter is,
as we have said, the grandest conception imaginable, for it symbolizes
both the ideal and the visible universes.(1062) For if


    _The possible unit is only a possibility as an actuality of
    nature, as an individual of any kind_, [and as] every individual
    natural object is capable of division, and by division loses its
    unity, or ceases to be a unit,(1063)


this is true only of the realm of exact Science in a world as deceptive as
it is illusive. In the realm of Esoteric Science the Unit divided _ad
infinitum_, instead of losing its unity, approaches with every division
the planes of the only eternal REALITY. The eye of the Seer can follow it
and behold it in all its pregenetic glory. This same idea of the reality
of the subjective, and the unreality of the objective Universe, is found
at the bottom of the Pythagorean and Platonic Teachings—limited to the
Elect alone; for Porphyry, speaking of the Monad and the Duad, says that
the former only was considered substantial and real, “that most simple
Being, the cause of all unity and the measure of all things.”

But the Duad, although the origin of Evil, or Matter—hence _unreal_ in
Philosophy—is still Substance during Manvantara, and is often called the
Third Monad, in Occultism, and the connecting line as between two Points,
or Numbers, which proceeded from THAT, “which was before all Numbers,” as
expressed by Rabbi Barahiel. And from this Duad proceeded all the
Scintillas of the three Upper and the four Lower Worlds or Planes—which
are in constant interaction and correspondence. This is a teaching which
the Kabalah has in common with Eastern Occultism. For in the Occult
Philosophy there is the “ONE Cause” and the “Primal Cause,” the latter
thus becoming, paradoxically, the Second, as is clearly expressed by the
author of the _Qabbalah, from the Philosophical Writings of Ibn Gabirol_,
who says:


    In the treatment of the Primal Cause, two things must be
    considered, the Primal Cause _per se_, and the relation and
    connection of the Primal Cause with the visible and unseen
    universe.(1064)


Thus he shows the early Hebrews, as the later Arabians, following in the
steps of the Oriental Philosophy, such as the Chaldean, Persian, Hindû,
etc. Their Primal Cause was designated at first,


    By the triadic שדי Shaddaï, the [triune] Almighty, subsequently by
    the Tetragrammaton, יהוה, YHVH symbol of the Past, Present, and
    Future,(1065)


and, let us add, of the eternal IS, or the I AM. Moreover, in the Kabalah
the name YHVH (or Jehovah) expresses a He and a She, male and female, two
in one, or Chokmah and Binah, and his, or rather their Shekinah or
synthesizing Spirit (or Grace), which again makes of the Duad a Triad.
This is demonstrated in the Jewish Liturgy for Pentecost, and the prayer:


    “In the name of Unity, of the Holy and Blessed Hû [He], and His
    She’keenah, the Hidden and Concealed Hû, blessed be YHVH [the
    Quaternary] for ever.” Hû is said to be masculine and YaH
    feminine, together they make the יהוה אחד _i.e._, one YHVH. One,
    but of a male‐female nature. The She’keenah is always considered
    in the Qabbalah as feminine.(1066)


And so it is considered in the exoteric _Purânas_, for Shekinah is no more
than Shakti—the female double of any God—in such case. And so it was with
the early Christians, whose Holy Spirit was feminine, as Sophia was with
the Gnostics. But in the transcendental Chaldean Kabalah, or _Book of
Numbers_, Shekinah is sexless, and the purest abstraction, a state, like
Nirvâna, neither subject nor object, nor anything except an absolute
PRESENCE.

Thus it is only in the anthropomorphized systems—such as the Kabalah has
now for the most part become—that Shekinah‐Shakti is feminine. As such she
becomes the Duad of Pythagoras, the two straight lines which can form no
geometrical figure and are the symbol of Matter. Out of this Duad, when
united in the basic line of the Triangle on the lower plane (the upper
Triangle of the Sephirothal Tree), emerge the Elohim, or Deity in Cosmic
Nature, with the true Kabalists the _lowest_ designation, translated in
the _Bible_ “God.”(1067) Out of these (the Elohim) issue the Scintillas.

The Scintillas are the “Souls,” and these Souls appear in the three‐fold
form of Monads (Units), Atoms and Gods—according to our Teaching. As says
the _Esoteric Catechism_:

_Every Atom becomes a visible complex unit_ [a molecule], _and once
attracted into the sphere of terrestrial activity, the Monadic Essence,
passing through the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms, becomes man_.

Again:

_God, Monad, and Atom are the correspondences of Spirit, Mind, and Body_
[Âtmâ, Manas, and Sthûla Sharîra] _in man_.

In their septenary aggregation they are the “Heavenly Man,” in the
Kabalistic sense; thus, terrestrial man is the provisional reflection of
the Heavenly. Once again:

_The Monads_ [Jîvas] _are the Souls of the Atoms; both are the fabric in
which the Chohans_ [Dhyânîs, Gods] _clothe themselves when a form is
needed_.

This relates to cosmic and sub‐planetary Monads, not to the super‐cosmic
Monads, the Pythagorean Monad, as it is called, in its synthetic
character, by the Pantheistical Peripatetics. The Monads of the present
dissertation are treated, from the standpoint of their individuality, as
_Atomic Souls_, before these Atoms descend into pure terrestrial form. For
this descent into _concrete_ Matter marks the medial point of their own
individual pilgrimage. Here, losing in the mineral kingdom their
individuality, they begin to ascend through the seven states of
terrestrial evolution to that point where a correspondence is firmly
established between the human and Deva (divine) consciousness. At present,
however, we are not concerned with their terrestrial metamorphoses and
tribulations, but with their life and behaviour in Space, on planes
wherein the eye of the most intuitional Chemist and Physicist cannot reach
them—unless, indeed, he develops in himself highly clairvoyant faculties.

It is well known that Leibnitz came very near the truth several times, but
he defined Monadic Evolution incorrectly, a thing not to be wondered at,
since he was not an Initiate, nor even a Mystic, but only a very
intuitional Philosopher. Yet no Psycho‐physicist ever came nearer than has
he to the Esoteric general outline of evolution. This evolution—viewed
from its several standpoints, _i.e._, as the _Universal_ and the
_Individualized_ Monad, and the chief aspects of the Evolving Energy after
differentiation, the purely Spiritual, the Intellectual, the Psychic and
the Physical—may be thus formulated as an invariable law: a descent of
Spirit into Matter, equivalent to an ascent in physical evolution; a
reäscent from the depths of materiality towards its _status quo ante_,
with a corresponding dissipation of concrete form and substance up to the
Laya‐state, or what Science calls the “zero‐point,” and beyond.

These states—once the spirit of Esoteric Philosophy is grasped—become
absolutely necessary from simple logical and analogical considerations.
Physical Science having now ascertained, through its department of
Chemistry, the invariable law of this evolution of Atoms—from their
“protylean” state down to that of a physical and then a chemical particle,
or molecule—cannot well reject these states as a general law. And once it
is forced by its enemies—Metaphysics and Psychology(1068)—out of its
alleged impregnable strongholds, it will find it more difficult than it
now appears to refuse room in the Spaces of SPACE to Planetary Spirits
(Gods), Elementals, and even the Elementary Spooks or Ghosts, and others.
Already Figuier and Paul D’Assier, two Positivists and Materialists, have
succumbed before this logical necessity. Other and still greater
Scientists will follow in that intellectual “Fall.” They will be driven
out of their position not by spiritual, theosophical, or any other
physical or even mental phenomena, but simply by the enormous _gaps_ and
_chasms_ that open daily and will still be opening before them, as one
discovery follows the other, until they are finally knocked off their feet
by the ninth wave of simple common sense.

We may take as an example, Mr. W. Crookes’ latest discovery of what he has
named Protyle. In the _Notes on the Bhagavad Gîtâ_, by one of the best
metaphysicians and Vedântic scholars in India, the lecturer, referring
cautiously to “things Occult” in that great Indian Esoteric work, makes a
remark as suggestive as it is strictly correct. He says:


    Into the details of the evolution of the solar system itself, it
    is not necessary for me to enter. You may gather some idea _as to
    the way_ in which the various elements start into existence from
    these three principles into which Mûlaprakriti [the Pythagorean
    Triangle] is differentiated, by examining the lecture delivered by
    Professor Crookes a short time ago upon the so‐called elements of
    modern chemistry. This lecture will give you some idea of the way
    in which these so‐called elements spring from Vishvânara,(1069)
    the most objective of these three principles, which seems to stand
    in the place of the _protyle_ mentioned in that lecture. Except in
    a few particulars, this lecture seems to give the outlines of the
    theory of physical evolution on the plane of Vishvânara, and is,
    so far as I know, the nearest approach made by modern
    investigators to the real occult theory on the subject.(1070)


These words will be reëchoed and approved by every Eastern Occultist. Much
from the lectures by Mr. Crookes has already been quoted in Section XI. A
second lecture has been delivered by him, as remarkable as the first, on
the “Genesis of the Elements,”(1071) and also a third one. Here we have
almost a corroboration of the teachings of Esoteric Philosophy concerning
the mode of primeval evolution. It is, indeed, as near an approach, made
by a great scholar and specialist in Chemistry,(1072) to the Secret
Doctrine, as could be made apart from the application of the Monads and
Atoms to the dogmas of pure transcendental Metaphysics, and their
connection and correlation with “Gods and intelligent conscious Monads.”
But Chemistry is now on its ascending plane, thanks to one of its highest
European representatives. It is impossible for it to go back to that day
when Materialism regarded its _sub_‐elements as absolutely simple and
homogeneous bodies, which it had raised, in its blindness, to the rank of
Elements. The mask has been snatched off by too clever a hand for there to
be any fear of a new disguise. And after years of pseudology, of bastard
molecules parading under the name of Elements, behind and beyond which
there could be nought but void, a great professor of Chemistry asks once
more:


    What are these elements, whence do they come, what is their
    signification?... These elements perplex us in our researches,
    baffle us in our speculations, and haunt us in our very dreams.
    They stretch like an unknown sea before us—mocking, mystifying,
    and murmuring strange revelations and possibilities.(1073)


Those who are heirs to primeval revelations have taught these
“possibilities” in every century, but have never found a fair hearing. The
truths inspired into Kepler, Leibnitz, Gassendi, Swedenborg, etc., were
ever alloyed with their own speculations in one or another predetermined
direction—hence were distorted. But now one of the great truths has dawned
upon an eminent professor of exact Modern Science, and he fearlessly
proclaims as a fundamental axiom that Science has not made itself
acquainted, so far, with real simple Elements. For Mr. Crookes tells his
audience:


    If I venture to say that our commonly received elements are not
    simple and primordial, that they have _not_ arisen by chance or
    have _not_ been created in a desultory and mechanical manner, but
    have been evolved from simpler matters—or perhaps, indeed, from
    one sole kind of matter—I do but give formal utterance to an idea
    which has been, so to speak, for some time “in the air” of
    science. Chemists, physicists, philosophers of the highest merit,
    declare explicitly their belief that the seventy (or thereabouts)
    elements of our text‐books are not the pillars of Hercules which
    we must never hope to pass.... Philosophers in the present as in
    the past—men who certainly have not worked in the laboratory—have
    reached the same view from another side. Thus Mr. Herbert Spencer
    records his conviction that “the chemical atoms are produced from
    the true or physical atoms by processes of evolution under
    conditions which chemistry has not yet been able to produce.”...
    And the poet has forestalled the philosopher. Milton (_Paradise
    Lost_, Book V.) makes the Archangel Raphael say to Adam instinct
    with the evolutionary idea, that the Almighty had created

    ... “One first matter, all
    Indued with various forms, various degrees
    Of substance.”


Nevertheless, the idea would have remained crystallized “in the air of
Science,” and would not have descended into the thick atmosphere of
Materialism and profane mortals for years to come, perhaps, had not Mr.
Crookes bravely and fearlessly reduced it to its simple constituents, and
thus publicly forced it on scientific notice. Says Plutarch:


    An idea is a Being incorporeal, which has no subsistence by
    itself, but gives figure and form unto shapeless matter, and
    becomes the cause of the manifestation.(1074)


The revolution produced in old Chemistry by Avogadro was the first page in
the volume of “New Chemistry.” Mr. Crookes has now turned the second page,
and is boldly pointing _to what may be the last_. For Protyle once
accepted and recognized—as invisible Ether was, both being logical and
scientific necessities—Chemistry will have virtually ceased to live: it
will reäppear in its reïncarnation as—“New Alchemy,” or “Meta‐chemistry.”
The discoverer of radiant matter will have vindicated in time the Archaic
Âryan works on Occultism, and even the _Vedas_ and _Purânas_. For what are
the manifested “Mother,” the “Father‐Son‐Husband” (Aditi and Daksha, a
form of Brahmâ, as Creators), and the “Son”—the three “First‐born”—but
simply Hydrogen, Oxygen, and that which in its terrestrial manifestation
is called Nitrogen. Even the exoteric descriptions of the “First‐born”
Triad give all the characteristics of these three “gases.” Priestley, the
“discoverer” of Oxygen, or of that which was known in the highest
antiquity!

Yet all the ancient, mediæval, and modern Poets and Philosophers have been
anticipated even in the exoteric Hindû books as to the Elemental Vortices
inaugurated by the Universal Mind—Descartes’ “Plenum” of Matter
differentiated into particles; Leibnitz’s “ethereal fluid”; and Kant’s
“primitive fluid” dissolved into its elements; Kepler’s solar vortex and
systemic vortices; in short, through Anaxagoras, down to Galileo,
Torricelli, and Swedenborg, and after them to the latest speculations by
European Mystics—all this is found in the Hindû Hymns, or Mantras, to the
“Gods, Monads and Atoms,” in their Fulness, for they are inseparable. In
Esoteric Teachings, the most transcendental conceptions of the Universe
and its mysteries, as also the most seemingly materialistic speculations,
are found reconciled, because these Sciences embrace the whole scope of
evolution from Spirit to Matter. As declared by an American Theosophist:


    The Monads [of Leibnitz] may from one point of view be called
    _force_, from another _matter_. To Occult Science, _force_ and
    _matter_ are only two sides of the same substance.(1075)


Let the reader remember these “Monads” of Leibnitz, every one of which is
a living mirror of the Universe, every Monad reflecting every other, and
compare this view and definition with certain Sanskrit Shlokas translated
by Sir William Jones, in which it is said that the creative source of the
Divine Mind,


    Hidden in a veil of thick darkness, formed mirrors of the atoms of
    the world, and cast reflection from its own face on every atom.


When, therefore, Mr. Crookes declares that:


    If we can show how the so‐called chemical elements might have been
    generated we shall be able to fill up a formidable gap in our
    knowledge of the universe,


the answer is ready. The theoretical knowledge is contained in the
Esoteric meaning of every Hindû cosmogony in the _Purânas_; the practical
demonstration thereof—is in the hands of those who will not be recognized
in _this_ century, save by the very few. The scientific possibilities of
various discoveries, that must inexorably lead exact Science into the
acceptation of Eastern Occult views, which contain all the requisite
material for the filling of those “gaps,” are, so far, at the mercy of
Modern Materialism. It is only by working in the direction taken by Mr.
William Crookes that there is any hope for the recognition of a few,
hitherto Occult, truths.

Meanwhile, any one thirsting to have a glimpse at a practical diagram of
the evolution of primordial Matter—which, separating and differentiating
under the impulse of cyclic law, divides itself on a general view into a
septenary gradation of _Substance_—can do no better than examine the
plates attached to Mr. Crookes’ lecture, _Genesis of the Elements_, and
ponder well over some passages of the text. In one place he says:


    Our notions of a chemical element have expanded. Hitherto the
    molecule has been regarded as an aggregate of two or more atoms,
    and no account has been taken of the architectural design on which
    these atoms have been joined. We may consider that the structure
    of a chemical element is more complicated than has hitherto been
    supposed. Between the molecules we are accustomed to deal with in
    chemical reactions and ultimate atoms as first created, come
    smaller molecules or aggregates of physical atoms; these sub‐
    molecules differ one from the other, according to the position
    they occupy in the yttrium edifice.

    Perhaps this hypothesis can be simplified if we imagine yttrium to
    be represented by a five‐shilling piece. By chemical fractionation
    I have divided it into five separate shillings, and find that
    these shillings are not counterparts, but like the carbon atoms in
    the benzol ring, have the impress of their position, 1, 2, 3, 4,
    5, stamped on them.... If I throw my shillings into the melting‐
    pot or dissolve them chemically, the mint stamp disappears and
    they all turn out to be silver.(1076)


This will be the case with all the Atoms and molecules when they have
separated from their compound forms and bodies—when Pralaya sets in.
Reverse the case, and imagine the dawn of a new Manvantara. The pure
“silver” of the absorbed material will once more separate into SUBSTANCE,
which will generate “Divine Essences” whose “Principles”(1077) are the
Primary Elements, the Sub‐elements, the Physical Energies, and subjective
and objective Matter; or, as these are epitomized—GODS, MONADS, and ATOMS.
If leaving for one moment the metaphysical or transcendental side of the
question—dropping out of the present consideration the supersensuous and
intelligent Beings and Entities believed in by the Kabalists and
Christians—we turn to the theory of atomic evolution, the Occult Teachings
are still found corroborated by exact Science and its confessions, so far,
at least, as regards the supposed “simple” Elements, now suddenly degraded
into poor and distant relatives, not even second cousins to the latter.
For we are told by Mr. Crookes that:


    Hitherto, it has been considered that if the atomic weight of a
    metal, determined by different observers, setting out from
    different compounds, was always found to be constant ... then such
    metal must rightly take rank among the simple or elementary
    bodies. We learn ... that this is no longer the case. Again, we
    have here wheels within wheels. Gadolinium is not an element but a
    compound. ... We have shown that yttrium is a complex of five or
    more new constituents. And who shall venture to gainsay that each
    of these constituents, if attacked in some different manner, and
    if the result were submitted to a test more delicate and searching
    than the radiant‐matter test, might not be still further
    divisible? Where, then, is the actual ultimate element? As we
    advance it recedes like the tantalizing mirage lakes and groves
    seen by the tired and thirsty traveller in the desert. Are we in
    our quest for truth to be thus deluded and baulked? The very idea
    of an element, as something absolutely primary and ultimate, seems
    to be growing less and less distinct.(1078)


In _Isis Unveiled_, we said:


    This mystery of first creation, which was ever the despair of
    Science, is unfathomable unless we accept the doctrine of Hermes.
    Could he [Darwin] remove his quest from the visible universe into
    the invisible, he might find himself on the right path. But then,
    he would be following in the footsteps of the Hermetists.(1079)


Our prophecy begins to assert itself.

But between Hermes and Huxley there is a middle course and point. Let the
men of Science only throw a bridge half‐way, and think seriously over the
theories of Leibnitz. We have shown _our_ theories with regard to the
evolution of Atoms—their last formation into compound chemical molecules
being produced within our terrestrial workshops in the Earth’s atmosphere
and not elsewhere—as strangely agreeing with the evolution of Atoms shown
on Mr. Crookes’ plates. Several times already it has been stated in this
volume that Mârttânda, the Sun, had evolved and aggregated, together with
his seven smaller Brothers, from his Mother Aditi’s bosom, that bosom
being Prima _Mater_‐ia—the lecturer’s primordial Protyle. Esoteric
Doctrines teach the existence of


    An antecedent form of energy having periodic cycles of ebb and
    swell, rest and activity.(1080)


And behold a great scholar in Science now asking the world to accept this
as one of his postulates! We have shown the “Mother,” fiery and hot,
becoming gradually cool and radiant, and this same Scientist claims as his
second postulate—a _scientific necessity_, it would seem—


    An internal action, akin to cooling, operating slowly in the
    protyle.


Occult Science teaches that the “Mother” lies stretched in Infinity,
during Pralaya, as the great Deep, the “_dry_ Waters of Space,” according
to the quaint expression in the _Catechism_, and becomes _wet_ only after
the separation and the moving over its face of Nârâyana, the

_Spirit which is invisible Flame, which never burns, but sets on fire all
that it touches, and gives it life and generation._(1081)

And now Science tells us that “the first‐born element ... most nearly
allied to protyle” would be “_hydrogen_ ... which for some time would be
the only existing form of matter” in the Universe. What says _Old_
Science? It answers: Just so; but we would call Hydrogen (and Oxygen),
which—in the pre‐geological and even pre‐genetic ages—instils the fire of
life into the “Mother” by incubation, the _spirit_, the _noumenon_, of
that which becomes in its grossest form Oxygen and Hydrogen and Nitrogen
on Earth—Nitrogen being of no divine origin, but merely an earth‐born
cement for uniting other gases and fluids, and serving as a sponge to
carry in itself the Breath of Life, pure air.(1082) Before these gases and
fluids become what they are in _our_ atmosphere, they are interstellar
Ether; still earlier and on a _deeper_ plane—something else, and so on _in
infinitum_. The eminent and learned gentleman must pardon an Occultist for
quoting him at such length; but such is the penalty of a Fellow of the
Royal Society who approaches so near the precincts of the Sacred Adytum of
Occult Mysteries as virtually to overstep the forbidden boundaries.

But it is time to leave Modern Physical Science and turn to the
psychological and metaphysical side of the question. We would only remark
that to the “two very reasonable postulates” required by the eminent
lecturer, “to get a glimpse of some few of the secrets so darkly hidden”
behind “the door of the Unknown,” a third should be added(1083)—lest no
battering at it should avail; the postulate that Leibnitz stood on a firm
groundwork of fact and truth in his speculations. The admirable and
thoughtful synopsis of these speculations—as given by John Theodore Mertz
in his “Leibnitz”—shows how nearly he has brushed the hidden secrets of
Esoteric Theogony in his _Monadologie_. And yet this philosopher has
hardly risen in his speculations above the first planes, the lower
principles of the Cosmic Great Body. His theory soars to no loftier
heights than those of the _manifested_ life, self‐consciousness and
intelligence, leaving the regions of the earlier post‐genetic mysteries
untouched, as his ethereal fluid is post‐planetary.

But this third postulate will hardly be accepted by the modern men of
Science; and, like Descartes, they will prefer keeping to the properties
of external things, which, like extension, are incapable of explaining the
phenomenon of motion, rather than accept the latter as an independent
Force. They will never become anti‐Cartesian in this generation; nor will
they admit that:


    This property of inertia is not a purely geometrical property;
    that it points to the existence of something in external bodies
    which is not extension merely.


This is Leibnitz’s idea as analyzed by Mertz, who adds that he called this
“something” Force, and maintained that external things were endowed with
Force, and that in order to be the bearers of this Force they must have a
Substance, for they are not lifeless and inert masses, but the centres and
bearers of Form—a purely Esoteric claim, since Force was with Leibnitz an
_active_ principle—the division between Mind and Matter disappearing by
this conclusion.


    The mathematical and dynamical enquiries of Leibnitz would not
    have led to the same result in the mind of a purely scientific
    enquirer. But Leibnitz was not a scientific man in the modern
    sense of the word. Had he been so, he might have worked out the
    conception of energy, defined mathematically the ideas of force
    and mechanical work, and arrived at the conclusion that even for
    purely scientific purposes it is desirable to look upon force, not
    as a primary quantity, but as a quantity derived from some other
    value.


But, luckily for truth:


    Leibnitz was a philosopher; and as such he had certain primary
    principles, which biassed him in favour of certain conclusions,
    and his discovery that external things were substances endowed
    with force was at once used for the purpose of applying these
    principles. One of these principles was the law of continuity, the
    conviction that all the world was connected, that there were no
    gaps and chasms which could not be bridged over. The contrast of
    extended thinking substances was unbearable to him. The definition
    of the extended substances had already become untenable: it was
    natural that a similar enquiry was made into the definition of
    mind, the thinking substance.


The divisions made by Leibnitz, however incomplete and faulty from the
standpoint of Occultism, show a spirit of metaphysical intuition to which
no man of Science, not Descartes, not even Kant, has ever reached. With
him there existed ever an infinite gradation of thought. Only a small
portion of the contents of our thoughts, he said, rises into the clearness
of apperception, “into the light of perfect consciousness.” Many remain in
a confused or obscure state, in the state of “perceptions”; but they are
there. Descartes denied soul to the animal. Leibnitz, as do the
Occultists, endowed “the whole creation with mental life, this being,
according to him, capable of infinite gradations.” And this, as Mertz
justly observes:


    At once widened the realm of mental life, destroying the contrast
    of _animate_ and _inanimate matter_; it did yet more—it reäcted on
    the conception of matter, of the extended substance. For it became
    evident that external or material things presented the property of
    extension to our senses only, not to our thinking faculties. The
    mathematician, in order to calculate geometrical figures, had been
    obliged to divide them into an infinite number of infinitely small
    parts, and the physicist saw no limit to the divisibility of
    matter into atoms. The bulk through which external things seemed
    to fill space was a property which they acquired only through the
    coarseness of our senses.... Leibnitz followed these arguments to
    some extent, but he could not rest content in assuming that matter
    was composed of a finite number of very small parts. His
    mathematical mind forced him to carry out the argument _in
    infinitum_. And what became of the atoms then? They lost their
    extension and they retained only their property of resistance;
    they were the centres of force. They were reduced to mathematical
    points.... But if their extension in space was nothing, _so much
    fuller was their inner life_. Assuming that inner existence, such
    as that of the human mind, is a new dimension, not a geometrical
    but a metaphysical dimension, ... having reduced the geometrical
    extension of the atoms to nothing, Leibnitz endowed them with an
    infinite extension in the direction of their metaphysical
    dimension. After having lost sight of them in the world of space,
    the mind has, as it were, to dive into a metaphysical world to
    find and grasp the real essence of what appears in space merely as
    a mathematical point.... As a cone stands on its point, or a
    perpendicular straight line cuts a horizontal plane only in one
    mathematical point, but may extend infinitely in height and depth,
    so the essences of _things real_ have only a punctual existence in
    this physical world of space; but have an infinite depth of inner
    life in the metaphysical world of thought.(1084)


This is the spirit, the very root of Occult doctrine and thought. The
“Spirit‐Matter” and “Matter‐Spirit” extend infinitely _in depth_, and like
the “essence of things” of Leibnitz, our essence of _things real_ is at
the _seventh depth_; while the _unreal_ and gross matter of Science and
the external world, is at the lowest extreme of our perceptive senses. The
Occultist knows the worth or worthlessness of the latter.

The student must now be shown the fundamental distinction between the
system of Leibnitz(1085) and that of Occult Philosophy, on the question of
the Monads, and this may be done with his _Monadologie_ before us. It may
be correctly stated that were Leibnitz’ and Spinoza’s systems reconciled,
the essence and spirit of Esoteric Philosophy would be made to appear.
From the shock of the two—as opposed to the Cartesian system—emerge the
truths of the Archaic Doctrine. Both oppose the Metaphysics of Descartes.
His idea of the contrast of two Substances—Extension and Thought—radically
differing from each other and mutually irreducible, is too arbitrary and
too un‐philosophical for them. Thus Leibnitz made of the two Cartesian
Substances two attributes of one universal Unity, in which he saw God.
Spinoza recognized but one universal indivisible Substance, an absolute
ALL, like Parabrahman. Leibnitz, on the contrary, perceived the existence
of a plurality of Substances. There was but One for Spinoza; for Leibnitz
an infinitude of Beings, _from_, and _in_, the One. Hence, though both
admitted but _One Real Entity_, while Spinoza made it impersonal and
indivisible, Leibnitz divided his personal Deity into a number of divine
and semi‐divine Beings. Spinoza was a _subjective_, Leibnitz an
_objective_ Pantheist, yet both were great Philosophers in their intuitive
perceptions.

Now, if these two teachings were blended together and each corrected by
the other—and foremost of all the One Reality weeded of its
personality—there would remain as sum total a true spirit of Esoteric
Philosophy in them; the impersonal, attributeless, absolute Divine
Essence, which is no “being” but the root of all Being. Draw a deep line
in your thought between that ever‐incognizable Essence, and the as
invisible, yet comprehensible Presence, Mûlaprakriti or Shekinah, _from
beyond_ and _through which_ vibrates the Sound of the Verbum, and from
which evolve the numberless Hierarchies of intelligent Egos, of conscious
as of semi‐conscious, “apperceptive” and “perceptive” Beings, whose
Essence is spiritual Force, whose Substance is the Elements, and whose
Bodies (when needed) are the Atoms—and our Doctrine is there. For, says
Leibnitz:


    The primitive element of every material body being force, which
    has none of the characteristics of [objective] matter—it can be
    conceived but can never be the object of any imaginative
    representation.


That which was for him the primordial and ultimate element in everybody
and object was thus not the material atoms, or molecules, necessarily more
or less extended, as those of Epicurus and Gassendi, but, as Mertz shows,
immaterial and metaphysical Atoms, “mathematical points,” or _real
souls_—as explained by Henri Lachelier (Professeur Agrégé de Philosophie),
his French biographer.


    That which exists outside of us in an absolute manner, are Souls
    whose essence is force.(1086)


Thus, _reality_ in the manifested world is composed of a _unity of units_,
so to say, immaterial—from our standpoint—and infinite. These Leibnitz
calls Monads, Eastern Philosophy Jîvas, while Occultism, with the
Kabalists and all the Christians, gives them a variety of names. With us,
as with Leibnitz, they are “the expression of the universe,”(1087) and
every physical point is but the phenomenal expression of the noumenal,
metaphysical Point. His distinction between “perception” and
“apperception” is the philosophical though dim expression of the Esoteric
Teachings. His “reduced universes,” of which “there are as many as there
are Monads”—is the chaotic representation of our Septenary System with its
divisions and sub‐divisions.

As to the relation his Monads bear to our Dhyân Chohans, Cosmic Spirits,
Devas, and Elementals, we may reproduce briefly the opinion of a learned
and thoughtful Theosophist, Mr. C. H. A. Bjerregaard, on the subject. In
an excellent paper, “On the Elementals, the Elementary Spirits, and the
Relationship between Them and Human Beings,” read by him before the Âryan
Theosophical Society of New York, Mr. Bjerregaard thus distinctly
formulates his opinion:


    To Spinoza, substance is dead and inactive, but to Leibnitz’s
    penetrating powers of mind everything is living activity and
    active energy. In holding this view, he comes infinitely nearer
    the Orient than any other thinker of his day, or after him. His
    discovery that _an active energy forms the essence of substance_
    is a principle that places him in direct relationship to the Seers
    of the East.(1088)


And the lecturer proceeds to show that to Leibnitz Atoms and Elements are
_Centres of Force_, or rather “spiritual beings whose very nature it is to
act,” for the


    Elementary particles are vital forces, not acting mechanically,
    but from an internal principle. They are incorporeal spiritual
    units [“substantial,” however, but not “immaterial” in our sense]
    inaccessible to all change from without ... [and] indestructible
    by any external force. Leibnitz’ monads differ from atoms in the
    following particulars, which are very important for us to
    remember, otherwise we shall not be able to see the difference
    between Elementals and mere matter. Atoms are not distinguished
    from each other, they are qualitatively alike; but one monad
    differs from every other monad qualitatively; and every one is a
    peculiar world to itself. Not so with the atoms; they are
    absolutely alike quantitatively and qualitatively, and possess no
    individuality of their own.(1089) Again, the atoms [molecules,
    rather] of materialistic philosophy can be considered as extended
    and divisible, while the monads are mere “metaphysical points” and
    indivisible. Finally, and this is a point where these monads of
    Leibnitz closely resemble the Elementals of mystic philosophy,
    these monads are representative beings. Every monad reflects every
    other. Every monad is a living mirror of the Universe within its
    own sphere. And mark this, for upon it depends the power possessed
    by these monads, and upon it depends the work they can do for us;
    in mirroring the world, the monads are not mere passive reflective
    agents, but _spontaneously self active_; they produce the images
    spontaneously, as the soul does a dream. In every monad,
    therefore, the adept may read everything, even the future. Every
    monad—or Elemental—is a looking‐glass that can speak.


It is at this point that Leibnitz’s philosophy breaks down. There is no
provision made, nor any distinction established, between the “Elemental”
Monad and that of a high Planetary Spirit, or even the Human Monad or
Soul. He even goes so far as to sometimes doubt whether


    God has ever made anything but monads or substances without
    extension.(1090)


He draws a distinction between Monads and Atoms,(1091) because, as he
repeatedly states:


    Bodies with all their qualities are only phenomenal, like the
    rainbow. _Corpora omnia cum omnibus qualitatibus suis non sunt
    aliud quam phenomena bene fundata, ut Iris._(1092)


But soon after he finds a provision for this in a substantial
correspondence, a certain metaphysical bond between the Monads—_vinculum
substantiale_. Esoteric Philosophy, teaching an _objective_
Idealism—though it regards the objective Universe and all in it as Mâyâ,
Temporary Illusion—draws a practical distinction between Collective
Illusion, Mahâmâyâ, from the purely metaphysical standpoint, and the
objective relations in it between various conscious Egos so long as this
Illusion lasts. The Adept, therefore, _may_ read the future in an
Elemental Monad, but he has to draw together for this object a great
number of them, as each Monad represents only a portion of the Kingdom it
belongs to.


    It is not in the object, but in the modification of the cognition
    of the object that the monads are limited. They all tend
    (confusedly) to the infinite, to the whole, but they are limited
    and distinguished by the degrees of distinctness in their
    perception.(1093)


And as Leibnitz explains:


    All the portions of the universe are distinctly represented in the
    monads, but some are reflected in one monad, some in another.


A number of Monads could represent simultaneously the thoughts of the two
million inhabitants of Paris.

But what say the Occult Sciences to this, and what do they add?

They say that what is called collectively Monads by Leibnitz—roughly
viewed, and leaving every subdivision out of calculation, for the
present—may be separated into three distinct Hosts,(1094) which, counted
from the highest planes, are, firstly, “Gods,” or conscious, spiritual
Egos; the intelligent Architects, who work after the plan in the Divine
Mind. Then come the Elementals, or “Monads,” who form collectively and
unconsciously the grand Universal Mirrors of everything connected with
their respective realms. Lastly, the “Atoms,” or material molecules, which
are informed in their turn by their “perceptive” Monads, just as every
cell in a human body is so informed. There are shoals of such _informed_
Atoms which, in their turn, inform the molecules; an infinitude of Monads,
or Elementals proper, and countless spiritual Forces—Monadless, for they
are pure incorporealities,(1095) except under certain laws, when they
assume a form—not _necessarily_ human. Whence the substance that clothes
them—the apparent organism they evolve around their centres? The Formless
(Arûpa) Radiations, existing in the harmony of Universal Will, and being
what we term the collective or the aggregate of Cosmic Will on the plane
of the subjective Universe, unite together an infinitude of Monads—each
the mirror of its own Universe—and thus individualize for the time being
an independent Mind, omniscient and universal; and by the same process of
magnetic aggregation they create for themselves objective, visible bodies,
out of the interstellar Atoms. For Atoms and Monads, associated or
dissociated, simple or complex, are, from the moment of the first
differentiation, but the “principles,” corporeal, psychic and spiritual,
of the “Gods”—themselves the Radiations of Primordial Nature. Thus, to the
eye of the Seer, the higher Planetary Powers appear under two aspects: the
subjective—as _influences_, and the objective—as mystic _forms_, which,
under Karmic law, become a _Presence_, Spirit and Matter being One, as
repeatedly stated. Spirit is Matter _on the seventh plane_; Matter is
Spirit at the lowest point of its cyclic activity; and both are—Mâyâ.

Atoms are called Vibrations in Occultism; also Sound—collectively. This
does not interfere with Mr. Tyndall’s scientific discovery. He traced, on
the lower rung of the ladder of monadic being, the whole course of the
_atmospheric_ Vibrations—and this constitutes the _objective_ part of the
process in Nature. He has traced and recorded the rapidity of their motion
and transmission; the force of their impact; their setting up vibrations
in the tympanum and their transmission of these to the otoliths, etc.,
till the vibration of the auditory nerve commences—and a new phenomenon
now takes place: the _subjective_ side of the process or the _sensation_
of sound. Does he perceive or see it? No; for his specialty is to discover
the behaviour of Matter. But why should not a Psychic see it, a spiritual
Seer, whose inner Eye is opened, one who can see through the veil of
Matter? The waves and undulations of Science are all produced by Atoms
propelling their molecules into activity _from within_. Atoms fill the
immensity of Space, and by their continuous vibration _are_ that MOTION
which keeps the wheels of Life perpetually going. It is that inner work
that produces the natural phenomenon called the correlation of Forces.
Only, at the origin of every such “Force,” there stands the _conscious_
guiding Noumenon thereof—Angel or God, Spirit or Demon, ruling powers, yet
the same.

As described by Seers—those who can see the motion of the interstellar
shoals, and follow them clairvoyantly in their evolution—they are
dazzling, like specks of virgin snow in radiant sunlight. Their velocity
is swifter than thought, quicker than any mortal physical eye can follow,
and, as well as can be judged from the tremendous rapidity of their
course, the motion is circular. Standing on an open plain, on a mountain
summit especially, and gazing into the vast vault above and the spatial
infinitudes around, the whole atmosphere seems ablaze with them, the air
soaked through with these dazzling coruscations. At times, the intensity
of their motion produces flashes like the Northern Lights in the Aurora
Borealis. The sight is so marvellous, that, as the Seer gazes into this
inner world, and feels the scintillating points shoot past him, he is
filled with awe at the thought of other, still greater mysteries, that lie
beyond, and within, this radiant ocean.

However imperfect and incomplete this explanation on “Gods, Monads and
Atoms,” it is hoped that some students and Theosophists, at least, will
feel that there may indeed be a close relation between Materialistic
Science and Occultism, which is the complement and missing soul of the
former.




Section XV. Cyclic Evolution and Karma.


It is the spiritual evolution of the _inner_, immortal Man that forms the
fundamental tenet of the Occult Sciences. To realize even distantly such a
process, the student has to believe (_a_) in the One Universal Life,
independent of Matter (or what Science regards as Matter); and (_b_) in
the individual Intelligences that animate the various manifestations of
this Principle. Mr. Huxley does not believe in Vital Force; others
Scientists do. Dr. J. H. Hutchinson Stirling’s work _As regards
Protoplasm_ has made no small havoc of this dogmatic negation. Professor
Beale’s decision also is in favour of a Vital Principle; and Dr. B. W.
Richardson’s lectures on Nervous Ether have been sufficiently quoted.
Thus, opinions are divided.

The One Life is closely related to the One Law which governs the World of
Being—KARMA. Exoterically, this is simply and literally “action,” or
rather an “effect‐producing cause.” Esoterically, it is quite a different
thing in its far‐reaching moral effects. It is the unerring LAW OF
RETRIBUTION. To say to those ignorant of the real significance,
characteristics, and awful importance of this eternal immutable Law, that
no theological definition of a Personal Deity can give an idea of this
impersonal, yet ever present and active Principle, is to speak in vain.
Nor can it be called Providence. For Providence, with the Theists—the
Protestant Christians, at any rate—rejoices in a personal male gender,
while with the Roman Catholics it is a female potency. “Divine Providence
tempers His blessings to secure their better effects,” Wogan tells us.
Indeed “He” tempers them, which Karma—a sexless principle—does not.

Throughout the first two Parts, it has been shown that, at the first
flutter of renascent life, Svabhâvat, “_the Mutable Radiance of the
Immutable Darkness unconscious in Eternity_,” passes, at every new rebirth
of Kosmos, from an inactive state into one of intense activity; that it
differentiates, and then begins its work through that differentiation.
This work is KARMA.

The Cycles are also subservient to the effects produced by this activity.

_The one Cosmic Atom becomes seven Atoms on the plane of Matter, and each
is transformed into a centre of energy; that same Atom becomes seven Rays
on the plane of Spirit; and the seven creative Forces of Nature, radiating
from the Root‐Essence ... follow, one the right, the other the left path,
separate till the end of the Kalpa, and yet in close embrace. What unites
them? Karma._

The Atoms emanated from the Central Point emanate in their turn new
centres of energy, which, under the potential breath of Fohat, begin their
work from within without, and multiply other minor centres. These, in the
course of evolution and involution, form in their turn the roots or
developing causes of new effects, from worlds and “man‐bearing” globes,
down to the genera, species, and classes of all the seven kingdoms, of
which we know only _four_. For as says the _Book of the Aphorisms of Tson‐
ka‐pa_:


    The blessed workers have received the Thyan‐kam, in the eternity.


Thyan‐kam is the power or knowledge of guiding the impulses of Cosmic
Energy in the right direction.

The true Buddhist, recognizing no “personal God,” nor any “Father” and
“Creator of Heaven and Earth,” still believes in an _Absolute
Consciousness_, Adi‐Buddhi; and the Buddhist Philosopher _knows_ that
there are Planetary Spirits, the Dhyân Chohans. But though he admits of
“Spiritual Lives,” yet, as they are temporary in eternity, even they,
according to his Philosophy, are “the Mâyâ of the Day,” the Illusion of a
“Day of Brahmâ,” a short Manvantara of 4,320,000,000 years. The Yin‐Sin is
not for the speculations of men, for the Lord Buddha has strongly
prohibited all such enquiry. If the Dhyân Chohans and all the Invisible
Beings—the Seven Centres and their direct Emanations, the minor centres of
Energy—are the direct reflex of the One Light, yet men are far removed
from these, since the whole of the visible Kosmos consists of “_self‐
produced_ beings, the creatures of Karma.” Thus regarding a personal God
“as only a gigantic shadow thrown upon the void of space by the
imagination of ignorant men,”(1096) they teach that only “two things are
[objectively] eternal, namely Âkâsha and Nirvâna”; and that these are
_one_ in reality, and but a Mâyâ when divided.


    Everything has come out of Âkâsha [or Svabhâvat on our earth] in
    obedience to a law of motion inherent in it, and after a certain
    existence passes away. No thing ever came out of nothing. We do
    not believe in miracles; hence we deny creation and cannot
    conceive of a creator.(1097)


If a Vedântic Brahman of the Advaita Sect, were asked whether he believed
in the existence of God, he would probably answer, as Jacolliot was
answered—“I am myself ‘God’;” while a Buddhist (a Sinhalese especially)
would simply laugh, and say in reply, “There is no God; no Creation.” Yet
the root Philosophy of both Advaita and Buddhist scholars is _identical_,
and both have the same respect for animal life, for both believe that
every creature on Earth, however small and humble, “is an immortal portion
of the immortal Matter”—Matter having with them quite another significance
from that which it has with either Christian or Materialist—and that every
creature is subject to Karma.

The answer of the Brâhman would have suggested itself to every ancient
Philosopher, Kabalist, and Gnostic of the early days. It contains the very
spirit of the Delphic and Kabalistic commandments, for Esoteric Philosophy
solved, ages ago, the problem of what man _was_, _is_, and _will be_; his
origin, life‐cycle—interminable in its duration of successive incarnations
or rebirths—and his final absorption into the Source from which he
started.

But it is not Physical Science that we can ever ask to read man for us, as
the riddle of the Past, or of the Future; since no Philosopher can tell us
even what man is, as known to both Physiology and Psychology. In doubt
whether man was a God or a beast, Science has now connected him with the
latter and derives him from an animal. Certainly the task of analyzing and
classifying the human being as a _terrestrial animal_ may be left to
Science, which Occultists, of all men, regard with veneration and respect.
They recognize its ground and the wonderful work it has done, the progress
achieved in Physiology, and even—to a degree—in Biology. But man’s
_inner_, spiritual, psychic, or even moral, nature cannot be left to the
tender mercies of an ingrained Materialism; for not even the higher
psychological Philosophy of the West is able, in its present
incompleteness and tendency towards a decided Agnosticism, to do justice
to the inner man; especially to his higher capacities and perceptions, and
to those states of consciousness, across the road to which such
authorities as Mill draw a strong line, saying “So far, and no farther
shalt thou go.”

No Occultist would deny that man—together with the elephant and the
microbe, the crocodile and the lizard, the blade of grass and the
crystal—is, in his physical formation, the simple product of the
evolutionary forces of Nature through a numberless series of
transformations; but he puts the case differently.

It is not against zoölogical and anthropological discoveries, based on the
fossils of man and animal, that every Mystic and believer in a Divine Soul
inwardly revolts, but only against the uncalled‐for conclusions built on
preconceived theories and made to fit in with certain prejudices. The
premisses of Scientists may or may not be always true; and as some of
these theories live but a short life, the deductions therefrom must ever
be one‐sided with materialistic Evolutionists. Yet it is on the strength
of such very ephemeral authority, that most of the men of Science
frequently receive honours where they deserve them the least.(1098)

To make the working of Karma—in the periodical renovations of the
Universe—more evident and intelligible to the student when he arrives at
the origin and evolution of man, he has now to examine with us the
Esoteric bearing of the Karmic Cycles upon Universal Ethics. The question
is, do those mysterious divisions of time, called Yugas and Kalpas by the
Hindûs, and so very graphically, κύκλοι, cycles, rings or circles, by the
Greeks, have any bearing upon, or any direct connection with, human life?
Even exoteric Philosophy explains that these perpetual circles of time are
ever returning on themselves, periodically and intelligently, in Space and
Eternity. There are “Cycles of Matter,”(1099) and there are “Cycles of
Spiritual Evolution,” and racial, national, and individual Cycles. May not
Esoteric speculation allow us a still deeper insight into their workings?

This idea is beautifully expressed in a very clever scientific work.


    The possibility of rising to a comprehension of a system of
    coördination so far outreaching in time and space all range of
    human observations, is a circumstance which signalizes the power
    of man to transcend the limitations of changing and inconsistent
    matter, and assert his superiority over all insentient and
    perishable forms of being. There is a method in the succession of
    events, and in the relation of coëxistent things, which the mind
    of man seizes hold of; and by means of this as a clue, he runs
    back or forward over æons of material history of which human
    experience can never testify. Events germinate and unfold. They
    have a past which is connected with their present, and we feel a
    well‐justified confidence that a future is appointed which will be
    similarly connected with the present and the past. This continuity
    and unity of history repeat themselves before our eyes in all
    conceivable stages of progress. The phenomena furnish us the
    grounds for the generalization of two laws which are truly
    _principles of scientific divination_, by which alone the human
    mind penetrates the sealed records of the past and the unopened
    pages of the future. The first of these is the law of evolution,
    or, to phrase it for our purpose, _the law of correlated
    successiveness or organized history in the individual_,
    illustrated in the changing phases of every single maturing system
    of results.... These thoughts summon into our immediate presence
    the measureless past and the measureless future of material
    history. They seem almost to open vistas through infinity, and to
    endow the human intellect with an existence and a vision exempt
    from the limitations of time and space and finite causation, and
    lift it up towards a sublime apprehension of the Supreme
    Intelligence whose dwelling place is eternity.(1100)


According to the teachings, Mâyâ—the illusive appearance of the
marshalling of events and actions on this Earth—changes, varying with
nations and places. But the chief features of one’s life are always in
accordance with the “Constellation” under which one is born, or, we should
say, with the characteristics of its animating principle or the Deity that
presides over it, whether we call it a Dhyân Chohan, as in Asia, or an
Archangel, as with the Greek and Latin Churches. In ancient Symbolism it
was always the Sun—though the Spiritual, not the visible, Sun was
meant—that was supposed to send forth the chief Saviours and Avatâras.
Hence the connecting link between the Buddhas, the Avatâras, and so many
other incarnations of the highest Seven. The closer the approach to one’s
Prototype, in “Heaven,” the better for the mortal whose Personality was
chosen, by his own _personal_ Deity (the Seventh Principle), as its
terrestrial abode. For, with every effort of will toward purification and
unity with that “Self‐God,” one of the lower Rays breaks, and the
spiritual entity of man is drawn higher and ever higher to the Ray that
supersedes the first, until, from Ray to Ray, the Inner Man is drawn into
the one and highest Beam of the Parent‐Sun. Thus, “the events of humanity
_do_ run coördinately with the number forms,” since the single units of
that humanity proceed one and all from the same source—the Central Sun and
its _shadow_, the visible. For the equinoxes and solstices, the periods
and various phases of the solar course, astronomically and numerically
expressed, are only the concrete symbols of the eternally living verity,
though they do seem _abstract ideas_ to uninitiated mortals. And this
explains the extraordinary numerical coincidences with geometrical
relations, shown by several authors.

Yes; “our destiny _is_ written in the stars”! Only, the closer the union
between the mortal reflection Man and his celestial Prototype, the less
dangerous the external conditions and subsequent reïncarnations—which
neither Buddhas nor Christs can escape. This is not superstition, least of
all is it _fatalism_. The latter implies a blind course of some still
blinder power, but man is a free agent during his stay on earth. He cannot
escape his _ruling_ Destiny, but he has the choice of two paths that lead
him in that direction, and he can reach the goal of misery—if such is
decreed to him—either in the snowy white robes of the martyr, or in the
soiled garments of a volunteer in the iniquitous course; for there are
_external_ and _internal conditions_ which affect the determination of our
will upon our actions, and it is in our power to follow either of the two.
Those who believe in Karma have to believe in Destiny, which, from birth
to death, every man weaves thread by thread round himself, as a spider his
web; and this Destiny is guided either by the heavenly voice of the
invisible Prototype outside of us, or by our more intimate _astral_, or
inner man, who is but too often the evil genius of the embodied entity
called man. Both these lead on the outward man, but one of them must
prevail; and from the very beginning of the invisible affray the stern and
implacable _Law of Compensation_ steps in and takes its course, faithfully
following the fluctuations of the fight. When the last strand is woven,
and man is seemingly enwrapped in the network of his own doing, then he
finds himself completely under the empire of this _self‐made_ Destiny. It
then either fixes him like the inert shell against the immovable rock, or
carries him away like a feather in a whirlwind raised by his own actions,
and this is—KARMA.

A Materialist, treating of the periodical creations of our globe, has
expressed it in a single sentence:


    The whole _past_ of the earth is nothing but an unfolded
    _present_.


The writer was Büchner, who little suspected that he was repeating an
axiom of the Occultists. It is quite true also, as Burmeister remarks,
that:


    The historical investigation of the development of the earth has
    proved that _now_ and _then_ rest upon the same base; that the
    past has been developed in the same manner as the present rolls
    on; and that the forces which were in action ever remained the
    same.(1101)


The Forces—their Noumena rather—are the same, of course; therefore, the
phenomenal Forces must be the same also. But how can any one feel so sure
that the attributes of Matter have not altered under the hand of Protean
Evolution? How can any Materialist assert with such confidence, as is done
by Rossmassler, that:


    This eternal conformity in the essence of phenomena renders it
    certain that fire and water possessed at all times the same powers
    and ever will possess them.


Who are they “that darken counsel with words without knowledge,” and where
were the Huxleys and Büchners when the foundations of the Earth were laid
by the Great Law? This same homogeneity of Matter and immutability of
natural laws, which are so much insisted upon by Materialism, are a
fundamental principle of the Occult Philosophy; but this unity rests upon
the inseparability of Spirit from Matter, and, if the two were once
divorced, the whole Kosmos would fall back into Chaos and Non‐being.
Therefore, it is absolutely _false_, and but an additional demonstration
of the great conceit of our age, to assert, as men of Science do, that all
the great geological changes and terrible convulsions of the past have
been produced _by ordinary and known physical Forces_. For these Forces
were but the tools and final means for the accomplishment of certain
purposes, acting periodically, and apparently mechanically, through an
inward impulse mixed up with, but beyond their material nature. There is a
purpose in every important act of Nature, whose acts are all cyclic and
periodical. But spiritual Forces having been usually confused with the
purely physical, the former are denied by, and therefore, because left
unexamined, have to remain unknown to Science.(1102) Says Hegel:


    The history of the World begins with its general aim, the
    realization of the Idea of Spirit—only in an _implicit_ form (_an
    sich_), that is, as Nature; a hidden, most profoundly hidden
    unconscious instinct, and the whole process of History ... is
    directed to rendering this unconscious impulse a conscious one.
    Thus appearing in the form of merely natural existence, natural
    will—that which has been called the subjective side—physical
    craving, instinct, passion, private interest, as also opinion and
    subjective conception—spontaneously present themselves at the very
    commencement. This vast congeries of volitions, interests and
    activities constitute the instruments and means of the World‐
    Spirit for attaining its object; bringing it to consciousness and
    realizing it. And this aim is none other than finding
    itself—coming to itself—and contemplating itself in concrete
    actuality. But that those manifestations of vitality on the part
    of individuals and peoples, in which they seek and satisfy their
    own purposes, are at the same time the means and instruments of a
    higher and broader purpose of which they know nothing—which they
    realize unconsciously—might be made a matter of question; rather
    has been questioned ... on this point I announced my view at the
    very outset, and asserted our hypothesis ... and our belief that
    Reason governs the World and has consequently governed its
    history. In relation to this independently universal and
    substantial existence—all else is subordinate, subservient to it,
    and the means for its development.(1103)


No Metaphysician or Theosophist could demur to these truths, which are all
embodied in Esoteric Teachings. There _is_ a predestination in the
geological life of our globe, as in the history, past and future, of races
and nations. This is closely connected with what we call Karma, and what
Western Pantheists called Nemesis and Cycles. The law of evolution is now
carrying us along the ascending arc of _our_ cycle, when the effects will
be once more re‐merged into, and re‐become the now neutralized causes, and
all things affected by the former will have regained their original
harmony. This will be the cycle of our special Round, a moment in the
duration of the Great Cycle, or Mahâyuga.

The fine philosophical remarks of Hegel are found to have their
application in the teachings of Occult Science, which shows Nature ever
acting with a given purpose, whose results are always dual. This was
stated in our first Occult volumes, in the following words:


    As our Planet revolves once every year around the Sun, and at the
    same time turns once in every twenty‐four hours upon its own axis,
    thus traversing minor circles within a larger one, so is the work
    of the smaller cyclic periods accomplished and recommenced within
    the Great Saros. The revolution of the physical world, according
    to the ancient doctrine, is attended by a like revolution in the
    world of intellect—the spiritual evolution of the world proceeding
    in cycles, like the physical one. Thus we see in history a regular
    alternation of ebb and flow in the tide of human progress. The
    great kingdoms and empires of the world, after reaching the
    culmination of their greatness, descend again, in accordance with
    the same law by which they ascended; till, having reached the
    lowest point, humanity reässerts itself and mounts up once more,
    the height of its attainment being, by this law of ascending
    progression by cycles, somewhat higher than the point from which
    it had before descended.(1104)


But these cycles—wheels within wheels, so comprehensively and ingeniously
symbolized by the various Manus and Rishis in India, and by the Kabiri in
the West(1105)—_do not affect all mankind at one and the same time_.
Hence, as we see, the difficulty of comprehending, and of discriminating
between them, with regard to their physical and spiritual effects, without
having thoroughly mastered their relations with, and action upon, the
respective positions of nations and races, in their destiny and evolution.
This system cannot be comprehended if the spiritual action of these
periods—_preördained_, so to say, by Karmic law—is separated from their
physical course. The calculations of the best Astrologers would fail, or
at any rate remain imperfect, unless this dual action is thoroughly taken
into consideration and mastered upon these lines. And this mastery can be
achieved only through INITIATION.

The Grand Cycle includes the progress of mankind from the appearance of
primordial man of ethereal form. It runs through the inner Cycles of man’s
progressive evolution from the ethereal down to the semi‐ethereal and
purely physical; down to the redemption of man from his “coat of skin” and
matter, after which it continues running its course downward and then
upward again, to meet at the culmination of a Round, when the Manvantaric
Serpent “swallows its tail” and seven Minor Cycles are passed. These are
the great Racial Cycles which affect equally all the nations and tribes
included in that special Race; but there are minor and national, as well
as tribal, Cycles within these, which run their course independently of
each other. They are called in Eastern Esotericism the Karmic Cycles. In
the West—since Pagan Wisdom has been repudiated as having grown from and
been developed by the Dark Powers, supposed to be at constant war with and
in opposition to the little tribal Jehovah—the full and awful significance
of the Greek Nemesis, or Karma, has been entirely forgotten. Otherwise
Christians would have better realized the profound truth that Nemesis is
without attributes; that while the dreaded Goddess is absolute and
immutable as a Principle, it is we ourselves—nations and individuals—who
propel it to action and give the impulse to its direction. Karma‐Nemesis
is the creator of nations and mortals, but once created, it is they who
make of her either a Fury or a rewarding Angel. Yea—


    Wise are they who worship Nemesis(1106)


—as the Chorus tells Prometheus. And as unwise they, who believe that the
Goddess may be propitiated by any sacrifices and prayers, or have her
wheel diverted from the path it has once taken. “The triform Fates and
ever mindful Furies” are her attributes only on Earth, and begotten by
ourselves. There is no return from the paths she cycles over; yet those
paths are of our own making, for it is we, collectively or individually,
who prepare them. Karma‐Nemesis is the synonym of Providence, _minus_
design, goodness, and every other _finite_ attribute and qualification, so
unphilosophically attributed to the latter. An Occultist or a Philosopher
will not speak of the goodness or cruelty of Providence; but, identifying
it with Karma‐Nemesis, he will nevertheless teach that it guards the good
and watches over them in this, as in future lives; and that it punishes
the evil‐doer—aye, even to his seventh rebirth—so long, indeed, as the
effect of his having thrown into perturbation even the smallest atom in
the Infinite World of Harmony has not been finally reädjusted. For the
only decree of Karma—an eternal and immutable decree—is absolute Harmony
in the world of Matter as it is in the world of Spirit. It is not,
therefore, Karma that rewards or punishes, but it is we who reward or
punish ourselves, according as we work with, through and along with
Nature, abiding by the laws on which that harmony depends, or—breaking
them.

Nor would the ways of Karma be inscrutable were men to work in union and
harmony, instead of disunion and strife. For our ignorance of these
ways—which one portion of mankind calls the ways of Providence, dark and
intricate, while another sees in them the action of blind Fatalism, and a
third, simple Chance, with neither Gods nor Devils to guide them—would
surely disappear, if we would but attribute all of them to their correct
cause. With right knowledge, or at any rate with a confident conviction
that our neighbours would no more work to hurt us than we would think of
harming them, two‐thirds of the world’s evil would vanish into thin air.
Were no man to hurt his brother, Karma‐Nemesis would have neither cause to
work for, nor weapons to act through. It is the constant presence in our
midst of every element of strife and opposition, and the division of
races, nations, tribes, societies and individuals into Cains and Abels,
wolves and lambs, that is the chief cause of the “ways of Providence.” We
cut these numerous windings in our destinies daily with our own hands,
while we imagine that we are pursuing a track on the royal high road of
respectability and duty, and then we complain because these windings are
so intricate and so dark. We stand bewildered before the mystery of our
own making, and the riddles of life that _we will not_ solve, and then
accuse the great Sphinx of devouring us. But verily there is not an
accident in our lives, not a misshapen day, or a misfortune, that could
not be traced back to our own doings in this or in another life. If one
breaks the laws of Harmony, or, as a theosophical writer expresses it, the
“laws of life,” one must be prepared to fall into the chaos oneself has
produced. For, according to the same writer:


    The only conclusion one can come to is that these laws of life are
    their own avengers; and consequently that every avenging angel is
    only a typified representation of their reäction.


Therefore, if any one is helpless before these immutable laws, it is not
ourselves, the artificers of our destinies, but rather those Angels, the
guardians of Harmony. Karma‐Nemesis is no more than the spiritual
dynamical effect of causes produced, and forces awakened into activity, by
our own actions. It is a law of Occult dynamics that “a given amount of
energy expended on the spiritual or astral plane is productive of far
greater results than the same amount expended on the physical objective
plane of existence.”

This condition of things will last till man’s spiritual intuitions are
fully opened, and this will not be until we fairly cast off our thick
coats of Matter; until we begin acting from _within_, instead of ever
following impulses from _without_, impulses produced by our physical
senses and gross selfish body. Until then the only palliatives for the
evils of life are union and harmony—a Brotherhood _in actu_, and Altruism
not simply in name. The suppression of one single bad _cause_ will
suppress not one, but many bad effects. And if a Brotherhood, or even a
number of Brotherhoods, may not be able to prevent nations from
occasionally cutting each other’s throats, still unity in thought and
action, and philosophical research into the mysteries of being, will
always prevent some persons, who are trying to comprehend that which has
hitherto remained to them a riddle, from creating additional causes of
mischief in a world already so full of woe and evil. Knowledge of Karma
gives the conviction that if


    ... virtue in distress, and vice in triumph
    Make atheists of mankind,(1107)


it is only because mankind has ever shut its eyes to the great truth that
man is himself his own saviour and his own destroyer. He need not accuse
Heaven and the Gods, Fates and Providence, of the apparent injustice that
reigns in the midst of humanity. But let him rather remember and repeat
this fragment of Grecian wisdom, which warns man to forbear accusing
_That_ which


    Just, though mysterious, leads us on unerring
    Through ways unmark’d from guilt to punishment;


and such are now the ways on which the great European nations move onward.
Every nation and tribe of the Western Âryans, like their Eastern brethren
of the Fifth Race, has had its Golden and its Iron Age, its period of
comparative irresponsibility, or its Satya Age of purity, and now, several
of them have reached their Iron Age, the Kali Yuga, an age black with
horrors.

On the other hand, it is true that the exoteric Cycles of every nation
have been rightly derived from, and shown to depend on, sidereal motions.
The latter are inseparably blended with the destinies of nations and men.
But, in the purely physical sense, Europe knows of no Cycles other than
the astronomical, and it makes its computations accordingly. Nor will it
hear of any other than _imaginary_ circles or circuits in the starry
heavens that gird them,


    With centric and eccentric scribbled o’er
    Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb.


But with the Pagans—of whom Coleridge rightly says, “Time, cyclical time,
was their abstraction of the Deity,” that “Deity” manifesting coördinately
with, and only through, Karma, and being that Karma‐Nemesis itself—the
Cycles meant something more than a mere succession of events, or a
periodical space of time of more or less prolonged duration. For they were
generally marked with recurrences of a more varied and intellectual
character than are exhibited in the periodical return of seasons or of
certain constellations. Modern wisdom is satisfied with astronomical
computations and prophecies, based on unerring mathematical laws. Ancient
Wisdom added to the cold shell of Astronomy the vivifying elements of its
soul and spirit—Astrology. And, as the sidereal motions _do_ regulate and
determine other events on Earth besides potatoes and the periodical
diseases of that useful vegetable—a statement which, not being amenable to
scientific explanation, is merely derided, while none the less
accepted—these events have to submit to predetermination, by simple
astronomical computations. Believers in Astrology will understand our
meaning, sceptics will laugh at the belief and mock the idea. Thus they
shut their eyes, ostrich‐like, to their own fate.(1108)

This because their little _historical_ period, so called, allows them no
margin for comparison. Sidereal heaven is before them; and though their
spiritual vision is still unopened, and the atmospheric dust of
terrestrial origin seals their sight and chains it within the limits of
physical systems, still they do not fail to perceive the movements and
note the behaviour of meteors and comets. They record the periodical
advents of those wanderers and “flaming messengers,” and prophesy, in
consequence, earthquakes, meteoric showers, the apparition of certain
stars, comets, etc. Are they, then, soothsayers after all? No; they are
learned Astronomers.

Why, then, should Occultists and Astrologers, as learned as these
Astronomers, be disbelieved when they prophesy the return of some cyclic
event on the same mathematical principles? Why should the claim that they
_know_ this return be ridiculed? Their forefathers and predecessors,
having recorded the recurrence of such events in their time and day,
throughout a period embracing hundreds of thousands of years, the
conjunction of the same constellations must necessarily produce, if not
quite the same, at any rate similar, effects. Are the prophecies to be
derided, because of the claim made for hundreds of thousands of years of
observation, and for millions of years for the human Races? In its turn,
Modern Science is laughed at by those who hold to Biblical chronology, for
its far more modest geological and anthropological figures. Thus Karma
adjusts even human laughter, at the mutual expense of sects, learned
societies, and individuals. Yet in the prognostication of _such_ future
events, at any rate, all foretold on the authority of cyclic recurrences,
no psychic phenomenon is involved. It is neither _prevision_, nor
_prophecy_; any more than is the signalling of a comet or star, several
years before its appearance. It is simply knowledge, and mathematically
correct computations, which enable the _Wise Men of the East_ to foretell,
for instance, that England is on the eve of such or another catastrophe;
that France is nearing such a point of her Cycle; and that Europe in
general is threatened with, or rather is on the eve of, a cataclysm, to
which her own Cycle of racial Karma _has led her_. Our view of the
reliability of the information depends, of course, on our acceptation or
rejection of the claim for a tremendous period of historical observation.
Eastern Initiates maintain that they have preserved records of racial
development and of events of universal import ever since the beginning of
the Fourth Race—their knowledge of events preceding that epoch being
traditional. Moreover, those who believe in Seership and in Occult Powers
will have no difficulty in crediting the general character, at least, of
the information given, even if it be traditional, once the tradition is
checked and corrected by clairvoyance and Esoteric Knowledge. But in the
present case no such metaphysical belief is claimed as our chief
dependence, for proof is given—on what, to every Occultist, is quite
scientific evidence—the records preserved through the Zodiac for
incalculable ages.

It is now amply proved that even horoscopes and judiciary Astrology are
not quite based on fiction, and that Stars and Constellations,
consequently, have an occult and mysterious influence on, and connection
with, individuals. And if with the latter, why not with nations, races,
and mankind as a whole? This, again, is a claim made on the authority of
the Zodiacal records. We shall then enquire how far the Zodiac was known
to the Ancients, and how far it is forgotten by the Moderns.




Section XVI. The Zodiac and its Antiquity.


“All men are apt to have a high conceit of their own understanding, and to
be tenacious of the opinions they profess,” said Jordan, justly adding to
this—“and yet almost all men are guided by the understandings of others,
not by their own; and may be said more truly to adopt, than to beget,
their opinions.”

This is doubly true in regard to scientific opinions upon hypotheses
offered for consideration—the prejudice and preconceptions of
“authorities,” so called, often deciding upon questions of the most vital
importance for history. There are several such predetermined opinions held
by our learned Orientalists, and few are more unjust or illogical than the
general error with regard to the antiquity of the Zodiac. Thanks to the
hobby of some German Orientalists, English and American Sanskritists have
accepted Professor Weber’s opinion that the peoples of India had no idea
or knowledge of the Zodiac prior to the Macedonian invasion, and that it
is from the Greeks that the ancient Hindûs imported it into their country.
We are further told, by several other “authorities,” that no Eastern
nation knew of the Zodiac before the Hellenes kindly acquainted their
neighbours with their invention. And _this_, in the face of the _Book of
Job_, which is declared, even by themselves, to be the oldest in the
Hebrew canon, and certainly prior to Moses; a book which speaks of the
_making_ of “Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades [Osh, Kesil, and Kimah] and the
chambers of the South”(1109); of Scorpio and the Mazaruth—the _twelve
signs_(1110); words which, if they mean anything, imply knowledge of the
Zodiac even among the nomadic Arabian tribes. The _Book of Job_ is alleged
to have preceded Homer and Hesiod by at least one thousand years—the two
Greek poets having themselves flourished some eight centuries before the
Christian era (!!). Though, by the bye, one who prefers to believe
Plato—who shows Homer flourishing far earlier—could point to a number of
Zodiacal signs mentioned in the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_, in the Orphic
poems, and elsewhere. But since the cock‐and‐bull hypothesis of some
modern critics that, so far from Orpheus, not even Homer or Hesiod has
ever existed, it would seem time lost to mention these archaic authors at
all. The Arabian Job will suffice; unless, indeed, his volume of
lamentations, along with the poems of the two Greeks, to which we may add
those of Linus, should now also be declared to be the patriotic forgery of
the Jew Aristobulus. But if the Zodiac was known in the days of Job, how
could the civilized and philosophical Hindûs have remained ignorant of it?

Risking the arrows of modern criticism—rather blunted by misuse—the reader
may make himself acquainted with Bailly’s learned opinion upon the
subject. Inferred speculations may be shown to be erroneous. Mathematical
calculations stand on more secure grounds. Taking as a starting point
several astronomical references in _Job_, Bailly devised a very ingenious
means of proving that the earliest founders of the Science of the Zodiac
belonged to an antediluvian, primitive people. The fact that he seems
willing to see some of the Biblical patriarchs in Thoth, Seth, and in the
Chinese Fohi, does not interfere with the validity of his proof as to the
antiquity of the Zodiac.(1111) Even accepting, for argument’s sake, his
cautious 3700 years B.C. as the correct age of the Zodiacal Science, this
date proves in the most irrefutable way that it was not the Greeks who
invented the Zodiac, for the simple reason that they did not exist as a
nation thirty‐seven centuries B.C.—at any rate not as a _historical_ race
admitted by the critics. Bailly then calculated the period at which the
constellations manifested the atmospheric influence called by Job the
“sweet influences of the Pleiades,”(1112) in Hebrew Kimah; that of Orion,
Kesil; and that of the desert rains with reference to Scorpio, the eighth
constellation; and found that in presence of the eternal conformity of
these divisions of the Zodiac, and of the names of the Planets applied in
the same order everywhere and always, and in presence of the impossibility
of attributing it all to chance and “coincidence”—“which never creates
such similarities”—a very great antiquity indeed must be allowed for the
Zodiac.(1113)

Again, if the _Bible_ is supposed to be an authority on any matter—and
there are some who still regard it as such, whether from Christian or
Kabalistical considerations—then the Zodiac is clearly mentioned in _II
Kings_, xxiii. 5. Before the “book of the law” was “found” by Hilkiah, the
high priest, the signs of the Zodiac were known and worshipped. These were
held in the same adoration as the Sun and Moon, since the


    priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense ...
    unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to
    all the host of heaven,


or to the “twelve signs or constellations,” as the marginal note in the
English _Bible_ explains, had followed the injunction for centuries. They
were stopped in their idolatry only by King Josiah, 624 B.C.

The _Old Testament_ is full of allusions to the twelve zodiacal signs, and
the whole scheme is built upon it—heroes, personages, and events. Thus in
the dream of Joseph, who saw eleven “Stars” bowing to the twelfth, which
was _his_ “Star,” the Zodiac is referred to. The Roman Catholics have
discovered in it, moreover, a prophecy of Christ, who is that twelfth
Star, they say, and the others the eleven apostles; the absence of the
twelfth being also regarded as a prophetic allusion to the treachery of
Judas. The twelve sons of Jacob, again, are a reference to the same, as is
justly pointed out by Villapandus.(1114) Sir James Malcolm, in his
_History of Persia_,(1115) shows the _Dabistan_ echoing all such
traditions about the Zodiac. He traces the invention of it to the palmy
days of the Golden Age of Iran, remarking that one of the said traditions
maintains that the Genii of the Planets are represented under the same
shapes and figures they had assumed when _they showed themselves to
several holy prophets_, and thus led to the establishment of the rites
based on the Zodiac.

Pythagoras, and after him Philo Judæus, held the number 12 as very sacred.


    This duodenary number is _perfect_. It is that of the signs of the
    Zodiac, which the sun visits in twelve months, and it is to honour
    that number that Moses divided his nation into twelve tribes,
    established the twelve cakes of the shew‐bread, and placed twelve
    precious stones upon the breast‐plate of the pontiffs.(1116)


According to Seneca, Berosus taught prophecy of every future event and
cataclysm by the Zodiac; and the times fixed by him for the conflagration
of the World—Pralaya—and for a deluge, are found to answer to the times
given in an ancient Egyptian papyrus. Such a catastrophe comes at every
renewal of the cycle of the Sidereal Year of 25,868 years. The names of
the Akkadian months were called by, and derived from, the names of the
signs of the Zodiac, and the Akkadians are far earlier than the Chaldæans.
Mr. Proctor shows, in his _Myths and Marvels of Astronomy_, that the
ancient Astronomers had acquired a system of the most accurate Astronomy
2,400 years B.C.; the Hindûs date their Kali Yuga from a great periodical
conjunction of the Planets thirty‐one centuries B.C.; but, withal, it was
the Greeks, belonging to the expedition of Alexander the Great, who were
the instructors of the Âryan Hindûs in Astronomy!

Whether the origin of the Zodiac is Âryan or Egyptian, it is still of an
immense antiquity. Simplicius, in the sixth century A.D., writes that he
had always heard that the Egyptians had kept astronomical observations and
records for a period of 630,000 years. This statement appears to frighten
Mr. Gerald Massey, who remarks on it that:


    If we read this number of years by the month which Euxodus said
    the Egyptians termed a year, _i.e._, a course of time, that would
    still yield the length of two cycles of precession [51,736
    years].(1117)


Diogenes Laërtius carried back the astronomical calculations of the
Egyptians to 48,863 years before Alexander the Great.(1118) Martianus
Capella corroborates this by telling posterity that the Egyptians had
secretly studied Astronomy for over 40,000 years, before they imparted
their knowledge to the world.(1119)

Several valuable quotations are made in _Natural Genesis_ with the view of
supporting the author’s theories, but they justify the teaching of the
Secret Doctrine far more. For instance, Plutarch is quoted from his _Life
of Sulla_, saying:


    One day when the sky was serene and clear, there was heard in it
    the sound of a trumpet, so loud, shrill, and mournful, that it
    affrighted and astonished the world. The Tuscan sages said that it
    portended a new race of men, and a renovation of the world; for
    they affirmed that there were eight several kinds of men, all
    being different in life and manners; and that Heaven had allotted
    each its time, which was limited by the circuit of the great year
    [25,868 years].(1120)


This reminds one strongly of our Seven Races of men, and of the eighth—the
“animal man”—descended from the later Third Race; as also of the
successive submersions and destruction of the continents which finally
disposed of almost all that Race. Says Iamblichus:


    The Assyrians have not only preserved the memorials of seven‐and‐
    twenty myriads of years [270,000 years], as Hipparchus says they
    have, but likewise of the whole apocatastases and periods of the
    Seven Rulers of the World.(1121)


This is as nearly as possible the calculation of the Esoteric Doctrine.
For 1,000,000 years are allowed for our present Root‐Race (the Fifth), and
about 850,000 years have passed since the submersion of the last large
island—part of the continent of Atlantis—the Ruta of the Fourth Race, the
Atlanteans; while Daitya, a small island inhabited by a mixed race, was
destroyed about 270,000 years ago, during the Glacial Period or
thereabouts. But the Seven Rulers, or the seven great Dynasties of the
Divine Kings, belong to the traditions of every great people of antiquity.
Wherever twelve are mentioned, they are invariably the twelve signs of the
Zodiac.

So patent is this fact, that the Roman Catholic writers—especially among
the French Ultramontanes—have tacitly agreed to connect the twelve Jewish
Patriarchs with the Signs of the Zodiac. This is done in a kind of
prophetico‐mystic way, which sounds to pious and ignorant ears like a
portentous token, a tacit divine recognition of the “chosen people of
God,” whose finger has purposely traced in heaven, from the beginning of
creation, the numbers of these patriarchs. For instance, curiously enough,
these writers, De Mirville among others, recognize all the characteristics
of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, in the words addressed by the dying
Jacob to his Sons, and in his definitions of the future of each
Tribe.(1122) Moreover, the respective banners of the same tribes are said
to have exhibited the same symbols and the same names as the Signs,
repeated in the twelve stones of the Urim and Thummim, and on the twelve
wings of the two Cherubs. Leaving to the said Mystics the proof of
exactitude in the alleged correspondence, we quote it as follows: Man, or
Aquarius, is in the sphere of Reuben, who is declared as “unstable as
water” (the Vulgate has it, “_rushing_ like water”); Gemini, in that of
Simeon and Levi, because of their strong fraternal association; Leo, in
that of Judah, “the strong Lion” of his tribe, “the lion’s whelp”; Pisces,
in Zabulon, who “shall dwell at the haven of the sea”; Taurus, in
Issachar, because he is “a strong ass couching down,” etc., and therefore
associated with the stables; (Virgo‐) Scorpio, in Dan, who is described as
“a serpent, an adder in the path that biteth,” etc.; Capricornus in
Naphtali, who is “a hind (a deer) let loose”; Cancer, in Benjamin, for he
is “ravenous”; Libra, the Balance, in Asher, whose “bread shall be fat”;
Sagittarius in Joseph, because “his bow abode in strength.” To make up for
the twelfth Sign, Virgo, made independent of Scorpio, we have Dinah, the
only daughter of Jacob. Tradition shows the _alleged_ tribes carrying the
twelve signs on their banners. But indeed the _Bible_, in addition to the
above, is filled with theo‐cosmological and astronomical symbols and
personifications.

It remains to wonder, and to query—if the actual, living Patriarchs’
destiny was so indissolubly wound up with the Zodiac—how it is that, after
the loss of the ten tribes, the ten signs also out of the twelve have not
miraculously disappeared from the sidereal fields? But this is of no great
concern. Let us rather busy ourselves with the history of the Zodiac
itself.

The reader may be reminded of some opinions expressed as to the Zodiac by
several of the highest authorities in Science.

Newton believed that the invention of the Zodiac could be traced as far
back as the expedition of the Argonauts; and Dulaure fixed its origin at
6,500 years B.C., just 2,496 years before the creation of the world,
according to the _Bible_ chronology.

Creuzer thought that it was very easy to show that most of the Theogonies
were intimately connected with religious calendars, and were related to
the Zodiac as to their prime origin; if not to the Zodiac known to us now,
then to something very analogous with it. He felt certain that the Zodiac
and its mystic relations are at the bottom of all the mythologies, under
one form or another, and that it had existed in the old form for ages,
before it was brought out in the present defined astronomical garb, owing
to some singular coördination of events.(1123)

Whether the “genii of the planets,” our Dhyân Chohans of supra‐mundane
spheres, showed themselves to “holy prophets,” or not, as claimed in the
_Dabistan_, it would seem that great laymen and warriors were favoured in
the same way in days of old in Chaldæa, when astrological Magic and
Theophania went hand in hand.


    Xenophon, no ordinary man, narrates of Cyrus ... that at the
    moment of his death he thanked the Gods and heroes, for having so
    often instructed him themselves about the signs in heaven—ἐν
    οὐρανίοις σημείοις.(1124)


Unless the Science of the Zodiac is admitted to be of the highest
antiquity and universality, how can we account for its Signs being traced
in the oldest Theogonies? Laplace is said to have felt struck with
amazement at the idea of the days of Mercury (Wednesday), Venus (Friday),
Jupiter (Thursday), Saturn (Saturday), and others, being related to the
days of the week in the same order and with the same names in India as in
Northern Europe.


    Try, if you can, with the present system of autochthonous
    civilizations, so much in fashion in our day, to explain how
    nations with no ancestry, no traditions or birthplace in common,
    could have succeeded in inventing a kind of celestial
    phantasmagoria, a veritable _imbroglio_ of sidereal denominations,
    without sequence or object, having no figurative relation with the
    constellations they represent, and still less, apparently, with
    the phases of our terrestrial life they are made to signify,


—had there not been a _general_ intention and a _universal_ cause and
belief, at the root of all this!(1125) Most truly has Dupuis asserted the
same:


    Il est impossible de découvrir le moindre trait de ressemblance
    entre les parties du ciel et les figures que les astronomes y ont
    _arbitrairement_ tracées; et de l’autre côté, _le hasard est
    impossible_.(1126)


Most certainly chance is “_impossible_.” There is no “chance” in Nature,
wherein everything is mathematically coördinate, and inter‐related in its
units. Says Coleridge:


    Chance is but the pseudonym of God [or Nature], for those
    particular cases which He does not choose to subscribe openly with
    His sign manual.


Replace the word “God” by Karma, and it will become an Eastern axiom.
Therefore, the sidereal “prophecies” of the Zodiac, as they are called by
Christian Mystics, never point to any one particular event, however solemn
and sacred it may be for some one portion of humanity, but to ever‐
recurrent, periodical laws in Nature, understood only by the Initiates of
the Sidereal Gods themselves.

No Occultist, no Astrologer of Eastern birth, will ever agree with
Christian Mystics, or even with Kepler’s mystical Astronomy, his great
science and erudition notwithstanding; and this because, if his premisses
are quite correct, his deductions therefrom are one‐sided and biassed by
Christian preconceptions. Where Kepler finds a prophecy directly pointing
to the Saviour, other nations see a symbol of an eternal law, decreed for
the actual Manvantara. Why see in Pisces a direct reference to Christ—one
of the several world‐reformers, a Saviour for his direct followers, but
only a great and glorious Initiate for all the rest—when that
constellation shines as a symbol of all the past, present, and future
Spiritual Saviours, who dispense light and dispel mental darkness?
Christian symbologists have tried to prove that this sign belonged to
Ephraim, Joseph’s son, the _elect_ of Jacob, and that therefore, it was at
the moment of the Sun’s entering into the sign of Pisces, the Fish, that
the “Elect Messiah,” the Ἰχθὺς of the first Christians, had to be born.
But if Jesus of Nazareth was that Messiah, was he really born at that
“moment,” or was his birth‐hour thus fixed by the adaptation of
Theologians, who sought only to make their preconceived ideas fit in with
sidereal facts and popular belief? Everyone is aware that the real time
and year of the birth of Jesus are totally unknown. And it is the
Jews—whose forefathers made the word Dag signify both “Fish” and “Messiah”
during the forced development of their rabbinical language—who are the
first to deny this Christian claim. And what of the further facts that
Brâhmans connect their “Messiah,” the eternal Avatâra Vishnu, with a Fish
and the Deluge, and that the Babylonians also made a Fish and a Messiah of
their Dag‐On, the Man‐Fish and Prophet?

There are learned iconoclasts among Egyptologists, who say that:


    When the Pharisees sought a “sign from heaven,” Jesus said, “there
    shall no sign be given .... but the sign of the prophet Jonas.”
    (_Mat._, xvi. 4.).... The sign of Jonas is that of the Oan or
    Fish‐Man of Nineveh.... Assuredly there was no other sign than
    that of the Sun reborn in Pisces. The voice of the Secret Wisdom
    says those who are looking for signs can have no other than that
    of the returning Fish‐Man Ichthys, Oannes, or Jonas—who could not
    be made flesh.


It would appear that Kepler maintained it as a positive fact that, at the
moment of the “incarnation,” all the planets were in conjunction in the
sign Pisces, called by the Jewish Kabbalists the “constellation of the
Messiah.” Kepler averred:


    It is in this constellation that the star of the Magi is to be
    found.


This statement, quoted from Dr. Sepp(1127) by De Mirville, emboldened the
latter to remark that:


    All the Jewish traditions, while announcing that star that many
    nations have seen [!],(1128) further added that it would absorb
    the seventy planets that preside over the destinies of various
    nations on this globe.(1129) “In virtue of those natural
    prophecies,” says Dr. Sepp, “it was written in the stars of the
    firmament that the Messiah would be born in the lunar year of the
    world 4320, in that memorable year when the entire choir of the
    planets would be celebrating its jubilee.”(1130)


There was indeed a rage, at the beginning of the present century, for
claiming restoration from the Hindûs for an alleged robbery from the Jews
of their “Gods,” patriarchs, and chronology. It was Wilford who recognized
Noah in Prithî and in Satyavrata, Enos in Dhruva, and even Assur in
Îshvara. After being residents for so many years in India, some
Orientalists, at least, ought to have known that it was not the Brâhmans
alone who had these figures, or who had divided their Great Age into four
minor ages. Nevertheless writers in the _Asiatic Researches_ indulged in
the most extravagant speculations. S. A. Mackey, the Norwich “philosopher,
astronomer, and shoemaker,” argues very pertinently:


    Christian theologians think it their duty to write against the
    long periods of Hindû chronology, and in them it may be
    pardonable: but when a man of learning crucifies the names and the
    numbers of the ancients, and wrings and twists them into a form,
    which means something quite foreign to the intention of the
    ancient authors; but which, so mutilated, fits in with the _birth_
    of some _maggot_ preëxisting in his own brain with so much
    exactness that he _pretends_ to be amazed at the discovery, I
    cannot think him quite so pardonable.(1131)


This is intended to apply to Captain (later Colonel) Wilford, but the
words may fit more than one of our modern Orientalists. Colonel Wilford
was the first to crown his unlucky speculations on Hindû chronology and
the _Purânas_ by connecting the 4,320,000 years with biblical chronology,
by simply dwarfing the figures to 4,320 years—the supposed lunar year of
the Nativity—and Dr. Sepp has simply plagiarized the idea from this
gallant officer. Moreover, he persisted in seeing in them Jewish property,
as well as Christian prophecy, thus accusing the Âryans of having helped
themselves to Semitic revelation, whereas the reverse was the case. The
Jews, moreover, need not be accused of directly despoiling the Hindûs, of
whose figures Ezra probably knew nothing. They had evidently and
undeniably borrowed them from the Chaldeans, along with the Chaldean Gods.
They turned the 432,000 years of the Chaldean Divine Dynasties(1132) into
4,320 lunar years from the world’s creation to the Christian era; as to
the Babylonian and Egyptian Gods, they quietly and modestly transformed
them into Patriarchs. Every nation was more or less guilty of such
refashioning and adaptation of a Pantheon—once common to all—of universal
into national and tribal Gods and Heroes. It was Jewish property in its
new Pentateuchal garb, and no one of the Israelites has ever forced it
upon any other nation—least of all upon the European.

Without stopping to notice this very unscientific chronology more than is
necessary, we may yet make a few remarks that may be found to the point.
The 4,320 _lunar_ years of the world—in the _Bible_ the _solar_ years are
used—are not fanciful, as such, even if their application is quite
erroneous; for they are only the distorted echo of the primitive Esoteric,
and later of the Brâhmanical doctrine concerning the Yugas. A Day of
Brahmâ equals 4,320,000,000 years, as also does a Night of Brahmâ, or the
duration of Pralaya, after which a _new_ “sun” rises triumphantly over a
_new_ Manvantara, for the Septenary Chain it illuminates. The teaching had
penetrated into Palestine and Europe centuries before the Christian
era,(1133) and was present in the minds of the Mosaic Jews, who based upon
it their small Cycle, though it received full expression only through the
Christian chronologers of the _Bible_, who adopted it, as also the 25th of
December, the day on which all the _solar_ Gods were said to have been
incarnated. What wonder, then, that the Messiah was _made_ to be born in
“the _lunar_ year of the world 4,320”? The “Sun of Righteousness and
Salvation” had once more arisen and had dispelled the pralayic darkness of
Chaos and Nonbeing on the plane of our objective little Globe and Chain.
Once the subject of the adoration was settled upon, it was easy to make
the supposed events of his birth, life, and death, fit in with the
Zodiacal exigencies and the old traditions, though they had to be somewhat
remodelled for the occasion.

Thus what Kepler said, as a great Astronomer, becomes comprehensible. He
recognized the grand and universal importance of all such planetary
conjunctions, “each of which”—as he has well said—“is a _climacteric_ year
of Humanity.”(1134) The rare conjunction of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars has
its significance and importance on account of its certain great results,
in India and China as much as it has in Europe, for the respective Mystics
of these countries. And it is certainly now no better than a mere
assumption to maintain that Nature had only Christ in view, in building
her (to the profane) fantastic and meaningless constellations. If it is
claimed that it was no hazard that could lead the archaic architects of
the Zodiac, thousands of years ago, to mark the figure of Taurus with the
asterisk _a_, with no better or more valid proof of it being _prophetic_
of the Verbum or Christ than that the _aleph_ of Taurus means the “one”
and the “first,” and that Christ was also the _alpha_ or the “one,” then
this “proof” may be shown to be strangely invalidated in more than one
way. To begin with, the Zodiac existed before the Christian era, at all
events; further, all the Sun‐Gods—Osiris, for instance—had been mystically
connected with the constellation Taurus and were all called by their
respective votaries the “First.” Further, the compilers of the mystical
epithets given to the Christian Saviour were all more or less acquainted
with the significance of the Zodiacal signs; and it is easier to suppose
that they should have arranged their claims so as to match the mystic
signs, than that the latter should have shone as a prophecy for one
portion of humanity, for millions of years, taking no heed of the
numberless generations that had gone before, and of those that were to be
born hereafter.

We are told:


    It is not simple chance that, in certain spheres, has placed on a
    throne the head of this bull [Taurus] trying to push back a Dragon
    with the ansated _cross_; we should know that this constellation
    of Taurus was called “_the great city of God_ and _the mother of
    revelations_,” and also “_the interpreter of the divine voice_,”
    the Apis Pacis of Hermontis, in Egypt, which [as the patristic
    fathers would assure the world] is said to have proffered oracles
    that related to the birth of the Saviour.(1135)


To this theological assumption there are several answers. Firstly, the
ansated Egyptian cross, or Tau, the Jaina cross, or Svastika, and the
Christian cross, have all the same meaning. Secondly, no peoples or
nations except the Christians gave the significance to the Dragon that is
given to it now. The Serpent was the symbol of WISDOM; and the Bull,
Taurus, the symbol of physical or terrestrial _generation_. Thus the Bull,
pushing off the Dragon, or spiritual Divine Wisdom, with the Tau, or
Cross—which is esoterically “the foundation and framework of all
construction”—would have an entirely phallic, physiological meaning, had
it not had yet another significance unknown to our Biblical scholars and
symbologists. At any rate, it has no special reference to the Verbum of
St. John, except, perhaps, in a general sense. The Taurus—which, by the
way, is no lamb, but a bull—was sacred in every Cosmogony, with the Hindûs
as with the Zoroastrians, with the Chaldees as with the Egyptians. So
much, every schoolboy knows.

It may perhaps help to refresh the memory of our Theosophists if we refer
them to what was said of the Virgin and the Dragon, and the universality
of periodical births and re‐births of World‐Saviours—Solar Gods—in _Isis
Unveiled,_(1136) with regard to certain passages in _Revelation_.

In 1853, the savant known as Erard‐Mollien read before the Institute of
France a paper tending to prove the antiquity of the Indian Zodiac, in the
signs of which were found the root and philosophy of all the most
important religious festivals of that country; the lecturer tried to
demonstrate that the origin of these religious ceremonies goes back into
the night of time to at least 3,000 B.C. The Zodiac of the Hindûs, he
thought, was long anterior to the Zodiac of the Greeks, and differed from
it much in some particulars. In it one sees the Dragon on a Tree, at the
foot of which the Virgin, Kanyâ‐Durgâ, one of the most ancient Goddesses,
is placed on a Lion dragging after it the solar car. He said:


    This is the reason why this Virgin Durgâ is not the simple
    _memento_ of an astronomical fact, but verily the most ancient
    divinity of the Indian Olympus. She is evidently the same whose
    return was announced in all the Sibylline books—the source of the
    inspiration of Virgil—an epoch of universal renovation.... And
    why, since the months are still named after this Indian solar
    Zodiac, by the Malayalim‐speaking people [of southern India],
    should that people have abandoned it to take that of the Greeks?
    Everything proves, on the contrary, that these zodiacal figures
    were transmitted to the Greeks by the Chaldeans, who got them from
    the Brâhmans.(1137)


But all this is very poor testimony. Let us, however, remember also that
which was said and accepted by the contemporaries of Volney, who remarks
that as Aries was in its fifteenth degree 1,447 B.C., it follows that the
first degree of Libra could not have coincided with the vernal equinox
later than 15,194 years B.C.; if we add to this, he argues, the 1,790
years that have passed since the birth of Christ, it appears that 16,984
years must have elapsed since the origin of the Zodiac.(1138)

Dr. Schlegel, moreover, in his _Uranographie Chinoise_, assigns to the
Chinese Astronomical Sphere an antiquity of 18,000 years.(1139)

Nevertheless, as opinions quoted without adequate proofs are of little
avail, it may be more useful to turn to scientific evidence. M. Bailly,
the famous French Astronomer of the last century, Member of the Academy,
etc., asserts that the Hindû systems of Astronomy are by far the oldest,
and that from them the Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and even the Jews
derived their knowledge. In support of these views he says:


    The astronomers who preceded the epoch 1491 are, first, the
    Alexandrian Greeks; Hipparchus, who flourished 125 years before
    our era, and Ptolemy, 260 years after Hipparchus. Following these
    were the Arabs, who revived the study of astronomy in the ninth
    century. These were succeeded by the Persians and the Tartars, to
    whom we owe the tables of Nassireddin in 1269, and those of Ulug‐
    beg in 1437. Such is the succession of events in Asia as known
    prior to the Indian epoch 1491. What, then, is an epoch? It is the
    observation of the longitude of a star at a given moment, the
    place in the sky where it was seen, and which serves as a point of
    reference, a starting‐point from which to calculate both the past
    and future positions of the star from its observed motion. But an
    epoch is useless unless the motion of the star has been
    determined. A people, new to science and obliged to borrow a
    foreign astronomy, finds no difficulty in fixing an epoch, since
    the only observation needed is one which can be made at any
    moment. But what it needs above all, what it is obliged to borrow,
    are those elements which depend on accurate determination, and
    which require continuous observation; above all, those motions
    which depend on time, and which can only be accurately determined
    by centuries of observation. These motions, then, must be borrowed
    from a nation which has made such observations, and has behind it
    the labours of centuries. We conclude, therefore, that a new
    people will not borrow the epochs of an ancient one, without also
    borrowing from them the “average motions.” Starting from this
    principle we shall find that the Hindû epochs 1491 and 3102 could
    not have been derived from those of either Ptolemy or Ulug‐beg.

    There remains the supposition that the Hindûs, comparing their
    observations in 1491 with those previously made by Ulug‐beg and
    Ptolemy, used the intervals between these observations to
    determine the average motions. The date of Ulug‐beg is too recent
    for such a determination; while those of Ptolemy and Hipparchus
    were barely remote enough. But if the Hindû motions had been
    determined from these comparisons, the epochs would be connected
    together. Starting from the epochs of Ulug‐beg and Ptolemy we
    should arrive at all those of the Hindûs. Hence foreign epochs
    were either unknown or useless to the Hindûs.(1140)

    We may add to this another important consideration. When a nation
    is obliged to borrow from its neighbours the methods or the
    average motions of its astronomical tables, it has even greater
    need to borrow, besides these, the knowledge of the inequalities
    of the motions of the heavenly bodies, the motions of the apogee,
    of the nodes, and of the inclination of the ecliptic; in short,
    all those elements the determination of which requires the art of
    observing, some instrumental appliances, and great industry. All
    these astronomical elements, differing more or less with the
    Greeks of Alexandria, the Arabs, the Persians and the Tartars,
    exhibit no resemblance whatever with those of the Hindûs. The
    latter, therefore, borrowed nothing from their neighbours.

    If the Hindûs did not borrow their epoch, they must have possessed
    a real one of their own, based on their own observations; and this
    must be either the epoch of the year 1491 after, or that of the
    year 3102 before our era, the latter preceding by 4,592 years the
    epoch 1491. We have to choose between these two epochs and to
    decide which of them is based on observation. But before stating
    the arguments which can and must decide the question, we may be
    permitted to make a few remarks to those who may be inclined to
    believe that it is modern observations and calculations which have
    enabled the Hindûs to determine the past positions of the heavenly
    bodies. It is far from easy to determine the celestial movements
    with sufficient accuracy to ascend the stream of time for 4,592
    years, and to describe the phenomena which must have occurred at
    that period. We possess to‐day excellent instruments; exact
    observations have been made for some two or three centuries, which
    already permit us to calculate with considerable accuracy the
    average motions of the Planets; we have the observations of the
    Chaldeans, of Hipparchus and of Ptolemy, which, owing to their
    remoteness from the present time, permit us to fix these motions
    with greater certainty. Still we cannot undertake to represent
    with invariable accuracy the observations throughout the long
    period intervening between the Chaldeans and ourselves; and still
    less can we undertake to determine with exactitude events
    occurring 4,592 years before our day. Cassini and Maier have each
    determined the secular motion of the moon, and they differ by 3m.
    43s. This difference would give rise in forty‐six centuries to an
    uncertainty of nearly three degrees in the moon’s place. Doubtless
    one of these determinations is more accurate than the other; and
    it is for observations of very great antiquity to decide between
    them. But in very remote periods, where observations are lacking,
    it follows that we are uncertain as to the phenomena. How, then,
    could the Hindûs have calculated back from the year 1491 A.D. to
    the year 3102 before our era, if they were only recent students of
    Astronomy?

    The Orientals have never been what we are. However high an opinion
    of their knowledge we may form from the examination of their
    Astronomy, we cannot suppose them ever to have possessed that
    great array of instruments which distinguishes our modern
    observatories, and which is the product of simultaneous progress
    in various arts, nor could they have possessed that genius for
    discovery, which has hitherto seemed to belong exclusively to
    Europe, and which, supplying the place of time, causes the rapid
    progress of science and of human intelligence. If the Asiatics
    have been powerful, learned and wise, it is power and time which
    have produced their merit and success of all kinds. Power has
    founded or destroyed their empires; now it has erected edifices
    imposing by their bulk, now it has reduced them to venerable
    ruins; and while these vicissitudes alternated with each other,
    patience accumulated knowledge; and prolonged experience produced
    wisdom. It is the antiquity of the nations of the East which has
    erected their scientific fame.

    If the Hindûs possessed in 1491 a knowledge of the heavenly
    motions sufficiently accurate to enable them to calculate
    backwards for 4592 years, it follows that they could only have
    obtained this knowledge from very ancient observations. To grant
    them such knowledge, while refusing them the observations from
    which it is derived, is to suppose an impossibility; it would be
    equivalent to assuming that at the outset of their career they had
    already reaped the harvest of time and experience. While on the
    other hand, if their epoch of 3102 is assumed to be real, it would
    follow that the Hindûs had simply kept pace with successive
    centuries down to the year 1491 of our era. Thus, time itself was
    their teacher; they knew the motions of the heavenly bodies during
    these periods, because they had seen them; and the duration of the
    Hindû people on earth is the cause of the fidelity of its records
    and the accuracy of its calculations.

    It would seem that the problem as to which of the two epochs of
    3102 and 1491 is the real one ought to be solved by one
    consideration, viz., that the ancients in general, and
    particularly the Hindûs, as we may see by the arrangement of their
    Tables, calculated, and therefore observed, eclipses only. Now,
    there was no eclipse of the sun at the moment of the epoch 1491;
    and no eclipse of the moon either fourteen days before or after
    that moment. Therefore the epoch 1491 is not based on an
    observation. As regards the epoch 3102, the Brâhmans of Tirvaloor
    place it at sunrise on February 18th. The sun was then in the
    first point of the Zodiac according to its true longitude. The
    other Tables show that at the preceding midnight the moon was in
    the same place, but according to its average longitude. The
    Brâhmans tell us also that this first point, the origin of their
    Zodiac, was, in the year 3102, 54 degrees behind the equinox. It
    follows that the origin—the first point of their Zodiac—was
    therefore in the sixth degree of Aquarius.

    There occurred, therefore, about this time and place an average
    conjunction; and indeed this conjunction is given in our best
    Tables: La Caille’s for the sun and Maier’s for the moon. There
    was no eclipse of the sun, the moon being too distant from her
    node; but fourteen days later, the moon having approached the
    node, must have been eclipsed. Maier’s tables, used without
    correction for acceleration, give this eclipse; but they place it
    during the day when it could not have been observed in India.
    Cassini’s tables give it as occurring at night, which shows that
    Maier’s motions are too rapid for distant centuries, when the
    acceleration is not allowed for; and which also proves that in
    spite of the improvement of our knowledge we can still be
    uncertain as to the actual aspect of the heavens in past times.

    Therefore we believe that, as between the two Hindû epochs, the
    real one is the year 3102, because it was accompanied by an
    eclipse which could be observed, and which must have served to
    determine it. This is a first proof of the truth of the longitude
    assigned by the Hindûs to the sun and the moon at this instant;
    and this proof would perhaps be sufficient, were it not that this
    ancient determination becomes of the greatest importance for the
    verification of the motions of these bodies, and must therefore be
    borne out by every possible proof of its authenticity.

    We notice, 1st, that the Hindûs seem to have combined two epochs
    together into the year 3102. The Tirvaloor Brâhmans reckon
    primarily from the first moment of the Kali Yuga; but they have a
    second epoch placed 2d. 3h. 32m. 30s. later. The latter is the
    true astronomical epoch, while the former seems to be a civil era.
    But if this epoch of the Kali Yuga had no reality, and was the
    mere result of a calculation, why should it be thus divided? Their
    calculated astronomical epoch would have become that of the Kali
    Yuga, which would have been placed at the conjunction of the sun
    and the moon, as is the case with the epochs of the three other
    Tables. They must have had some reason for distinguishing between
    the two; and this reason can only be due to the circumstances and
    the time of the epoch; which therefore could not be the result of
    calculation. This is not all; starting from the solar epoch
    determined by the rising of the sun on February 18th, 3102, and
    tracing back events 2d. 3h. 32m. 30s., we come to 2h. 27m. 30s.
    a.m. of February 16th, which is the instant of the beginning of
    Kali Yuga. It is curious that this age has not been made to
    commence at one of the four great divisions of the day. It might
    be suspected that the epoch should be midnight, and that the 2h.
    27m. 30s. are a meridian correction. But whatever may have been
    the reason for fixing on this moment, it is plain that were this
    epoch the result of calculation, it would have been just as easy
    to carry it back to midnight, so as to make the epoch correspond
    to one of the chief divisions of the day, instead of placing it at
    a moment fixed by the fraction of a day.

    2nd. The Hindûs assert that at the first moment of Kali Yuga there
    was a conjunction of all the planets; and their Tables show this
    conjunction while ours indicate that it might actually have
    occurred. Jupiter and Mercury were in exactly the same degree of
    the ecliptic; Mars being 8° and Saturn 17° distant from it. It
    follows that about this time, or some fifteen days after the
    commencement of Kali Yuga, and as the sun advanced in the Zodiac,
    the Hindûs saw four planets emerge successively from the Sun’s
    rays; first Saturn, then Mars, then Jupiter and Mercury, and these
    planets appeared united in a somewhat small space. Although Venus
    was not among them, the taste for the marvellous caused it to be
    called a general conjunction of all the planets. The testimony of
    the Brâhmans here coïncides with that of our Tables; and this
    evidence, the result of a tradition, must be founded on actual
    observation.

    3rd. We may remark that this phenomenon was visible about a
    fortnight after the epoch, and exactly at the time when the
    eclipse of the moon must have been observed, which served to fix
    the epoch. The two observations mutually confirm each other; and
    whoever made the one must have made the other also.

    4th. We may believe also that the Hindûs made at the same time a
    determination of the place of the moon’s node; this seems
    indicated by their calculation. They give the longitude of this
    point of the lunar orbit for the time of their epoch, and to this
    they add as a constant 40m., which is the node’s motion in 12d.
    14h. It is as if they stated that this determination was made
    thirteen days after their epoch, and that to make it correspond to
    that epoch, we must add the 40m. through which the node has
    retrograded in the interval. This observation is, therefore, of
    the same date as that of the lunar eclipse; thus giving three
    observations, which are mutually confirmatory.

    5th. It appears from the description of the Hindû Zodiac given by
    M. C. Gentil, that on it the places of the stars named the Eye of
    Taurus and the Wheat‐ear of Virgo, can be determined for the
    commencement of the Kali Yuga. Now, comparing these places with
    the actual positions, reduced by our precession of the equinoxes
    to the moment in question, we see that the point of origin of the
    Hindû Zodiac must lie between the fifth and sixth degree of
    Aquarius. The Brâhmans, therefore, were right in placing it in the
    sixth degree of that sign, the more so since this small difference
    may be due to the proper motion of the stars, which is unknown.
    Thus it was yet another observation which guided the Hindûs in
    this fairly accurate determination of the first point of their
    movable Zodiac.

    It does not seem possible to doubt the existence in antiquity of
    observations of this date. The Persians say that four beautiful
    stars were placed as guardians at the four corners of the world.
    Now it so happens that at the commencement of Kali Yuga, 3,000 or
    3,100 years before our era, the Eye of the Bull and the Heart of
    the Scorpion were exactly at the equinoctial points, while the
    Heart of the Lion and the Southern Fish were pretty near the
    solstitial points. An observation of the rising of the Pleiades in
    the evening, seven days before the autumnal equinox, also belongs
    to the year 3000 before our era. This and similar observations are
    collected in Ptolemy’s calendars, though he does not give their
    authors; and these, which are older than those of the Chaldeans,
    may well be the work of the Hindûs. They are well acquainted with
    the constellation of the Pleiades, and while we call it vulgarly
    the “Poussinière,” they name it Pillaloo‐codi—the “Hen and
    chickens.” This name has, therefore, passed from people to people,
    and comes to us from the most ancient nations of Asia. We see that
    the Hindûs must have observed the rising of the Pleiades, and have
    made use of it to regulate their years and their months; for this
    constellation is also called Krittikâ. Now they have a month of
    the same name, and this coïncidence can only be due to the fact
    that this month was announced by the rising or setting of the
    constellation in question.

    But what is even more decisive as showing that the Hindûs observed
    the stars, and in the same way that we do, marking their position
    by their longitude, is a fact mentioned by Augustinus Riccius
    that, according to observations attributed to Hermes, and made
    1,985 years before Ptolemy, the brilliant star in the Lyre and
    that in the heart of the Hydra were each seven degrees in advance
    of their respective positions as determined by Ptolemy. This
    determination seems very extraordinary. The stars advance
    regularly with respect to the equinox: and Ptolemy ought to have
    found the longitudes 28 degrees in excess of what they were 1,985
    years before his time. Besides, there is a remarkable peculiarity
    about this fact, the same error or difference being found in the
    positions of both stars; therefore the error was due to some cause
    affecting both stars equally. It was to explain this peculiarity
    that the Arab Thebith imagined the stars to have an oscillatory
    movement, causing them to advance and recede alternately. This
    hypothesis was easily disproved; but the observations attributed
    to Hermes remained unexplained. Their explanation, however, is
    found in Hindû Astronomy. At the date fixed for these
    observations, 1,985 years before Ptolemy, the first point of the
    Hindû Zodiac was 35 degrees in advance of the equinox; therefore
    the longitudes reckoned for this point are 35 degrees in excess of
    those reckoned from the equinox. But after the lapse of 1,985
    years the stars would have advanced 28 degrees, and there would
    remain a difference of only 7 degrees between the longitudes of
    Hermes and those of Ptolemy, and the difference would be the same
    for the two stars, since it is due to the difference between the
    starting‐points of the Hindû Zodiac and that of Ptolemy, which
    reckons from the equinox. This explanation is so simple and
    natural that it must be true. We do not know whether Hermes, so
    celebrated in antiquity, was a Hindû, but we see that the
    observations attributed to him are reckoned in the Hindû manner,
    and we conclude that they were made by the Hindûs, who, therefore,
    were able to make all the observations we have enumerated, and
    which we find noted in their Tables.

    6th. The observation of the year 3102, which seems to have fixed
    their epoch, was not a difficult one. We see that the Hindûs,
    having once determined the moon’s daily motion of 13° 10´ 35´´,
    made use of it to divide the Zodiac into 27 constellations,
    related to the period of the moon, which takes about 27 days to
    describe it.

    It was by this method that they determined the positions of the
    stars in this Zodiac; it was thus they found that a certain star
    of the Lyre was in 8s 24°, the Heart of the Hydra in 4s 7°,
    longitudes which are ascribed to Hermes, but which are calculated
    on the Hindû Zodiac. Similarly, they discovered that the Wheat‐ear
    of Virgo forms the commencement of their fifteenth constellation,
    and the Eye of Taurus the end of the fourth; these stars being the
    one in 6s 6° 40´, the other in 1s 23° 20´ of the Hindû Zodiac.
    This being so, the eclipse of the moon which occurred fifteen days
    after the Kali Yuga epoch, took place at a point between the
    Wheat‐ear of Virgo and the star θ of the same constellation. These
    stars are very approximately a constellation apart, the one
    beginning the fifteenth, the other the sixteenth. Thus it would
    not be difficult to determine the moon’s place by measuring her
    distance from one of these stars; from this they deduced the
    position of the sun, which is opposite to the moon, and then,
    knowing their average motions, they calculated that the moon was
    at the first point of the Zodiac according to her average
    longitude at midnight on the 17th‐18th February of the year 3102
    before our era, and that the sun occupied the same place six hours
    later according to his true longitude; an event which fixes the
    commencement of the Hindû year.

    7th. The Hindûs state that 20,400 years before the age of Kali
    Yuga, the first point of their Zodiac coincided with the vernal
    equinox, and that the sun and moon were in conjunction there. This
    epoch is obviously fictitious;(1141) but we may enquire from what
    point, from what epoch, the Hindûs set out in establishing it.
    Taking the Hindû values for the revolution of the sun and moon,
    viz., 363d. 6h. 12m. 30s., and 27d. 7h. 43m. 13s., we have—

    20,400 revolutions of the sun = 7,451,277d. 2h.
    272,724 revolutions of the moon = 7,451,277d. 7h.

    Such is the result obtained by starting from the Kali Yuga epoch;
    and the assertion of the Hindûs, that there was a conjunction at
    the time stated, is founded on their Tables; but if, using the
    same elements, we start from the era of the year 1491, or from
    another placed in the year 1282, of which we shall speak later,
    there will always be a difference of almost one or two days. It is
    both just and natural, in verifying the Hindû calculations, to
    take those among their elements which give the same result as they
    had themselves arrived at, and to set out from that one among
    their epochs which enables us to arrive at the fictitious epoch in
    question. Hence, since to make this calculation they must have set
    out from their real epoch, the one which was founded on an
    observation and not from any of those which were derived by this
    very calculation from the former, it follows that their real epoch
    was that of the year 3102 before our era.

    8th. The Tirvaloor Brâhmans give the moon’s motion as 7s 20° 0´
    7´´ on the movable Zodiac, and as 9k 7° 45´ 1´´ as referred to the
    equinox in a great period of 1,600,984 days, or 4,386 years and 94
    days. We believe this motion to have been determined by
    observation; and we must state at the outset that this period is
    of an extent which renders it but ill suited to the calculation of
    the mean motions.

    In their astronomical calculations the Hindûs make use of periods
    of 248, 3,031, and 12,372 days; but, apart from the fact that
    these periods, though much too short, do not present the
    inconvenience of the former, they contain an exact number of
    revolutions of the moon referred to its apogee. They are in
    reality mean motions. The great period of 1,600,984 days is not a
    sum of accumulated revolutions; there is no reason why it should
    contain 1,600,984 rather than 1,600,985 days. It would seem that
    observation alone must have fixed the number of days and marked
    the beginning and end of the period. This period ends on the 21st
    of May, 1282 of our era, at 5h. 15m. 30s. at Benares. The moon was
    then in apogee, according to the

    Hindûs, and her longitude was .. 7B 13° 45´ 1´´
    Maier gives the longitude as .. 7 13 53 48
    And places the apogee at .. .. 7 14 6 54

    The determination of the moon’s place by the Brâhmans thus differs
    only by nine minutes from ours, and that of the apogee by twenty‐
    two minutes, and it is very evident that they could only have
    obtained this agreement with our best Tables and this exactitude
    in the celestial positions by observation. If then, observation
    fixed the end of this period, there is every reason to believe
    that it determined its commencement. But then this motion,
    determined directly, and from nature, would of necessity be in
    close agreement with the true motions of the heavenly bodies.

    And in fact the Hindû motion during this long period of 4,883
    years, does not differ by a minute from that of Cassini, and
    agrees equally with that of Maier. Thus two peoples, the Hindûs
    and the Europeans, placed at the two extremities of the world, and
    perhaps as distant by their institutions, have obtained precisely
    the same results as regards the moon’s motions; and an agreement
    which would be inconceivable, if it were not based on the
    observation and mutual imitation of nature. We must remark that
    the four Tables of the Hindûs are all copies of the same
    Astronomy. It cannot be denied that the Siamese Tables existed in
    1687, when they were brought from India by M. de la Loubère. At
    that time the tables of Cassini and Maier were not in existence,
    and thus the Hindûs were already in possession of the exact motion
    contained in these Tables, while we did not yet possess it. It
    must, therefore, be admitted that the accuracy of this Hindû
    motion is the point of observation. It is exact throughout this
    period of 4,383 years, because it was taken from the sky itself;
    and if observation determined its close, it fixed its commencement
    also. It is the longest period which has been observed and of
    which the recollection is preserved in the annals of Astronomy. It
    has its origin in the epoch of the year 3102 B.C., and it is a
    demonstrative proof of the reality of that epoch.(1142)


Bailly is referred to at such length, as he is one of the few scientific
men who have tried to do full justice to the Astronomy of the Âryans. From
John Bentley down to Burgess’ _Sûrya‐Siddhânta_, not one Astronomer has
been fair enough to the most learned people of Antiquity. However
distorted and misunderstood the Hindû Symbology may be, no Occultist can
fail to do it justice once that he knows something of the Secret Sciences;
nor will he turn away from their metaphysical and mystical interpretation
of the Zodiac, even though the whole Pleiades of Royal Astronomical
Societies rise in arms against their mathematical rendering of it. The
descent and reäscent of the Monad or Soul cannot be disconnected from the
Zodiacal signs, and it looks more natural, in the sense of the fitness of
things, to believe in a mysterious sympathy between the metaphysical Soul
and the bright constellations, and in the influence of the latter on the
former, than in the absurd notion that the creators of Heaven and Earth
have placed in Heaven the types of twelve vicious Jews. And if, as the
author of _The Gnostics and their Remains_ asserts, the aim of all the
Gnostic schools and the later Platonists


    was to accommodate the old faith to the influence of Buddhistic
    theosophy, the very essence of which was that the innumerable gods
    of the Hindû mythology were but names for the Energies of the
    First Triad in its successive Avatârs or manifestations unto man,


whither can we better turn to trace these theosophic ideas to their very
root, than to the old Indian wisdom? We say again: Archaic Occultism would
remain incomprehensible to all, if it were to be rendered otherwise than
through the more familiar channels of Buddhism and Hindûism. For the
former is the emanation of the latter; and both are children of one
mother—ancient Lemuro‐Atlantean Wisdom.




Section XVII. Summary of the Position.


The reader has had the whole case presented to him from both sides, and it
remains with him to decide whether its summary stands in our favour or
not. If there were such a thing as a void, a vacuum in Nature, one ought
to find it produced, according to a physical law, in the minds of helpless
admirers of the “lights” of Science, who pass their time in mutually
destroying their teachings. If ever the theory that “two lights make
darkness” found its application it is in this case, where one‐half of the
“lights” imposes its forces and “modes of motion” on the belief of the
faithful, and the other half opposes the very existence of the same.
“Ether, Matter, Energy”—the sacred hypostatical trinity, the three
principles of the truly _unknown_ God of Science, called by them PHYSICAL
NATURE!

Theology is taken to task and ridiculed for believing in the union of
three persons in one Godhead—one God as to substance, three persons as to
individuality; and we are laughed at for our belief in unproved and
unprovable doctrines, in Angels and Devils, Gods and Spirits. And, indeed,
that which made the Scientists win the day over Theology in the Great
“Conflict between Religion and Science,” was precisely the argument that
neither the identity of that substance, nor the triple individuality
claimed—after having been conceived, invented, and worked out in the
depths of Theological Consciousness—could be proved to exist by any
scientific inductive process of reasoning, least of all by the evidence of
our senses. Religion must perish, it is said, because it teaches
“mysteries.” “Mystery is the negation of Common Sense,” and Science repels
it. According to Mr. Tyndall, Metaphysics is “fiction,” like poetry. The
man of Science “takes nothing on trust”; rejects everything “that is not
proven to him,” while the Theologian accepts “everything on blind faith.”
The Theosophist and the Occultist, who take nothing on trust, not even
_exact_ Science, the Spiritualist who denies dogma but believes in Spirits
and in _invisible but potent influences_, all share in the same contempt.
Very well, then; what we have to do now, is to examine for the last time
whether _exact_ Science does not act precisely in the same way as do
Theosophy, Spiritualism, and Theology.

In a work by Mr. S. Laing, considered a standard book on Science, _Modern
Science and Modern Thought_, the author of which, according to the
laudatory review of the _Times_, “exhibits with much power and effect the
immense discoveries of Science, and its numerous victories over old
opinions, whenever they have the rashness to challenge conclusions with
it,” we read as follows:


    What is the material universe composed of? Ether, Matter, Energy.


We stop to ask, What is Ether? And Mr. Laing answers in the name of
Science:


    Ether is not actually known to us by any test of which the senses
    can take cognizance, but is a sort of mathematical substance which
    we are compelled to assume in order to account for the phenomena
    of light and heat.(1143)


And what is Matter? Do you know more about it than you do about the
“hypothetical” agent, Ether?


    In perfect strictness, it is true that chemical investigations can
    tell us ... nothing directly of the composition of living matter,
    and ... it is also in strictness true, that we know nothing about
    the compositions of any [material] body whatever as it is.(1144)


And Energy? Surely you can define the third person of the Trinity of your
Material Universe? We can take the answer from any book on Physics:


    Energy is that which is only known to us by its effects.


Pray explain, for this is rather hazy.


    [In mechanics there is actual and potential energy: work actually
    performed, and the capacity for performing it. As to the nature of
    molecular Energy or Forces], the various phenomena which bodies
    present show that their molecules are under the influence of two
    contrary forces, one which tends to bring them together, and the
    other to separate them.... The first force ... is called
    _molecular attraction_ ... the second force is due to the _vis
    viva_, or moving force.(1145)


Just so: it is the nature of this _moving force_, of this _vis viva_, that
we want to know. What is it?

“We do not know!” is the invariable answer. “It is an empty shadow of my
imagination,” explains Mr. Huxley in his _Physical Basis of Life_.

Thus the whole structure of Modern Science is built on a kind of
“mathematical abstraction,” on a Protean “Substance which eludes the
senses” (Dubois Reymond), and on _effects_, the shadowy and illusive will‐
o’‐the wisps of a _something_ entirely unknown to, and beyond the reach
of, Science. “_Self‐moving_” Atoms! _Self‐moving_ Suns, Planets, and
Stars! But who, then, or _what_ are they all, if they are self‐endowed
with motion? Why then should you, Physicists, laugh at and deride our
“Self‐moving Archæus”? Mystery is rejected and scorned by Science, and as
Father Felix has truly said:


    She cannot escape it. Mystery is the fatality of Science.


The language of the French preacher is ours, and we quote it in _Isis
Unveiled_. Who—he asks—who of you, men of Science:


    Has been able to penetrate the secret of the formation of a body,
    the generation of a single atom? What is there, I will not say at
    the centre of a sun, but at the centre of an atom? Who has sounded
    to the bottom the abyss in a grain of sand? The grain of sand,
    gentlemen, has been studied four thousand years by science; she
    has turned and returned it; she divides it and subdivides it; she
    torments it with her experiments; she vexes it with her questions
    to snatch from it the final word as to its secret constitution;
    she asks it, with an insatiable curiosity: “Shall I divide thee
    infinitesimally?” Then suspended over this abyss, science
    hesitates, she stumbles, she feels dazzled, she becomes dizzy, and
    in despair says: “I DO NOT KNOW.”

    But if you are so fatally ignorant of the genesis and hidden
    nature of a grain of sand, how should you have an intuition as to
    the generation of a single living being? Whence in the living
    being does life come? Where does it commence? What is the life
    principle?(1146)


Do the men of Science deny all these charges? By no means: for here is a
confession of Tyndall, which shows how powerless is Science, even over the
world of Matter.


    The first marshalling of the atoms, on which all subsequent action
    depends, baffles a keener power than that of the microscope....
    Through pure excess of complexity, and long before observation can
    have any voice in the matter, the most highly trained intellect,
    the most refined and disciplined imagination, retires in
    bewilderment from the contemplation of the problem. We are struck
    dumb by an astonishment which no microscope can relieve, doubting
    not only the power of our instrument, but even whether we
    ourselves possess the intellectual elements which will ever enable
    us to grapple with the ultimate structural energies of nature.


How little is known of the material Universe, indeed, has now been
suspected for years, on the very admissions of these men of Science
themselves. And now there are some Materialists who would even make away
with Ether—or whatever Science calls the infinite Substance, the noumenon
of which the Buddhists call Svabhâvat—as well as with Atoms, too dangerous
both on account of their ancient philosophical, and their present
Christian and theological, associations. From the earliest Philosophers,
whose records passed to posterity, down to our present age—which, if it
denies Invisible Beings in Space, can never be so insane as to deny a
Plenum of some sort—the Fulness of the Universe has been an accepted
belief. And what it was said to contain, one learns from Hermes
Trismegistus (in Dr. Anna Kingsford’s able rendering), who is made to say:


    Concerning the void ... my judgment is that it does not exist,
    that it never has existed, and that it never will exist, for all
    the various parts of the universe are filled, as the earth also is
    complete and full of bodies, differing in quality and in form,
    having their species and their magnitude, one larger, one smaller,
    one solid, one tenuous. The larger ... are easily perceived; the
    smaller ... are difficult to apprehend, or altogether invisible.
    We know only of their existence by the sensation of feeling,
    wherefore many persons deny such entities to be bodies, and regard
    them as simply spaces,(1147) but it is impossible there should be
    such spaces. For if indeed there should be anything outside the
    universe ... then it would be a space occupied by intelligible
    beings analogous to its [the universe’s] Divinity.... I speak of
    the genii, for I hold they dwell with us, and of the heroes who
    dwell above us, between the earth and the higher airs; wherein are
    neither clouds nor any tempest.(1148)


And we “hold” it too. Only, as already remarked, no Eastern Initiate would
speak of spheres “_above_ us, between the earth and the airs,” even the
highest, as there is no such division or measurement in Occult speech, no
_above_, as no _below_, but an eternal _within, within two other withins_,
or the planes of subjectivity merging gradually into that of terrestrial
objectivity—this being for _man_ the last one, his own plane. This
necessary explanation may be closed here by giving, in the words of
Hermes, the belief on this particular point of the whole world of Mystics:


    There are many orders of the Gods; and in all there is an
    intelligible part. It is not to be supposed they do not come
    within the range of our senses; on the contrary, we perceive them,
    better even than those which are called visible.... There are then
    Gods, superior to all appearances; after them come the Gods whose
    principle is spiritual; these Gods being sensible, in conformity
    with their double origin, manifest all things by a sensible
    nature, each of them illuminating his works one by another.(1149)
    The supreme Being of heaven, or of all that is comprehended under
    this name, is Zeus, for it is by heaven that Zeus gives life to
    all things. The supreme Being of the sun is light, for it is by
    the disk of the sun that we receive the benefit of the light. The
    thirty‐six horoscopes of the fixed stars have for supreme Being,
    or prince, him whose name is _Pantomorphos_, or having all forms,
    because he gives divine forms to divers types. The seven planets,
    or wandering spheres, have for supreme Spirits Fortune and
    Destiny, who uphold the eternal stability of the laws of Nature
    throughout incessant transformation and perpetual agitation. The
    ether is the instrument or medium by which all is produced.(1150)


This is quite philosophical and in accordance with the spirit of Eastern
Esotericism: for all the Forces, such as Light, Heat, Electricity, etc.,
are called the “Gods”—Esoterically.

This, indeed, must be so, since the Esoteric Teachings in Egypt and India
were identical. And, therefore, the personification of Fohat, synthesizing
all the manifesting Forces in Nature is a legitimate result. Moreover, as
will be shown later, the real and Occult Forces in Nature only now begin
to be known—and even in this case, by heterodox, not orthodox,
Science,(1151) though their existence, in one instance at any rate, is
corroborated and certified by an immense number of educated people, and
even by some official men of Science.

The statement, moreover, in Stanza VI—that Fohat sets in motion the
primordial World‐Germs, or the aggregation of Cosmic Atoms and Matter,
“some one way, some the other way,” in the opposite direction—looks
orthodox and scientific enough. For there is, at all events, in support of
this position, one fact fully recognized by Science, and it is this. The
meteoric showers, periodical in November and August, belong to a system
moving in an elliptical orbit around the Sun. The aphelion of this ring is
1,732 millions of miles beyond the orbit of Neptune, its plane is inclined
to the Earth’s orbit at an angle of 64° 3´, and the direction of the
meteoric swarm moving round this orbit _is contrary to that of the Earth’s
revolution_.

This fact, recognized only in 1833, shows it to be the modern rediscovery
of what was very anciently known. Fohat turns with his two hands in
contrary directions the “seed” and the “curds,” or Cosmic Matter; in
clearer language, is turning particles in a highly attenuated condition,
and nebulæ.

Outside the boundaries of the Solar System, it is other Suns, and
especially the mysterious Central Sun—the “Abode of the Invisible Deity”
as some reverend gentlemen have called it—that determines the motion and
the direction of bodies. That motion serves also to differentiate the
homogeneous Matter, round and between the several bodies, into Elements
and Sub‐elements unknown to our Earth, and these are regarded by Modern
Science as distinct individual Elements, whereas they are merely temporary
appearances, changing with every small cycle within the Manvantara, some
Esoteric works calling them “Kalpic Masks.”

Fohat is the key in Occultism which opens and unriddles the multiform
symbols and allegories in the so‐called mythology of every nation;
demonstrating the wonderful Philosophy and the deep insight into the
mysteries of Nature, contained in the Egyptian and Chaldean as well as in
the Âryan religions. Fohat, shown in his true character, proves how deeply
versed were all those prehistoric nations in every Science of Nature, now
called the physical and chemical branches of Natural Philosophy. In India,
Fohat is the scientific aspect of both Vishnu and Indra, the latter older
and more important in the _Rig Veda_ than his sectarian successor; while
in Egypt, Fohat was known as Toom issued of Noot,(1152) or Osiris in his
character of a primordial God, creator of heaven and of beings.(1153) For
Toom is spoken of as the Protean God who _generates other Gods_ and gives
himself the form he likes; the “Master of Life, giving their vigour to the
Gods.”(1154) He is the _overseer_ of the Gods, and he “who creates spirits
and gives them shape and life”; he is “the North Wind and the Spirit of
the West”; and finally the “Setting Sun of Life,” or the vital electric
force that leaves the body at death; wherefore the Defunct begs that Toom
should give him the breath from his _right_ nostril (positive electricity)
that he might live in his _second_ form. Both the hieroglyph, and the text
of chapter xlii in the _Book of the Dead_, show the identity of Toom and
Fohat. The former represents a man standing erect with the hieroglyph of
the _breaths_ in his hands. The latter says:


    I open to the chief of An (Heliopolis). I am Toom. I cross the
    water spilt by Thot‐Hapi, the lord of the horizon, and am the
    divider of the earth [Fohat divides Space and, with his Sons, the
    Earth into seven zones]....

    I cross the heavens; I am the two Lions. I am Ra, I am Aam, I eat
    my heir.(1155).... I glide on the soil of the field of
    Aanroo,(1156) given me by the master of limitless eternity. I am a
    germ of eternity. I am Toom, to whom eternity is accorded.


The very words used by Fohat in the XIth Book, and the very titles given
him. In the Egyptian Papyri the whole Cosmogony of the Secret Doctrine is
found scattered about in isolated sentences, even in the _Book of the
Dead_. Number seven is quite as much insisted upon and emphasized therein
as in the _Book of Dzyan_. “The Great Water [the Deep or Chaos] is said to
be seven cubits deep”—“cubits” standing here of course for divisions,
zones, and principles. Therein, “in the great Mother, all the Gods, and
the Seven Great Ones are born.” Both Fohat and Toom are addressed as the
“Great Ones of the Seven Magic Forces,” who, “conquer the Serpent Apap” or
Matter.(1157)

No student of Occultism, however, ought to be betrayed, by the usual
phraseology used in the translations of Hermetic Works, into believing
that the ancient Egyptians or Greeks spoke of, and referred, monk‐like, at
every moment in conversation, to a Supreme Being, God, the “One Father and
Creator of all,” etc., in the way found on every page of such
translations. No such thing indeed; and those texts _are not the original
Egyptian_ texts. They are Greek compilations, the earliest of which does
not go beyond the early period of Neo‐Platonism. No Hermetic work written
by Egyptians—as we may see by the _Book of the Dead_—would speak of the
one universal God of the Monotheistic systems; the one _Absolute_ Cause of
all, was as unnameable and unpronounceable in the mind of the ancient
Philosopher of Egypt, as it is for ever _Unknowable_ in the conception of
Mr. Herbert Spencer. As for the Egyptian in general, as M. Maspero well
remarks, whenever he


    Arrived at the notion of divine Unity, the God One was never “God”
    simply. M. Lepage‐Renouf very justly observed that the word
    Nouter, Nouti, “God” had never ceased to be _a generic name_ to
    become a personal one.


Every God was the “one living and unique God” with them. Their


    Monotheism was purely geographical. If the Egyptian of Memphis
    proclaimed the Unity of Phtah to the exclusion of Ammon, the
    Thebeian Egyptian proclaimed the unity of Ammon to the exclusion
    of Phtah [as we now see done in India in the case of the Shaivas
    and the Vaishnavas]. Ra, the “One God” at Heliopolis is not the
    same as Osiris, the “One God” at Abydos, and can be worshipped
    side by side with him, without being absorbed by him. The one God
    is but the God of the nome or the city, Nouter Nouti, and does not
    exclude the existence of the one God of the neighbouring town or
    nome. In short, whenever we are speaking of Egyptian Monotheism,
    we ought to speak of the Gods One of Egypt, and not of the One
    God.(1158)


It is by this feature, preëminently Egyptian, that the authenticity of the
various so‐called _Hermetic Books_, ought to be tested; and it is totally
absent from the Greek fragments known under this name. This proves that a
Greek Neo‐Platonic, or perhaps a Christian hand, had no small share in the
editing of such works. Of course the fundamental Philosophy is there, and
in many a place—intact. But the style has been altered and smoothed in a
monotheistic direction, as much, if not more than that of the Hebrew
Genesis in its Greek and Latin translations. They _may_ be _Hermetic_
works, but not works written by either of the two Hermes—or rather, by
Thot Hermes, the directing Intelligence of the Universe(1159) or by Thot
his terrestrial incarnation called Trismegistus, of the Rosetta stone.

But all is doubt, negation, iconoclasm and brutal indifference, in our age
of a hundred “isms” and no religion. Every idol is broken save the Golden
Calf.

Unfortunately, no nation or nations can escape their Karmic fate, any more
than can units and individuals. History itself is dealt with by the so‐
called historians as unscrupulously as legendary lore. For this, Augustin
Thierry has made the _amende honorable_, if one may believe his
biographers. He deplored the erroneous principle that made all the _would‐
be_ historiographers lose their way, and each presume to correct
tradition, “that _vox populi_ which nine times out of ten is _vox Dei_”;
and he finally admitted that _in legend alone rests real history_; for he
adds:


    Legend is living tradition, and three times out of four it is
    truer than what we call History.(1160)


While Materialists deny everything in the Universe, save Matter,
Archæologists are trying to dwarf Antiquity, and seek to destroy every
claim of Ancient Wisdom by tampering with Chronology. Our present‐day
Orientalists and historical writers are to Ancient History that which the
white ants are to the buildings in India. More dangerous even than those
Termites, the modern Archæologists—the “authorities” of the future in the
matter of Universal History—are preparing for the history of past nations
the fate of certain edifices in tropical countries. As said Michelet:


    History will tumble down and break into atoms in the lap of the
    twentieth century, devoured to its foundations by her annalists.


Very soon, indeed, under their combined efforts, it will share the fate of
those ruined cities in both Americas, which lie deeply buried under
impassable virgin forests. Historical facts will remain concealed from
view by the inextricable jungles of modern hypotheses, denials and
scepticism. But very happily _actual_ History repeats herself, for she
proceeds, like everything else, in cycles; and dead facts, and events
deliberately drowned in the sea of modern scepticism, will ascend once
more and reappear on the surface.

In Volume II, the very fact that a work with pretensions to Philosophy,
which is also an exposition of the most abstruse problems, has to be
commenced by tracing the evolution of mankind from what are regarded as
supernatural beings—Spirits—will arouse the most malevolent criticism.
Believers in, and the defenders of, the Secret Doctrine, however, will
have to bear the accusation of madness _and worse_, as philosophically as
for long years already the writer has done. Whenever a Theosophist is
taxed with insanity, he ought to reply by quoting from Montesquieu’s
_Lettres Persanes_:


    By opening so freely their lunatic asylums to their supposed
    madmen, men only seek to assure each other that they are not
    themselves mad.





[Transcriber’s Note: Obvious printer’s errors have been corrected.]






FOOTNOTES


    1 See _Theosophist_, June, 1883.

    2 _Preface_ to the original edition.

    3 _Dan_, in modern Chinese and Tibetan phonetics _Chhan_, is the
      general term for the esoteric schools and their literature. In the
      old books, the word _Janna_ is defined as “reforming one’s self by
      meditation and knowledge,” a second _inner_ birth. Hence _Dzan_,
      _Djan_ phonetically; the _Book of Dzyan_. See Edkins, _Chinese
      Buddhism_, p. 129, note.

    4 Mr. Beglor, the chief engineer at Buddhagâya, and a distinguished
      archæologist, was the first, we believe, to discover it.

    5 See _Isis Unveiled_, Vol. II, p. 27.

    6 _Introduction to the Science of Religion_, p. 23.

    7 _Ain í Akbari_, translated by Dr. Blochmann, quoted by Max Müller,
      _op. cit._

    8 _Tao‐te‐King_, p. xxvii.

    9 Max Müller, _op. cit._, p. 114.

   10 Found out and proven only _now_, through the discoveries made by
      George Smith (see his _Chaldean Account of Genesis_), and which,
      thanks to this Armenian forger, have misled all the “civilized
      nations” for over 1,500 years into accepting Jewish derivations for
      direct _Divine_ Revelation.

   11 _Egypt’s Place in History_, i. 200.

   12 Spence Hardy, _The Legends and Theories of the Buddhists_, p. 66.

   13 E. Schlagintweit, _Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 77.

   14 Lassen (_Ind. Althersumkunde_, II, 1,072) shows a Buddhist monastery
      erected in the Kailâs. Range in 137 B.C.; and General Cunningham,
      one earlier than that.

   15 Rev. J. Edkins, _Chinese Buddhism_, p. 87.

   16 See, for example, Max Müller’s _Lectures_.

   17 _Op. cit._, p. 118.

   18 _Op. cit._, p. 318.

   19 _Asiatic Researches_, I, 272.

   20 See Max Müller, _op. cit._, pp. 288 _et seq._ This relates to the
      clever forgery, on leaves inserted in old Purânic MSS., and written
      in correct and archaic Sanskrit, of all that the Pandits had heard
      from Colonel Wilford about Adam and Abraham, Noah and his three
      sons, etc., etc.

   21 From a lecture by N. M. Prjevalsky.

   22 Lün‐Yü (§ I a); Schott, _Chinesische Literatur_, p. 7; quoted by Max
      Müller.

   23 _Life and Teachings of Confucius_, p. 96.

   24 Op. cit., p. 257.

   25 The name is used in the sense of the Greek word ἅνθρωπς.

   26 Rabbi Jehoshua Ben Chananea, who died about A.D. 72, openly declared
      that he had performed “miracles” by means of the book _Sepher
      Jetzirah_, and challenged every sceptic. Franck, quoting from the
      Babylonian _Talmud_, names two other thaumaturgists, Rabbis Chanina
      and Oshoi. (See _Jerusalem Talmud_, _Sanhedrin_, c. 7, etc.; and
      Franck, _Die Kabbalah_, pp. 55, 56). Many of the mediæval
      Occultists, Alchemists, and Kabalists have made the same claim; and
      even the late modern Magus, Éliphas Lévi, publicly asserts it in his
      books on Magic.

   27 It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that the term Divine
      Thought, like that of Universal Mind, must not be regarded as even
      vaguely shadowing forth an intellectual process akin to that
      exhibited by man. The “Unconscious,” according to von Hartmann,
      arrived at the vast creative, or rather evolutionary plan, “by a
      clairvoyant wisdom superior to all consciousness,” which in Vedântic
      language would mean absolute Wisdom. Only those who realize how far
      intuition soars above the tardy processes of ratiocinative thought
      can form the faintest conception of that absolute Wisdom which
      transcends the ideas of Time and Space. Mind, as we know it, is
      resolvable into states of consciousness, of varying duration,
      intensity, complexity, etc., all, in the ultimate, resting on
      sensation, which is again Mâyâ. Sensation, again, necessarily
      postulates limitation. The Personal God of orthodox Theism
      perceives, thinks, and is affected by emotion; he repents and feels
      “fierce anger.” But the notion of such mental states clearly
      involves the unthinkable postulate of the externality of the
      exciting stimuli, to say nothing of the impossibility of ascribing
      changelessness to a being whose emotions fluctuate with events in
      the worlds he presides over. The conceptions of a Personal God as
      changeless and infinite are thus unpsychological and, what is worse,
      unphilosophical.

   28 Plato proves himself an Initiate, when saying in _Cratylus_ that
      θεός is derived from θέειν, to move, to run, for the first
      astronomers who observed the motions of the heavenly bodies called
      the planets θεοί, gods. Later the word produced another term,
      ἀλήθεια—the breath of God.

   29 Nominalists, arguing with Berkeley that “it is impossible ... to
      form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving”
      (_Principles of Human Knowledge_, Introd., par. 10), may put the
      question, What is that body, the producer of that motion? Is it a
      substance? Then you are believers in a Personal God? etc., etc. This
      will be answered farther on, in a further part of this work;
      meanwhile, we claim our rights of Conceptionalists as against
      Roscelini’s materialistic views of Realism and Nominalism. “Has
      science,” says one of its ablest advocates, Edward Clodd, “revealed
      anything that weakens or opposes itself to the ancient words in
      which the essence of all religion, past, present, and to come, is
      given; to do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly before thy God?”
      And we agree, provided we connote by the word God, not the crude
      anthropomorphism which is still the backbone of our current
      theology, but the symbolic conception of that which is the Life and
      Motion of the Universe, to know which in the physical order is to
      know time past, present, and to come, in the existence of
      successions of phenomena; to know which, in the moral, is to know
      what has been, is, and will be, within human consciousness. (See
      _Science and the Emotions_, a Discourse delivered at South Place
      Chapel, Finsbury, London, December 27th, 1885.)

   30 _Isis Unveiled_, II, 264‐5.

   31 Rig Veda.

   32 We are told by the Western mathematicians and some American
      Kabalists, that in the _Kabalah_ also “the value of the Jehovah name
      is that of the diameter of a circle.” Add to this the fact that
      Jehovah is the third of the Sephiroth, Binah, a feminine word, and
      you have the key to the mystery. By certain Kabalistic
      transformations this name, which is androgynous in the first
      chapters of _Genesis_, becomes in its transformations entirely
      masculine, Cainite and phallic. The choosing of a deity among the
      pagan gods and making of it a special national God, to call upon it
      as the “One Living God,” the “God of Gods,” and then proclaiming
      this worship monotheistic, does not change it into the One Principle
      whose “Unity admits not of multiplication, change, or form,”
      especially in the case of a priapic deity, as Jehovah is now
      demonstrated to be.

   33 See that suggestive work, _The Source of Measures_, where the author
      explains the real meaning of the word _Sacr’_ from which “sacred,”
      “sacrament,” are derived, words which have now become synonyms of
      holiness, though purely phallic!

   34 _Mândûkya Upanishad_, I. 28.

   35 _Bodhimür_, Book II.

   36 See the _Vedânta Sâra_, by Major G. A. Jacob; and also _The
      Aphorisms of Shândilya_, translated by Cowell, p. 42.

   37 _Aitareya Upanishad._

   38 Nevertheless, prejudiced and rather fanatical Christian Orientalists
      would like to prove this to be pure Atheism. For proof of this,
      compare Major Jacob’s _Vedânta Sâra_. Yet, the whole of antiquity
      echoes the thought:

      Omnis enim per se divom natura necesse est
      Immortali ævo summa cum pace fruatur—

      as Lucretius has it—a purely Vedântic conception.

   39 The very names of the two chief deities, Brahmâ and Vishnu, ought to
      have long ago suggested their esoteric meanings. Brahman, or Brahm,
      is derived by some from the root _brih_, to grow or to expand (see
      _Calcutta Review_, vol. lxvi., p. 14); Vishnu, from the root _vish_,
      to pervade, to enter into the nature of the essence; Brahmâ‐Vishnu
      thus being infinite Space, of which the Gods, the Rishis, the Manus,
      and all in this Universe are simply the Potencies (Vibhûtayah).

   40 See Manu’s account of Brahmâ separating his body into male and
      female, the latter the female Vâch, in whom he creates Virâj, and
      compare this with the esotericism of Chapters II, III, and IV of
      _Genesis_.

   41 Occultism is indeed “in the air” at the close of this our century.
      Among many other works recently published, we would recommend
      especially to students of theoretical Occultism who would not
      venture beyond the realm of our special human plane, _New Aspects of
      Life and Religion_, by Henry Pratt, M.D. It is full of esoteric
      dogmas and philosophy, the latter, however, in the concluding
      chapters, rather limited by what seems to be a spirit of conditioned
      positivism. Nevertheless, what is said of Space as “the Unknown
      First Cause,” merits quotation.

      “This unknown something, thus recognized as, and identified with,
      the primary embodiment of Simple Unity, is invisible and impalpable
      [as _abstract_ space, granted]: and because invisible and
      impalpable, therefore incognizable. And this incognizability has led
      to the error of supposing it to be a simple void, a mere receptive
      capacity. But, even viewed as an absolute void, space must be
      admitted to be either self‐existent, infinite, and eternal, or to
      have had a first cause outside, behind, and beyond itself.

      “And yet could such a cause be found and defined, this would only
      lead to the transferring thereto of the attributes otherwise
      accruing to space, and thus merely throw the difficulty of
      origination a step farther back, without gaining additional light as
      to primary causation.” (_Op. cit._, p. 5.)

      This is precisely what has been done by the believers in an
      anthropomorphic creator, an extra‐cosmic, instead of an intra‐cosmic
      God. Many of Dr. Pratt’s subjects—most of them we may say—are old
      Kabalistic ideas and theories which he presents in quite a new
      garb—“New Aspects” of the Occult in Nature, indeed. Space, however,
      viewed as a Substantial Unity—the living Source of Life—is, as the
      Unknown Causeless Cause, the oldest dogma in Occultism, millenniums
      earlier than the Pater‐Æther of the Greeks and Latins. So are “Force
      and Matter, as Potencies of Space, inseparable, and the unknown
      revealers of the Unknown.” They are all found in Âryan philosophy
      personified as Vishvakarman, Indra, Vishnu, etc., etc. Still they
      are expressed very philosophically, and under many unusual aspects,
      in the work referred to.

   42 In contradistinction to the manifested Universe of matter, the term
      Mûlaprakriti (from _mûla_, root, and prakriti, nature), or the
      unmanifested primordial Matter—called by Western Alchemists Adam’s
      Earth—is applied by the Vedântins to _Parabrahman_. Matter is dual
      in religious metaphysics, and in esoteric teachings septenary, like
      everything else in the Universe. As Mûlaprakriti, it is
      undifferentiated and eternal: as Vyakta, it becomes differentiated
      and conditioned, according to _Shvetâshvatara Upanishad_, I, 8, and
      _Devî Bhâgavata Purâna_. The author of the Four lectures on the
      _Bhagavad Gîtâ_, in speaking of Mûlaprakriti, says: “From its [the
      Logos’] objective standpoint, Parabrahman appears to it as
      Mûlaprakriti.... Of course this Mûlaprakriti is material to it, as
      any material object is material to us.... Parabrahman is an
      unconditioned and absolute reality, and Mûlaprakriti is a sort of
      veil thrown over it.” (_Theosophist_, VIII, 304.)

   43 Esoteric Philosophy, regarding every finite thing as Mâyâ (or the
      illusion of ignorance), must necessarily view in the same light
      every intra‐cosmic planet and body, seeing that it is something
      organized, hence finite. The sentence, therefore, “it proceeds from
      without inwardly, etc.”, in its first clause, refers to the dawn of
      the Mahâmanvantara, or the great reëvolution after one of the
      complete periodical dissolutions of every compound form in Nature,
      from planet to molecule, into its ultimate essence or element; and
      in its second clause, to the partial or local Manvantara, which may
      be a solar or even a planetary one.

   44 By Centre, a centre of energy or a cosmic focus is meant; when the
      so‐called “creation,” or formation, of a planet, is accomplished by
      that force which is designated by Occultists Life and by Science
      Energy, then the process takes place from within outwardly, every
      atom being said to contain in itself the creative energy of the
      divine Breath. And, whereas after an Absolute Pralaya, when the
      preëxisting material consists but of One Element, and Breath “is
      everywhere,” the latter acts from without inwardly; after a Minor
      Pralaya, when everything having remained _in statu quo_—in a
      refrigerated state, so to say, like the moon—then at the first
      flutter of Manvantara, the planet or planets begin their
      resurrection to life from within outwardly.

   45 In the evolutionary cycles of ideas, it is curious to notice how
      ancient thought seems to be reflected in modern speculation. Had Mr.
      Herbert Spencer read and studied ancient Hindû philosophers when he
      wrote a certain passage in his _First Principles_ (p. 482)? Or is it
      an independent flash of inner perception that made him say half
      correctly, half incorrectly, “motion as well as matter, being fixed
      in quantity [?], it would seem that the change in the distribution
      of matter which motion effects, coming to a limit in whichever
      direction it is carried [?], the indestructible motion thereupon
      necessitates a reverse distribution. Apparently, the universally
      coëxistent forces of attraction and repulsion which, as we have
      seen, necessitate rhythm in all minor changes throughout the
      Universe, also necessitate rhythm in the totality of its
      changes—produce now an immeasurable period during which the
      attracting forces predominating, cause universal concentration, and
      then an immeasurable period, during which the repulsive forces
      predominating, cause universal diffusion—alternate eras of evolution
      and dissolution.”

   46 Whatever the news of Physical Science upon the subject, Occult
      Science has been teaching for ages that Âkâsha (of which Ether is
      the grossest form), the Fifth universal cosmic Principle—to which
      corresponds and from which proceeds human Manas—is, cosmically, a
      radiant, cool, diathermanous plastic matter, creative in its
      physical nature, correlative in its grossest aspects and portions,
      immutable in its higher principles. In the creative condition it is
      called the Sub‐Root; and in conjunction with radiant heat, it
      recalls “dead worlds to life.” In its higher aspect it is the Soul
      of the World; in its lower—the Destroyer.

   47 _Hypoth._, 1675.

   48 The “First” presupposes necessarily something which is the “first
      brought forth,” “the first in time, space, and rank”—and therefore
      finite and conditioned. The “first” _cannot be Absolute_ for it is a
      manifestation. Therefore, Eastern Occultism calls the Abstract All
      the One Causeless Cause, the Rootless Root, and limits the “First
      Cause” to the Logos, in the sense that Plato gives to this term.

   49 See T. Subba Row’s four able lectures on the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_, in
      _The Theosophist_, Feb. 1887.

   50 Called by Christian theology, Archangels, Seraphs, etc., etc.

   51 “Pilgrim” is the appellation given to our Monad (the Two in one)
      during its cycle of incarnations. It is the only immortal and
      eternal Principle in us, being an indivisible part of the integral
      whole—the Universal Spirit, from which it emanates, and into which
      it is absorbed at the end of the cycle. When it is said to emanate
      from the One Spirit, an awkward and incorrect expression has to be
      used for lack of appropriate words in English. The Vedântins call it
      Sûtrâtmâ (Thread‐Soul), but their explanation differs somewhat from
      that of the Occultists; to explain which difference, however, is
      left to the Vedântins themselves.

   52 It is not the physical organisms that remain _in statu quo_, least
      of all their psychic principles, during the great Cosmic or even
      Solar Pralayas, but only their âkâshic or astral “photographs.” But
      during the Minor Pralayas, once overtaken by the “Night,” the
      planets remain intact, though dead, just as a huge animal, caught
      and embedded in the polar ice, remains the same for ages.

   53 Thus Spencer, who, nevertheless, like Schopenhauer and von Hartmann,
      only reflects an aspect of the old esoteric philosophers, and hence
      lands his readers on the bleak shore of Agnostic despair—reverently
      formulates the grand mystery; “that which persists unchanging in
      quantity, but ever changing in form, under these sensible
      appearances which the Universe presents to us, is an unknown and
      unknowable power, which we are obliged to recognize as without limit
      in Space and without beginning or end in Time.” It is only daring
      Theology—never Science or Philosophy—which seeks to gauge the
      Infinite and unveil the Fathomless and Unknowable.

   54 Space.

   55 It is stated in Book II, ch. viii, of _Vishnu Purâna_: “By
      immortality is meant existence to the end of the Kalpa”; and Wilson,
      the translator, remarks in a foot‐note: “This, according to the
      _Vedas_, is all that is to be understood of the immortality [or
      eternity] of the gods; they perish at the end of universal
      dissolution [or Pralaya].” And Esoteric Philosophy says: “They
      ‘perish’ not, but are _reäbsorbed_.”

   56 Celestial Beings.

   57 And hence to manifest it.

   58 Nirvâna. Nippang in Chinese; Neibban in Burmese; Moksha in India.

   59 Nidâna and Mâyâ. The “Twelve” Nidânas (in Tibetan Ten‐brel Chug‐nyi)
      are the chief causes of existence, effects generated by a
      concatenation of causes produced.

   60 See Wassilief, _Der Buddhismus_, pp. 97‐128.

   61 The term “Wheel” is the symbolical expression for a world or globe,
      which shows that the ancients were aware that our Earth was a
      revolving globe, not a motionless square as some Christian Fathers
      taught. The “Great Wheel” is the whole duration of our Cycle of
      Being, or Mahâkalpa, _i.e._, the whole revolution of our special
      Chain of seven Globes or Spheres from beginning to end; the “Small
      Wheels” meaning the Rounds, of which there are also seven.

   62 Absolute Perfection, Paranirvâna, which is Yong‐Grub.

   63 See Dzungarian _Mani Kumbum_, the “Book of the 10,000 Precepts.”
      Also consult Wassilief’s _Der Buddhismus_, pp. 327 and 357, etc.

   64 In clearer words: One has to acquire true Self‐Consciousness in
      order to understand Samvriti, or the “origin of delusion.”
      Paramârtha is the synonym of the term Svasamvedanâ, or the
      “reflection which analyses itself.” There is a difference in the
      interpretation of the meaning of Paramârtha between the Yogâchâryas
      and the Madhyamikas, neither of whom, however, explain the real and
      true esoteric sense of the expression.

   65 In India it is called the “Eye of Shiva,” but beyond the Great Range
      it is known in Esoteric phraseology as “Dangma’s Opened Eye.” Dangma
      means a purified soul, one who has become a Jîvanmukta, the highest
      Adept, or rather a Mahâtmâ so‐called. His “Opened Eye” is the inner
      spiritual eye of the seer; and the faculty which manifests through
      it, is not clairvoyance as ordinarily understood, _i.e._, the power
      of seeing at a distance, but rather the faculty of spiritual
      intuition, through which direct and certain knowledge is obtainable.
      This faculty is intimately connected with the “third eye,” which
      mythological tradition ascribes to certain races of men.

   66 _Vishnu Purâna_, I. 21.

   67 And yet, one, _claiming authority_, namely, Sir Monier Williams,
      Boden Professor of Sanskrit at Oxford, has just denied the fact.
      This is what he taught his audience, on June the 4th, 1888, in his
      annual address before the Victoria Institute of Great Britain:
      “Originally, Buddhism set its face against all solitary asceticism
      ... to attain sublime heights of knowledge. It had no occult, no
      esoteric system of doctrine ... withheld from ordinary men” (!!).
      And, again: “... When Gautama Buddha began his career, the later and
      lower form of Yoga seems to have been little known.” And then,
      contradicting himself, the learned lecturer forthwith informs his
      audience that “we learn from _Lalita‐Vistara_ that various forms of
      bodily torture, self‐maceration, and austerity were common in
      Gautama’s time.” (!!) But the lecturer seems quite unaware that this
      kind of torture and self‐maceration is precisely the lower form of
      Yoga, _Hatha_ Yoga, which was “little known” and yet so “common” in
      Gautama’s time.

   68 It is even argued that all the Six Darshanas, or Schools of
      Philosophy, show traces of Buddha’s influence, being either taken
      from Buddhism or due to Greek teaching! (See Weber, Max Müller,
      etc.) We labour under the impression that Colebrooke, “the highest
      authority” in such matters, had long ago settled the question by
      showing that “the Hindûs were in this instance the teachers, not the
      learners.”

   69 Soul, as the basis of all, Anima Mundi.

   70 Absolute Being and Consciousness, which are Absolute Non‐Being and
      Unconsciousness.

   71 “Paramârthasatya” is self‐consciousness; Svasamvedanâ, or self‐
      analyzing reflection—from _parama_, above everything, and _artha_,
      comprehension; _satya_ meaning absolute true being, or _esse_. In
      Tibetan Paramârthasatya is Dondampaidenpa. The opposite of this
      absolute reality, or actuality, is Samvritisatya—the relative truth
      only—Samvriti meaning “false conception” and being the origin of
      Illusion, Mâyâ; in Tibetan Kundzabchidenpa, “illusion‐creating
      appearance.”

   72 _Aphorisms of the Bodhisattvas._

   73 Âryâsanga was a pre‐Christian Adept and founder of a Buddhist
      esoteric school, though Csoma de Körös places him, for some reasons
      of his own, in the seventh century A.D. There was another Aryâsanga,
      who lived during the first centuries of our era, and the Hungarian
      scholar most probably confuses the two.

   74 _Vâyu Purâna_.

   75 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson, I. 20.

   76 Finite self‐consciousness, I mean. For how can the _Absolute_ attain
      this otherwise than simply as an _aspect_, the highest of which
      aspects known to us is human consciousness?

   77 See Schwegler’s _Handbook of the History of Philosophy_, in
      Sterling’s translation, p. 28.

   78 Vajrapâni or Vajradhara means the diamond‐holder; in Tibetan
      Dorjesempa, _sempa_ meaning the soul; its adamantine quality
      referring to its indestructibility in the hereafter. The explanation
      with regard to the Anupâdaka given in the _Kâla Chakra_, the first
      in the Gyut division of the _Kanjur_, is half esoteric. It has
      misled the Orientalists into erroneous speculations with respect to
      the Dhyâni‐Buddhas and their earthly correspondencies, the Mânushi‐
      Buddhas. The real tenet is hinted at in a subsequent volume, and
      will be more fully explained in its proper place.

   79 To quote Hegel again, who with Schelling practically accepted the
      Pantheistic conception of periodical Avatâras (special incarnations
      of the World‐Spirit in Man, as seen in the case of all the great
      religious reformers): “The essence of man is spirit ... only by
      stripping himself of his finiteness and surrendering himself to pure
      self‐consciousness does he attain the truth. Christ‐man, as man in
      whom the Unity of God‐man [identity of the individual with the
      universal Consciousness as taught by the Vedântins and some
      Advaitees] appeared, has, in his death and history generally,
      himself presented the eternal history of Spirit—a history which
      every man has to accomplish in himself, in order to exist as
      Spirit.”—_Philosophy of History_, Sibree’s English Translation, p.
      340.

   80 Chohanic, Dhyâni‐Buddhic.

   81 Rûpa.

   82 Arûpa.

   83 “Mother of the Gods,” Aditi, or Cosmic Space. In the _Zohar_, she is
      called Sephira, the Mother of the Sephiroth, and Shekinah in her
      primordial form, _in abscondita_.

   84 Hence Non‐Being is “Absolute Being,” in Esoteric Philosophy. In the
      tenets of the latter even Âdi‐Buddha (the First or Primeval Wisdom)
      is, while manifested, in one sense an Illusion, Mâyâ, since all the
      gods, including Brahmâ, have to die at the end of the Age of Brahmâ;
      the abstraction called Parabrahman—whether we call it Ain Suph, or
      with Herbert Spencer the Unknowable—alone being the One Absolute
      Reality. The One Secondless Existence is Advaita, “Without a
      Second,” and all the rest is Mâyâ, so teaches the Advaita
      Philosophy.

   85 Motion.

   86 Wilson, I. iv.

   87 Mother‐Lotus.

   88 An unpoetical term, yet still very graphic.

   89 Gross, _The Heathen Religion_, p. 195.

   90 _Precepts for Yoga_.

   91 A Vedântin of the Visishthadvaita Philosophy would say that, though
      the only independent Reality, Parabrahman is inseparable from His
      Trinity. That He is three, “Parabrahman, Chit, and Achit,” the last
      two being dependent Realities unable to exist separately; or, to
      make it clearer, Parabrahman is the Substance—changeless, eternal,
      and incognizable—and Chit (Âtmâ) and Achit (Anâtmâ) and its
      qualities, as form and colour are the qualities of any object. The
      two are the garment, or body, or rather aspect (sharîra) of
      Parabrahman. But an Occultist would find much to say against this
      claim, and so would the Advaiti Vedântin.

   92 _Sc._, Sons.

   93 Simultaneously.

   94 Moves.

   95 Periodical.

   96 Wilson, _Vishnu Purâna_, I. 40.

   97 Triangle.

   98 Quaternary.

   99 Hiranyagarbha.

  100 The three hypostases of Brahmâ, or Vishnu, the three Avasthâs.

  101 Number, truly; but never Motion. It is Motion which begets the
      Logos, the Word, in Occultism.

  102 The “fourteen precious things.” The narrative or allegory is found
      in the _Shatapatha Brâmanah_ and others. The Japanese Secret Science
      of the Buddhist Mystics, the Yamabooshi, has “seven precious
      things.” We will speak of them, hereafter.

  103 “The original for Understanding is Sattva, which Shankara renders
      Antaskarana. ‘Refined,’ he says, ‘by sacrifices and other
      sanctifying operations.’ In the _Katha_, at p. 148, Sattva is
      rendered by Shankara to mean Buddhi—a common use of the word.”
      (_Bhagavadgîtâ_, etc., translated by Kâshinâth Trimbak Telang, M.A.;
      edited by Max Müller, p. 193.) Whatever meaning various schools may
      give the term, Sattva is the name given among Occult students of the
      Âryâsanga School to the dual Monad, or Âtmâ‐Buddhi, and Âtmâ‐Buddhi
      on this plane corresponds to Parabrahman and Mûlaprakriti on the
      higher plane.

  104 Amrita.

  105 Cory’s _Ancient Fragments_, p. 314.

  106 On Rosenkranz.

  107 i. 2.

  108 _John_, i. 4.

  109 Lanoo is a student, a Chelâ who studies practical Esotericism.

  110 “Whom thou knowest now as Kwan‐Shai‐Yin.”—_Comment._

  111 Eka is One; Chatur, Four; Tri, Three; and Sapta, Seven.

  112 “Tridasha,” or Thirty, three times ten, alludes to the Vedic deities
      in round numbers, or more accurately 33—a sacred number. They are
      the 12 Âdityas, the 8 Vasus, the 11 Rudras, and the 2 Ashvins—the
      twin sons of the Sun and Sky. This is the root‐number of the Hindû
      Pantheon, which enumerates 33 crores, or three hundred and thirty
      millions of gods and goddesses.

  113 Stars.

  114 The Upper Space.

  115 Element.

  116 The Gnostic Sophia, “Wisdom,” who is the “Mother” of the Ogdoad
      (Aditi, in a certain sense, with her eight sons), is the Holy Ghost
      and the Creator of all, as in the ancient systems. The “Father” is a
      far later invention. The earliest manifested Logos was female
      everywhere—the mother of the seven planetary powers.

  117 See _Chinese Buddhism_, by the Rev. Joseph Edkins, who always gives
      correct facts, although his conclusions are very frequently
      erroneous.

  118 _Book of Sarparâjni_.

  119 By “God, the Father,” the seventh principle in Man and Kosmos are
      here unmistakably meant, this principle being inseparable in its
      Esse and Nature from the seventh cosmic principle. In one sense it
      is the Logos of the Greeks and the Avalokiteshvara of the Esoteric
      “Buddhists.”

  120 Fitzedward Hall’s edition, in the _Bibliotheca Indica_, p. 16.

  121 _Anugîtâ_, ch. xxvi, K. T. Telang’s Translation, p. 333.

  122 See Mariette’s _Abydos_, II. 63, and III. 413, 414, No. 1,122.

  123 _Book of Dzyan_, III.

  124 Od is the pure life‐giving Light, or magnetic fluid; Ob the
      messenger of death used by sorcerers, the nefarious evil fluid; Aour
      is the synthesis of the two, Astral Light proper. Can the
      Philologists tell why Od—a term used by Reichenbach to denominate
      the vital fluid—is also a Tibetan word meaning light, brightness,
      radiancy? It also means “sky” in an Occult sense. Whence the root of
      the word? But Âkâsha is not quite Ether, but far higher than that,
      as will be shown.

  125 This is again similar to the doctrine of Fichte and German
      Pantheists. The former reveres Jesus as the great teacher who
      inculcated the unity of the spirit of man with the God‐Spirit or
      Universal Principle (the Advaita doctrine). It is difficult to find
      a single speculation in Western metaphysics which has not been
      anticipated by archaic Eastern philosophy. From Kant to Herbert
      Spencer, it is all a more or less distorted echo of the Dvaita,
      Advaita, and Vedântic doctrines generally.

  126 Compare Dowson’s _Dictionary of Hindû Mythology_, p. 57.

  127 Whether the genus of the bird be _cygnus_, _anser_, or _pelecanus_,
      it is no matter, as it is an aquatic bird floating or moving on the
      waters like the Spirit, and then issuing from those waters to give
      birth to other beings. The true significance of the symbol of the
      Eighteenth Degree of the Rosecroix is precisely this, though it was
      later on poetised into the motherly feeling of the pelican rending
      its bosom to feed its seven little ones with its blood.

  128 The reason why Moses forbids eating the pelican and swan
      (_Deuteronomy_, xiv. 16, 17), classing the two among the unclean
      fowls, and permits eating “the bald locusts, beetles, and the
      grasshopper after his kind” (_Leviticus_ xi. 22.), is a purely
      physiological one, and has to do with mystic symbology only in so
      far as the word “unclean,” like every other word, ought not to be
      understood literally; for it is esoteric like all the rest, and may
      as well mean “holy” as not. It is a very suggestive blind in
      connection with certain superstitions—_e.g._, that of the Russian
      people, who will not use the pigeon for food; not because it is
      “unclean” but because the “Holy Ghost” is credited with having
      appeared under the form of a dove.

  129 Chaos.

  130 Not the Mediæval Alchemists, but the Magi and Fire‐Worshippers, from
      whom the Rosicrucians, or the Philosophers _per ignem_, the
      successors of the Theurgists, borrowed all their ideas concerning
      Fire, as a mystic and divine element.

  131 _Isis Unveiled_, I. 146.

  132 “Para” gives the force of beyond, outside.

  133 Purusha.

  134 Prakriti.

  135 I, I. 7.

  136 The Web.

  137 The Father.

  138 The Root of Matter.

  139 The Elements, with their respective Powers, or Intelligences.

  140 The Web.

  141 _Popular Astronomy_, pp. 507, 508.

  142 _American Journal of Science_, July, 1870.

  143 Winchell, _World‐Life_, pp. 83‐5.

  144 Of the Atoms.

  145 The Universe.

  146 Primeval Light.

  147 This is said in view of the fact that the flame from a fire is
      inexhaustible, and that the lights of the whole Universe could be
      lit from one simple rush‐light without diminishing the flame.

  148 Chap. viii., p. 80, Telang’s Translation.

  149 _Deuteronomy_, iv 24.

  150 _Thess._, i. 7, 8.

  151 _Acts_, ii. 3.

  152 _Rev._, xix. 13.

  153 Telang’s Translation, _Sacred Books of the East_, viii. 278.

  154 Dhyân Chohans.

  155 Formless.

  156 With Bodies.

  157 Pitris.

  158 The Four, represented in the Occult numerals by the Tetraktys, the
      Sacred or Perfect Square, is a Sacred Number with the Mystics of
      every nation and race. It has one and the same significance in
      Brâhmanism, Buddhism, in Kabalism and in the Egyptian, Chaldean and
      other numerical systems.

  159 In the _Kabalah_, the same numbers, viz., 1065 are a value of
      Jehovah, since the numerical values of the three letters which
      compose his name—Jod, Vau and twice Hé—are respectively 10 (י), 6
      (ו) and 5 (ה); or again thrice seven, 21. “Ten is the Mother of the
      Soul, for Life and Light are therein united,” says Hermes. “For
      number one is born of the Spirit and the number ten from Matter
      [Chaos, feminine]; the unity has made the ten, the ten the unity.”
      (_Book of the Keys_.) By means of Temura, the anagrammatical method
      of the _Kabalah_, and the knowledge of 1065 (21), a universal
      science may be obtained regarding Cosmos and its mysteries (Rabbi
      Yogel). The Rabbis regard the numbers 10, 6, and 5 as the most
      sacred of all.

  160 The reader may be told that an American Kabalist has now discovered
      the same number for the Elohim. It came to the Jews from Chaldæa.
      See “Hebrew Metrology,” in _The Masonic Review_, July, 1885,
      McMillan Lodge, No. 141.

  161 We find the same expression in Egypt. Mout signifies, for one thing,
      “Mother,” and shows the character assigned to her in the triad of
      that country. She was no less the mother than the wife of Ammon, one
      of the principal titles of the god being “the husband of his
      mother.” The goddess Mout, or Mût, is addressed as “Our Lady,” the
      “Queen of Heaven” and “of the Earth,” thus “sharing these titles
      with the other mother goddesses, Isis, Hathor, etc.” (Maspero).

  162 The Sparks.

  163 The permutation of Oeaohoo. The literal signification of the word
      is, among the Eastern Occultists of the North, a circular wind,
      whirlwind; but in this instance, it is a term to denote the
      ceaseless and eternal Cosmic Motion, or rather the Force that moves
      it, which Force is tacitly accepted as the Deity, but never named.
      It is the eternal Kârana, the ever‐acting Cause.

  164 vi. 15. The _Anugîtâ_ forms part of the Ashvamedha Parvan of the
      _Mahâbhârata_. The translator of the _Bhagavadgîtâ_, edited by Max
      Müller, regards it as a continuation of the _Bhagavadgîtâ_. Its
      original is one of the oldest _Upanishads_.

  165 This shows the modern metaphysicians, added to all past and present
      Hegels, Berkeleys, Schopenhauers, Hartmanns, Herbert Spencers, and
      even the modern Hylo‐Idealists to boot, no better than the pale
      copyists of hoary antiquity.

  166 It is the knowledge of this law that permits and helps the Arhat to
      perform his Siddhis, or various phenomena, such as the
      disintegration of matter, the transport of objects from one place to
      another, etc.

  167 These are ancient Commentaries attached with modern Glossaries to
      the Stanzas, for the Commentaries in their symbolical language are
      usually as difficult to understand as the Stanzas themselves.

  168 In a polemical scientific work, _The Modern Genesis_ (p. 48), the
      Rev. W. B. Slaughter, criticizing the position assumed by the
      astronomers, says: “It is to be regretted that the advocates of this
      [nebular] theory have not entered more largely into the discussion
      of it [the beginning of rotation] No one condescends to give us the
      _rationale_ of it. How does the process of cooling and contracting
      the mass impart to it a rotatory motion?” (Quoted by Winchell,
      _World‐Life_, p. 94.) It is not materialistic Science that can ever
      solve it. “_Motion is eternal in the unmanifested, and periodical in
      the manifest_,” says an Occult teaching. It is “_when heat caused by
      the descent of Flame into primordial matter causes its particles to
      move, which motion becomes the Whirlwind_.” A drop of liquid assumes
      a spheroidal form owing to its atoms moving around themselves in
      their ultimate, unresolvable, and noumenal essence; unresolvable for
      Physical Science, at any rate. The question is amply treated later
      on.

  169 The x, the unknown quantity.

  170 Which makes Ten, or the perfect number, applied to the “Creator,”
      the name given to the totality of the Creators blended by the
      Monotheists into One, as the “Elohim,” Adam Kadmon or Sephira, the
      Crown—are the androgyne synthesis of the ten Sephiroth, who stand
      for the symbol of the manifested Universe in the popularized
      _Kabalah_. The Esoteric Kabalists, however, following the Eastern
      Occultists, divide the upper Sephirothal triangle (or Sephira,
      Chokmah and Binah) from the rest, which leaves seven Sephiroth. As
      for Svabhâvat, the Orientalists explain the term as meaning the
      universal plastic matter diffused through space, with, perhaps, half
      an eye to the Ether of Science. But the Occultists identify it with
      “Father‐Mother” on the mystic plane.

  171 Arûpa.

  172 Boundless Circle.

  173 Subjective, Formless.

  174 Bhâskara.

  175 This refers to the Abstract Thought and concrete Voice, or the
      manifestation thereof, the effect of the Cause. Adam Kadmon, or
      Tetragrammaton, is the Logos in the _Kabalah_. Therefore this Triad
      answers in the latter to the highest Triangle of Kether, Chokmah and
      Binah, the last a female potency, and at the same time the male
      Jehovah, as partaking of the nature of Chokmah, or the male Wisdom.

  176 The Secret Doctrine teaches that the Sun is a central star and not a
      planet. Yet the ancients knew of and worshipped seven great gods,
      excluding the Sun and Earth. Which was that “Mystery God” they set
      apart? Of course not Uranus, only discovered by Herschel in 1781.
      But could it not be known by another name? Says Ragon: “Occult
      Sciences having discovered through astronomical calculations that
      the number of the planets must be seven, the ancients were led to
      introduce the Sun into the scale of the celestial harmonies, and
      make him occupy the vacant place. Thus, every time they perceived an
      influence that pertained to none of the six planets known, they
      attributed it to the Sun.... The error seems important, but was not
      so in practical results, if the astrologers replaced Uranus by the
      Sun, which ... is a central Star relatively motionless, turning only
      on its axis and regulating time and measure; and which cannot be
      turned aside from its true functions.” (_Maçonnerie Occulte_, p.
      447.) The nomenclature of the days of the week is also faulty. “The
      Sun‐day ought to be Uranus‐day (Urani dies, Urandi),” adds the
      learned writer.

  177 Planetary System.

  178 “The Sun rotates on its axis always in the same direction in which
      the planets revolve in their respective orbits,” astronomy teaches
      us.

  179 See _Anugîtâ_, Telang, x. 9; and _Aitareya Brâhmana_, Haug, p. 1.

  180 This essence of cometary matter, Occult Science teaches, is totally
      different from any of the chemical or physical characteristics with
      which Modern Science is acquainted. It is homogeneous in its
      primitive form beyond the Solar Systems, and differentiates entirely
      once it crosses the boundaries of our Earth’s region; vitiated by
      the atmospheres of the planets and the already compound matter of
      the interplanetary stuff, it is heterogeneous only in our manifested
      world.

  181 Manas—the Mind‐Principle, or the Human Soul.

  182 Buddhi—the Divine Soul.

  183 See _Correlation of Physical Forces_, 1843, p. 81; and _Address to
      the British Association_, 1866.

  184 Very similar ideas were those of W. Mattieu Williams, in _The Fuel
      of the Sun_; of Dr. C. William Siemens, _On the Conservation of
      Solar Energy_ (_Nature_, XXV, 440‐444, March 9, 1882); and also of
      Dr. P. Martin Duncan in an _Address_, as the President of the
      Geological Society, London, May, 1877. See _World‐Life_, by
      Alexander Winchell, LL.D., p. 53, _et seq_.

  185 When we speak of Neptune, it is not as an Occultist but as a
      European. The true Eastern Occultist will maintain that, whereas
      there are many yet undiscovered planets in our system, Neptune does
      not really belong to it, in spite of its _apparent_ connection with
      our Sun and the influence of the latter upon it. This connection is
      mâyâvic, imaginary, they say.

  186 Word, Voice and Spirit.

  187 These are the four “Immortals,” which are mentioned in the _Atharva
      Veda_ as the “Watchers” or Guardians of the four quarters of the
      sky. (See Ch. lxxvi., 1‐4, _et seq_.)

  188 _Conflict between Religion and Science_, pp. 132 and 133.

  189 _Principles of Science_, II. 455.

  190 _Les Mystères de l’Horoscope_, Ely Star, p. xi.

  191 _Psalms_, civ. 4.

  192 The difference between the Builders, the Planetary Spirits, and the
      Lipika must not be lost sight of. (See Shlokas 5 and 6 of this
      Commentary.)

  193 That is, he is under the influence of their guiding thought.

  194 Cosmic mists.

  195 The World to be.

  196 Atoms.

  197 See A. P. Sinnett’s _Esoteric Buddhism_, 5th annotated edition, pp.
      171‐173.

  198 The first and greatest Tibetan Reformer who founded the “Yellow‐
      Caps,” Gelukpas. He was born in the year 1355 A.D., in the district
      of Amdo, and was the Avatâra of Amitâbha, the celestial name of
      Gautama Buddha.

  199 T. Subba Row seems to identify him with, and to call him, the Logos.
      (See his _Lectures on the Bhagavadgîtâ_, in the _Theosophist_, vol.
      ix.)

  200 Helmholtz, _Faraday Lecture_, 1881.

  201 It is well known that sand, when placed on a metal plate in
      vibration, assumes a series of regular figures of various
      descriptions. Can Science give a _complete_ explanation of this
      fact?

  202 See _The Masonic Cyclopædia_, Mackenzie; and _The Pythagorean
      Triangle_, Oliver.

  203 Ormazd is the Logos, the “First Born,” and the Sun.

  204 _Against Apion_, I, 25.

  205 See _Isis Unveiled_, II., 430‐438.

  206 See Dowson’s _Hindû Classical Dictionary_.

  207 The mineral atoms.

  208 Gaseous clouds.

  209 See _Kabbalah Denudata_, “De Anima,” p. 113.

  210 “The doctrine of the rotation of the earth about an axis was taught
      by the Pythagorean Hicetas, probably as early as 500 B.C. It was
      also taught by his pupil Ecphantus, and by Heraclides, a pupil of
      Plato. The immobility of the sun and the orbital rotation of the
      earth were shown by Aristarchus of Samos as early as 281 B.C. to be
      suppositions accordant with facts of observation. The heliocentric
      theory was also taught about 150 B.C., by Seleucus of Seleucia on
      the Tigris. [It was taught 500 B.C. by Pythagoras.—H.P.B.] It is
      said also that Archimedes, in a work entitled _Psammites_,
      inculcated the heliocentric theory. The sphericity of the earth was
      distinctly taught by Aristotle, who appealed for proof to the figure
      of the earth’s shadow on the moon in eclipses. (Aristotle, _De
      Cælo_, lib. II., cap, XIV.) The same idea was defended by Pliny.
      (_Nat. Hist._, II., 65.) These views seem to have been lost from
      knowledge for more than a thousand years....” (Winchell, _World‐
      Life_, 551‐2.)

  211 _On Vortex Atoms_.

  212 _Op. cit._, 567.

  213 Abridged from _Principia Rerum Naturalium_.

  214 The Lipika.

  215 That is: the First is now the Second World.

  216 The Formless Universe of Thought.

  217 The Shadowy World of Primal Form, or the Intellectual.

  218 In the _Rig Veda_, we find the names Brahmanaspati and Brihaspati
      alternating with, and equivalent to, each other. Also see
      _Brihadâranyaka Upanishad_; Brihaspati is a deity called the “Father
      of the Gods.”

  219 _Logic_, II. 125.

  220 Having already taken the first three.

  221 Hosts.

  222 The four Aspects are the body, its life or vitality, and the
      “double” of the body—the triad which disappears with the death of
      the person—and the Kâma Rûpa which disintegrates in Kâma Loka.

  223 _On Amos_, iv.

  224 _Theol. Cir._, I. vii.

  225 See _The Occult World_, pp. 89, 90.

  226 Thus the sentence, “Natura Elementorum obtinet revelationem Dei”
      (Clemens, _Stromata_, IV. 6), is applicable to both or neither.
      Consult the _Zends_, II. 228, and Plutarch _De Iside_, as compared
      by Layard, _Académie des Inscriptions_, 1854, Vol. XV.

  227 _Exodus_ xxvi, xxvii.

  228 _Antiquities_, I. VIII, ch. xxii.

  229 _Chinese Buddhism_, p. 216.

  230 “Man” was here substituted for “Dragon.” Compare the Ophite Spirits.
      The Angels recognized by the Roman Catholic Church, who correspond
      to these “Faces,” were with the Ophites: Dragon—Raphael;
      Lion—Michael; Bull, or Ox—Uriel; and Eagle—Gabriel. The four keep
      company with the four Evangelists, and preface the Gospels.

  231 _Ezekiel_, i.

  232 The Jews, save the Kabalists, having no names for East, West, South,
      and North, expressed the idea by words signifying before, behind,
      right and left, and very often confounded the terms exoterically,
      thus making the blinds in the _Bible_ more confused and difficult to
      interpret. Add to this the fact that out of the forty‐seven
      translators of King James’ Bible “only three understood Hebrew, and
      of these two died before the Psalms were translated” (_Royal Masonic
      Cyclopædia_), and one may easily understand what reliance can be
      placed on the English version of the _Bible_. In this work the Douay
      Roman Catholic version is generally followed.

  233 The vertical line or the figure 1.

  234 Circle.

  235 Also for those who, etc.

  236 The Formless World and the World of Forms.

  237 _Theosophist_, Feb., 1877, p. 303.

  238 These voluntary reïncarnations are referred to in our Doctrine as
      Nirmânakâyas—the surviving spiritual principles of men.

  239 Sûkshma Sharîra, “dream‐like” illusive body, with which are clothed
      the inferior Dhyânis of the celestial Hierarchy.

  240 Compare this Esoteric tenet with the Gnostic doctrine found in
      _Pistis‐Sophia_ (Knowledge‐Wisdom), in which treatise Sophia
      (Achamôth) is shown lost in the waters of Chaos (Matter), on her way
      to the Supreme Light, and Christos delivering and helping her on the
      right Path. Note well, that “Christos” with the Gnostics meant the
      Impersonal Principle, the Âtman of the Universe, and the Âtmâ within
      every man’s soul—and not Jesus; though in the old Coptic MS., in the
      British Museum, “Christos” is replaced by “Jesus” and other terms.

  241 _A Catechism of the Visishthadvaita Philosophy_, by N.
      Bhâshiyacharya, F.T.S., late Pandit of the Adyar Library.

  242 _Träume eines Geistersehers_, quoted by C. C. Massey, in his preface
      to Von Hartmann’s _Spiritismus_.

  243 _Le Livre des Morts_, Paul Pierret, Chap. xvii. p. 61.

  244 See also for other data on this peculiar expression, the Day of
      “Come To Us,” _The Funerary Ritual of the Egyptians_, by Viscount de
      Rougé.

  245 Chaos.

  246 Our Universe.

  247 _The Theosophist_, Feb., 1887, p. 305.

  248 _Op. cit._, p. 306.

  249 Madhya is said of something whose commencement and end are unknown,
      and Para means infinite. These expressions all relate to infinitude
      and to division of time.

  250 _Op. cit._, p. 307.

  251 From the Sanskrit _Laya_, the point of matter where every
      differentiation has ceased.

  252 _Five Years of Theosophy_, Art., “Personal and Impersonal God,” p.
      200.

  253 Elements.

  254 Fraction.

  255 Presidential Address before the Royal Society of Chemists, March,
      1888.

  256 P. 242.

  257 Worlds.

  258 A period of 311,040,000,000,000 years, according to Brâhmanical
      calculations.

  259 See the _Scientific Arena_, a monthly journal devoted to current
      philosophical teaching and its bearing upon the religious thought of
      the age. New York: A. Wilford Hall, Ph.D., LL.D., Editor, July,
      August, and September, 1886.

  260 Such, we believe, is the name applied to what he also calls “Etheric
      Centres,” by J. W. Keely, of Philadelphia, the inventor of the
      famous “Motor”—destined, as his admirers have hoped, to
      revolutionize the motor power of the world.

  261 The moon is _dead_ only so far as regards her _inner_
      principles—_i.e._, _psychically_ and _spiritually_, however absurd
      the statement may seem. Physically, she is only as a semi‐paralysed
      body may be. She is aptly referred to in Occultism as the “Insane
      Mother,” the great sidereal _lunatic_.

  262 Occultists, however, having the most perfect faith in their own
      exact records, astronomical and mathematical, calculate the age of
      humanity, and assert that men (as separate sexes) have existed in
      this Round just 18,618,727 years, as the Brâhmanical teachings and
      even some Hindû calendars declare.

  263 The commentaries on the Stanzas are resumed on p. 213.

  264 In _Esoteric Buddhism_ and _Man: Fragments of Forgotten History_.

  265 Many more planets are enumerated in the Secret Books than in modern
      astronomical works.

  266 p. 48.

  267 See, in _Esoteric Buddhism_, “The Constitution of Man,” and the
      “Planetary Chain.”

  268 Winchell’s _World‐Life_.

  269 P. 113 (5th edition).

  270 pp. 185‐6.

  271 Kosha is “sheath” literally, the sheath of every principle.

  272 Sthûla‐upâdhi, or basis of the principle.

  273 Life.

  274 The Astral Body, or Linga Sharîra.

  275 Buddhi.

  276 See Diagram II, p. 195.

  277 Extract from the Teacher’s letters on various topics.

  278 We are not concerned with the other Globes in this work except
      incidentally.

  279 _Esoteric Buddhism_, p. 136.

  280 _Lucifer_, May, 1888.

  281 _Esoteric Buddhism_ (5th ed.), p. 46.

  282 _Op. cit._, p. 49.

  283 _Op. cit._, p. 140.

  284 p. 177 _supra_.

  285 Occultism divides the periods of Rest (Pralaya) into several kinds:
      there is the _Individual_ Pralaya of each Globe, as humanity and
      life pass on to the next—seven minor Pralayas in each Round; the
      _Planetary_ Pralaya, when seven Rounds are completed; the _Solar_
      Pralaya, when the whole system is at an end; and finally the
      _Universal_ Pralaya, Mahâ or Brahmâ Pralaya, at the close of the Age
      of Brahmâ. These are the chief Pralayas or “destruction periods.”
      There are many other minor ones, but with these we are not concerned
      at present.

  286 Pp. 48, 49.

  287 _Ibid._

  288 “Physical” here means differentiated for cosmical purposes and work;
      that “physical side,” nevertheless, if objective to the apperception
      of beings from other planes, is yet quite subjective to us on our
      plane.

  289 Pp. 276 _et seq_.

  290 _Ibid._

  291 See diagram, _op. cit._, p. 277.

  292 _Op. cit._, pp. 273‐4.

  293 _Op. cit._, p. 274‐5.

  294 II. 278‐9.

  295 P. 48.

  296 The _Natures_ of the seven Hierarchies or Classes of Pitris and
      Dhyân Chohans which compose our nature and bodies are here meant.

  297 Round, or revolution of Life and Being round the seven smaller
      Wheels.

  298 Thirds.

  299 Race.

  300 P. 235.

  301 _Rev._, xii. 7‐9.

  302 See Vol. II, Shloka 17.

  303 _Isis Unveiled_, I. 299, 300. Compare also Dunlap, _Sôd: the Son of
      the Man_, pp. 51 _et seq._

  304 On the authority of Irenæus, of Justin Martyr and of the _Codex_
      itself, Dunlap shows that the Nazarenes regarded “Spirit” as a
      _female and evil_ Power, in its connection with our Earth.

  305 Fetahil is identical with the host of the Pitris, who “created man”
      as a “shell” only. He was, with the Nazarenes, the King of Light,
      and the Creator; but in this instance he is the unlucky Prometheus,
      who fails to get hold of the Living Fire necessary for the formation
      of the Divine Soul, as he is ignorant of the secret name, the
      ineffable or incommunicable name of the Kabalists.

  306 The spirit of Matter and Concupiscence; Kâma Rûpa _minus_ Manas,
      Mind.

  307 _Codex Nazaræus_, ii. 233.

  308 This Mano of the Nazarenes strangely resembles the Hindû Manu, the
      Heavenly Man of the _Rig Veda_.

  309 “I am the true _Vine_, and my father is the husbandman.” (_John_,
      xv. 1.)

  310 With the Gnostics, Christ, as well as Michael who is identical with
      him in some respects, was the “Chief of the Æons.”

  311 _Codex Nazaræus_, i. 135.

  312 See the Cosmogony of Pherecydes.

  313 I. 301, note.

  314 They are found, however, in the Chaldean _Book of Numbers_.

  315 _Op. cit._, II. 183 _et seq._

  316 For the difference between _nous_, the higher divine Wisdom, and
      psyche, the lower and terrestrial, see _St. James_, iii. 15‐17.

  317 Jehovah’s connection with the Moon in the _Kabalah_ is well known to
      students.

  318 For the Nazarenes, see _Isis Unveiled_, II. 131 and 132. The true
      followers of the true Christos were all Nazarenes and _Christians_,
      and were the opponents of the later Christians.

  319 See the diagram of the Lunar Chain of seven worlds, p. 195, where,
      as in our own or any other Chain, the upper worlds are spiritual,
      while the lowest, whether Moon, Earth, or any other planet, is dark
      with matter.

  320 The whole Kosmos. The reader is reminded that in the Stanzas Kosmos
      often means only our own Solar System, not the Infinite Universe.

  321 This is purely astronomical.

  322 For a clearer explanation of the above, see “Saptaparna” in the
      Index.

  323 _Op. cit._, III. 346.

  324 _Book of Dzyan_.

  325 See _Index_, at the words “Evolution,” “Darwin,” “Kapila,” “Battle
      of Life,” etc.

  326 _Isis Unveiled_, II. 260.

  327 _Vishnu Purâna_.

  328 Chain.

  329 Earth.

  330 Kenealy, _Book of God_, p. 118.

  331 Acosta, vi. 14.

  332 Kenealy, _Ibid._

  333 I, 587‐93.

  334 That which was _natural_ in the sight of primitive man, has only now
      become _miracle_ to us; and that which was to him a miracle, could
      never be expressed in our language.

  335 There is no nation in the world in which the feeling of devotion, or
      of religious mysticism, is more developed and prominent than in the
      Hindû people. See what Max Müller says of this idiosyncrasy and
      national feature in his works. This is a direct inheritance from the
      primitive _conscious_ men of the Third Race.

  336 _Lectures on Heroes_.

  337 Vehicle.

  338 Âtman.

  339 Âtmâ‐Buddhi, Spirit‐Soul. This relates to the cosmic principles.

  340 Again.

  341 Avalokiteshvara.

  342 Builders. The seven creative Rishis, now connected with the
      constellation of the Great Bear.

  343 Earth.

  344 Rosenroth, _Liber Mysterii_ IV. 1.

  345 _Genesis_ i.

  346 _Auszüge aus dem Zohar_, pp. 13‐15.

  347 See _Vishnu Purâna_, Book I.

  348 Ch. lxxxviii.

  349 Ch. lxiv. 29, 30.

  350 _Ibid._, 34, 35.

  351 A World, when called a “higher World,” is not higher by reason of
      its location, but because it is superior in quality or essence. Yet
      such a World is generally understood by the profane as “Heaven,” and
      located above our heads.

  352 Of Form, the Sthûla Sharîra, External Body.

  353 Pearls.

  354 Ἄνθρωπος, a work on Occult Embryology, Book I.

  355 Namely, a congenital idiot.

  356 _John_ iii, 8.

  357 Ch. cxlviii.

  358 _Ibid._, cxlix. 51.

  359 _The Seven Souls of Man_, p. 2; a Lecture by Gerald Massey.

  360 _De Iside et Osiride_, xliii.

  361 Ch. xli.

  362 iv. 5.

  363 Mariette’s _Abydos_, plate 51.

  364 P. Pierret, _Études Égyptologiques_.

  365 _Ritual_, ch. ii.

  366 Linked into.

  367 _Op. cit._, xvii. 4.

  368 Several inimical critics are anxious to prove that no Seven
      Principles of Man, or Septenary Constitution of our Chain, were
      taught in our earlier volumes, _Isis Unveiled_. Though in that work
      the doctrine could only be hinted at, there are many passages,
      nevertheless, in which the Septenary Constitution of both Man and
      the Chain is openly mentioned. Speaking of the Elohim (II. 420), it
      is said: “They remain over the seventh heaven (or spiritual world),
      for it is they who, according to the Kabalists, formed in succession
      the six material worlds, or rather, attempts at worlds, that
      preceded our own, which, they say, is the seventh.” Our Globe, in
      the diagram representing the Chain, is, of course, the seventh and
      lowest; though, as the evolution on these Globes is cyclic, it is
      the fourth, on the descending arc of matter. And again (II. 367) it
      is written: “In the Egyptian notions, _as in those of all other
      faiths founded on philosophy_, man was not merely ... a union of
      soul and body; he was a trinity, when spirit was added to it.
      Besides, that doctrine made him consist of ... body, ... astral
      form, or shadow, ... animal soul, ... the higher soul, and ...
      terrestrial intelligence ... [and] a sixth principle, etc.,
      etc.”—the seventh—SPIRIT. So clearly are these principles mentioned,
      that even in the _Index_ (II. 683), one finds “Six Principles of
      Man,” the seventh being, in strict truth, the synthesis of the six,
      and _not_ a principle but a ray of the Absolute ALL.

  369 See Diagram III, p. 221.

  370 pp. 340‐351, “Genesis of the Soul.”

  371 _De Mysteriis_, ii. 3.

  372 _Asiatic Researches_, xi. 99, 100.

  373 Ch. xxxii. 9.

  374 Their Upper Triad.

  375 Bhûmi or Prithivî.

  376 _Book of the Dead_, i. 7. Compare also _Mysteries of Rostan_.

  377 Kingdom.

  378 Kingdom.

  379 The first Shadow of the Physical Man.

  380 Man.

  381 The Moon.

  382 See _Mantuan Codex_.

  383 The formation of the “Living Soul,” or Man, would render the idea
      more clearly. A “Living Soul” is a synonym of Man in the _Bible_.
      These are our seven “Principles.”

  384 _Ha Idra Zuta Kadisha_, xxii. 746.

  385 xviii. 12.

  386 _Hebrews_, iv.

  387 Cruden, _sub voce_.

  388 _Book of Numbers_, 1. viii. 3.

  389 p. 389.

  390 Plate VII. p. 37.

  391 Esotericism teaches the same. But Manas is not Nephesh; nor is the
      latter the Astral, but the Fourth Principle, and also the Second,
      Prâna, for Nephesh is the “Breath of Life” in man, as in beast or
      insect; of physical, material life, which has no spirituality in it.

  392 Éliphas Lévi, whether purposely or otherwise, has confused the
      numbers: with us his No. 2 is No. 1 (Spirit); and by making of
      Nephesh both the Plastic Mediator and Life, he thus makes in reality
      only six principles, because he repeats the first two.

  393 _Zohar_, “Idra Suta,” Book iii., p. 292b.

  394 1. 302.

  395 Read, in _Isis Unveiled_ (ii. 297‐303), the doctrine of the _Codex
      Nazaræus_. Every tenet of our teaching is found there under a
      different form and allegory.

  396 _Manu_, Bk. I.

  397 The word “Sin” is curious, but has a particular Occult relation to
      the Moon, besides being its Chaldean equivalent.

  398 Professor Zöllner’s theory has been more than welcomed by several
      Scientists, who are also Spiritualists; Professors Butlerof and
      Wagner, of St. Petersburg, for instance.

  399 “The giving reality to abstractions is the error of Realism. Space
      and Time are frequently viewed as separated from all the concrete
      experiences of the mind, instead of being generalizations of these
      in certain aspects.” (Bain, _Logic_, Part II. p. 389.)

  400 _The Mysteries of Magic_, by A. E. Waite.

  401 Wilson, I. 23, 24.

  402 _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 169.

  403 In the Sânkhya philosophy, the seven Prakritis, or “productive
      productions,” are Mahat, Ahamkâra, and the _five_ Tanmâtras. See
      _Sânkhya Kârikâ_, III., and the Commentary thereon.

  404 See _Linga Purâna_, Prior Section, lxx. 12 _et seq._; and _Vâyu
      Purâna_, ch. iv., but especially the former _Purâna_—Prior Section,
      viii. 67‐74.

  405 _Vishnu Purâna_, Book vi., ch. iv. No use to say so to the Hindûs,
      who know their _Purânas_ by heart, but very useful to remind our
      Orientalists and those Westerns who regard Wilson’s translations as
      authoritative, that, in his English translation of the _Vishnu
      Purâna_, he is guilty of the most ludicrous contradictions and
      errors. So on this identical subject of the seven Prakritis, or the
      seven zones of Brahmâ’s Egg, the two accounts differ totally. In
      Vol. i. p. 40, the Egg is said to be externally invested by seven
      envelopes. Wilson comments: “by Water, Air, Fire, Ether, and
      Ahamkâra”—which last word does not exist in the Sanskrit texts. And
      in Vol. v. p. 198, of the same _Purâna_, it is written: “in this
      manner were the seven forms of nature (Prakriti) reckoned from Mahat
      to Earth” (?). Between Mahat, or Mahâ‐Buddhi, and “Water, etc.”, the
      difference is very considerable.

  406 According to the great metaphysician Hegel also. For him Nature was
      a _perpetual becoming_. A purely Esoteric conception. Creation or
      Origin, in the Christian sense of the term, is absolutely
      unthinkable. As the above‐quoted thinker said: “God (the Universal
      Spirit) _objectivizes himself as Nature_, and again rises out of
      it.”

  407 _Book of Dzyan_, Comm. III, par. 18.

  408 P. 19.

  409 Primitive, or First Man.

  410 Reïncarnation.

  411 Vehicle.

  412 See, for example, _Sacred Mysteries among the Mayas and the
      Quichés_, by Augustus le Plongeon, who shows the identity between
      the Egyptian rites and beliefs and those of the people he describes.
      The ancient hieratic alphabets of the Mayas and the Egyptians are
      almost identical.

  413 In _The Theosophist_, 1881.

  414 T. Subba Row, _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 154.

  415 Also called the “Sons of Wisdom” and of the “Fire‐Mist,” and the
      “Brothers of the Sun,” in the Chinese records. Si‐dzang (Tibet) is
      mentioned, in the MSS. of the sacred library of the province of Fo‐
      Kien, as the great seat of Occult learning from time immemorial,
      ages before Buddha. The Emperor Yu, the “Great” (2,207 B.C.), a
      pious Mystic and great Adept, is said to have obtained his Knowledge
      from the “Great Teachers of the Snowy Range” in Si‐dzang.

  416 _Matt._ vi. 5, 6.

  417 _The Virgin of the World_, pp. 134‐5.

  418 _Paracelsus_, Franz Hartmann, M.D., p. 44.

  419 This word is explained by Dr. Hartmann, from the original texts of
      Paracelsus before him, as follows. According to this great
      Rosicrucian; “Mysterium is everything out of which something may be
      developed, which is only germinally contained in it. A seed is the
      ‘Mysterium’ of a plant, an egg that of a living bird, etc.”

  420 _Op. cit._, pp. 41, 42.

  421 It is only the mediæval Kabalists who, following the Jewish and one
      or two Neo‐Platonists, applied the term Microcosm to man. Ancient
      philosophy called the Earth the Microcosm of the Macrocosm, and man
      the outcome of the two.

  422 “This doctrine, preached 300 years ago,” remarks the translator, “is
      identical with the one that has revolutionized modern thought, after
      having been put into new shape and elaborated by Darwin. It is still
      more elaborated by Kapila in the Sânkhya philosophy.”

  423 The Eastern Occultist says that they are guided and informed by
      Spiritual Beings, the Workmen in the invisible Worlds, and behind
      the veil of Occult Nature, or Nature _in abscondito_.

  424 Wilson, I. ii., (Vol. I. 35).

  425 A frequent expression in the said “Fragments,” to which we take
      exception. The _Universal Mind_ is not a _Being_ or “God.”

  426 _The Virgin of the World_, p. 47. “Asclepios,” Pt. I.

  427 _Divine Pymander_, ix. 64.

  428 _The Virgin of the World_, p. 153.

  429 _Op. cit._, pp. 139, 140. Fragments from the “Physical Eclogues” and
      “Florilegium” of Stobæus.

  430 _Vishnu Purâna_, I. ii, Wilson, I. 13‐15.

  431 _Op. cit._, pp. 135‐138.

  432 This teaching does not refer to Prakriti‐Purusha beyond the
      boundaries of our small universe.

  433 The ultimate quiescent state; the Nirvânic condition of the Seventh
      Principle.

  434 The teaching is all given from our plane of consciousness.

  435 Or the “dream of Science,” the primeval really homogeneous matter,
      which no mortal can make objective in this Race, or Round either.

  436 “Vishnu, in the form of his active energy, neither ever rises nor
      sets, and is at once, the _seven‐fold sun_ and distinct from it,”
      says _Vishnu Purâna_, II. xi., (Wilson, II. 296).

  437 “In the same manner as a man approaching a mirror placed upon a
      stand, beholds in it his own image, so the energy (or reflection) of
      Vishnu [the Sun] is never disjoined but remains ... in the Sun (as
      in a mirror), that is there stationed.” (_Ibid._, _loc. cit._)

  438 Compare the Hermetic “Nature” “going down cyclically into matter
      when she meets the ‘Heavenly Man’.”

  439 The writers of the above knew perfectly well the physical cause of
      the tides, of the waves, etc. It is the informing Spirit of the
      whole cosmic solar body that is meant here, and which is referred to
      whenever such expressions are used from the mystic point of view.

  440 _Five Years of Theosophy_, pp. 110, 111, art., “The Twelve Signs of
      the Zodiac.”

  441 See Stanzas III and IV, and the Commentaries thereupon, and
      especially compare the comments on Stanza IV, concerning the Lipika
      and the four Mahârâjahs, the agents of Karma.

  442 And “Gods” or Dhyânis, too, not only the Genii or “guided Forces.”

  443 The meaning of this is that as man is composed of all the Great
      Elements—Fire, Air, Water, Earth and Ether—the Elementals which
      respectively belong to these Elements feel attracted to man by
      reason of their coëssence. That Element which predominates in a
      certain constitution will be the ruling Element throughout life. For
      instance, if man has a preponderance of the earthly, gnomic Element,
      the Gnomes will lead him towards assimilating metals—money and
      wealth, and so on. “Animal man is the son of the animal elements out
      of which his Soul [life] was born, and animals are the mirrors of
      man,” says Paracelsus. (_De Fundamento Sapientiæ._) Paracelsus was
      cautious, and wanted the _Bible_ to agree with what he said, and
      therefore did not say all.

  444 Cyclic progress in development.

  445 The God in man and often the incarnation of a God, a highly
      Spiritual Dhyân Chohan in him, besides the presence of his own
      Seventh Principle.

  446 Now, what “God” is meant here? Not God the “Father,” the
      anthropomorphic fiction; for that God is the Elohim collectively,
      and has no being apart from the Host. Besides, such a God is finite
      and imperfect. It is the high Initiates and Adepts who are meant
      here by the “few in number.” And it is precisely such men who
      believe in “Gods”, and know no “God” but one Universal unrelated and
      unconditioned Deity.

  447 _The Virgin of the World_, pp. 104‐5, “The Definitions of
      Asclepios.”

  448 P. 120.

  449 _National Reformer_, January 9th, 1887. Article “Phreno‐Kosmo‐
      Biology,” by Dr. Lewins.

  450 This is Cyclic law; but this law itself is often defied by human
      stubbornness.

  451 Vol. I. p. 256.

  452 _Sepher Jetzirah._

  453 As far as “Divine Revelation” is concerned, we agree. Not so with
      regard to “human history.” For there is “history” in most of the
      allegories and “myths” of India; and events, real actual events, are
      concealed under them.

  454 When the “false theologies” disappear, then true prehistoric
      realities will be found, contained especially in the mythology of
      the Âryans and ancient Hindûs, and even the pre‐Homeric Hellenes.

  455 See Section VII, “Deus Lunus.”

  456 From an MS.

  457 _Guide au Musée de Boulaq_, pp. 148, 149.

  458 As we said in _Isis Unveiled_ (II. 438‐9): “To the present moment,
      in spite of all controversies and researches, History and Science
      remain as much as ever in the dark as to the origin of the Jews.
      They may as well be the exiled Chandâlas of old India, the
      ‘bricklayers’ mentioned by Veda‐Vyâsa and Manu, as the Phœnicians of
      Herodotus, or the Hyksos of Josephus, or the descendants of Pali
      shepherds, or a mixture of all these. The _Bible_ names the Tyrians
      as a kindred people and claims dominion over them.... Yet whatever
      they may have been, they became a hybrid people, not long after the
      time of Moses, for the _Bible_ shows them freely intermarrying not
      alone with the Canaanites, but with every other nation or race they
      came in contact with.”

  459 _Knowledge_, Vol. I; see also Petrie’s letter to _The Academy_, Dec.
      17, 1881.

  460 _The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid_, p. 9.

  461 _Op. cit._, I. 519.

  462 _The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid_, p. 93.

  463 vii. 13 _et seq._

  464 P. 224.

  465 Vol. I. Part I. 46.

  466 x. 10.

  467 See _Isis Unveiled_, II. 442‐3.

  468 _Exodus_, 11. 21.

  469 George Smith, _Chaldean Account of Genesis_, pp. 299, 300.

  470 II. 3.

  471 As a reminder how the _esoteric_ religion of Moses was crushed
      several times, and the worship of Jehovah, as reëstablished by
      David, put in its place, by Hezekiah for instance, compare _Isis
      Unveiled_ (II. 436‐42). Surely there must have been some very good
      reasons why the Sadducees, who furnished almost all the High Priests
      of Judæa, held to the Laws of Moses and spurned the alleged “Books
      of Moses,” the _Pentateuch_ of the Synagogue and the _Talmud_?

  472 Once more, remember the Hindû Wittoba crucified in space; the
      significance of the “sacred sign,” the Svastika; Plato’s Decussated
      Man in Space, etc.

  473 See farther on the description given of the early Âryan Initiation:
      of Vishvakarman crucifying the Sun, Vikarttana, shorn of his
      beams—on a cruciform lathe.

  474 _Primeval Man Unveiled; or the Anthropology of the Bible_, by the
      author (unknown) of _The Stars and the Angels_, 1870, p. 14.

  475 _Op. cit._, p. 195.

  476 Especially in the face of the evidence furnished by the authorized
      _Bible_ itself in _Genesis_ (iv. 16, 17), which shows Cain going to
      the land of Nod and there marrying a wife.

  477 _Ibid._, p. 194.

  478 _Ibid._, p. 55.

  479 _Ibid._, pp. 206‐7.

  480 _Acts_, xvii. 23, 24.

  481 _Taittirîyaka Upanishad_, Second Vallî, First Anuvâka.

  482 _Ephesians_, vi, 12.

  483 _Oracles of Zoroaster_, “Effatum,” xvi.

  484 _Georgica_, Book II. 325.

  485 _Isis Unveiled._

  486 _Op. cit._, I. 5‐13, Burnell’s translation.

  487 The ideal apex of the Pythagorean Triangle.

  488 See A. Coke Burnell’s translation, edited by Ed. W. Hopkins, Ph. D.

  489 Ahamkâra, as universal Self‐Consciousness, has a triple aspect, as
      has also Manas. For this “conception of I,” or the Ego, is either
      _sattva_, “pure quietude,” or appears as _rajas_, “active,” or
      remains _tamas_, “stagnant,” in darkness. It belongs to Heaven and
      Earth, and assumes the properties of Ether.

  490 See _Sânkhya Kârikâ_ III, and Commentaries.

  491 The word “eternity,” by which Christian theologians interpret the
      term “for ever and ever,” does not exist in the Hebrew tongue.
      “Oulam,” says Le Clerc, only imports a time when beginning or end is
      not known. It does not mean “infinite duration,” and the term “for
      ever,” in the _Old Testament_, only signifies a “long time.” Nor is
      the word “eternity” used in the Christian sense in the _Purânas_.
      For in _Vishnu Purâna_, it is clearly stated that by “eternity” and
      “immortality” only “existence to the end of the Kalpa” is meant.
      (Book II. chap. viii.)

  492 Orphic Theogony is purely Oriental and Indian in its spirit. The
      successive transformations it has undergone, have now separated it
      widely from the spirit of ancient Cosmogony, as may be seen by
      comparing it even with Hesiod’s _Theogony_. Yet the truly Âryan
      Hindû spirit breaks forth everywhere in both the Hesiodic and Orphic
      systems. (See the remarkable work of James Darmesteter, “Cosmogonies
      Âryennes,” in his _Essais Orientaux_.) Thus the original Greek
      conception of Chaos is that of the Secret Wisdom Religion. In
      Hesiod, therefore, Chaos is infinite, boundless, endless and
      beginningless in duration, an abstraction and a visible presence at
      the same time, Space filled with darkness, which is primordial
      matter in its _pre‐cosmic_ state. For in its etymological sense,
      Chaos is Space, according to Aristotle, and Space is the ever Unseen
      and Unknowable Deity, in our philosophy.

  493 The _manifested_ Spirit: Absolute, Divine Spirit is one with
      absolute Divine Substance; Parabrahman and Mûlaprakriti are one in
      essence. Therefore, Cosmic Ideation and Cosmic Substance, in their
      primal character, are one also.

  494 _Sepher Yetzirah_, Chap. I. Mishna ix.

  495 _Ibid._ It is from “Arba” that Abram is derived.

  496 _Zohar_, I. 2a.

  497 _Sepher Yetzirah_, Mishna ix. 10.

  498 _Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection_.

  499 Plato, _Timæus_.

  500 Suidas, _sub voc._ “Tyrrhenia.” See Cory’s _Ancient Fragments_, p.
      309, 2nd ed.

  501 The reader will understand that by “years” is meant “ages,” not mere
      periods of 13 lunar months each.

  502 See the Greek translation by Philon Byblius.

  503 Cory, _Op. cit._, p. 3.

  504 _Isis Unveiled_, I. 342.

  505 Mithras was regarded among the Persians as the _theos ek petras_—the
      God from the rock.

  506 Bordj is called a fire‐mountain, a volcano: therefore it contains
      fire, rock, earth and water; the male, or active, and the female, or
      passive, elements. The myth is suggestive.

  507 _Op. cit._, I. 156.

  508 Henry Pratt, M.D., _New Aspects of Life_.

  509 _Siphrah Dtzenioutha_, i. 16.

  510 Damascius, in his Theogony, calls it Dis, “the disposer of all
      things.” Cory, _Ancient Fragments_, p. 314.

  511 _Isis Unveiled_, I. 341.

  512 “Migration of Abraham,” 32.

  513 With the Greeks, the River‐Gods, all of them the Sons of the
      Primeval Ocean—Chaos, in its masculine aspect—were the respective
      ancestors of the Hellenic races. For them the Ocean was the Father
      of the Gods; and thus in this connection they had anticipated the
      theories of Thales, as rightly observed by Aristotle. (_Metaph._ I.
      3‐5.)

  514 xxvi. 5.

  515 _Isis Unveiled_, I. 133‐4.

  516 The Spirit, or hidden voice of the Mantras; the active manifestation
      of the latent force, or Occult potency.

  517 Orthography of the _Archaic Dictionary_.

  518 We do not mean the current or accepted _Bible_, but the _real_
      Jewish Scripture, now kabatistically explained.

  519 See _Genesis_, ii. 4.

  520 It is “unutterable” for the simple reason that it is non‐existent.
      It _never_ was either a _name_, or any _word_ at all, but an _idea_
      that could not be expressed. A substitute was created for it in the
      century preceding our era.

  521 The Cosmic Tabernacle of Moses, erected by him in the Desert, was
      _square_, representing the four Cardinal Points and the four
      Elements, as Josephus tells his readers. (_Antiq._ I. viii. ch.
      xxii.) The idea was taken from the pyramids in Egypt, and also in
      Tyre, where the pyramids became pillars. The Genii, or Angels, have
      their abodes in these four points respectively.

  522 Isaac Myer’s _Qabbalah_, published 1888, p. 415.

  523 As, for instance, in _Vishnu Purâna_, Bk. I.

  524 Plutarch, _De Iside et Osiride_, lvi.

  525 _Spirit History of Man_, p. 88.

  526 Movers, _Phoinizer_, 268.

  527 Cory, _Ancient Fragments_, 240.

  528 _Vishnu Purâna_, Bk. I. Ch. iv., Fitzedward Hall’s rendering.

  529 Just as Mûlaprakriti is known only to Îshvara, the Logos, as he is
      called by T. Subba Row.

  530 Franck, _Die Kabbala_, 126.

  531 Philo, _Quæst. et Solut._

  532 Franck, _Op. cit._, 153.

  533 The “Seven Angels of the Face,” with the Christians.

  534 _Philosophumena_, vi. 42.

  535 _The Kabbalah Unveiled_, 47.

  536 _Qabbalah_, 233.

  537 p. 79.

  538 Arnobius, VI. xii.

  539 We employ the term as one accepted and sanctioned by use, and
      therefore more comprehensible to the reader.

  540 See Dunlap, _Sôd: the Mysteries of Adoni_, 23.

  541 With the ancient Jews, as shown by Le Clerc, the word Oulom meant
      simply a time whose beginning or end was not known. The term
      “Eternity,” properly speaking, did not exist in the Hebrew tongue
      with the meaning applied by Vedântins to Parabrahman, for instance.

  542 _Zohar_, Part I. fol. 20a.

  543 In the Indian Pantheon the double‐sexed Logos is Brahmâ, the
      Creator, whose seven “Mind‐born” Sons are the primeval Rishis—the
      Builders.

  544 Says Rabbi Simeon: “Oh, companions, companions, man as an emanation
      was both man and woman, as well on the side of the ‘Father’ as on
      the side of the ‘Mother.’ And this is the sense of the words: ‘And
      Elohim spake, Let there be Light, and it was Light’; ... and this is
      the _two‐fold man_.” (_Auszüge ans dem Sohar_, 13, 15.) Light, then,
      in _Genesis_, stood for the Androgyne Ray, or “Heavenly Man.”

  545 _Zohar_, iii. 290.

  546 _Op. cit._, ii. 261.

  547 ix. 1.

  548 _Chaldean Account of Genesis_, 62, 63.

  549 The Seven Swans that are believed to descend from Heaven on Lake
      Mânsarovara, are in the popular fancy the Seven Rishis of the Great
      Bear, who assume that form to visit the locality where the _Vedas_
      were written.

  550 See Petronius, _Satyricon_, cxxxvi.

  551 _Progress of Religious Ideas_, I. 17 _et seq._

  552 iii. 165.

  553 Ch. liv. 3.

  554 Ch. xxii. 1.

  555 Ch. xlii. 13.

  556 Ch. liv. 1, 2; ch. lxxvii. i.

  557 _Vishnu Purâna_, I. 39.

  558 _Op. cit._, _ibid._

  559 Ch. xvii. 50, 51.

  560 Ch. xlii. 13.

  561 Ch. lxxx. 9.

  562 See Max Müller’s “Our Figures.”

  563 A Kabalist would be rather inclined to believe that as the Arabic
      _cifron_ was taken from the Indian _sunyan_, nought, so the Jewish
      Kabalistic Sephiroth (_Sephrim_) were taken from the word _cipher_,
      not in the sense of emptiness, but in that of creation by number and
      degrees of evolution. And the Sephiroth are 10 or [circle split by
      vertical line].

  564 See King’s _Gnostics and their Remains_, 370 (2nd ed.).

  565 _De Vita Pithag._

  566 The year of his birth is given as 608 B.C.

  567 That is to say 332 B.C.

  568 _Metaphysics_, vii., F.

  569 _Euterpe_, 75, 76.

  570 _De Cultu Egypt._

  571 xxi. 5 _et seq._

  572 II _Kings_, xviii. 4.

  573 _Supra_, pp. 386, 387.

  574 III. 124.

  575 Movers, _Phoinizer_, 282.

  576 See _Isis Unveiled_, I. 56.

  577 Weber, _Akad‐Vorles_, 213, _et seq._

  578 The Chinese seem to have thus anticipated Sir William Thomson’s
      theory that the first living germ had dropped to the earth from some
      passing comet. Query: Why should this be called _scientific_ and the
      Chinese idea a superstitious, foolish theory?

  579 Compare Movers, _Phoinizer_, 268.

  580 His triadic Goddesses are Sati and Anouki.

  581 Ptah was originally the god of Death, of Destruction, like Shiva. He
      is a Solar God only by virtue of the Sun’s fire killing as well as
      vivifying. He was the national God of Memphis, the radiant and
      “fair‐faced” God.

  582 _Book of Numbers._

  583 Wilson, _Vishnu Purâna_, I. Pref. lxxxiv‐v.

  584 There is a curious piece of information in the Buddhist esoteric
      traditions. The exoteric or allegorical biography of Gautama Buddha
      shows this great Sage dying of an indigestion of “pork and rice”; a
      very prosaic end, indeed, with little of the solemn element in it!
      This is explained as an allegorical reference to his having been
      born in the “Boar” or Varâha Kalpa, when Vishnu assumed the form of
      that animal to raise the Earth out of the “Waters of Space.” Now as
      the Brâhmans descend direct from Brahmâ and are, so to speak,
      identified with him; and as they are at the same time the mortal
      enemies of Buddha and Buddhism, we have this curious allegorical
      hint and combination. The Brâhmanism of the Boar or Varâha Kalpa has
      slaughtered the religion of Buddha in India, swept it from its face.
      Therefore Buddha, who is identified with his philosophy, is said to
      have died from the effects of eating of the flesh of a wild hog. The
      very idea of one who established the most rigorous vegetarianism and
      respect for animal life—even to refusing to eat eggs as being
      vehicles of latent life—dying of an indigestion of meat, is absurdly
      contradictory and has puzzled more than one Orientalist. But the
      present explanation, however, unveils the allegory, and makes clear
      all the rest. The Varâha, however, is no simple Boar, but seems to
      have meant at first some antediluvian lacustrine animal “delighting
      to sport in water.” (_Vâyu Purâna._)

  585 According to Colonel Wilford, the conclusion of the “Great War” took
      place in 1370 B.C., (_Asiatic Researches_, xi. 116.); according to
      Bentley, 575 B.C.!! We may yet hope, before the end of this century,
      to see the Mahâbhâratan epic proclaimed identical with the wars of
      the great Napoleon.

  586 See _Royal Asiat. Soc._ ix. 364.

  587 Bk. vi. ch. iii.

  588 In the Vedânta and Nyâya, Nimitta, from which Naimittika, is
      rendered as the Efficient Cause, when antithesized with Upâdâna, the
      Physical or Material Cause. In the Sânkhya, Pradhâna is a cause
      inferior to Brahmâ, or rather Brahmâ being himself a cause, is
      superior to Pradhâna. Hence “Incidental” is a wrong translation, and
      ought to be rendered, as shown by some scholars, “Ideal” Cause: even
      Real Cause would have been better.

  589 XII. iv, 35.

  590 _Vâyu Purâna._

  591 Wilson, _Vishnu Purâna_, VI, iii.

  592 The chief Kumâra, or Virgin‐God, a Dhyân Chohan who refuses to
      create. A prototype of St. Michael, who also refuses to do so.

  593 See concluding lines in Section, “Chaos: Theos: Kosmos.”

  594 _Ibid._, iv.

  595 This prospect would hardly suit Christian theology, which prefers an
      eternal, everlasting Hell for its followers.

  596 The term “Elements” must be here understood to mean not only the
      visible and physical elements, but also that which St. Paul calls
      Elements—the Spiritual, Intelligent Potencies—Angels and Demons in
      their manvantaric forms.

  597 When this description is correctly understood by Orientalists, in
      its esoteric significance, then it will be found that this cosmic
      correlation of World‐Elements may explain the correlation of
      physical forces better than those now known. At any rate,
      Theosophists will perceive that Prakriti has _seven forms_, or
      principles, “reckoned from Mahat to Earth.” The “Waters” mean here
      the mystic “Mother”; the Womb of Abstract Nature, in which the
      Manifested Universe is conceived. The seven “zones” have reference
      to the Seven Divisions of that Universe, or the Noumena of the
      Forces that bring it into being. It is all allegorical.

  598 _Vishnu Purâna_, Bk. VI. Ch. iv., Wilson’s mistakes being corrected
      and the original terms put in brackets.

  599 As it is the Mahâ, the Great, or so‐called Final, Pralaya which is
      here described, every thing is reäbsorbed into its original One
      Element; the “Gods themselves, Brahmâ and the rest” being said to
      die and disappear during that long “Night.”

  600 The “Builders” of the Stanzas.

  601 From the _Siphra Dtzenioutha_, c. i. § 16 _et seq._; as quoted in
      Myer’s _Qabbalah_, 232‐3.

  602 Compare the _Siphra Dtzenioutha_.

  603 Bk. I. Ch. iii.

  604 pp. 219, 221.

  605 See Jacolliot’s _Les Fils de Dieu_, and _L’Inde des Brahmes_, p.
      230.

  606 If this is not prophetic, what is?

  607 Wilson, _Vishnu Purâna_, Bk. IV. Ch. xxiv.

  608 The _Matsya Purâna_ gives Katâpa.

  609 _Vishnu Purâna_, _Ibid._

  610 Max Müller translates the name as Morya, of the Morya dynasty, to
      which Chandragupta belonged. (See _History of Ancient Sanskrit
      Literature_). In _Matsya Purâna_, chapter cclxxii, the dynasty of
      ten Moryas, or Maureyas, is spoken of. In the same chapter, it is
      stated that the Moryas will one day reign over India, after
      restoring the Kshattriya race many thousand years hence. Only that
      reign will be purely spiritual and “not of this world.” It will be
      the kingdom of the next Avatâra. Colonel Tod believes the name
      Morya, or Maurya, a corruption of Mori, a Rajpût tribe, and the
      commentary on the _Mahâvanso_ thinks that some princes have taken
      their name Maurya from their town called Mori, or as Professor Max
      Müller gives it, Morya‐Nâgara, which is more correct, after the
      original _Mahâvanso_. The Sanskrit Encyclopedia, _Vâchaspattya_, we
      are informed by our Brother, Devan Bâdhâdur R. Ragoonath Rao, of
      Madras, places Katâpa (Kalâpa) on the northern side of the
      Himâlayas, hence in Tibet. The same is stated in the _Bhâgavata
      Purâna_, Skanda xii.

  611 _Ibid._, ch. iv. The _Vayu Purâna_ declares that Moru will
      reëstablish the Kshattriyas in the Nineteenth coming Yuga. (See
      _Five Years of Theosophy_, 483, art. “The Moryas and Koothoomi.”)

  612 See _Dissertations Relating to Asia_.

  613 Ch. lxxxi.

  614 I. 11.

  615 In the Indian _Purânas_, it is Vishnu, the First, and Brahmâ, the
      Second Logos, or the Ideal and Practical Creators, who are
      respectively represented, one as manifesting the Lotus, the other as
      issuing from it.

  616 Not the efforts, however, of the trained psychic faculties of an
      Initiate into Eastern Metaphysics, and the Mysteries of Creative
      Nature. It is the Profane of the past ages, who have degraded the
      pure ideal of cosmic creation into an emblem of mere human
      reproduction and sexual functions: it is the Esoteric Teachings, and
      the Initiates of the Future, whose mission it is, and will be, to
      redeem and ennoble once more the primitive conception, so sadly
      profaned by its crude and gross application to exoteric dogmas and
      personations, by theological and ecclesiastical religionists. The
      silent worship of abstract or noumenal Nature, the only divine
      manifestation, is the one ennobling religion of Humanity.

  617 Surely the words of the old Initiate into the _primitive_ Mysteries
      of Christianity, “Know ye not ye are the Temple of God” (1
      _Corinth_, iii. 16), could not be applied in _this_ sense to _men_;
      though the meaning _was_, undeniably, so stated, in the minds of the
      Hebrew compilers of the _Old Testament_. And here is the abyss that
      lies between the symbolism of the _New Testament_ and the Jewish
      canon. This gulf would have remained, and have ever widened, had not
      Christianity, especially and most glaringly the Latin Church, thrown
      a bridge over it. Modern Popery has now spanned it entirely, by its
      dogma of the two immaculate conceptions, and the anthropomorphic
      and, at the same time idolatrous, character it has conferred upon
      the Mother of its God.

  618 It was so carried _only_ in the Hebrew _Bible_, and its servile
      copyist, Christian theology.

  619 The same idea is carried out exoterically in the incidents of the
      exodus from Egypt. The Lord God tempts Pharaoh sorely, and “plagues
      him with great plagues,” lest the king should escape punishment, and
      thus afford no pretext for one more triumph to his “chosen people.”

  620 _Exodus_, ii. 10. Even to the seven daughters of the Midianite
      priest, who came to draw _water_, and whom Moses helped to _water_
      their flock; for which service the Midian gives Moses his daughter
      Zipporah, or Sippara, the _shining_ Wave, as wife. (_Exod._ ii.
      16‐21.) All this has the same secret meaning.

  621 With the Egyptians it was the resurrection in rebirth, after 3,000
      years of purification, either in Devachan or the “Fields of Bliss.”

  622 Such “frog‐Goddesses” may be seen at Boulak, in the Cairo Museum.
      For the statement about the Church‐lamps and inscriptions, the
      learned ex‐director of the Boulak Museum, M. Gaston Maspero, must be
      held responsible. (See his _Guide au Musée de Boulaq_, p. 146.)

  623 The Goddess Τρίμορφος in the statuary of Alcamenes.

  624 Ancient Mythology includes ancient Astronomy as well as Astrology.
      The planets were the hands pointing out, on the dial of our Solar
      System, the hours of certain periodical events. Thus, Mercury was
      the _messenger_, appointed to keep time during the daily solar and
      lunar phenomena, and was otherwise connected with the God and
      Goddess of Light.

  625 A caricatured and dwarfed Vedântin notion of Parabrahman containing
      within _itself_ the whole Universe, as being that boundless Universe
      itself, and _nothing existing outside of itself_.

  626 Just as they are to this day in India; the bull of Shiva, and the
      cow representing several Shaktis or Goddesses.

  627 Hence the worship of the Moon by the Hebrews.

  628 “_Male_ and _female_, created he them.”

  629 Because it was too sacred. It is referred to as THAT in the _Vedas_.
      It is the “Eternal Cause,” and cannot, therefore, be spoken of as a
      “First Cause,” a term implying the absence of Cause, at one time.

  630 _Pneumatologie: Des Esprits_, tom. III. p. 117; “Archéologie de la
      Vierge Mère.”

  631 p. 23.

  632 Myer’s _Qabbalah_, 335‐6.

  633 _Moreh Nebhuchim_, III. xxx.

  634 See _De Diis Syriis_, Teraph., II. Synt. p. 31.

  635 I. i. 21.

  636 See _Pausanias_, viii. 35‐8.

  637 Cornutus, _De Natura Deorum_, xxxiv. 1.

  638 The Roman Catholics are indebted for the idea of consecrating the
      month of May to the Virgin to the pagan Plutarch, who shows that
      “May is sacred to Maia (Μαῖα) or Vesta” (Aulus Gellius, _sub voc._
      Maia), our mother‐earth, our nurse and nourisher, personified.

  639 Thot‐Lunus is the Budha‐Soma of India, or Mercury and the Moon.

  640 _Ezekiel_, viii. 16.

  641 The Earth flees for her life, in the allegory, before Prithu, who
      pursues her. She assumes the shape of a cow, and, trembling with
      terror, runs away and hides even in the regions of Brahmâ.
      Therefore, it is _not_ our Earth. Again, in every _Purâna_, the calf
      changes name. In one it is Manu Svâyambhuva, in another Indra, in a
      third the Himavat (Himâlayas) itself, while Meru was the milker.
      This is a deeper allegory than one may be inclined to think.

  642 His _clear_ realization is, that the Egyptians _prophesied_ Jehovah
      (!) and his incarnated Redeemer (the good serpent), etc.; even to
      identifying Typhon with the _wicked_ dragon of the garden of Eden.
      And this passes as serious and sober _science_!

  643 Hathor is the _infernal_ Isis, the Goddess preëminently of the West
      or the Nether World.

  644 This is from De Mirville, who proudly confesses the similarity, and
      he _ought to know_. See “Archéologie de la Vierge Mère,” in his _Des
      Esprits_, pp. 111‐113.

  645 _Magie_, p. 153.

  646 De Mirville, _Ibid._, pp. 116 and 119.

  647 _Hymns to Minerva_, p. 19.

  648 _Sermon sur la Sainte Vierge._

  649 _Apoc._, ch. xii.

  650 Wägner and McDowall, _Asgard and the Gods_, p. 86.

  651 See _De Vitâ Apollionii_, I. xiv.

  652 _Adv. Hæres._ xxxvii.

  653 Gerald Massey, _The Natural Genesis_, I. 340.

  654 Ch. xv.

  655 Ch. xi.

  656 _De Mundi Opif._, _Par._, pp. 30 and 419.

  657 For the same reason the division of the principles in man into seven
      is thus reckoned, as they describe the same circle in the higher and
      lower human nature.

  658 Thus the septenary division is the oldest and preceded the four‐fold
      division. It is the root of archaic classification.

  659 In Chinese Buddhism and Esotericism, the Genii are represented by
      four Dragons—the Mahârâjahs of the Stanzas.

  660 _Op. cit._, II. 312‐13.

  661 _Ibid._, I. 321.

  662 Proclus, _Tim._, I.

  663 _Prep. Evang._, I. iii. 3.

  664 _Op. cit._, pp. 366‐8.

  665 _Job_, ii.

  666 _Genesis_, vi.

  667 _James_, i. 13.

  668 _James_, i. 2, 12; _Matth._, vi. 13. See Cruden, _sub voc._

  669 _Padma Purâna._

  670 _Vishnu Purâna_, I. i.

  671 Vol. II. ch. x.

  672 See Chwolsohn, _Nabathean Agriculture_, II. 217.

  673 One Day of Brahmâ lasts 4,320,000,000 years—multiply this by 360!
      The A‐suras (No‐gods, or Demons) are here still Suras, Gods higher
      in hierarchy than such secondary Gods as are not even mentioned in
      the _Vedas_. The duration of the War shows its significance, and
      also shows that the combatants are only the personified Cosmic
      Powers. It is evidently for sectarian purposes and out of _odium
      theologicum_ that the illusive form Mâyâmoha, assumed by Vishnu, was
      attributed in later reärrangements of old texts to Buddha and the
      Daityas, as in the _Vishnu Purâna_, unless it was a fancy of Wilson
      himself. He also fancied he found an allusion to Buddhism in the
      _Bhagavadgîtâ_, whereas, as proved by K. T. Telang, he had only
      confused the Buddhists and the older Chârvâka materialists. The
      version exists nowhere in other _Purânas_ if the inference does, as
      Professor Wilson claims, in the _Vishnu Purâna_; the translation of
      which, especially of Book III. ch. xviii, where the reverend
      Orientalist arbitrarily introduces Buddha, and shows him teaching
      Buddhism to Daityas, led to another “great war” between himself and
      Col. Vans Kennedy. The latter charged him publicly with wilfully
      distorting Purânic texts. “I affirm,” wrote the Colonel at Bombay,
      in 1840, “that the _Purânas_ do not contain what Professor Wilson
      has stated is contained in them; ... until such passages are
      produced I may be allowed to repeat my former conclusions that
      Professor Wilson’s opinion, that the _Purânas_ as now extant are
      compilations made between the eighth and seventeenth centuries
      [A.D.!], rests solely _on gratuitous assumptions and unfounded
      assertions_, and that his reasoning in support of it is either
      futile, fallacious, contradictory, or improbable.” (See _Vishnu
      Purâna_, trans. by Wilson, edit, by Fitzedward Hall, Vol. V,
      Appendix.)

  674 This statement belongs to the _third_ War, since the terrestrial
      continents, seas and rivers are mentioned in connection with it.

  675 _Vishnu Purâna_, III. xvii (Wilson, Vol. III. 204‐5).

  676 Book I. chap. xvii (Wilson, Vol. II. 36), in the story of
      Prahlâda—the Son of Hiranyakashipu, the Purânic Satan, the great
      enemy of Vishnu, and the King of the Three Worlds—into whose heart
      Vishnu entered.

  677 _Ibid._, I. iv (Wilson, Vol. I. 64).

  678 II _Chronicles_, ii. 5.

  679 “There was a day when the _Sons of God_ came before the Lord, and
      Satan came _with his brothers_, also before the Lord.” (_Job_ ii.,
      Abyss., Ethiopic text.)

  680 _Ibid._, Vol. III. 205‐7.

  681 _Journal of the Royal Asiat. Society_, xix. 302.

  682 Wilson’s opinion that the _Vishnu Purâna_ is a production _of our
      era_, and that in its present form it is not earlier than between
      the VIIIth and the XVIIth (!!) century, is absurd beyond noticing.

  683 P. 3.

  684 _Ibid._, p. 2.

  685 _Ibid._, p. 21.

  686 See _The Monthly Magazine_, for April, 1797.

  687 Ἤτοι μὲν πρώτιστα Χάος γ’eνετ᾽ (l. 166); γένετο being considered in
      antiquity as meaning: “was _generated_” and not simply “_was_.” (See
      Taylor’s “Introd. to the _Parmenides_ of Plato,” p. 260.)

  688 It is the confusion between the “Bound,” and the “Infinite,” that
      Kapila overwhelms with sarcasms in his disputations with the Brâhman
      Yogis, who claim in their mystical visions to see the “Highest One.”

  689 _Ibid._

  690 See T. Taylor’s article in his _Monthly Magazine_, quoted in the
      _Platonist_ of Feb., 1887, edited by T. M. Johnson, F.T.S., Osceola,
      Missouri.

  691 _Vit. Pythag._, p. 47.

  692 _Asgard and the Gods_, 22.

  693 Vâch—the “melodious cow, who milks sustenance and Water,” and yields
      us “nourishment and sustenance,” as described in the _Rig Veda_.

  694 _The Theosophist_, Feb., 1887, pp. 302‐3.

  695 _Ibid._, p. 304.

  696 _The Masonic Review_, June, 1886.

  697 Objective—in the world of Mâyâ, of course; still as real as we are.

  698 “In the course of cosmic manifestation, this Daiviprakriti, instead
      of being the Mother of the Logos, should, strictly speaking, be
      called his Daughter.” (“Notes on the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_,” _op. cit._,
      p. 305.)

  699 The wise men who, like Stanley Jevons amongst the moderns, invented
      a method to make the incomprehensible assume a tangible form, could
      only do so by resorting to numbers and geometrical figures.

  700 The Pranava, Om, is a mystic term pronounced by the Yogis during
      meditation; of the terms called, according to exoteric commentators,
      Vyâkritis, or Aum, Bhûh, Bhuvah, Svah, (Om, Earth, Sky, Heaven),
      Pranava is, perhaps, the most sacred. They are pronounced with
      breath suppressed. See _Manu_ II. 76‐81, and Mitakshara commenting
      on the _Yâjnavâkhya‐Smriti_, I. 23. But the esoteric explanation
      goes a great deal further.

  701 “Lectures on the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_,” _ibid._, p. 307.

  702 It is this Trinity that is allegorized by the “Three Steps of
      Vishnu,” which mean—Vishnu being considered as the Infinite in
      exotericism—that from Parabrahman issued Mûlaprakriti, Purusha (the
      Logos) and Prakriti; the four forms—with itself, the synthesis—of
      Vâch. And in the _Kabalah_, Ain Suph, Shekinah, Adam Kadmon and
      Sephira, the four, or the three, emanations being distinct—yet One.

  703 Chaldean _Book of Numbers_. In the current _Kabalah_ the name
      Jehovah replaces that of Adam Kadmon.

  704 Justin Martyr tells us that, owing to his ignorance of these four
      sciences, he was rejected by the Pythagoreans as a candidate for
      admission into their school.

  705 Diogenes Laërtius, in _Vit. Pythag._

  706 31415, or π, the synthesis, or the Host _unified_ in the Logos and
      the Point, called in Roman Catholicism the “Angel of the Face,” and
      in Hebrew, Michael, מיכאל, “who [is like unto, or the same] as God,”
      the manifested representation.

  707 Appearing at the beginning of Cycles, as also of every Sidereal
      Year, of 25,868 years. Therefore, the Kabeira or Kabarim received
      their name in Chaldæa, for it means the Measures of Heaven, from
      _Kob_, “measure of,” and _Urim_, “Heavens.”

  708 _The Natural Genesis_, II. 316.

  709 See Kircher’s _Œdipus Ægypt._, II. 423.

  710 This Egyptian word Naja reminds one a good deal of the Indian Nâga,
      the Serpent‐God. Brahmâ and Shiva and Vishnu are all crowned and
      connected with Nâgas—a sign of their cyclic and cosmic character.

  711 _Comment. on the Yashna_, 174.

  712 First Treatise, p. 59.

  713 Says the translator of Avicebron’s _Qabbalah_ of this “Sum Total”:
      “The letter of Kether is י (Yod), of Binah ה (Heh), together YaH,
      the feminine Name; the third letter, that of ’Hokhmah, is ו (Vav),
      making together יהו YHV of יהוה YHVH, the Tetragrammaton, and really
      the complete symbols of its efficaciousness. The last ה (Heh) of
      this Ineffable Name _being always applied to the Six Lower and the
      last, together the Seven_ remaining Sephiroth.” (Myer’s _Qabbalah_,
      p. 263). Thus the Tetragrammaton is holy only in its abstract
      synthesis. As a Quaternary containing the lower Seven Sephiroth, _it
      is phallic_.

  714 The statement will, of course, be found preposterous and absurd, and
      simply laughed at. But if one believes in the final submersion of
      Atlantis, 850,000 years ago, as taught in _Esoteric Buddhism_—the
      gradual first sinking having begun during the Eocene Age—one has
      also to accept the statement for the so‐called Lemuria, the
      continent of the Third Root‐Race, which was first nearly destroyed
      by combustion, and then submerged. As the Commentary teaches: “_The
      First Earth having been purified by the Forty‐nine Fires, her
      people, born of Fire and Water, could not die ...; the Second Earth
      [with its Race] disappeared as vapour vanishes in the air ...; the
      Third Earth had everything consumed on it after the Separation, and
      went down into the lower Deep [the Ocean]. This was twice eighty‐two
      Cyclic Years ago._” Now a Cyclic Year is what we call a Sidereal
      Year, and is founded on the Precession of the Equinoxes. The length
      of this Sidereal Year is 25,868 years, and the period mentioned in
      the Commentary is, therefore, in all equal to 4,242,352 years. More
      details will be found in Volume II. Meanwhile, this doctrine is
      embodied in the “Kings of Edom.”

  715 The same reserve is found in the _Talmud_ and in every national
      system of religion whether monotheistic or exoterically
      polytheistic. From the superb religious poem by the Kabalist Rabbi
      Solomon ben Yehudah Ibn Gabirol, the “Kether Malchuth,” we select a
      few definitions given in the prayers of Kippûr: “Thou art One, the
      beginning of all numbers, and the foundation of all edifices; Thou
      art One, and in the secret of Thy unity the wisest of men are lost,
      because they know it not. Thou art One, and Thy Unity is never
      diminished, never extended, and cannot be changed. Thou art One, but
      _not as an element of numeration; for Thy Unity admits not of
      multiplication, change or form_. Thou art Existent; but the
      understanding and vision of mortals cannot attain to thy existence,
      nor determine for thee the Where, the How, and the Why. Thou art
      Existent, but in thyself alone, there being none other that can
      exist with thee. Thou art Existent, before all time and without
      place. Thou art Existent, and thy existence is so profound and
      secret that none can penetrate and discover thy secrecy. Thou art
      living, but within no time that can be fixed or known; Thou art
      living, but not by a spirit or a soul, for _Thou art Thyself_, the
      Soul of all Souls.” There is a distance between this Kabalistical
      Deity and the Biblical Jehovah, the spiteful and revengeful God of
      Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, who tempted the first and wrestled with the
      last. No Vedântin but would repudiate such a Parabrahman!

  716 Edkins, _Chinese Buddhism_, ch. xx. And very wisely have they acted.

  717 If he rejected it, it was on the ground of what he calls the
      “changes,” in other words, rebirths of man, and constant
      transformations. He denied immortality to the Personality of man, as
      we do, not to Man.

  718 He may be laughed at by the Protestants; but the Roman Catholics
      have no right to mock him, without becoming guilty of blasphemy and
      sacrilege. For it is over 200 years since Confucius was canonized as
      a Saint in China by the Roman Catholics, who have thereby obtained
      many converts among the ignorant Confucianists.

  719 The animals regarded as sacred in the _Bible_ are by no means few in
      number; as, for instance, the Goat, the Azaz‐el, or God of Victory.
      As Aben Ezra says: “If thou art capable of comprehending the mystery
      of Azazel, thou wilt learn the mystery of His [God’s] name, for it
      has similar associates in Scriptures. I will tell thee by allusion
      one portion of the mystery; when thou shalt have _thirty three years
      of age_ thou wilt comprehend me.” So with the mystery of the
      Tortoise. Rejoicing over the poetry of biblical metaphors,
      associating “incandescent stones,” “sacred animals,” etc., with the
      name of Jehovah, and quoting from the _Bible de Vence_ (XIX. 318) a
      pious French writer says: “Indeed all of them are Elohim, _like
      their God_”; for, these Angels, “ ‘assume,’ _through a holy
      usurpation_, ‘the very divine name of Jehovah each time they
      represent him’.” (De Mirville, _Des Esprits_.) No one ever doubted
      that the Name must have been _assumed_, when under the guise of the
      Infinite, One Incognizable, the Malachim, or Messengers, descended
      to eat and drink with men. But if the Elohim and even lower Beings,
      _assuming_ the God‐name, were and are still worshipped, why should
      the same Elohim be called Devils, when appearing under the names of
      other Gods?

  720 _Matth._, xxiv. 28.

  721 Bryant is right in saying “Druid bardism says of Noah that when he
      came out of the ark (the birth of a new cycle), after a stay therein
      of a year and a day, that is 364 + 1=365 days, he was congratulated
      by Neptune upon his birth from the waters of the Flood, who wished
      him a _Happy New Year_.” The “Year,” or cycle, esoterically, was the
      new race of men, _born from woman_, after the Separation of the
      Sexes, which is the secondary meaning of the allegory; its primary
      meaning being the beginning of the Fourth Round, or the _new_
      Creation.

  722 From an unpublished MS.

  723 Or literally: “One Prâdhânika Brahma Spirit: THAT was.” The
      “Prâdhânika Brahma Spirit” is Mûlaprakriti and Parabrahman.

  724 Wilson, _Vishnu Purâna_, I. 73‐5.

  725 Origen, _Contra Celsum_, VI. xxii.

  726 _Timæus._

  727 “And the fourth creation is _here_ the primary, for _things_
      immovable are emphatically known as primary”—according to a
      commentary translated by Fitzedward Hall in his editing of Wilson’s
      translation.

  728 How can “divinities” have been created _after_ the animals? The
      esoteric meaning of the expression “animals” is the _germs of all
      animal life_, including man. Man is called a _sacrificial animal_,
      that is, the only one among the animal creation who sacrifices to
      the Gods. Moreover, by “sacred animals” the twelve Signs of the
      Zodiac are often meant in the sacred texts, as already stated.

  729 _Vishnu Purâna_, _ibid._

  730 _Op. cit._, I. ix.

  731 Myer’s _Qabbalah_, 415‐16.

  732 _Contra Hær._, I. xvii. 1.

  733 _Ibid._, I. xxx.

  734 Superior to the Spirits, or “Heavens,” of the Earth only.

  735 _Ibid._, I. v. 2.

  736 See _Isis Unveiled_, II. 183.

  737 See also King’s _Gnostics and their Remains_, p. 97. Other sects
      regarded Jehovah as Ialdabaoth himself. King identifies him with
      Saturn.

  738 _Ordinances of Manu_, I. 33.

  739 _Irenæus_, _op. cit._, I. xxx. 6.

  740 Elsewhere, however, the identity is revealed. See _supra_ the
      quotation from Iba Gabirol and his 7 heavens, 7 earths, etc.

  741 This must not be confused with _precosmic_ “DARKNESS,” the Divine
      ALL.

  742 I. 2; and also at the beginning of II.

  743 The quotations that follow in treating of the seven Creations,
      except when otherwise stated, are all from _Vishnu Purâna_, Bk. I.
      Ch. i‐v.

  744 I. 240.

  745 Brucker, _ibid._

  746 Compare _Genesis_ xix. 34‐8 and iv. 1.

  747 Vishnu is both Bhûtesha, “Lord of the Elements,” and of all things,
      and Vishvarûpa, “Universal Substance” or Soul.

  748 Compare, for their “post‐types,” the Treatise written by Trithemius,
      Agrippa’s master, in the sixteenth century, “Concerning the Seven
      Secondaries, or Spiritual Intelligences, who, after God, actuate the
      Universe,” which, in addition to secret cycles and several
      prophecies, discloses certain facts and beliefs about the Genii, or
      the Elohim, which preside over and guide the septenary stages of the
      World’s Course.

  749 From the first, the Orientalists have found themselves beset with
      great difficulties in regard to any possible order in the Purânic
      “Creations.” Brahman is very often confused by Wilson with Brahmâ,
      for which he is criticized by his successors. The _Original Sanscrit
      Texts_ are preferred by Mr. Fitzedward Hall for the translation of
      the _Vishnu Purâna_, to the text used by Wilson. “Had Professor
      Wilson enjoyed the advantages which are now at the command of the
      student of Indian philosophy, unquestionably he would have expressed
      himself differently,” says the editor of his work. This reminds one
      of the answer given by one of Thomas Taylor’s admirers to those
      scholars who criticized his translations of Plato: “Taylor might
      have known less Greek than his critics, but he knew more Plato.” Our
      present Orientalists disfigure the _mystic_ sense of the Sanskrit
      texts far more than Wilson ever did, though the latter is undeniably
      guilty of very gross errors.

  750 _Vâyu Purâna._

  751 _Collected Works_, III. 381.

  752 Professor Wilson translates as though animals were higher in the
      scale of “creation” than divinities, or angels, although the truth
      about the Devas is very plainly stated further on. This “Creation,”
      says the text, is both Primary (Prâkrita) and Secondary (Vaikrita).
      It is the Secondary, as regards the origin of the Gods from Brahmâ,
      the _personal_ anthropomorphic _creator_ of our material universe;
      it is the Primary as affecting Rudra, who is the immediate
      production of the First Principle. The term Rudra is not only a
      title of Shiva, but embraces agents of creation, angels and men, as
      will be shown further on.

  753 Neither plant nor animal, but an existence between the two.

  754 _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 276, art., “Mineral Monad.”

  755 “These notions,” remarks Professor Wilson, “the birth of Rudra and
      the saints, seem to have been _borrowed_ from the Shaivas, and to
      have been awkwardly engrafted upon the Vaishnava system.” The
      esoteric meaning ought to have been consulted before venturing such
      a hypothesis.

  756 See _Sânkhya Kârikâ_, v. 46. p. 146.

  757 Parâshara, the Vedic Rishi, who received the _Vishnu Purâna_ from
      Pulastya and taught it to Maitreya, is placed by the Orientalists at
      various epochs. As correctly observed, in the _Hindû Classical
      Dictionary_: “Speculations as to his era differ widely, from 575
      B.C. to 1391 B.C., and _cannot be trusted_.” Quite so; but they are
      no more untrustworthy than any other date, as assigned by the
      Sanskritists, so famous in the department of arbitrary fancy.

  758 They may indeed mark a “special” or extra “creation,” since it is
      they who, by incarnating themselves within the senseless human
      shells of the two first Root‐Races, and a great portion of the Third
      Root‐Race, create, so to speak, a _new race_: that of thinking,
      self‐conscious and _divine_ men.

  759 _Hindû Classical Dictionary._

  760 _Linga Purâna_, Prior Section, lxx. 174.

  761 See _Manu_, I. 10.

  762 See _Linga_, _Vâyu_ and _Mârkandeya Purânas_.

  763 Movers, _Phoinizer_, 282.

  764 Weber, _Akad. Vorles_, 213, 214, etc.

  765 IX. 850.

  766 _Stromata_, I. v. 6.

  767 The Gehenna of the _Bible_ was a valley near Jerusalem, where the
      monotheistic Jews immolated their children to Moloch, if the word of
      the prophet Jeremiah is to be believed. The Scandinavian Abode of
      Hel or Hela was a frigid region—Kâma Loka again—and the Egyptian
      Amenti a place of purification. (See _Isis Unveiled_, II. 11.)

  768 I. vi. i.

  769 _Cod. Naz._, I. 47; see also _Psalms_, lxxxix. 18.

  770 I _Cor._, viii. 5.

  771 _Concerning Divine Names_, traduction Darboy, 364.

  772 See de Mirville, _Des Esprits_, ii. 322.

  773 _The Correlation of Physical Forces_, p. 89.

  774 _Ibid._, xiv.

  775 II _Sam._, xxii. 9, 11.

  776 _Deut._, iv. 24.

  777 _Op. cit._, III. 415.

  778 II _Sam._, xxii. 14, 15.

  779 Herodotus, _Polymnia_, 190, 191.

  780 viii. 24.

  781 _Fa‐hwa‐King._

  782 See _La Mission des Juifs_.

  783 _China Revealed_, as quoted in Hargrave Jennings’ _Phallicism_, p.
      273.

  784 p. 202.

  785 _Op. cit._, p. 60.

  786 _Ibid._

  787 O’Brien, _Round Towers of Ireland_, p. 61, quoted by Hargrave
      Jennings in his _Phallicism_, p. 246.

  788 _Introduction to the Science of Religion_, p. 332.

  789 _Pantheon_, text 3.

  790 Their intellection, of course, being of quite a different nature to
      any we can conceive of on Earth.

  791 See his Third Letter to Bentley.

  792 _Concepts of Modern Physics_, pp. xi, xii, Introd. to 2nd Ed.

  793 “Recherches expérimentales sur la relation qui existe entre la
      résistance de l’air et sa température,” p. 68, translated from
      Stallo’s quotation.

  794 From the criticism of _Concepts of Modern Physics_, in _Nature_. See
      Stallo’s work, p. xvi of Introduction.

  795 Mr. Robert Ward, discussing the questions of Heat and Light in the
      November _Journal of Science_, 1881, shows us how utterly ignorant
      is Science about one of the commonest facts of Nature—the heat of
      the Sun. He says: “The question of the temperature of the sun has
      been the subject of investigation with many scientists: Newton, one
      of the first investigators of this problem, tried to determine it,
      and after him all the scientists who have been occupied with
      calorimetry have followed his example. All have believed themselves
      successful, and have formulated their results with great confidence.
      The following, in the chronological order of the publication of the
      results, are the temperatures (in centigrade degrees) found by each
      of them: Newton, 1,699,300°; Pouillet, 1,461°; Tollner, 102,200°;
      Secchi, 5,344,840°; Ericsson, 2,726,700°; Fizeau, 7,500°; Waterston,
      9,000,000°; Spoëren, 27,000°; Deville, 9,500°; Soret, 5,801,846°;
      Vicaire, 1,500°; Rosetti, 20,000°. The difference is as 1,400°
      against 9,000,000°, or no less than 8,998,600°!! There probably does
      not exist in science a more astonishing contradiction than that
      revealed in these figures.” And yet without doubt if an Occultist
      were to give out an estimate, each of these gentlemen would
      vehemently protest in the name of “exact” Science at the rejection
      of his special result.

  796 See _Correlation of the Physical Forces_, Preface.

  797 _Soirées_, vol. ii.

  798 Stallo’s above‐cited work, _Concepts of Modern Physics_, a volume
      which has called forth the liveliest protests and criticisms, is
      recommended to anyone inclined to doubt this statement. “The
      professed antagonism of science to metaphysical speculation,” he
      writes, “has led the majority of scientific specialists to assume
      that the methods and results of empirical research are wholly
      independent of the control of the laws of thought. They either
      silently ignore, or openly repudiate, the simplest canons of logic,
      including the laws of non‐contradiction, and ... resent with the
      utmost vehemence every application of the rule of consistency to
      their hypotheses and theories ... and they regard an examination (of
      them) ... in the light of these laws as an impertinent intrusion of
      ‘_à priori_ principles and methods’ into the domains of empirical
      science. Persons of this cast of mind find no difficulty in holding
      that atoms are absolutely inert, and at the same time asserting that
      these atoms are perfectly elastic; or in maintaining that the
      physical universe, in its last analysis, resolves itself into ‘dead’
      matter and motion, and yet denying that all physical energy is in
      reality kinetic; or in proclaiming that all phenomenal differences
      in the objective world are ultimately due to the various motions of
      absolutely simple material units, and, nevertheless, repudiating the
      proposition that these units are equal.” (p. xix.) The blindness of
      eminent Physicists to some of the most obvious consequences of their
      own theories is marvellous. “When Prof. Tait, in conjunction with
      Prof. Stewart, announces that ‘matter is simply passive’ (_The
      Unseen Universe_, sec. 104), and then, in connection with Sir
      William Thomson, declares that ‘matter has an innate power of
      resisting external influences’ (_Treat. on Nat. Phil._, Vol. I. sec.
      216), it is hardly impertinent to inquire how these statements are
      to be reconciled. When Prof. Du Bois Reymond ... insists upon the
      necessity of reducing all the processes of nature to motions of a
      substantial, indifferent substratum, _wholly destitute of quality_
      (_Ueber die Grenzen des Naturerkennens_, p. 5), having declared
      shortly before in the same lecture that ‘resolution of all changes
      in the material world into motions of atoms _caused by their
      constant central forces_ would be the completion of natural
      science,’ we are in a perplexity from which we have the right to be
      relieved.” (Pref. xliii.)

  799 Stallo, _loc. cit._, p. x.

  800 _Silliman’s Journal_, vol. viii. pp. 364 _et seq._

  801 See Clerk Maxwell’s _Treatise on Electricity_, and compare with
      Cauchy’s _Mémoire sur la Dispersion de la Lumière_.

  802 Stallo, _loc. cit._, p. x.

  803 _Nature_, vol. xxvii. p. 304.

  804 _Op. cit._, p. xxiv.

  805 “_Somewhat_ different!” exclaims Stallo. “The real import of this
      ‘somewhat’ is, that the medium in question _is not, in any
      intelligible sense, material at all_, having none of the properties
      of matter.” All the properties of matter depend upon differences and
      changes, and the “hypothetical” Ether here defined is not only
      destitute of differences, but incapable of difference and change—in
      the physical sense let us add. This proves that if Ether is
      “matter,” it is so only as something visible, tangible and existing,
      for _spiritual_ senses alone; that it is a Being indeed—but not of
      our plane—Pater Æther, or Âkâsha.

  806 _Veræ causæ_ for Physical Science are mâyâvic or illusionary causes
      for the Occultist, and _vice versâ_.

  807 Very much “differentiated,” on the contrary, since the day it left
      its _laya_ condition.

  808 _Op. cit._, pp. xxiv‐xxvi.

  809 _Sept Leçons de Physique Générale_, p. 38, _et seq._, Ed. Moigno.

  810 Defin. 8, B. I. Prop. 69, “Scholium.”

  811 See _Modern Materialism_, by the Rev. W. F. Wilkinson.

  812 “Attraction,” Le Couturier, a Materialist, writes, “has now become
      for the public that which it was for Newton himself—a simple word,
      an Idea” (_Panorama des Mondes_), since its cause is unknown.
      Herschell virtually says the same, when remarking, that whenever
      studying the motion of the heavenly bodies, and the phenomena of
      attraction, he feels penetrated at every moment with the idea of
      “the existence of causes that act for us under a veil, disguising
      their direct action.” (_Musée des Sciences_, August, 1856.)

  813 If we are taken to task for believing in operating Gods and Spirits
      while rejecting a personal God, we answer to the Theists and
      Monotheists: Admit that your Jehovah is _one of the Elohim_, and we
      are ready to recognize him. Make of him, as you do, the Infinite,
      the ONE and the Eternal God, and we will never accept him in this
      character. Of tribal Gods there were many; the One Universal Deity
      is a principle, an abstract Root‐Idea, which has nought to do with
      the unclean work of finite Form. We do not worship the Gods, we only
      honour Them, as beings superior to ourselves. In this we obey the
      Mosaic injunction, while Christians disobey their
      _Bible_—missionaries foremost of all. “Thou shalt not revile the
      Gods,” says one of them—Jehovah—in _Exodus_, xxii. 28; but at the
      same time in verse 20 it is commanded: “He that sacrificeth to any
      God, save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed.” Now in
      the original texts it is not “God” but Elohim—and we challenge
      contradiction—and Jehovah is one of the Elohim, as proved by his own
      words in _Genesis_, iii. 22, when “the Lord God said: Behold the Man
      is become as one of us.” Hence both those who worship and sacrifice
      to the Elohim, the Angels, and to Jehovah, and those who revile the
      Gods of their fellowmen, are far greater transgressors than the
      Occultists or than any Theosophist. Meanwhile many of the latter
      prefer believing in some one “Lord” or other, and are quite welcome
      to do as they like.

  814 To liken the “immateriate species to wooden iron,” and to laugh at
      Spiller for referring to them as “incorporeal matter” does not solve
      the mystery. (See _Concepts of Modern Physics_, p. 165 _et infra_.)

  815 See _Vossius_, Vol. II. p. 528.

  816 _De Carlo_, I. 9.

  817 _De Motibus Planetarum Harmonicis_, p. 248.

  818 _World‐Life_, Prof. Winchell, LL.D., pp. 49 and 50.

  819 _Panorama des Mondes_, pp. 47 and 53.

  820 Newton, _Optics_, III. Query 28, 1704; quoted in _World‐Life_, p.
      50.

  821 _Ibid._

  822 When read in a fair and unprejudiced spirit, Sir Isaac Newton’s
      works are an ever ready witness to show how he must have hesitated
      between gravitation and attraction, impulse, and some other _unknown
      cause_, to explain the regular course of the planetary motion. But
      see his _Treatise on Colour_ (Vol. III. Question 31). We are told by
      Herschell that Newton left with his successors the duty of drawing
      all the scientific conclusions from his discovery. How Modern
      Science has abused the privilege of building its newest theories
      upon the law of gravitation, may be realized when one remembers how
      profoundly religious was that great man.

  823 The materialistic notion that because, in Physics, real or sensible
      motion is impossible in pure space or vacuum, therefore, the eternal
      Motion of and in Cosmos—regarded as infinite Space—is a _fiction_,
      only shows once more that such expressions of Eastern metaphysics as
      “pure Space,” “pure Being,” the “Absolute” etc., have never been
      understood in the West.

  824 From Winchell’s _World‐Life_, p. 379.

  825 _Correl. Phys. Forces_, p. 173.

  826 See _Revue Germanique_ of the 31st Dec. 1860, art., “Lettres et
      Conversations d’Alexandre Humboldt.”

  827 Prof. Winchell.

  828 _World‐Life_, p. 553.

  829 But see _Astronomie du Moyen Age_, by Delambre.

  830 See _Isis Unveiled_, I. 270, 271.

  831 _World‐Life_, 554.

  832 Godefroy, _Cosmogonie de la Révélation_.

  833 The terms “high” and “low” being only relative to the position of
      the observer in Space, any use of those terms tending to convey the
      impression that they stand for abstract realities, is necessarily
      fallacious.

  834 Jacob Ennis, _The Origin of the Stars_.

  835 P. 99, note.

  836 If such is the case, how does Science explain the comparatively
      small size of the planets nearest the Sun? The theory of meteoric
      aggregation is only a step farther from truth than the nebular
      conception, and has not even the quality of the latter—its
      metaphysical element.

  837 Laplace, _Système du Monde_, p. 414, ed. 1824.

  838 Faye, _Comptes Rendus_, t. xc. pp. 640‐2.

  839 Wolf.

  840 _Panorama des Mondes_, Le Couturier.

  841 _World‐Life_, Winchell, p. 140.

  842 Sir William Thomson’s lecture on “The latent dynamical theory
      regarding the probable origin, total amount of heat, and duration of
      the Sun,” 1887.

  843 Thomson and Tait, _Natural Philosophy_. And even on these figures
      Bischof disagrees with Thomson, and calculates that 350,000,000
      years would be required for the Earth to cool from a temperature of
      20,000° to 200° centigrade. This is, also, the opinion of Helmholtz.

  844 Coulomb’s Law.

  845 _Musée des Sciences_, 15 August, 1857.

  846 _Panorama des Mondes_, p. 55.

  847 _Revue des Deux Mondes_, July 15, 1860.

  848 _Cosmographie._

  849 _Soirées._

  850 _Discours_, 165.

  851 p. 28.

  852 _Des Esprits_, III. 155, Deuxième Mémoire.

  853 Laing’s _Modern Science and Modern Thought_.

  854 _Ibid._, p. 17.

  855 _Heaven and Earth._

  856 Winchell, _World‐Life_, p. 196.

  857 _L’Univers expliqué par la Révélation_, and _Cosmogonie de la
      Révélation_. But see De Mirville’s _Deuxième Mémoire_. The author, a
      terrible enemy of Occultism, was yet one who wrote great truths.

  858 See _Kabbala Denudata_, II. 67.

  859 “Sur la Distinction des Forces,” published in the _Mémoires de
      l’Académie des Sciences de Montpellier_, Vol. II. fasc. i, 1854.

  860 P. 123.

  861 _Der Weltæther als Kosmische Kraft_, p. 4.

  862 See _Popular Science Review_, Vol. V. pp. 329‐34.

  863 See _Correlation of Physical Forces_, p. 110.

  864 See Buckwell’s _Electric Science_.

  865 Schelling, _Ideen_, etc., p. 18.

  866 _Op. cit._, p. 161.

  867 _Princ._, Def. iii.

  868 _Philosophical Magazine_, Vol. II. p. 252.

  869 _Concepts of Modern Physics_, xxxi., Introductory to the 2nd
      Edition.

  870 _Loc. cit._

  871 J. P. Cooke, _The New Chemistry_, p. 13.

  872 “It imports that equal volumes of all substances, when in the
      gaseous state, and under like conditions of pressure and
      temperature, contain the same number of molecules—whence it follows
      that the weights of the molecules are proportional to the specific
      gravities of the gases; that therefore, these being different, the
      weights of the molecule are different also; and inasmuch as the
      molecules of certain elementary substances are monatomic (consist of
      but one atom each) while the molecules of various other substances
      contain the same number of atoms, that the ultimate atoms of such
      substances are of different weights.” (_Concepts of Modern Physics_,
      p. 34.) As shown further on in the same volume, this cardinal
      principle of modern theoretical chemistry is in utter and
      irreconcilable conflict with the first proposition of the atomo‐
      mechanical theory—namely, the absolute equality of the primordial
      units of mass.

  873 Wundt, _Die Theorie der Materie_, p. 381.

  874 Nazesmann, _Thermochemie_, p. 150.

  875 Krœnig, Clausius, Maxwell, etc., _Philosophical Magazine_, Vol. XIX.
      p. 18.

  876 _Philosophical Magazine_, Vol. XIV. p. 321.

  877 Referring to the “Aura,” one of the Masters says in the _Occult
      World_: “How could you make yourself understood by, command in fact,
      those semi‐intelligent Forces, whose means of communication with us
      are not through spoken words, but through sounds and colours in
      correlation between the vibrations of the two.” It is this
      “correlation” that is unknown to Modern Science, although it has
      been many times explained by the Alchemists.

  878 The Substance of the Occultist, however, is to the most refined
      Substance of the Physicist, what Radiant Matter is to the leather of
      the Chemist’s boots.

  879 The names of the Seven Rays—which are, Sushumnâ, Harikesha,
      Vishvakarman, Vishvatryarchâs, Sannaddha, Sarvâvasu and Svarâj—are
      all mystical, and each has its distinct application in a distinct
      state of consciousness, for Occult purposes. The Sushumnâ, which, as
      said in the Nirukta (11, 6), is only to light up the Moon, is the
      Ray nevertheless cherished by the initiated Yogîs. The totality of
      the Seven Rays spread through the Solar System constitutes, so to
      say, the physical Upâdhi (Basis) of the Ether of Science; in which
      Upâdhi, light, heat, electricity, etc., the Forces of orthodox
      Science, correlate to produce their terrestrial effects. As psychic
      and spiritual effects, they emanate from, and have their origin in,
      the supra‐solar Upâdhi, in the Æther of the Occultist—or Âkâsha.

  880 Leslie’s _Fluid Theory of Light and Heat_.

  881 Buckle’s _History of Civilization_, Vol. III. p. 384.

  882 On the plane of manifestation and illusionary matter it may be so;
      not that it is nothing more, for it is vastly more.

  883 Neutral, or Laya.

  884 _Scientific Letters_, Professor Butlerof.

  885 _Ibid._

  886 _Ibid._

  887 _Ibid._

  888 Called the “drinker of waters,” solar heat causing water to
      evaporate.

  889 I. ii. (Wilson, I. 38.)

  890 Its founder, Râmânujâchârya, was born A.D. 1017.

  891 The Gandharva of the _Veda_ is the deity who knows and reveals the
      secrets of heaven and divine truths to mortals. Cosmically, the
      Gandharvas are the aggregate Powers of the Solar Fire, and
      constitute its Forces; psychically, the Intelligence residing in the
      Sushumnâ, the Solar Ray, the highest of the Seven Rays; mystically,
      the Occult Force in the Soma, the Moon, or lunar plant, and the
      drink made of it; physically, the phenomenal, and spiritually, the
      noumenal, causes of Sound and the “Voice of Nature.” Hence, they are
      called the 6,333 heavenly singers, and musicians of Indra’s Loka,
      who personify, even in number, the various and manifold sounds in
      Nature, both above and below. In the later allegories they are said
      to have mystic power over women, and to be fond of them. The
      Esoteric meaning is plain. They are one of the forms, if not the
      prototypes, of Enoch’s Angels, the Sons of God, who saw that the
      daughters of men were fair (_Gen._, vi.), who married them, and
      taught the daughters of Earth the secrets of Heaven.

  892 Pp. 329‐334.

  893 Not only “through space,” but filling every point of our Solar
      System, for it is the physical residue, so to say, of Ether, its
      “lining” (envelope) on our plane; Ether having to serve other cosmic
      and terrestrial purposes besides being the “agent” for transmitting
      light. It is the Astral Fluid or Light of the Kabalists, and the
      Seven Rays of Sun‐Vishnu.

  894 What need, then, of etheric waves for the transmission of light,
      heat, etc., if _this_ substance can pass through vacuum.

  895 And how can it be otherwise? Gross ponderable matter is the body,
      the shell, of Matter or Substance, the female passive principle; and
      this Fohatic Force is the second principle, Prâna—the male and the
      active. On our globe this Substance is the second principle of the
      septenary Element—Earth; in the atmosphere, it is that of Air, which
      is the cosmic gross body; in the Sun it becomes the Solar Body and
      that of the Seven Rays; in Sidereal Space it corresponds with
      another principle, and so on. The whole is a homogeneous Unity
      alone, the parts are all differentiations.

  896 Or the reverberation, and for Sound repercussion, _on our plane_ of
      that which is a perpetual motion of that Substance on higher planes.
      Our world and senses are ceaselessly victims of Mâyâ.

  897 An honest admission, this.

  898 Yet it is not Ether, but only one of the principles of Ether, the
      latter being itself one of the principles of Âkâsha.

  899 And so does Prâna (Jîva) pervade the whole living body of man; but
      alone, without having an atom to act upon, it would be
      quiescent—dead; _i.e._, would be in Laya, or, as Mr. Crookes has it,
      “locked in Protyle.” It is the action of Fohat upon a compound or
      even upon a simple, body that produces life. When a body dies, it
      passes into the same polarity as its male energy, and repels
      therefore the active agent, which, losing hold of the whole, fastens
      on the parts or molecules, this action being called chemical.
      Vishnu, the Preserver, transforms himself into Rudra‐Shiva, the
      Destroyer—a correlation seemingly unknown to Science.

  900 Verily, unless the Occult terms of the Kabalists are adopted!

  901 “Unchangeable” only during manvantaric periods, after which it
      merges once more into Mûlaprakriti; “invisible” for ever, in its own
      essence, but seen in its reflected coruscations, called the Astral
      Light by the modern Kabalists. Yet, conscious and grand Beings,
      clothed in that same Essence, move in it.

  902 One has to add ponderable, to distinguish it from that Ether which
      is Matter still, though a substratum.

  903 The Occult Sciences reverse the statement, and say that it is the
      Sun, and all the Suns that are from it, which emanate at the
      manvantaric dawn from the Central Sun.

  904 Here, we decidedly beg to differ from the learned gentleman. Let us
      remember that this Ether—whether Âkâsha, or its lower principle,
      Ether, is meant by the term—is septenary. Âkâsha is Aditi in the
      allegory, and the mother of Mârttânda, the Sun, the Devamâtri,
      Mother of the Gods. In the Solar System, the Sun is her Buddhi and
      Vâhana, the Vehicle, hence the sixth principle; in Kosmos all the
      Suns are the Kâma Rûpa of Âkâsha and so is ours. It is only when
      regarded as an individual Entity in his own Kingdom, that Sûrya, the
      Sun, is the seventh principle of the great body of Matter.

  905 To be more correct, let us rather call it Agnosticism. Brutal but
      frank Materialism is more honest than Janus‐faced Agnosticism in our
      days. Western Monism, so‐called, is the Pecksniff of modern
      Philosophy, turning a pharisaical face to Psychology and Idealism,
      and its natural face of a Roman Augur, swelling his cheek with his
      tongue, to Materialism. Such Monists are worse than Materialists;
      because, while looking at the Universe and at psycho‐spiritual man
      from the same negative stand‐point, the latter put their case far
      less plausibly than do sceptics of Mr. Tyndall’s or even of Mr.
      Huxley’s stamp. Herbert Spencer, Bain and Lewes are more dangerous
      to universal truths than is Büchner.

  906 _Geology_, by Professor A. Winchell.

  907 See _Five Years of Theosophy_, pp. 245‐262—Arts. “Do the Adepts deny
      the Nebular Theory?” and “Is the Sun merely a Cooling Mass?”—for the
      true Occult teaching.

  908 _Philosophie Naturelle_, art. 142.

  909 _Astronomie_, p. 342.

  910 Commentary on Stanza IV, _ante_, pp. 126‐7.

  911 _Popular Science Review_, Vol. IV. p. 148.

  912 And the _central mass_, too, as will be found, or rather the centre
      of the reflection.

  913 This “matter” is just like the reflection in a mirror of the flame
      from a “photogenic” lamp‐wick.

  914 See _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 258, for an answer to this
      speculation of Herschell.

  915 _Ibid._, p. 156.

  916 Paracelsus for one, who called it Liquor Vitæ, and Archæus.

  917 _Alchemical_ “composition,” rather.

  918 “This vital force ... radiates around man like a luminous sphere,”
      says Paracelsus in _Paragranum_.

  919 _Popular Science Review_, Vol. X. pp. 380‐3.

  920 _De Generatione Hominis._

  921 _De Viribus Membrorum_. See _Life of Paracelsus_, by Franz Hartmann,
      M.D., F.T.S.

  922 P. 384.

  923 Ch. xiii; Telang’s translation, p. 292.

  924 _Ibid._, ch. xxxvi; p. 385.

  925 The division of the physical senses into five, comes to us from a
      great antiquity. But while adopting the number, no modern
      Philosopher has asked himself how these senses could exist, _i.e._,
      be perceived and used in a self‐conscious way, unless there were the
      _sixth_ sense, mental perception, to register and record them;
      and—this for the Metaphysicians and Occultists—the _seventh_ to
      preserve the spiritual fruitage and remembrance thereof, as in a
      Book of Life which belongs to Karma. The Ancients divided the senses
      into five, simply because their teachers, the Initiates, stopped at
      _hearing_, as being that sense which developed on the physical
      plane, or rather, got dwarfed and limited to this plane, only at the
      beginning of the Fifth Race. The Fourth Race already had begun to
      lose the _spiritual_ condition, so preëminently developed in the
      Third Race.

  926 _Ibid._, ch. x: pp. 277, 278.

  927 _Mundakopanishad_, p. 298.

  928 _Bhagavadgîtâ_, ch. vii; _ibid._, pp. 73, 74.

  929 Ahamkâra, I suppose, that “Egoship,” or “Ahamship,” which leads to
      every error.

  930 The Elements are the five Tanmâtras of earth, water, fire, air and
      ether, the producers of the grosser elements.

  931 _Anugîtâ_, ch. xx; _ibid._, p. 313.

  932 The conductor in the sense of Upâdhi—a material or physical basis;
      but, as the second principle of the universal Soul and Vital Force
      in Nature, it is intelligently guided by the fifth principle
      thereof.

  933 And too great an exuberance of it in the nervous system leads as
      often to disease and death. If it were the animal system which
      generated it, such would not be the case, surely. Hence, the latter
      emergency shows its independence of the system, and its connection
      with the Sun‐Force, as Metcalfe and Hunt explain.

  934 P. 387.

  935 _Paragranum; Life of Paracelsus_, by Dr. F. Hartmann.

  936 In a recent work on Symbolism in Buddhism and Christianity—in
      Buddhism and Roman Catholicism, rather, many later rituals and
      dogmas in Northern Buddhism, in its popular exoteric form, being
      identical with those of the Latin Church—some curious facts are to
      be found. The author of this volume, with more pretensions than
      erudition, has indiscriminately crammed into his work ancient and
      modern Buddhist teachings, and has sorely confused Lamaïsm with
      Buddhism. On page 404 of this volume, called _Buddhism in
      Christendom, or Jesus the Essene_, our _pseudo_‐Orientalist devotes
      himself to criticizing the “Seven Principles” of the “Esoteric
      Buddhists,” and attempts to ridicule them. On page 405, the closing
      page, he speaks enthusiastically of the Vidyâdharas, “the seven
      great legions of dead men made wise.” Now, these Vidyâdharas, whom
      some Orientalists call “demi‐gods,” are in fact, exoterically, a
      kind of Siddhas, “affluent in devotion,” and, esoterically, they are
      identical with the seven classes of Pitris, one class of which endow
      man in the Third Race with Self‐consciousness, by incarnating in the
      human shells. The “Hymn to the Sun,” at the end of his queer volume
      of mosaic, which endows Buddhism with a Personal God (!!), is an
      unfortunate thrust at the very proofs so elaborately collected by
      the unlucky author.

      Theosophists are fully aware that Mr. Rhys Davids has likewise
      expressed his opinion on their beliefs. He said that the theories
      propounded by the author of _Esoteric Buddhism_ “were not Buddhism,
      and were not esoteric.” The remark is the result of (_a_) the
      unfortunate mistake of writing “Buddhism” instead of “Budhaïsm,” or
      “Budhism,” _i.e._, of connecting the system with Gautama’s religion
      instead of with the Secret Wisdom taught by Krishna, Shankarâchârya,
      and many others, as much as by Buddha; and (_b_) of the
      impossibility of Mr. Rhys Davids knowing anything of the true
      Esoteric Teachings. Nevertheless as he is the greatest Pâli and
      Buddhist scholar of the day, whatever he may say is entitled to
      respectful hearing. But when one who knows no more of exoteric
      Buddhism on Scientific and Materialistic lines, than he knows of
      Esoteric Philosophy, defames those whom he honours with his spite,
      and assumes with the Theosophists the airs of a profound scholar,
      one can only smile or—heartily laugh at him.

  937 _The Human Species_, pp. 10, 11.

  938 _The Theosophist._

  939 Not only does it not deny the occurrence, though attributing it to a
      wrong cause, as always, each theory contradicting every other (see
      the theories of Secchi, of Faye, and of Young), the spots depending
      on the superficial accumulation of vapours cooler than the
      photosphere (?), etc., etc., but we have men of Science who
      _astrologize_ upon the spots. Professor Jevons attributes all the
      great periodical commercial crises to the influence of the sun‐spots
      every eleventh cyclic year. (See his _Investigations into Currency
      and Finance_.) This is worthy of praise and encouragement surely.

  940 _Le Soleil_, II. 184.

  941 _World‐Life_, p. 48.

  942 Unfortunately, as these pages are being written, the “archebiosis of
      terrestrial existence” has turned, under a somewhat stricter
      chemical analysis, into a simple precipitate of sulphate of
      lime—hence, from the scientific standpoint, not even an organic
      substance! _Sic transit gloria mundi!_

  943 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson, I. 16, Fitzedward Hall’s rendering.

  944 _Popular Astronomy_, p. 444.

  945 In his _World‐Life_ (page 48), in the appended footnotes, Professor
      Winchell says, “It is generally admitted that at excessively high
      temperatures matter exists in a state of dissociation—that is, no
      chemical combination can exist”; and, to prove the unity of Matter,
      would appeal to the spectrum, which in every case of homogeneity
      will show a _bright_ line, whereas in the case of several molecular
      arrangements existing—in the nebulæ say, or a star—“the spectrum
      should consist of two or three bright lines”! This would be no proof
      either way to the Physicist‐Occultist, who maintains that beyond a
      certain limit of visible Matter, no spectrum, no telescope and no
      microscope are of any use. The unity of Matter, of that which is
      real cosmic Matter to the Alchemist, or “Adam’s Earth” as the
      Kabalists call it, can hardly be proved or disproved, by either the
      French _savant_ Dumas, who suggests “the composite nature” of the
      “elements” on “certain relations of atomic weights,” or even by Mr.
      Crookes’ “radiant matter,” though his experiments may seem “to be
      best understood on the hypothesis of the homogeneity of the elements
      of matter, and the continuity of the states of matter.” For all this
      does not go beyond _material_ Matter, so to say, even in what is
      shown by the spectrum, that modern “eye of Shiva” of physical
      experiments. It is only of this Matter, that H. St. Claire Deville
      could say that “when bodies, deemed to be simple, combine with one
      another, they vanish, they are individually annihilated”; simply
      because he could not follow those bodies in their further
      transformation in the world of spiritual cosmic Matter. Verily
      Modern Science will never be able to dig deep enough into the
      cosmological formations to find the Roots of the World‐Stuff or
      Matter, unless she works on the same lines of thought as the
      mediæval Alchemist did.

  946 _Concepts of Modern Physics_, p. vi.

  947 Book I. ch. II. p. 25. _Vishnu Purâna_, Fitzedward Hall’s
      Translation.

  948 _Vide_ in preceding Section VII., “Life, Force, or Gravity,”
      quotation from _Anugitâ_.

  949 The word “supernatural” implies _above or outside_ nature. Nature
      and Space are one. Now Space for the metaphysician exists outside
      any act of sensation, and is a purely subjective representation,
      notwithstanding the contention of Materialism, which would connect
      it forcibly with one or another datum of sensation. For our senses,
      it is fairly subjective when independent of anything within it. How
      then can any phenomenon, or anything else, step outside, or be
      performed beyond, that which has no limits? But when spatial
      extension becomes simply conceptual, and is thought of in an idea
      connected with certain actions, as by the Materialists and the
      Physicists, then again they have hardly a right to define and claim
      that which can, or cannot, be produced by Forces generated within
      even limited spaces, as they have not even an approximate idea of
      what those Forces are.

  950 It is not correct, when speaking of Idealism, to show it based upon
      “the old ontological assumptions that things or entities exist
      independently of each other, and otherwise than as terms of
      relations” (Stallo). At any rate, it is incorrect to say so of
      Idealism in Eastern Philosophy and _its_ cognition, for it is just
      the reverse.

  951 Independent, in a certain sense, but not _disconnected_ with it.

  952 “By Fohat, more likely,” would be an Occultist’s reply.

  953 The reason for such psychic capacities is given farther on.

  954 The above was written in 1886, at a time when hopes of success for
      the “Keely Motor” were at their highest. Every word then said by the
      writer proved true, and now only a few remarks are added with regard
      to the failure of Mr. Keely’s expectations, so far, a failure now
      admitted by the discoverer himself. Though, however, the word
      _failure_ is here used, the reader should understand it in a
      relative sense, for, as Mrs. Bloomfield‐Moore explains: “What Mr.
      Keely does admit is that, baffled in applying vibratory force to
      mechanics, upon his first and second lines of experimental research,
      he was obliged either to confess a _commercial_ failure, or to try a
      third departure from his base or principle, seeking success through
      another channel.” And this “channel” is on the _physical_ plane.

  955 We learn that these remarks are not applicable to Mr. Keely’s latest
      discovery; time alone can show the exact limit of his achievements.

  956 _Theosophical Siftings_, No. 9.

  957 This is also the division made by the Occultists, under other names.

  958 Quite so, since there is the _seventh_ beyond, which begins the same
      enumeration from the first to the last, on another and higher plane.

  959 From Mrs. Bloomfield‐Moore’s paper, _The New Philosophy_.

  960 In answer to a friend, that eminent Geologist writes: “I can only
      say, in reply to your letter, that it is at present, and perhaps
      always will be, impossible to reduce, even approximately, geological
      time into years, or even into millenniums.” (Signed, William
      Pengelly, F.R.S.)

  961 Plato, in speaking of the irrational, turbulent Elements, “composed
      of fire, air, water, and earth,” means Elementary Dæmons. (See
      _Timæus_.)

  962 Plato in the _Timæus_ uses the word “secretions” of turbulent
      Elements.

  963 Valentinus’ _Esoteric Treatise on the Doctrine of Gilgul_.

  964 See Mackenzie’s _Royal Masonic Cyclopædia_.

  965 See _Isis Unveiled_, II. 152.

  966 See Mackenzie, _ibid._, _sub voc._

  967 _Isis Unveiled_, I. 317.

  968 _Viveka Chudamani_, translated by Mohini M. Chatterji, as “The Crest
      Jewel of Wisdom.” See _Theosophist_, July and August, 1886.

  969 The Tanmâtras are literally the type or rudiment of an element
      devoid of qualities; but esoterically, they are the primeval Noumena
      of that which becomes in the progress of evolution, a Cosmic
      Element, in the sense given to the term in Antiquity, not in that of
      Physics. They are the Logoi, the seven emanations or rays of the
      Logos.

  970 Ch. xxxvi; Telang’s translation, pp. 387‐8.

  971 See _Theosophist_, August, 1886.

  972 The now universal error of attributing to the Ancients the knowledge
      of only seven planets, simply because they mentioned no others, is
      based on the same general ignorance of their Occult doctrines. The
      question is not whether they were, or were not, aware of the
      existence of the later discovered planets; but whether the reverence
      paid by them to the four exoteric and three secret Great Gods—the
      Star‐Angels, had not some special reason. The writer ventures to say
      there was such a reason, and it is this. Had they known of as many
      planets as we do now—and this question can hardly be decided at
      present, either way—they would still have only connected the seven
      with their religious worship, because these seven are directly and
      specially connected with our Earth, or, using esoteric phraseology,
      with our septenary Ring of Spheres.

  973 _John_, x. 30.

  974 _Ibid._, xx. 17.

  975 _Ibid._, xiv. 28.

  976 _Matt._, v. 16.

  977 _Ibid._, xiii. 43.

  978 1 _Cor._, iii. 16.

  979 _Theosophist_, Aug., 1886.

  980 These are planets accepted for purposes of Judicial Astrology only.
      The astro‐theogonical division differed from the above. The Sun,
      being a central _star_ and not a planet, stands, with _its_ seven
      planets, in more occult and mysterious relations to _our_ Globe than
      is generally known. The Sun was, therefore, considered the great
      Father of all the Seven “Fathers,” and this accounts for the
      variations found between the Seven and Eight Great Gods of Chaldean
      and other countries. Neither the Earth, nor the Moon, its satellite,
      nor yet the stars, for another reason, were anything more than
      _substitutes used for Esoteric purposes_. Yet, even with the
      exclusion of the Sun and the Moon from the calculation, the Ancients
      seem to have known of _seven_ planets. How many more are known to
      us, so far, if we throw out the Earth and Moon? _Seven_, and no
      more: Seven primary or principal planets, the rest _planetoids_
      rather than planets.

  981 When one remembers that under the powerful telescope of Sir William
      Herschell, that eminent Astronomer—gauging merely that portion of
      heaven in the equatorial plane, the approximate centre of which is
      occupied by our Earth—saw in one quarter of an hour, 16,000 stars
      pass; and applying this calculation to the totality of the “Milky
      Way” he found in it no less than eighteen millions of Suns, one
      wonders no longer that Laplace, in conversation with Napoleon I,
      should have called God a _hypothesis_—perfectly useless to speculate
      upon for _exact_ Physical Science, at any rate. Occult Metaphysics
      and transcendental Philosophy will alone be able to lift the
      smallest corner of the impenetrable veil in this direction.

  982 _Numb._, xi. 16.

  983 _Deut._, xxxii. 8, 9.

  984 _Ibid._, 9.

  985 C. W. King in _The Gnostics and their Remains_ (p. 344), identifies
      it with “that _summum bonum_ of Oriental aspiration, the Buddhist
      Nirvâna, ‘perfect repose, the Epicurean _Indolentia_’;” a view that
      looks flippant enough in its expression, though not quite untrue.

  986 See Origen’s Copy of the Chart, or Diagramma of the Ophites.

  987 See also Section XIV.

  988 Abraham and Saturn are identical in astro‐symbology, and he is the
      forefather of the Jehovistic Jews.

  989 _John_, viii. 37, 38, 41, 44.

  990 _Matthew_, v. 22.

  991 The Elemental Vortices inaugurated by the “Mind” have not been
      improved by their modern transformation.

  992 I have often been taken to task for using expressions in _Isis_
      denoting belief in a _personal_ and anthropomorphic God. This is
      _not_ my idea. Kabalistically speaking, the “Architect” is the
      generic name for the Sephiroth, the Builders of the Universe, as the
      “Universal Mind” represents the collectivity of the Dhyân Chohanic
      Minds.

  993 _Timæus._

  994 I. 258.

  995 _Researches on Light in its Chemical Relations_.

  996 _Modern Chemistry._

  997 _Isis Unveiled_, I. 137.

  998 _Faraday Lectures_, 1881.

  999 Thus, what the writer of the present work said ten years ago in
      _Isis Unveiled_ was, it seems, prophetic. These are the words: “Many
      of these mystics, by following what they were taught by some
      treatises, secretly preserved from one generation to another,
      achieved discoveries which would not be despised even in our modern
      days of exact sciences. Roger Bacon, the friar, was laughed at as a
      quack, and is now generally numbered among ‘pretenders’ to magic
      art; but his discoveries were nevertheless accepted, and are now
      used by those who ridicule him the most. Roger Bacon belonged by
      right, if not by fact, to that Brotherhood which includes all those
      who study the Occult Sciences. Living in the thirteenth century,
      almost a contemporary, therefore, of Albertus Magnus and Thomas
      Aquinas, his discoveries—such as gunpowder and optical glasses, and
      his mechanical achievements—were considered by everyone as so many
      miracles. He was accused of having made a compact with the Evil
      One.” (Vol. I, pp. 64, 65.)

 1000 Just so; “those forms of energy ... _which become evident_ ...” in
      the laboratory of the Chemist and Physicist; but _there are other
      forms of energy_ wedded to _other forms_ of matter, _which are
      supersensuous_, yet are known to the Adepts.

 1001 _Presidential Address_, p. 16.

 1002 It is just the existence of such worlds on other planes of
      consciousness that is asserted by the Occultist. The Secret Science
      teaches that the primitive race was boneless, and that there are
      worlds invisible to us, peopled as our own, besides the
      _populations_ of Dhyân Chohans.

 1003 _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 258 _et seq._

 1004 Says Mr. Crookes in the same address: “The first riddle which we
      encounter in chemistry is: ‘What are the elements?’ Of the attempts
      hitherto made to define or explain an element, none satisfy the
      demands of the human intellect. The text books tell us that an
      element is ‘a body which has not been decomposed;’ that it is ‘a
      something to which we can add, but from which we can take nothing,’
      or ‘a body which increases in weight with every chemical change.’
      Such definitions are doubly unsatisfactory: they are provisional,
      and may cease to‐morrow to be applicable in any given case. They
      take their stand, not on any attribute of the things to be defined,
      but on the limitations of human power: they are confessions of
      intellectual impotence.”

 1005 And the lecturer quotes Sir George Airy, who says (in _Faraday’s
      Life and Letters_, Vol. II., p. 354): “I can easily conceive that
      there are plenty of bodies about us not subject to this intermutual
      action, and therefore not subject to the law of gravitation.”

 1006 The Vedântic philosophy conceives of such; but then it is not
      physics, but metaphysics, called by Mr. Tyndall “poetry” and
      “fiction.”

 1007 In the form they are now, we conceive?

 1008 And to Kapila and Manu—especially and originally.

 1009 Here is a scientific corroboration of the eternal law of
      correspondences and analogy.

 1010 This method of illustrating the periodic law in the classification
      of elements is, in the words of Mr. Crookes, proposed by Professor
      Emerson Reynolds, of Dublin University, who ... “points out that in
      each period, the general properties of the elements vary from one to
      another, with approximate regularity until we reach the _seventh
      member_, which is in more or less striking contrast with the first
      element of the same period, as well as with the first of the next.
      Thus chlorine, the seventh member of Mendeleef’s third period,
      contrasts sharply with both sodium, the first member of the same
      series, and with potassium, the first member of the next series;
      whilst on the other hand, sodium and potassium are closely
      analogous. The six elements, whose atomic weights intervene between
      sodium and potassium, vary in properties, step by step, until
      chlorine, the contrast to sodium, is reached. But from chlorine to
      potassium, the analogue of sodium, there is a change in properties
      _per saltum_..... If we thus recognize a contrast in properties—more
      or less decided—between the first and the last members of each
      series, we can scarcely help admitting the existence of a point of
      mean variation within each system. In general the _fourth_ element
      of each series possesses the property we might expect a transition‐
      element to exhibit.... Thus for the purpose of graphic translation,
      Professor Reynolds considers that the fourth member of a
      period—silicon, for example—may be placed at the apex of a
      symmetrical curve, which shall represent for that particular period,
      the direction in which the properties of the series of elements vary
      with rising atomic weights.”

      Now, the writer humbly confesses complete ignorance of modern
      Chemistry and its mysteries. But she is pretty well acquainted with
      the Occult Doctrine with regard to _correspondences of types and
      antetypes_ in nature, and to perfect analogy as a fundamental law in
      Occultism. Hence she ventures on a remark which will strike every
      Occultist, however it may be derided by orthodox Science. This
      method of illustrating the periodic law in the behaviour of
      elements, whether or not still a hypothesis in Chemistry, _is a law
      in Occult Sciences_. Every well‐read Occultist knows that the
      _seventh_ and _fourth_ members—whether in a septenary chain of
      worlds, the septenary hierarchy of angels, or in the constitution of
      man, animal, plant, or mineral atom—that the _seventh_ and _fourth_
      members, we say, in the geometrically and mathematically uniform
      workings of the immutable laws of Nature, always play a distinct and
      specific part in the septenary system. From the stars twinkling high
      in heaven, to the sparks flying asunder from the rude fire built by
      the savage in his forest; from the hierarchies and the essential
      constitution of the Dhyân Chohans—organized for diviner
      apprehensions and a loftier range of perception than the greatest
      Western Psychologist ever dreamed of, down to Nature’s
      _classification_ of species among the humblest insects; finally from
      Worlds to Atoms, everything in the Universe, from great to small,
      proceeds in its spiritual and physical evolution, cyclically and
      septennially, showing its seventh and fourth number (the latter the
      turning point) behaving in the same way as is shown in that periodic
      law of Atoms. Nature never proceeds _per saltum_. Therefore, when
      Mr. Crookes remarks on this that he does not “wish to infer that the
      gaps in Mendeleef’s table, and in this graphic representation of it
      [the diagram showing the evolution of Atoms] necessarily mean that
      there are elements actually existing to fill up the gaps; these gaps
      may only mean that at the birth of the elements there was an easy
      potentiality of the formation of an element which would fit into the
      place”—an Occultist would respectfully remark to him that the latter
      hypothesis can only hold good, if the septenary arrangement of Atoms
      is not interfered with. This is _the one law_, and an infallible
      method that must always lead one who follows it to success.

 1011 A group of electricians has just protested against the new theory of
      Clausius, the famous professor of the University of Bonn. The
      character of the protest is shown in the signature, which has “Jules
      Bourdin, in the name of the group of Electricians, which had the
      honour of being introduced to Professor Clausius in 1881, and whose
      war‐cry (_cri de ralliement_) is _À bas l’Ether_”—down with Ether,
      even; they want Universal _Void_, you see!

 1012 _Smithsonian Contributions_, xxi., Art. 1. pp. 79‐97.

 1013 _System of Logic_, p. 229.

 1014 Beyond the zero‐line of action.

 1015 _Progymnasmata_, p. 795.

 1016 _De Stellâ Novâ in Pede Serpentarii_, p. 115.

 1017 _Hypothèses Cosmogoniques_, p. 2, C. Wolf, 1886.

 1018 See _Philosophical Transactions_, p. 269, _et seq._

 1019 Laplace conceived that the external and internal zones of the ring
      would rotate with the same angular velocity, which would be the case
      with a solid ring; but the principle of equal areas requires the
      inner zones to rotate more rapidly than the outer. (_World‐Life_, p.
      121.) Prof. Winchell points out a good many mistakes of Laplace; but
      as a geologist he is not infallible himself in his “astronomical
      speculations.”

 1020 _Five Years of Theosophy_, pp. 249‐251, Art. “Do the Adepts deny the
      Nebular Theory?”

 1021 Had Astronomers, in their present state of knowledge, merely held to
      the hypothesis of Laplace, which was simply the formation of the
      Planetary System, it might in time have resulted in something like
      an approximate truth. But the two parts of the general problem—that
      of the formation of the Universe, or the formation of the Suns and
      Stars from the Primitive Matter, and then the development of the
      Planets round their Sun—rest on quite different facts in Nature and
      are even so viewed by Science itself. They are at the opposite poles
      of Being.

 1022 Aristotle’s _Physica_, viii. 1.

 1023 _Hypothèses Cosmogoniques_, p. 3, Wolf.

 1024 Vol. I., p. 185, quoted by Wolf, p. 3. Wolf’s argument is here
      summarised.

 1025 Note vii. Summarized from Wolf, p. 6.

 1026 _Five Years of Theosophy_, pp. 241, 242, and 239.

 1027 But the spectra of these nebulæ have never yet been ascertained.
      When they _are_ found with bright lines, then only may they be
      cited.

 1028 _Hypothèses Cosmogoniques_, p. 3.

 1029 Mr. Crookes’ Protyle must not be regarded as the _primary_ stuff,
      out of which the Dhyân Chohans, in accordance with the immutable
      laws of Nature, wove our Solar System. This Protyle cannot even be
      the Prima Materia of Kant, which that great mind saw used up in the
      formation of the worlds, and thus existing no longer in a diffused
      state. Protyle is a _mediate_ phase in the progressive
      differentiation of Cosmic Substance from its normal undifferentiated
      state. It is, then, the aspect assumed by Matter in its middle
      passage into full objectivity.

 1030 See Stanza III, Commentary 9, (p. 109) about “Light,” or “_Cold_
      Flame,” where it is explained that the “Mother”—Chaos—is a cold
      Fire, a cool Radiance, colourless, formless, devoid of every
      quality. “_Motion as the One Eternal_ IS, _and contains the
      potentialities of every quality in the Manvantaric Worlds_,” it is
      said.

 1031 _Hypothèses Cosmogoniques_, pp. 4, 5.

 1032 _World‐Life_, p. 196.

 1033 _Westminster Review_, XX., July 27, 1868.

 1034 Vol. XIV. p. 252.

 1035 _Hypothèses Cosmogoniques._

 1036 Which “Light” we call Fohat.

 1037 This is a mistake, which implies a material agent, distinct from the
      influences which move it, _i.e._, blind matter and perhaps “God”
      again, whereas this One Life is the very God and Gods “Itself.”

 1038 The same error.

 1039 _Popular Science Review_, Vol. X.

 1040 “Is the Jîva a myth, as Science says, or is it not?” ask some
      Theosophists, wavering between materialistic and idealistic Science.
      The difficulty of really grasping Esoteric problems concerning the
      “ultimate state of Matter” is again the old crux of the _objective_
      and the _subjective_. What is Matter? Is the Matter of our present
      objective consciousness anything but our _sensations_? True, the
      sensations we receive come _from without_, but can we really—except
      in terms of phenomena—speak of the “gross matter” of this plane as
      an entity apart from and independent of us? To all such arguments
      Occultism answers: True, in _reality_ Matter is not independent of,
      or existent outside, our perceptions. Man is an _illusion_: granted.
      But the existence and actuality of other, still more illusive, but
      not less _actual_, entities than we are, is not a claim which is
      lessened, but rather strengthened, by this doctrine of Vedântic and
      even Kantian Idealism.

 1041 See _Musée des Sciences_, August, 1856.

 1042 Book II. of the _Commentary on the Book of Dzyan_.

 1043 Even the question of the plurality of worlds inhabited by sentient
      creatures is rejected, or is approached with the greatest caution!
      And yet see what the great astronomer, Camille Flammarion, says in
      his _Pluralité des Mondes_.

 1044 Nevertheless, it may be shown on the testimony of the _Bible_
      itself, and of such good Christian theologians as Cardinal Wiseman,
      that this plurality is taught in both the _Old_ and the _New
      Testaments_.

 1045 See _Plurality of Worlds_, Vol. II.

 1046 See on this _La Pluralité des Mondes Habités_, par C. Flammarion,
      wherein is given a list of the many men of Science who have written
      to prove the theory.

 1047 _World‐Life_, pp. 496‐498, _et seq._

 1048 _World‐Life._

 1049 _The Book of Enoch._ Trans. by Archbishop Laurence, Ch. LXXIX.

 1050 The Âtmâ, or Spirit, the Spiritual SELF, passing like a thread
      through the five Subtle Bodies, or Principles, Koshas, is called
      “Thread‐soul,” or Sûtrâtmâ in Vedântic Philosophy.

 1051 “The Septenary Principle,” _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 197.

 1052 _Pythagorean Triangle_, by the Rev. G. Oliver, p. 36.

 1053 See Kant’s _Critique de la Raison Pure_, Barui’s transl., II. 54.

 1054 Plutarch, _De Placitis Philosophorum_.

 1055 In the Greek and Latin Churches—which regard marriage as one of the
      sacraments—the officiating priest during the marriage ceremony
      represents the apex of the triangle; the bride, its left feminine
      side, and the bridegroom the right side, while the base line is
      symbolized by the row of witnesses, the bridesmaids and best men.
      But behind the priest there is the Holy of Holies, with its
      mysterious containments and symbolic meaning, inside of which no one
      but the consecrated priests should enter. In the early days of
      Christianity the marriage ceremony was a mystery and a true symbol.
      Now, however, even the Churches have lost the true meaning of this
      symbolism.

 1056 _New Aspects of Life and Religion_, by Henry Pratt, M.D., p. 7. Ed.
      1886.

 1057 _Ibid._, pp. 7, 8.

 1058 _Ibid._, p. 9.

 1059 _Pythagorean Triangle_, by the Rev. G. Oliver, pp. 18, 19.

 1060 P. 387.

 1061 P. 387.

 1062 In the World of Form, symbolism finding expression in the Pyramids,
      has in them both triangle and square, four co‐equal triangles or
      surfaces, four basic points, and the fifth—the apex.

 1063 Pp. 385, 386.

 1064 _Op. cit._ By Isaac Myer. P. 174.

 1065 P. 175.

 1066 P. 175.

 1067 “The lowest designation, or the Deity in Nature, the more general
      term Elohim, is translated God.” (P. 175.) Such recent works as the
      _Qabbalah_ of Mr. Isaac Myer, and of Mr. S. L. MacGregor Mathers,
      fully justify our attitude towards the Jehovistic Deity. It is not
      the transcendental, philosophical, and highly metaphysical
      abstraction of the original Kabalistic thought—Ain‐Suph‐Shekinah‐
      Adam‐Kadmon, and all that follows—that we oppose, but the
      crystallization of all these into the highly unphilosophical,
      repulsive, and anthropomorphic Jehovah, the androgynous and _finite_
      deity, for which eternity, omnipotence, and omniscience are claimed.
      We do not war against the _Ideal Reality_, but the hideous
      theological _Shadow_.

 1068 Let not the word “Psychology” cause the reader, by association of
      ideas, to carry his thought to modern “Psychologists,” so‐called,
      whose _Idealism_ is another name for uncompromising Materialism, and
      whose pretended Monism is no better than a mask to conceal the void
      of final annihilation—even of consciousness. Here _spiritual_
      Psychology is meant.

 1069 “Vishvânara is not merely the manifested objective world, but the
      one physical basis [the horizontal line of the triangle] from which
      the whole objective world starts into existence.” And this is the
      Cosmic Duad, the Androgynous Substance. Only beyond this is the true
      Protyle.

 1070 T. Subba Row. See _Theosophist_, Feb. 1887.

 1071 By W. Crookes, F.R.S., V.P.C.S., delivered at the Royal Institution,
      London, on Friday, February 18th, 1887.

 1072 How true it is will be fully demonstrated only on that day when Mr.
      Crookes’ discovery of radiant matter will have resulted in a further
      elucidation with regard to the true source of light, and will have
      revolutionized all the present speculations. Further familiarity
      with the northern streamers of the _aurora borealis_ may help the
      recognition of this truth.

 1073 _Genesis of the Elements_, p. 1.

 1074 _De Placit. Philos._

 1075 _The Path_, I. 10, p. 297.

 1076 P. 11.

 1077 Corresponding on the cosmic scale with the Spirit, Soul, Mind, Life,
      and the three Vehicles—the Astral, the Mâyâvic and the Physical
      Bodies (of mankind), whatever division is made.

 1078 _Ibid._ p. 16.

 1079 Vol. I, p. 429.

 1080 _Ibid._, p. 21.

 1081 “The Lord is a consuming _fire_.” “In him was _life_, and the life
      was the light of men.”

 1082 Which if separated _alchemically_ would yield the Spirit of Life,
      and its Elixir.

 1083 Foremost of all, the postulate that there is no such thing in Nature
      as _inorganic_ substances or bodies. Stones, minerals, rocks, and
      even chemical “atoms” are simply organic units in profound lethargy.
      Their coma has an end and their inertia becomes activity.

 1084 _Ibid._, p. 144.

 1085 The orthography of the name—as spelt by himself—is Leibniz. He was
      of Slavonian descent though born in Germany.

 1086 _Monadologie_, Introd.

 1087 “Leibnitz’s dynamism,” says Professor Lachelier, “would offer but
      little difficulty if, with him, the monad had remained a simple atom
      of _blind force_. But....” One perfectly understands the perplexity
      of Modern Materialism!

 1088 _The Path_, I. 10, p. 297.

 1089 Leibnitz was an _absolute_ Idealist in maintaining that “material
      atoms are contrary to reason.” (_Système Nouveau_, Erdmann, p. 126,
      col. 2.) For him Matter was a simple representation of the Monad,
      whether human or atomic. Monads, he thought (as do we), are
      everywhere. Thus the human soul is a Monad, and every cell in the
      human body has its Monad, as has every cell in animal, vegetable,
      and even in the so‐called _inorganic_ bodies. His Atoms are the
      molecules of modern Science, and his Monads those _simple atoms_
      that Materialistic Science takes on faith, though it will never
      succeed in _interviewing_ them—except in imagination. But Leibnitz
      is rather contradictory in his views about Monads. He speaks of his
      “Metaphysical Points” and “Formal Atoms,” at one time as
      _realities_, occupying space; at another as pure spiritual _ideas_;
      then he again endows them with objectivity and aggregates and
      positions in their co‐relations.

 1090 _Examen des Principes du P. Malebranche._

 1091 The Atoms of Leibnitz have, in truth, nothing but the name in common
      with the atoms of the Greek Materialists, or even the molecules of
      Modem Science. He calls them “Formal Atoms,” and compares them to
      the “Substantial Forms” of Aristotle. (See _Système Nouveau_, § 3.)

 1092 Letter to Father Desbosses, _Correspondence_, xviii.

 1093 _Monadologie_, § 60. Leibnitz, like Aristotle, calls the “created”
      or _emanated_ Monads (the Elementals issued from Cosmic Spirits or
      Gods)—Entelechies, Ἐντελέχειαι, and “incorporeal automata.”
      (_Monadologie_ § 18.)

 1094 These three “rough divisions” correspond to Spirit, Mind (or Soul),
      and Body, in the human constitution.

 1095 Brother C. H. A. Bjerregaard, in the lecture already mentioned,
      warns his audience not to regard the Sephiroth too much as
      _individualities_, but to avoid at the same time seeing in them
      _abstractions_. “We shall never arrive at the truth,” he says, “much
      less the power of associating with these celestials, until we return
      to the simplicity and fearlessness of the primitive ages, when men
      mixed freely with the gods, and the gods descended among men and
      guided them in truth and holiness.” (P. 296.) “There are several
      designations for ‘angels’ in the Bible, which clearly show that
      beings like the elementals of the Kabbala and the monads of
      Leibnitz, must be understood by that term rather than that which is
      commonly understood. They are called ‘morning stars,’ ‘flaming
      fires,’ ‘the mighty ones,’ and St. Paul sees them in his cosmogonic
      vision as ‘Principalities and Powers.’ Such names as these preclude
      the idea of personality, and we find ourselves compelled to think of
      them as impersonal existences ... as an _influence_, a spiritual
      substance, or _conscious_ force.” (Pp. 321, 322.)

 1096 _Buddhist Catechism_, by H. S. Olcott, President of the Theosophical
      Society, p. 51.

 1097 _Ibid._ 51, 52.

 1098 We refer those who would regard the statement as an impertinence or
      irreverence levelled at accepted Science, to Dr. James Hutchinson
      Stirling’s work _As regards Protoplasm_, which is a defence of a
      Vital Principle _versus_ the Molecularists—Huxley, Tyndall, Vogt,
      and Co.—and request them to examine whether it is true or not to say
      that, though the scientific premisses may not be always correct,
      they are, nevertheless, accepted, to fill up a gap or a hole in some
      beloved materialistic hobby. Speaking of protoplasm and the organs
      of man, as “viewed by Mr. Huxley,” the author says: “Probably then,
      in regard to any continuity in protoplasm of power, of form, or of
      substance, we have seen _lacunæ_ enow. Nay, Mr. Huxley himself can
      be adduced in evidence on the same side. Not rarely do we find in
      his essay admissions of _probability_, where it is _certainty_ that
      is alone in place. He says, for example: ‘It is more than probable
      that _when_ the vegetable world is thoroughly explored we _shall_
      find all plants in possession of the same powers.’ When a conclusion
      is decidedly announced, it is rather disappointing to be told, as
      here, that the premisses are still to collect [!!].... Again, here
      is a passage in which he is seen to cut his own ‘_basis_’ from
      beneath his own feet. After telling us that all forms of protoplasm
      consist of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen ‘in very complex
      union,’ he continues: ‘To this complex combination, _the nature of
      which has never been determined with exactness_ [!!], the name of
      _protein_ has been applied.’ This, plainly, is an identification, on
      Mr. Huxley’s own part, of protoplasm and _protein_; and what is said
      of one, being necessarily true of the other, it follows that he
      admits the nature of protoplasm never to have been determined with
      exactness, and that even in his eyes the _lis_ is still _sub
      judice_. This admission is strengthened by the words, too, ‘If we
      use this term (protein) with such _caution_ as may properly arise
      out of our _comparative ignorance_ of the things for which it
      stands’ ” ... etc. (pp. 33 and 34, ed. 1872, in reply to Mr. Huxley
      in _Yeast_).

      This is the eminent Huxley, the king of physiology and biology, who
      is proven playing at blind man’s buff with _premisses_ and _facts_!
      What may not the “smaller fry” of Science do after this!

 1099 “The Cycles of Matter,” a name given by Professor Winchell to an
      Essay written in 1860.

 1100 _World‐Life_, pp. 535, 548.

 1101 Quoted in Büchner’s _Force and Matter_.

 1102 Men of Science will say: We deny, because nothing of the kind has
      ever come within the scope of our experience. But, as argued by
      Charles Richet, the Physiologist: “So be it, but have you at least
      demonstrated the contrary?... Do not, at any rate, deny _à priori_.
      Actual Science is not sufficiently advanced to give you such
      right.”—_La Suggestion Mentale et le Calcul des Probabilités._

 1103 _Lectures on the Philosophy of History_, p. 26. Sibree’s Eng.
      Transl.

 1104 _Isis Unveiled_, Vol. 1, p. 34.

 1105 This symbolism does not prevent these now seemingly mythic
      personages from having ruled the Earth once upon a time under the
      human form of actual living, though truly divine and god‐like Men.
      The opinion of Colonel Vallancey—and also of Count de Gebelin—that
      the “names of the Kabiri appear to be all allegorical, and to have
      signified no more [?] than an almanac of the vicissitudes of the
      seasons—calculated for the operations of agriculture” (_Collect. de
      Reb. Hibern._, No. 13, Præf. Sect. 5), is as absurd as his assertion
      that Æon, Cronus, Saturn and Dagon are all one, namely, the
      “Patriarch Adam.” The Kabiri were the instructors of mankind in
      agriculture, because they were the Regents over the seasons and
      Cosmic Cycles. Hence it was they who regulated, as Planetary Spirits
      or Angels (Messengers), the _mysteries_ of the _art_ of agriculture.

 1106 “Who dread Karma‐Nemesis,” would be better.

 1107 Dryden.

 1108 Not all, however, for there are men of Science awakening to truth.
      This is what we read: “Whatever way we turn our eyes we encounter a
      mystery ... all in Nature for us is the unknown.... Yet they are
      numerous, those superficial minds for whom nothing can be produced
      by natural forces outside of facts observed long ago, consecrated in
      books and grouped more or less skilfully with the help of theories
      whose ephemeral duration ought, by this time, to have demonstrated
      their insufficiency, .... I do not pretend to contest the
      possibility of invisible beings, of a nature different from ours and
      capable of moving matter to action. Profound philosophers have
      admitted this in all epochs, as a consequence of the great law of
      continuity which rules the universe. That intellectual life, which
      we see starting in some way from non‐being (_néant_) and gradually
      reaching man, can it stop abruptly at man to reäppear only in the
      infinite, in the sovereign regulator of the world? This is little
      probable.” Therefore, “I no more deny the existence of spirits than
      I deny soul, while I yet try to explain certain facts without this
      hypothesis.” _The Non‐Defined Forces, Historical and Experimental
      Researches_, p. 3. (Paris, 1877.) The author is A. de Rochas, a
      well‐known man of Science in France, and his work is one of the
      signs of the time.

 1109 ix. 9.

 1110 xxxviii. 31, 32.

 1111 _Astronomie Antique._

 1112 The Pleiades, as all know, are the seven stars beyond the Bull,
      which appear at the beginning of spring. They have a very Occult
      meaning in the Hindû Esoteric Philosophy, and are connected with
      _Sound_ and other mystic principles in Nature.

 1113 See _Astronomie Antique_, pp. 63 to 74.

 1114 _Temple de Jerusalem_, Vol. II, Part II, Chap. xxx.

 1115 Ch. vii.

 1116 Quoted by De Mirville, _Des Esprits_, iv. p. 58.

 1117 _Natural Genesis_, ii. p. 318.

 1118 _Proœm_, 2.

 1119 _Astronomy of the Ancients_, Lewis, p. 264.

 1120 _Natural Genesis_, ii. p. 319.

 1121 Proclus, _In Timæum_, i.

 1122 _Genesis_, xlix.

 1123 Creuzer, iii. p. 930.

 1124 _Cyropædia_, viii. p. 7, as quoted in _Des Esprits_, iv. p. 55.

 1125 _Des Esprits_, iv. pp. 59, 60.

 1126 _Origine de tous les Cultes_, “Zodiaque.”

 1127 _Vie de Notre Seigneur Jésus Christ_, I. p. 9.

 1128 Whether many nations have seen that identical star, or not, we all
      know that the sepulchres of the “three Magi”—who rejoice in the
      quite Teutonic names of Kaspar and Melchior, Balthazar being the
      only exception, and the two having little of the Chaldean ring in
      them—are shown by the priests in the famous cathedral of Cologne,
      where the Magian bodies are not only supposed, but firmly believed
      to have been buried.

 1129 This tradition about the “seventy planets” that preside over the
      destinies of nations, is based on the Occult cosmogonical teaching
      that besides our own septenary chain of World‐Planets, there are
      many more in the Solar System.

 1130 _Des Esprits_, iv. p. 67.

 1131 _The Mythological Astronomy of the Ancients Demonstrated_; Part the
      Second, or The Key of Urania: pp. 23, 24. Ed. 1823.

 1132 Every scholar is aware, of course, that the Chaldeans claimed the
      same digits (432), or 432,000, for their Divine Dynasties as the
      Hindûs do for their Mahâyuga, namely 4,320,000. Therefore has Dr.
      Sepp, of Munich, undertaken to support Kepler and Wilford in their
      charge that the Hindûs borrowed them from the Christians, and the
      Chaldeans from the Jews, who, it is claimed, expected their Messiah
      in the lunar year of the world 4,320!!! As these figures, according
      to ancient writers, were based by Berosus on the 120 Saroses—each of
      the divisions meaning six Neroses of 600 years each, making a sum
      total of 432,000 years—they would appear to be peremptory, remarks
      De Mirville (_Des Esprits_, iii. p. 24). So the pious professor of
      Munich undertook to explain them _in the correct way_. He claims to
      have solved the riddle by showing that “the saros being composed,
      according to Pliny, of 222 synodial months, to wit, 18 years 6/10,”
      the calculator naturally fell back on the figures “given by Suidas,”
      who affirmed that the “120 saroses made 2,222 sacerdotal and cyclic
      years, which equalled 1,656 solar years.” (_Vie de Notre Seigneur
      Jésus Christ_, ii. p. 417.)

      But Suidas said nothing of the kind; and, even supposing he had, he
      would prove little, if anything, by such a statement. The Neroses
      and Saroses were the same thorn in the side of _uninitiated_ ancient
      writers as the apocalyptic 666 of the “Great Beast” is in that of
      the modern, and the former figures have found their unlucky Newtons,
      as have the latter.

 1133 See _Isis Unveiled_, ii. p. 132.

 1134 The reader has to bear in mind that the phrase “climacteric year”
      has more than the usual significance, when used by Occultists and
      Mystics. It is not only a critical period, during which some great
      change is periodically expected, whether in human or cosmic
      constitution, but it likewise pertains to universal spiritual
      changes. The Europeans called every 63rd year the “grand
      climacteric,” and perhaps justly supposed those years to be the
      years produced by multiplying 7 into the odd numbers 3, 5, 7 and 9.
      But 7 is the real scale of Nature, in Occultism, and 7 has to be
      multiplied in quite a different way and method than is as yet known
      to European nations.

 1135 _Des Espirits_; iv. p. 61.

 1136 ii. p. 490.

 1137 See _Recueil de l’Académie des Inscriptions_, 1853, quoted in _Des
      Esprits_, iv. p. 62.

 1138 _Ruins of Empires_, p. 360.

 1139 See pp. 54, 196, _et seqq_.

 1140 For a detailed scientific proof of this conclusion, see page 121 of
      M. Bailly’s work, where the subject is discussed technically.

 1141 Why it should be “fictitious” can never be made plain by European
      Scientists.

 1142 Bailly’s _Traité de l’Astronomie Indienne et Orientale_, pp. xx. _et
      seq._ Ed. 1787.

 1143 Ch. III. “On Matter.”

 1144 _Lecture on Protoplasm_, by Mr. Huxley.

 1145 Ganot’s _Physics_, p. 68, Atkinson’s Translation.

 1146 See Vol. I. pp. 338, 339, quoted from _Le Mystère et la Science_,
      Conférences, Père Félix de Notre Dame.

 1147 Behold the work of Cycles and their periodical return! Those who
      denied such “Entities” (Forces) to be bodies, and called them
      “Spaces,” were the prototypes of our modern “science‐struck” public,
      and their official teachers, who speak of the Forces of Nature as
      the imponderable energy of Matter and as modes of motion, and yet
      hold electricity, for one, as being as _atomic as Matter_
      itself—(Helmholtz). Inconsistency and contradiction reign as much in
      official as in heterodox Science.

 1148 _The Virgin of the World_ of Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, rendered
      into English by Dr. Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland. Pp. 83, 84.

 1149 “Hermes here includes as Gods the sensible Forces of Nature, the
      elements and phenomena of the Universe,” remarks Dr. A. Kingsford in
      a foot‐note explaining it very correctly. So does Eastern
      Philosophy.

 1150 _Ibid._, pp. 64, 65.

 1151 See also Section IX, THE COMING FORCE.

 1152 “O Toom, Toom! issued from the great [female] which is in the bosom
      of the waters [the great Deep or Space], luminous through the two
      Lions,” the dual Force, or power of the two _solar eyes_, or the
      electro‐positive and the electro‐negative forces. See _Book of the
      Dead_, ch. iii.

 1153 See _Book of the Dead_, chapter xvii.

 1154 Chapter lxxix.

 1155 An image expressing the succession of divine functions, the
      transmutation of one form into another, or the correlation of
      forces. Aam is the electro‐positive force, devouring all others, as
      Saturn devoured his progeny.

 1156 Aanroo is in the domain of Osiris, a field divided into _fourteen_
      sections, “surrounded with an _iron_ enclosure, within which grows
      the _corn of life seven_ cubits high,” the Kâma Loka of the
      Egyptians. Those only of the dead, who know the names of the
      janitors of the “seven halls,” will be admitted into Amenti _for
      ever_; _i.e._, those who have passed through the Seven Races of each
      Round—otherwise they will rest in the _lower fields_; and it
      represents also the seven successive Devachans, or Lokas. In Amenti
      one becomes pure spirit for the eternity (xxx. 4); while in Aanroo
      the “soul of the spirit,” or the Defunct, is _devoured_ each time by
      Uræus—the Serpent, Son of the Earth (in another sense the primordial
      vital principles in the Sun), _i.e._, the Astral Body of the
      deceased or the “Elementary” fades out and disappears in the “Son of
      the Earth,” _limited_ time. The soul quits the fields of Aanroo and
      goes on earth under any shape it likes to assume. (See chapter
      xcix., _Book of the Dead_.)

 1157 See _Book of the Dead_, chapter cviii. 4.

 1158 Maspero in the _Guide au Musée de Boulaq_, p. 152. Ed. 1883.

 1159 See _Book of the Dead_, ch. xciv.

 1160 _Revue des Deux Mondes_, 1865, pp. 157 and 158.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET DOCTRINE, VOL. 1 OF 4***



CREDITS


June 1, 2017

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>. (This
            file was produced from images generously made available by The
            Internet Archive.)



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 54824‐0.txt or 54824‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/4/8/2/54824/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law
means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the
Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States
without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect
the Project Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the ebooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use
this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away — you may do practically _anything_ in the United States with
ebooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to
the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works
based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are
removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™
mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing
Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement
for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
    and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
    restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re‐use
    it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with
    this ebook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org. If you are not
    located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the
    country where you are located before using this ebook.


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts
not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    – You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    – You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e‐mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    – You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    – You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The Project Gutenberg Trademark
LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation
as set forth in Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not
protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™
collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such
as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data,
transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer
virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS‐IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle‐aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64‐6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business
office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801)
596‐1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date
contact information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep
ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook’s ebook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our ebooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new ebooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new ebooks.






***FINIS***
