letter Ma is equivalent to, and corresponds with, the number 5, which is
composed of a Binary, the symbol of the two sexes separated, and of the
Ternary, the symbol of the Third Life, the progeny of the Binary. This,
again, is often symbolized by a Pentagon, the latter being a sacred sign,
a divine Monogram. Maitreya is the secret name of the Fifth Buddha, and
the Kalkî Avatâra of the Brâhmans, the last Messiah who will come at the
culmination of the Great Cycle. It is also the initial letter of the Greek
Metis, or Divine Wisdom; of Mimra, the Word, or Logos; and of Mithras, the
Mihr, the Monad Mystery. All these are born in, and from, the Great Deep,
and are the Sons of Mâyâ, the “Mother”; in Egypt, Moot; in Greece,
Minerva, Divine Wisdom; of Mary, or Miriam, Myrrha, etc., the Mother of
the Christian Logos; and of Mâyâ, the Mother of Buddha. Mâdhava and
Mâdhavî are the titles of the most important Gods and Goddesses of the
Hindû Pantheon. Finally, Mandala is, in Sanskrit, a “Circle,” or an Orb,
also the ten divisions of the _Rig Veda_. The most sacred names in India
generally begin with this letter, from Mahat, the first manifested
Intellect, and Mandara, the great mountain used by the Gods to churn the
Ocean, down to Mandâkinî, the heavenly Gangâ, or Ganges, Manu, etc., etc.

Will this be called a coincidence? A strange one is it then, indeed, when
we see even Moses, found in the Water of the Nile, with the symbolical
consonant in his name. And Pharaoh’s daughter “called his name Moses; and
she said, Because I drew him out of the Water.”(620) Besides which, the
Hebrew sacred name of God, applied to this letter M, is Meborach, the
“Holy” or the “Blessed,” and the name for the Water of the Flood is Mbul.
A reminder of the “Three Maries” at the Crucifixion, and their connection
with Mare, the Sea, or Water, may close these examples. This is why, in
Judaism and Christianity, the Messiah is always connected with Water,
Baptism; and also with the Fishes, the sign of the Zodiac called Mînam in
Sanskrit, and even with the Matsya (Fish) Avatâra, and the Lotus, the
symbol of the womb, or with the water‐lily, which has the same
signification.

In the relics of ancient Egypt, the greater the antiquity of the votive
symbols and emblems of the objects exhumed, the oftener are Lotus‐flowers
and Water found in connection with the Solar Gods. The God Khnoom, the
Moist Power, or Water, as Thales taught, being the principle of all
things, sits on a throne enshrined in a Lotus. The God Bes stands on a
Lotus, ready to devour his progeny. Thot, the God of Mystery and Wisdom,
the sacred Scribe of Amenti, wearing the solar disk as head gear, sits
with a bull’s head—the sacred bull of Mendes being a form of Thot—and a
human body, on a full blown Lotus. Finally, it is the Goddess Hiqit, under
her shape of a frog, who rests on the Lotus, thus showing her connection
with water. And it is from the unpoetical shape of this frog‐symbol,
undeniably the glyph of the most ancient of the Egyptian Deities, that the
Egyptologists have been vainly trying to unravel the mystery and functions
of the Goddess. Its adoption in the Church, by the early Christians, shows
that they knew it better than our modern Orientalists. The “frog or toad
Goddess” was one of the chief Cosmic Deities connected with Creation, on
account of this animal’s amphibious nature, and chiefly because of its
apparent resurrection, after long ages of solitary life, enshrined in old
walls, in rocks, etc. She not only participated in the organization of the
World, together with Khnoom, but was also connected with _the dogma of
resurrection_.(621) There must have been some very profound and sacred
meaning attached to this symbol, since, notwithstanding the risk of being
charged with a disgusting form of zoölatry, the early Egyptian Christians
adopted it in their Churches. A frog or toad, enshrined in a Lotus‐flower,
or simply without the latter emblem, was the form chosen for the _Church‐
lamps_, on which were engraved the words, “Ἐγώ εἰμι ἀναστάσις”—I am the
resurrection.(622) These frog‐Goddesses are also found on all the mummies.




Section IX. The Moon; Deus Lunus, Phœbe.


This archaic symbol is the most poetical of all symbols, as also the most
philosophical. The ancient Greeks brought it into prominence, and the
modern poets have worn it threadbare. The Queen of Night, riding in the
majesty of her peerless light in Heaven, throwing all, even Hesperus, into
darkness, and spreading her silver mantle over the whole Sidereal World,
has ever been a favourite theme with all the poets of Christendom, from
Milton and Shakespeare down to the latest versifier. But the refulgent
lamp of night, with her suite of stars unnumbered, spoke only to the
imagination of the profane. Until lately, Religion and Science had nought
to do with the beautiful mythos. Yet, the cold chaste Moon, she, who, in
the words of Shelley:


    ... makes all beautiful on which she smiles,
    That wandering shrine of soft, yet icy flame
    Which ever is transformed, yet still the same,
    And warms not, but illumes....


stands in closer relations to Earth than any other sidereal orb. The Sun
is the Giver of Life to the whole Planetary System; the Moon is the Giver
of Life to our Globe; and the early races understood and knew it, even in
their infancy. She is the Queen, and she is the King. She was King Soma
before she became transformed into Phœbe and the chaste Diana. She is
preëminently the Deity of the Christians, through the Mosaic and
Kabalistic Jews, though the civilized world may have remained ignorant of
the fact for long ages; in fact, ever since the last initiated Father of
the Church died, carrying with him into his grave the secrets of the Pagan
Temples. For such Fathers as Origen or Clemens Alexandrinus, the Moon was
Jehovah’s living symbol; the Giver of Life and the Giver of Death, the
Disposer of Being—in _our_ World. For, if Artemis was Luna in Heaven, and,
with the Greeks, Diana on Earth, who presided over child‐birth and life;
with the Egyptians, she was Hekat (Hecate) in Hell, the Goddess of Death,
who ruled over magic and enchantments. More than this; as the personified
Moon, whose phenomena are triadic, Diana‐Hecate‐Luna is the _three in
one_. For she is _Diva triformis_, _tergemina_, _triceps_, three heads on
one neck,(623) like Brahmâ‐Vishnu‐Shiva. Hence she is the prototype of our
Trinity, which has not always been entirely male. The number seven, so
prominent in the _Bible_, so sacred in the seventh day, or Sabbath, came
to the Jews from antiquity, deriving its origin from the four‐fold number
7 contained in the 28 days of the lunar month, each septenary portion
thereof being typified by one quarter of the Moon.

It is worth the trouble of presenting, in this work, a bird’s‐eye view of
the origin and development of the lunar myth and worship, in historical
antiquity, on our side of the globe. Its earlier origin is untraceable by
_exact_ Science, which rejects all tradition; while for Theology, which,
under the guidance of the crafty Popes, has put a brand on every fragment
of literature that does not bear the _imprimatur_ of the Church of Rome,
its archaic history is a sealed book. Whether the Egyptian or the Âryan
Hindû religious philosophy is the more ancient—the Secret Doctrine says it
is the latter—does not much matter, in this instance, as the Lunar and
Solar “worship” are the most ancient in the world. Both have survived, and
prevail to this day throughout the whole world; with some openly, with
others—as, for instance, in Christian symbology—secretly. The cat, a lunar
symbol, was sacred to Isis, who was the Moon in one sense, just as Osiris
was the Sun, and is often seen on the top of the Sistrum in the hand of
the Goddess. This animal was held in great veneration in the city of
Bubastis, which went into deep mourning on the death of the sacred cats,
because Isis, as the Moon, was particularly worshipped in that city of
mysteries. The astronomical symbolism connected with it has already been
given in Section I, and no one has better described it than Mr. Gerald
Massey, in his _Lectures_ and in _The Natural Genesis_. The eye of the
cat, it is said, seems to follow the lunar phases in their growth and
decline, and its orbs shine like two stars in the darkness of night. Hence
the mythological allegory which shows Diana hiding in the Moon, under the
shape of a cat, when she was seeking, in company with other Deities, to
escape the pursuit of Typhon, as related in the _Metamorphoses_ of Ovid.
The Moon, in Egypt, was both the “Eye of Horns” and the “Eye of Osiris,”
the Sun.

The same with the Cynocephalus. The dog‐headed ape was a glyph to
symbolize the Sun and Moon, in turn, though the Cynocephalus is really
_more a Hermetic than a religious symbol_. For it is the hieroglyph of
Mercury, the planet, and of the Mercury of the Alchemical philosophers,
who say that:


    Mercury has to be ever _near_ Isis, as her _minister_, for without
    Mercury neither Isis nor Osiris can accomplish anything in the
    Great Work.


The Cynocephalus, whenever represented with the caduceus, the crescent, or
the lotus, is a glyph of the “philosophical” Mercury; but when seen with a
reed, or a roll of parchment, he stands for Hermes, the secretary and
adviser of Isis, as Hanumâna filled the same office with Râma.

Though the regular Sun‐Worshippers, the Parsîs, are few, yet not only is
the bulk of the Hindû mythology and history based upon, and interblended
with, these two worships, but so is even the Christian religion itself.
From their origin down to our modern day, it has coloured the theologies
of both the Roman Catholic and Protestant Churches. Indeed, the difference
between the Aryan Hindû and the Âryan European faiths is very small, if
only the fundamental ideas of both are taken into consideration. Hindûs
are proud of calling themselves Sûryavanshas and Chandravanshas, of the
_Solar_ and _Lunar_ Dynasties. The Christians pretend to regard this as
idolatry, and yet they adhere to a religion entirely based upon Solar and
Lunar worship. It is vain and useless for the Protestants to exclaim
against the Roman Catholics for their “Mariolatry,” based on the ancient
cult of lunar Goddesses, when they themselves worship Jehovah,
preëminently a _lunar_ God; and when both Churches have accepted in their
theologies the _Sun_‐Christ and the _Lunar_ Trinity.

What is known of Chaldean Moon‐Worship, of the Babylonian God, Sin, called
by the Greeks Deus Lunus, is very little; and that little is apt to
mislead the profane student, who fails to grasp the esoteric significance
of the symbols. As popularly known to the ancient profane philosophers and
writers—for those who were initiated were pledged to silence—the Chaldeans
were the worshippers of the Moon under _her_, and _his_, various names,
just as were the Jews, who came after them.

In the unpublished MS. on the Art‐Speech, already mentioned, giving a key
to the formation of the ancient symbolical language, a logical _raison
d’être_ is brought forward for this double worship. It is written by a
wonderfully well‐informed and acute scholar and Mystic, who gives it in
the comprehensive form of a hypothesis. The latter, however, forcibly
becomes a proven fact in the history of religious evolution in human
thought, to anyone who has ever had a glimpse into the secret of ancient
symbology. Thus, he says:


    One of the first occupations among men, connected with those of
    actual necessity, would be the perception of time periods,(624)
    marked on the vaulted arch of the heavens, sprung and rising over
    the level floor of the horizon, or the plain of still water. These
    would come to be marked as those of day and night, of the phases
    of the moon, of its stellar or synodic revolutions, and of the
    period of the solar year with recurrence of the seasons, and with
    the application to such periods of the natural measure of day or
    night, or of the day divided into the light and the dark. It would
    also be discovered that there was a longest and shortest solar
    day, and two solar days of equal day and night, within the period
    of the solar year; and the points in the year of these could be
    marked with the greatest precision in the starry groups of the
    heavens or the constellations, subject to that retrograde movement
    thereof, which in time would require a correction by
    intercalation, as was the case in the description of the Flood,
    where correction of 150 days was made for a period of 600 years,
    during which confusion of landmarks had increased.... This would
    naturally come to pass with all races in all time; and such
    knowledge must be taken to have been inherent in the human race,
    prior to what we call the historic period as during the same.


On this basis, the author seeks for some natural physical function,
possessed in common by the human race, and connected with the periodical
manifestations, such that “the connection between the two kinds of
phenomena ... became fixed in common or popular usage.” He finds it in:


    (_a_) The feminine physiological phenomena every lunar month of 28
    days, or 4 weeks of 7 days each, so that 13 occurrences of the
    period should happen in 364 days, which is the solar week‐year of
    52 weeks of 7 days each. (_b_) The quickening of the fœtus is
    marked by a period of 126 days, or 18 weeks of 7 days each. (_c_)
    That period which is called “the period of viability” is one of
    210 days, or 30 weeks of 7 days each. (_d_) The period of
    parturition is accomplished in 280 days, or a period of 40 weeks
    of 7 days each, or 10 lunar months of 28 days each, or of 9
    calendar months of 31 days each, counting on the royal arch of
    heavens for the measure of the period of traverse from the
    darkness of the womb to the light and glory of conscious
    existence, that continuing inscrutable mystery and miracle....
    Thus the observed periods of time marking the workings of the
    birth function would naturally become a basis of astronomical
    calculation.... We may almost affirm ... that this was the mode of
    reckoning among all nations, either independently, or
    intermediately and indirectly by tuition. It was the mode with the
    Hebrews, for even to‐day they calculate the calendar by means of
    the 354 and 355 of the lunar year, and we possess a special
    evidence that it was the mode with the ancient Egyptians, as to
    which this is the proof:

    The basic idea underlying the religious philosophy of the Hebrews
    was that God contained all things within himself,(625) and that
    man was his image, man including woman.... The place of the man
    and woman with the Hebrews was among the Egyptians occupied by the
    bull and the cow, sacred to Osiris and Isis,(626) who were
    represented, respectively, by a man having a bull’s head, and a
    woman having the head of a cow; which symbols were worshipped.
    Notoriously Osiris was the Sun and the river Nile, the tropical
    year of 365 days, which number is the value of the word Neilos,
    and the bull, as he was also the principle of fire and of life‐
    giving force; while Isis was the moon, the bed of the river Nile,
    or the Mother Earth, for the parturient energies of which water
    was a necessity, the lunar year of 354‐364 days, the time‐maker of
    the periods of gestation, and the cow marked by, or with, the
    crescent new moon....

    But the use of the cow of the Egyptians for the woman of the
    Hebrews was not intended as of any radical difference of
    signification, but a concurrence in the teaching, intended, and
    merely as the substitution of a symbol of common import, which was
    this, viz., the period of parturition with the cow and the woman
    was held to be the same, or 280 days, or ten lunar months of 4
    weeks each. And in this period consisted the essential value of
    this animal symbol, whose mark was that of the crescent
    moon.(627)... These parturient and natural periods are found to
    have been subjects of symbolism all over the world. They were thus
    used by the Hindûs, and are found to be most plainly set forth by
    the ancient Americans, in the Richardson and Gest tablets, in the
    Palenque Cross and elsewhere, and manifestly lay at the base of
    the formation of the calendar forms of the Mayas of Yucatan, the
    Hindûs, the Assyrians, and the ancient Babylonians, as well as the
    Egyptians and old Hebrews. The natural symbols ... would be either
    the phallus or the phallus and yoni, ... _male_ and _female_.
    Indeed, the words translated by the generalizing terms male and
    female, in the 27th verse of the 1st chapter of Genesis are ...
    _sacr_ and _n’cabvah_ or, literally, phallus and yoni.(628) While
    the representation of the phallic emblems would barely indicate
    the genital members of the human body, when their functions and
    the development of the seed‐vesicles emanating from them were
    considered, there would come into indication a mode of measures of
    lunar time, and through lunar, of solar time.


This is the physiological or anthropological key to the Moon symbol. The
key that opens the mystery of Theogony, or the evolution of the
manvantaric Gods, is more complicated, and has nothing phallic in it.
There, all is mystical and divine. But the Jews, beyond connecting Jehovah
directly with the Moon as a generative God, preferred to ignore the higher
Hierarchies, and have made their Patriarchs of some of these zodiacal
constellations and planetary Gods, thus euhemerizing the purely
theosophical idea and dragging it down to the level of sinful humanity.
The MS., from which the above is extracted, explains very clearly to what
Hierarchy of Gods Jehovah belonged, and who this Jewish God was; for it
shows, in clear language, that which the writer has always insisted upon,
namely, that the God with which the Christians have burdened themselves,
was no better than the lunar symbol of the reproductive or generative
faculty in Nature. They have ever ignored even the Hebrew secret God of
the Kabalists, Ain Suph, a conception as grand as Parabrahman in the
earliest Kabalistic and mystical ideas. But it is not the _Kabalah_ of
Rosenroth that can ever give the true original teachings of Shimeon Ben
Yochaï, which were as metaphysical and philosophical as any could be. And
how many are there among the students of the _Kabalah_ who know anything
of them except in their distorted Latin translations? Let us glance at the
idea which led the ancient Jews to adopt a substitute for the Ever‐
Unknowable, and which has misled the Christians into mistaking the
substitute for the reality.


    If to these organs [phallus and yoni] as symbols of creative
    cosmic agencies the idea of ... time periods can be attached,
    then, indeed, in the construction of Temples as Dwellings of
    Deity, or of Jehovah, that part designated as the Holy of Holies,
    or The Most Holy Place, should borrow its title from the
    recognized sacredness of the generative organs, considered as
    symbols of measures as well as of creative cause.

    With the ancient Wise, there was no name, and no idea, and no
    symbol, of a First Cause.(629) With the Hebrews, the indirect
    conception of such was couched in a term of negation of
    comprehension, viz., Ain Suph, or the Without Bounds. But the
    symbol of _its first comprehensible manifestation_ was the
    conception of a circle with its diameter line, to at once carry a
    geometric, phallic, and astronomic idea; ... for the one takes its
    birth from the 0, or the circle, without which it could not be,
    and from the 1, or primal one, spring the 9 digits, and,
    geometrically, all plane shapes. So in Kabalah this circle, with
    its diameter line, is the picture of the 10 Sephiroth, or
    Emanations, composing the Adam Kadmon, or the Archetypal Man, the
    creative origin of all things.... This idea of connecting the
    picture of the circle and its diameter line, that is, the number
    10, with the signification of the reproductive organs, and the
    Most Holy Place ... was carried out constructively in the King’s
    Chamber, or Holy of Holies, of the great Pyramid, in the
    Tabernacle of Moses, and in the Holy of Holies of the Temple of
    Solomon.... It is _the picture of a double womb_, for in Hebrew
    the letter _Hé_ (ה) is at the same time the number 5, and the
    symbol of the womb, and twice 5 is 10, or the phallic number.


This “double womb” also shows the duality of the idea carried from the
highest or spiritual down to the lowest or terrestrial plane; and limited
by the Jews to the latter. With them, therefore, the number seven has
acquired the most prominent place in their exoteric religion, a cult of
external forms and empty rituals; take, for instance, their Sabbath, the
seventh day sacred to their Deity, the Moon, symbolical of the generative
Jehovah. But, with other nations, the number seven was typical of
theogonic evolution, of Cycles, Cosmic Planes, and the Seven Forces and
Occult Powers in Kosmos, as a Boundless Whole, whose first upper Triangle
was unreachable to the finite intellect of man. While other nations,
therefore, busied themselves, in their forcible limitation of Kosmos in
Space and Time, only with its septenary manifested plane, the Jews centred
this number solely in the Moon, and based all their sacred calculations
thereupon. Hence we find the thoughtful author of the MS. just quoted,
remarking, in reference to the metrology of the Jews, that:


    If 20,612 be multiplied by 4/3, _the product will afford a base
    for the ascertainment of the mean revolution of the moon_; and if
    this product be again multiplied by 4/3, this continued product
    will afford a base for finding the exact period of the mean solar
    year, ... this form ... becoming, for the finding of astronomical
    periods of time, of very great service.


This double number—male and female—is symbolized also in some well‐known
idols; for instance:


    Ardhanârî‐Îshvara, the Isis of the Hindûs, Eridanus, or Ardan, or
    the Hebrew Jordan, or _source of descent_. She is standing on a
    lotus‐leaf floating on the water. But the signification is, that
    it is androgyne or hermaphrodite, that is phallus and yoni
    combined, the number 10, the Hebrew letter _Yod_ (י), the
    _containment of Jehovah_. She, or rather she‐he, gives the minutes
    of the same circle of 360 degrees.


“Jehovah,” in its best aspect is Binah, the “Upper mediating Mother, the
Great Sea or Holy Spirit,” and therefore rather a synonym of Mary, the
Mother of Jesus, than of his Father; that “Mother, being the Latin Mare,”
the Sea, is here, also, Venus, the Stella del Mare, or “Star of the Sea.”

The ancestors of the mysterious Akkadians—the Chandravanshas or
Indovanshas, the Lunar Kings, whom tradition shows reigning at Prayâga
(Allahabad), ages before our era—had come from India, and brought with
them the worship of their forefathers, of Soma, and his son Budha, which
afterwards became that of the Chaldeans. Yet such adoration, apart from
popular Astrolatry and Heliolatry, was in no sense _idolatry_. No more, at
any rate, than the modern Roman Catholic symbolism which connects the
Virgin Mary, the Magna Mater of the Syrians and Greeks, with the Moon.

Of this worship, the most pious Roman Catholics feel quite proud, and
loudly confess to it. In a _Mémoire_ to the French Academy, the Marquis De
Mirville says:


    It is only natural that, as an unconscious prophecy, Ammon‐Râ
    should be his mother’s husband, since the Magna Mater of the
    Christians _is precisely the spouse of that son she conceives_....
    We [Christians] can understand now _why Neïth throws radiance on
    the Sun, while remaining the Moon_, since the Virgin, who is the
    Queen of Heaven, _as was Neïth_, clothes the Christ‐Sun, as does
    Neïth, and is clothed by him; “_Tu vestis solem et te sol vestit_”
    [as is sung by the Roman Catholics during their service].

    We [Christians] understand also how it is that the famous
    inscription at Saïs should have stated that “none has ever lifted
    my veil [peplum],” considering that this sentence, literally
    translated, _is the summary of what is sung in the Church on the
    Day of the Immaculate Conception_.(630)


Surely nothing could be more sincere than this! It justifies entirely what
Mr. Gerald Massey has said in his Lecture on “Luniolatry, Ancient and
Modern”:


    The man in the moon [Osiris‐Sut, Jehovah‐Satan, Christ‐Judas, and
    other Lunar Twins] is often charged with bad conduct.... In the
    lunar phenomena the moon was one, as _the_ moon, which was two‐
    fold in sex, and three‐fold in character, as mother, child, and
    adult male. Thus the child of the moon became the consort of his
    own mother! It could not be _helped_ if there was to be any
    reproduction. He was compelled to be his own father! These
    relationships were repudiated by later sociology, and the
    primitive man in the moon got tabooed. Yet in its latest, most
    inexplicable phase, this has become the central doctrine of the
    grossest superstition the world has seen, for these lunar
    phenomena and their humanly represented relationships, the
    incestuous included, are the very foundations of the Christian
    Trinity in Unity. Through ignorance of the symbolism, the simple
    representation of early time has become the most profound
    religious mystery in modern Luniolatry. The Roman Church, without
    being in any wise ashamed of the proof, portrays the Virgin Mary
    arrayed with the sun, and the horned moon at her feet, holding the
    lunar infant in her arms—as child and consort of the mother moon!
    The mother, child, and adult male, are fundamental....

    In this way it can be proved that our Christology is mummified
    mythology, and legendary lore, which have been palmed off upon us
    in the _Old Testament_ and the _New_, as divine revelation uttered
    by the very voice of God.(631)


A charming allegory is found in the _Zohar_, one which unveils better than
anything else ever did the true character of Jehovah, or YHVH, in the
primitive conception of the Hebrew Kabalists. It is now found in the
philosophy of Ibn Gebirol’s _Kabalah_, translated by Isaac Myer.


    In the introduction written by R. ’Hiz’qee‐yah, which is very old,
    and forms part of our Brody edition of the _Zohar_ (1. 5b. _sq._)
    is an account of a journey taken by R. El’azar, son of R. Shim‐on
    b. Yo’haï, and R. Abbah.... They met a man bearing a heavy
    burden.... They conversed together ... and the explanations of the
    Thorah, by the man with the burden, were so wonderful, that they
    asked him for his name; he replied: “Do not ask me who I am; but
    we will all proceed with the explanation of the Thorah [Law].”
    They asked: “Who caused thee thus to walk and carry such a heavy
    load?” He answered: “The letter י (Yod, which = 10, and is the
    symbolical letter of Kether and the essence and germ of the Holy
    Name יהוה, YHVH) made war, etc.”.... They said to him: “If thou
    wilt tell us the name of thy father, we will kiss the dust of thy
    feet.” He replied: “... As to my father, _he had his dwelling in
    the Great Sea, and was a fish therein_ [like Vishnu and Dagon or
    Oannes]; which [first] destroyed the Great Sea ... and he was
    great and mighty and ‘Ancient of Days,’ until he swallowed all the
    other fishes in the (Great) Sea.” ... R. El’azar listened to his
    words and said to him: “Thou art the Son of the Holy Flame, thou
    art the Son of Rab Ham‐’_nun_‐ah Sabah (the old) [the _fish_ in
    Aramaic or Chaldee is _nun_ (_noon_)], thou art the Son of the
    Light of the Thorah [Dharma], etc.”(632)


Then the author explains that the feminine Sephira, Binah, is termed by
the Kabalists the Great Sea: therefore Binah, whose divine names are
Jehovah, Yah, and Elohim, is simply the Chaldean Tiamat, the Female Power,
the Thalatth of Berosus, who presides over the Chaos, and was made out
later by Christian Theology to be the Serpent and the Devil. She‐He (Yah‐
hovah) is the supernal Hé, and Eve. This Yah‐hovah then, or Jehovah, is
identical with our Chaos—Father, Mother, Son—on the material plane, and in
the purely physical World; Deus and Demon, at one and the same time; the
Sun and Moon, Good and Evil, God and Demon.

Lunar magnetism generates life, preserves and destroys it, psychically as
well as physically. And if, astronomically, the Moon is one of the seven
planets of the Ancient World, in Theogony she is one of the Regents
thereof—with Christians now as much as with Pagans, the former referring
to her under the name of one of their Archangels, and the latter under
that of one of their Gods.

Therefore the meaning of the “fairy tale,” translated by Chwolsohn from
the Arabic translation of an old Chaldean MS., of Qû‐tâmy being instructed
by the _idol_ of the Moon, is easily understood. Seldenus tells us the
secret, as well as Maimonides in his _Guide to the Perplexed_.(633) The
worshippers of the Teraphim, or the Jewish Oracles, “carved images, and
claimed that the light of the principal stars [planets] permeating these
through and through, the Angelic Virtues [or the Regents of the stars and
planets] conversed with them, teaching them many most useful things and
arts.” And Seldenus explains that the Teraphim were built and composed
after the position of certain planets, those which the Greeks called
στοιχεῖα, and according to figures that were located in the sky, and
called ἀλεξητήριοι, or the Tutelary Gods. Those who traced out the
στοιχεῖα were called στοιχειωματικοί, or diviners by the στοιχεῖα.(634)

It is such sentences, however, in the _Nabathean Agriculture_, which have
frightened the men of Science, and made them proclaim the work “either an
apocryphon, or a fairy tale, unworthy of the notice of an Academician.” At
the same time, as shown, zealous Roman Catholics and Protestants
metaphorically tore it to pieces; the former because “it described the
worship of demons,” the latter because it was “ungodly.” Once more, all
are wrong. It is _not_ a fairy tale; and, as far as the pious Churchmen
are concerned, the same worship may be shown in their Scriptures, however
disfigured by translation. Solar and Lunar worship and also the worship of
the Stars and Elements can be traced, and figure in Christian Theology.
These are defended by Papists, and can be stoutly denied by the
Protestants only at their own risk and peril. Two instances may be given.

Ammianus Marcellinus teaches that ancient divinations were always
accomplished with the help of the Spirits of the Elements (_Spiritus
Elementorum_, and in Greek πνεύματα τῶν στοιχείων).(635)

But it is found now that the Planets, the Elements, and the Zodiac, were
figured not only at Heliopolis by the twelve stones called “Mysteries of
the Elements” (_Elementorum Arcana_), but also in Solomon’s Temple, and,
as pointed out by various writers, in several old Italian churches and
even at _Notre Dame de Paris_, where they can be seen to this day.

No symbol, even including the Sun, was more complex in its manifold
meanings than the lunar symbol. The sex was, of course, dual. With some it
was male; as, for instance, the Hindû “King Soma,” and the Chaldean Sin;
with other nations it was female, the beauteous Goddesses Diana‐Luna,
Ilithyia, Lucina. With the Tauri, human victims were sacrificed to
Artemis, a form of the lunar Goddess; the Cretans called her Dictynna, and
the Medes and Persians Anaïtis, as shown by an inscription of Colœ:
Ἀρτέμιδι Ἀνάειτι. But, we are now concerned chiefly with the most chaste
and pure of the virgin Goddesses, Luna‐Artemis, to whom Pamphôs was the
first to give the surname of Καλλίστη, and of whom Hippolytus wrote:
Καλλίστα πολὺ παρθένων.(636) This Artemis‐Lochia, the Goddess that
presided at conception and childbirth, is, in her functions and as the
triple Hecate, the Orphic Deity, the predecessor of the God of the Rabbins
and pre‐Christian Kabalists, and his lunar type. The Goddess Τρίμορφος was
the personified symbol of the various and successive aspects represented
by the Moon in each of her three phases; and this interpretation was
already that of the Stoics,(637) while the Orpheans explained the epithet
Τρίμορφος by the three kingdoms of Nature over which she reigned. Jealous,
bloodthirsty, revengeful and exacting, Hecate‐Luna is a worthy counterpart
of the “jealous God” of the Hebrew prophets.

The whole riddle of the Solar and Lunar worship, as now traced in the
churches, hangs indeed on this world‐old mystery of lunar phenomena. The
correlative forces in the “Queen of Night,” that lie latent for Modern
Science, but are fully active to the knowledge of Eastern Adepts, explain
well the thousand and one images under which the Moon was represented by
the Ancients. It also shows how much more profoundly learned in the
Selenic Mysteries were the Ancients than are now our modern Astronomers.
The whole Pantheon of the lunar Gods and Goddesses, Nephtys or Neïth,
Proserpina, Melitta, Cybele, Isis, Astarte, Venus, and Hecate, on the one
hand, and Apollo, Dionysus, Adonis, Bacchus, Osiris, Atys, Thammuz, etc.,
on the other, all show on the face of their names and titles—those of
“Sons” and “Husbands” of their “Mothers”—their identity with the Christian
Trinity. In every religious system, the Gods were made to merge their
functions, as Father, Son, and Husband, into one, and the Goddesses were
identified as Wife, Mother, and Sister of the male God; the former
synthesizing the human attributes as the “Sun, the Giver of Life,” the
latter merging all the other titles in the grand synthesis known as Maia,
Maya, Maria, etc., a generic name. Maia, in its forced derivation, has
come to mean with the Greeks, “mother,” from the root _ma_ (nurse), and
even gave its name to the month of May, which was sacred to all these
Goddesses before it became consecrated to Mary.(638) Its primitive
meaning, however, was Mâyâ, Durgâ, translated by the Orientalists as
“inaccessible,” but meaning in truth the “unreachable,” in the sense of
illusion and unreality, as being the source and cause of spells, the
personification of illusion.

In religious rites, the Moon served a dual purpose. Personified as a
female Goddess for exoteric purposes, or as a male God in allegory and
symbol, in Occult Philosophy our satellite was regarded as a sexless
Potency to be well studied, because it was to be dreaded. With the
initiated Âryans, Chaldeans, Greeks and Romans, Soma, Sin, Artemis Soteira
(the hermaphrodite Apollo, whose attribute is the lyre, and the bearded
Diana of the bow and arrow), Deus Lunus, and especially Osiris‐Lunus and
Thot‐Lunus,(639) were the Occult potencies of the Moon. But whether male
or female, whether Thot or Minerva, Soma or Astoreth, the Moon is the
Occult Mystery of Mysteries, and more a symbol of evil than of good. Her
seven phases, in the original Esoteric division, are divided into three
astronomical phenomena and four purely psychic phases. That the Moon was
not always reverenced is shown in the Mysteries, in which the death of the
Moon‐God—the three phases of gradual waning and final disappearance—was
allegorized by the Moon standing for the Genius of Evil that, for the
time, triumphs over the Light and Life‐giving God, the Sun; and all the
skill and learning of the ancient Hierophants in Magic were required to
turn this triumph into a defeat.

It was the most ancient worship of all, that of the Third Race of our
Round, the Hermaphrodites, in which the _male_ Moon became sacred, when,
after the so‐called Fall, the sexes had become separated. Deus Lunus then
became an androgyne, male and female in turn; to finally serve, _for
purposes of sorcery_, as a dual power for the Fourth Root Race, the
Atlanteans. With the Fifth, our own Race, the Lunar‐solar worship divided
the nations into two distinct, antagonistic camps. It led to events
described æons later in the Mahâbhâratan War, which to the Europeans is
the fabulous, to the Hindûs and Occultists the historical, strife between
the Sûryavanshas and the Indovanshas. Originating in the dual aspect of
the Moon, the worship of the female and the male principles respectively,
it ended in distinct Solar and Lunar cults. Among the Semitic races, the
Sun was for a very long time feminine and the Moon masculine; the latter
notion being adopted by them from the Atlantean traditions. The Moon was
called the “Lord of the Sun,” Bel‐Shemesh, before the Shemesh worship. The
ignorance of the incipient reasons for such a distinction, and of Occult
principles, led the nations into anthropomorphic idol‐worship. During that
period which is absent from the Mosaic books, viz., from the exile from
Eden to the allegorical Flood, the Jews, with the rest of the Semites,
worshipped Dayanisi, דינאישי, the “Ruler of Men,” the “Judge,” or the Sun.
Though the Jewish canon and Christianism have made the Sun to become the
“Lord God” and “Jehovah” in the _Bible_, yet the same _Bible_ is full of
indiscreet traces of the androgyne Deity, which was Jehovah, the Sun, and
Astoreth, the Moon in its female aspect, and quite free from the present
metaphorical element given to it. God is a “consuming fire,” appears _in_,
and “is encompassed _by_ fire.” It was not only in vision that Ezekiel saw
the Jews “worshipping the Sun.”(640) The Baal of the Israelites—the
Shemesh of the Moabites and the Moloch of the Ammonites—was the identical
“Sun‐Jehovah,” and he is till now the “King of the Host of Heaven,” the
Sun, as much as Astoreth was the “Queen of Heaven,” or the Moon. The “Sun
of Righteousness” has _only now_ become a _metaphorical_ expression. But
the religion of every ancient nation had been primarily based upon the
Occult manifestations of a purely abstract Force or Principle now called
“God.” The very establishment of such worship shows, in its details and
rites, that the philosophers who evolved such systems of Nature,
subjective and objective, possessed profound knowledge, and were
acquainted with many facts of a scientific nature. For besides being
purely Occult, the rites of Lunar worship were based, as just shown, upon
a knowledge of Physiology—quite a modern science with us—Psychology,
sacred Mathematics, Geometry and Metrology, in their right applications to
symbols and figures, which are but glyphs recording observed natural and
scientific _facts_; in short upon a most minute and profound knowledge of
Nature. As we have just said, lunar magnetism generates life, preserves
and destroys it; and Soma embodies the triple power of the Trimûrti,
though it remains unrecognized by the profane to this day. The allegory
that makes Soma, the Moon, produced by the Churning of the Ocean of Life
(Space) by the Gods in another Manvantara, that is, in the pre‐genetic day
of our Planetary System, and the myth, which represents “the Rishis
milking the Earth, whose calf was Soma, the Moon,” have a deep
cosmographical meaning; for it is neither _our_ Earth which is milked, nor
was the Moon which we know the calf.(641) Had our wise men of Science
known as much of the mysteries of Nature as the ancient Âryans did, they
would surely never have imagined that the Moon was projected from the
Earth. Once more, the oldest of permutations in Theogony, the Son becoming
his own Father and the Mother generated by the Son, has to be remembered
and taken into consideration if the symbolical language of the Ancients is
to be understood by us. Otherwise mythology will be ever haunting the
Orientalists as simply “the disease which springs up at a peculiar stage
of human culture!”—as Renouf gravely observes.

The Ancients taught the auto‐generation, so to speak, of the Gods: the One
Divine Essence, _unmanifested_, perpetually begetting a Second‐Self,
_manifested_, which Second‐Self, androgynous in its nature, _gives birth,
in an immaculate way_, to everything macrocosmical and microcosmical in
this Universe. This was shown in the Circle and the Diameter, or the
Sacred Ten (10), a few pages back.

But our Orientalists, notwithstanding their extreme desire to discover one
homogeneous Element in Nature, _will not_ see it. Cramped in their
researches by such ignorance, the Âryanists and Egyptologists are
constantly led astray from truth in their speculations. Thus, de Rougé is
unable to understand, in the text which he translates, the meaning of
Ammon‐Ra saying to King Amenophes, who is supposed to be Memnon: “Thou art
my Son, I have begotten thee.” And, finding the same idea in many a text
and under various forms, this very Christian Orientalist is finally
compelled to exclaim:


    For this idea to have entered the mind of a hierogrammatist, there
    must have been in their religion a more or less defined doctrine,
    _indicating as a possible fact that might come to pass, a divine
    and immaculate incarnation under a human form._


Precisely. But why throw the explanation on to an impossible prophecy,
when the whole secret is explained by the later religion copying the
earlier?

This doctrine was universal, nor was it the mind of any one
hierogrammatist that evolved it; for the Indian Avatâras are a proof to
the contrary. After which, having come “to realize more clearly”(642) what
the “Divine Father and Son” were with the Egyptians, de Rougé still fails
to account for, and to perceive what were the functions attributed to, the
_feminine_ Principle in that primordial generation. He does not find it in
the Goddess Neïth, of Saïs. Yet he quotes the sentence of the Commander to
Cambyses, when introducing that king into the Saïtic temple: “I made known
to his Majesty the dignity of Saïs, which is the abode of Neïth, the great
[female] producer, _genitrix of the Sun_, who is the _first‐born, and who
is not begotten, but only brought forth_”—and hence is the fruit of an
Immaculate Mother.

How much more grandiose, philosophical and poetical—for whoever is able to
understand and appreciate it—is the real distinction made between the
Immaculate Virgin of the ancient Pagans and the modern Papal conception.
With the former, the ever‐youthful Mother Nature, the antitype of her
prototypes, the Sun and Moon, _generates_ and _brings forth_ her “mind‐
born” Son, the Universe. The Sun and Moon, as male‐female deities,
fructify the Earth, the microcosmical Mother, and the latter conceives and
brings forth, in her turn. With the Christians, the “First‐born”
(_primogenitus_) is indeed generated, _i.e._, begotten (_genitus, non
factus_), and positively _conceived and brought forth_: “_Virgo pariet_,”
explains the Latin Church. Thus does that Church drag down the noble
spiritual ideal of the Virgin Mary to the earth, and, making her “of the
earth earthy,” degrades the ideal she portrays to the lowest of the
anthropomorphic Goddesses of the rabble.

Truly, Neïth, Isis, Diana, etc., by whatever name she was called, was “a
demiurgical Goddess, at once visible and invisible, having her place in
Heaven, and _helping on the generation of species_”—the Moon, in short.
Her occult aspects and powers are numberless, and, in one of them, the
Moon becomes with the Egyptians Hathor, another aspect of Isis,(643) and
both of these Goddesses are shown suckling Horus. Behold in the Egyptian
Hall of the British Museum, Hathor worshipped by Pharaoh Thotmes, who
stands between her and the Lord of Heavens. The monolith was taken from
Karnac. The same Goddess has the following legend inscribed on her throne:
“_The Divine Mother and Lady, or Queen of Heaven_”; also the “_Morning
Star_,” and the “_Light of the Sea_”—_Stella Matutina_ and _Lux Maris_.
All the Lunar Goddesses had a dual aspect; one _divine_, the other
_infernal_. All were the Virgin Mothers of an _immaculately_ born Son—the
Sun. Raoul Rochette shows the Moon‐Goddess of the Athenians, Pallas, or
Cybele, Minerva, or again Diana, holding her child‐son on her lap, invoked
in her festivals as Μονογενὴς θεοῦ, the “One Mother of God,” sitting on a
lion, and surrounded by twelve personages; in whom the Occultist
recognizes the twelve great Gods, and the pious Christian Orientalist the
Apostles, or rather the Grecian Pagan prophecy thereof.

They are both right, for the Immaculate Goddess of the Latin Church is a
faithful copy of the older Pagan Goddesses; the number of the Apostles is
that of the twelve Tribes, and the latter are a personification of the
twelve great Gods, and of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac. Almost every
detail in the Christian dogma is borrowed from the Heathens. Semele, the
Wife of Jupiter and Mother of Bacchus, the Sun, is, according to Nonnus,
also “carried,” or made to ascend to Heaven after her death, where she
presides between Mars and Venus, under the name of the “Queen of the
World,” or the Universe, πανβασίλεια; “at the name of which,” as at the
names of Hathor, Hecate, and other infernal Goddesses, “all the demons
tremble.”(644)

“Σεμέλην τρέμουσι δαίμονες.” This Greek inscription on a small temple,
reproduced on a stone that was found by Beger, and copied by Montfaucon,
as De Mirville tells us, informs us of the stupendous fact, that the Magna
Mater of the old world was an impudent “plagiarism” of the Immaculate
Virgin Mother of his Church, perpetrated by the Demon. Whether so, or
_vice versâ_, is of no importance. That which is interesting to note is
the perfect identity between the _archaic copy_ and the _modern original_.

Did space permit we might show the inconceivable coolness and unconcern
exhibited by certain followers of the Roman Catholic Church, when they are
made to face the revelations of the Past. To Maury’s remark that “the
Virgin took possession of all the Sanctuaries of Ceres and Venus, and that
the Pagan rites, proclaimed and practised in honour of those Goddesses,
were in a great measure transferred to the Mother of Christ,”(645) the
advocate of Rome answers, that such _is_ the fact, and that it is just as
it should be, and quite natural.


    As the dogma, the liturgy, and the rites professed by the Roman
    Apostolical Church in 1862 are found engraved on monuments,
    inscribed on papyri, and cylinders _hardly posterior to the
    Deluge_, it does seem impossible to deny the existence of a _first
    ante‐historical_ [Roman] _Catholicism of which our own is but the
    faithful continuation_.... [But while the former was the
    culmination, the “_summum_ of the impudence of demons and goëtic
    necromancy” ... the latter is _divine_.] If in _our_ [Christian]
    _Revelation_ [_l’Apocalypse_], Mary, clothed with the Sun and
    having the Moon under her feet, has no longer anything in common
    _with the humble servant_ [servante] _of Nazareth_ [_sic_], it is
    because she has now become the greatest of theological and
    cosmological powers in _our_ universe.(646)


Verily so, since Pindar thus sings of her “assumption”: “She sits _at the
right hand_ of her Father [Jupiter], ... and is more powerful than all the
other (Angels or) Gods”(647)—a hymn likewise applied to the Virgin. St.
Bernard also, quoted by Cornelius à Lapide, is made to address the Virgin
Mary in this wise: “The Sun‐Christ lives in thee and thou livest in
him.”(648)

Again the Virgin is admitted to be the Moon by the same unsophisticated
holy man. Being the Lucina of the Church, in childbirth the verse of
Virgil, “_Casta fove Lucina, tuus jam regnat Apollo_,” is applied to her.
“Like the Moon, the Virgin is the Queen of Heaven,” adds the innocent
saint.(649)

This settles the question. According to such writers as De Mirville, the
more similarity there exists between the Pagan conceptions and the
Christian dogmas, the more divine appears the Christian religion, and the
more is it seen to be the only truly inspired one, especially in its Roman
Catholic form. The unbelieving Scientists and Academicians who think they
see in the Latin Church quite the opposite of divine inspiration, and who
will not believe in the Satanic tricks of plagiarism by anticipation, are
severely taken to task. But then “they believe in nothing and reject even
the _Nabathean Agriculture_ as a romance and a pack of superstitious
nonsense,” complains the memorialist. “In their perverted opinion
Qû‐tâmy’s ‘idol of the Moon’ and the statue of the Madonna are one!” A
noble Marquis, twenty‐five years ago, wrote six huge volumes, or, as he
calls them “Mémoires to the French Academy,” with the sole object of
proving Roman Catholicism to be an inspired and revealed faith. As a proof
thereof, he furnishes numberless facts, all tending to show that the
entire Ancient World, ever since the Deluge, had, with the help of the
Devil, been systematically plagiarizing the rites, ceremonies, and dogmas
of the future Holy Church, which was to be born ages later. What would
that faithful son of Rome have said had he heard his co‐religionist, M.
Renouf, the distinguished Egyptologist of the British Museum, declaring in
one of his learned lectures, that neither “Hebrews nor Greeks borrowed any
of their ideas from Egypt”?

But perhaps M. Renouf intended to say that it was the Egyptians, the
Greeks, and the Âryans, who borrowed their ideas from the Latin Church?
And if so, why, in the name of logic, do the Papists reject the additional
information which the Occultists may give them on Moon‐worship, since it
all tends to show that the worship of the Roman Catholic Church is as old
as the world—_of Sabæanism and Astrolatry_?

The reason of early Christian and later Roman Catholic Astrolatry, or the
symbolical worship of Sun and Moon, a worship identical with that of the
Gnostics, though less philosophical and pure than the “Sun‐worship” of the
Zoroastrians, is a natural consequence of its birth and origin. The
adoption by the Latin Church of such symbols as Water, Fire, Sun, Moon and
Stars, and many others, is simply a continuation by the early Christians
of the old worship of Pagan nations. Thus, Odin got his wisdom, power, and
knowledge, by sitting at the feet of Mimir, the thrice‐wise Jotun, who
passed his life by the fountain of primeval Wisdom, the crystalline Waters
of which increased his knowledge daily. “Mimir drew the highest knowledge
from the fountain, because the World was born of Water; hence primeval
Wisdom was to be found in that mysterious element.” The eye which Odin had
to pledge to acquire that knowledge may be “the Sun, which enlightens and
penetrates all things; his other eye being the Moon, whose reflection
gazes out of the deep, and which at last, when setting, sinks into the
Ocean.”(650) But it is something more than this. Loki, the Fire‐God, is
said to have hidden in the Water, as well as in the Moon, the light‐giver,
whose reflection he found therein. This belief that the Fire finds refuge
in the Water was not limited to the old Scandinavians. It was shared by
all nations and was finally adopted by the early Christians, who
symbolized the Holy Ghost under the shape of Fire, “cloven tongues like as
of fire”—the breath of the Father‐Sun. This Fire descends also into the
Water, or the Sea—Mare, Mary. The Dove was the symbol of the Soul with
several nations; it was sacred to Venus, the Goddess born from the sea‐
foam, and it became later the symbol of the Christian Anima Mundi, or Holy
Spirit.

One of the most occult chapters in the _Book of the Dead_ is that
entitled, “The transformation into the God giving Light to the Path of
Darkness,” wherein “Woman‐Light of the Shadow” serves Thot in his retreat
in the Moon. Thot‐Hermes is said to hide therein, because he is the
representative of the Secret Wisdom. He is the manifested Logos of its
light side; the concealed Deity or “Dark Wisdom” when he is supposed to
retire to the opposite hemisphere. Speaking of her power, the Moon calls
herself repeatedly: “The Light which shineth in Darkness,” the “Woman‐
Light.” Hence it became the accepted symbol of all the Virgin‐Mother
Goddesses. As the wicked “evil” Spirits warred against the Moon in days of
yore, so they are supposed to war now, without, however, being able to
prevail against the actual Queen of Heaven, Mary, the Moon. Hence, also,
the Moon was intimately connected in all the Pagan Theogonies with the
Dragon, her eternal enemy. The Virgin, or Madonna, stands on the mythical
Satan thus symbolized, who lies crushed and powerless, under her feet.
This, because the head and tail of the Dragon, which, to this day in
Eastern Astronomy, represent the ascending and descending nodes of the
Moon, were also symbolized in ancient Greece by the two serpents. Hercules
kills them on the day of his birth, and so does the Babe in his Virgin‐
Mother’s arms. As Mr. Gerald Massey aptly observes in this connection:


    All such symbols figured their own facts from the first, and did
    not pre‐figure others of a totally different order. The
    iconography [and dogmas, too] had survived in Rome from a period
    remotely pre‐Christian. _There was neither forgery nor
    interpolation of types; nothing but a continuity of imagery with a
    perversion of its meaning._




Section X. Tree, Serpent, and Crocodile Worship.


    Object of horror or of adoration, men have for the serpent an
    implacable hatred, or prostrate themselves before its genius. Lie
    calls it, Prudence claims it, Envy carries it in its heart, and
    Eloquence on its caduceus. In Hell it arms the whip of the Furies;
    in Heaven Eternity makes of it its symbol.

    DE CHÂTEAUBRIAND.


The Ophites asserted that there were several kinds of Genii, from God to
man; that the relative superiority of these was decided by the degree of
Light that was accorded to each; and they maintained that the Serpent had
to be constantly called upon and to be thanked for the signal service it
had rendered humanity. For it taught Adam that if he ate of the fruit of
the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, he would raise his Being immensely
by the learning and wisdom he would thus acquire. Such was the exoteric
reason given.

It is easy to see whence is the primal idea of the dual, Janus‐like
character of the Serpent—the good and the bad. This symbol is one of the
most ancient, because the reptile preceded the bird, and the bird the
mammal. Hence the belief, or rather the superstition, of the savage tribes
who think that the souls of their ancestors live under this form, and the
general association of the Serpent with the Tree. The legends about the
various meanings it represents are numberless; but, as most of them are
allegorical, they have now passed into the class of fables based on
ignorance and dark superstition. For instance, when Philostratus narrates
that the natives of India and Arabia fed on the heart and liver of
Serpents in order to learn the language of all the animals, the Serpent
being credited with that faculty, he certainly never meant his words to be
accepted literally.(651) As will be found more than once as we proceed,
Serpent and Dragon were names given to the Wise Ones, the Initiated Adepts
of olden times. It was their wisdom and their learning that were devoured
or assimilated by their followers, whence the allegory. When the
Scandinavian Sigurd is fabled to have roasted the heart of Fafnir, the
Dragon, whom he had slain, and thence to have become the wisest of men,
the meaning is the same. Sigurd had become learned in the runes and
magical charms; he had received the “Word” from an Initiate of the name of
Fafnir, or from a sorcerer, after which the latter died, as do many, after
“passing the word.” Epiphanius lets out a secret of the Gnostics in trying
to expose their “heresies.” The Gnostic Ophites, he says, had a reason for
honouring the Serpent: _it was because he taught the primeval men the
Mysteries_.(652) Verily so; but they did not have Adam and Eve in the
Garden in their minds when teaching this dogma, but simply that which is
stated above. The Nâgas of the Hindû and Tibetan Adepts were human Nâgas
(Serpents), not reptiles. Moreover, the Serpent has ever been the type of
consecutive or serial rejuvenation, of Immortality and Time.

The numerous and extremely interesting readings, the interpretations and
facts about Serpent worship, given in Mr. Gerald Massey’s _Natural
Genesis_, are very ingenious and scientifically correct. But they are far
from covering the _whole_ of the meanings implied. They divulge only the
astronomical and physiological mysteries, with the addition of some cosmic
phenomena. On the lowest plane of materiality, the Serpent was, no doubt,
the “great emblem of Mystery in the Mysteries,” and was, very likely,
“adopted as a type of feminine pubescence, on account of its sloughing and
self‐renewal.” It was so, however, only with regard to mysteries
concerning terrestrial _animal_ life, for as the symbol of “_re‐clothing_
and re‐birth in the [universal] mysteries,” its “final phase,”(653) or
shall we rather say its incipient and culminating phases, was not of this
plane. These phases were generated in the pure realm of Ideal Light, and
having accomplished the round of the whole cycle of adaptations and
symbolism, the Mysteries returned from whence they had come, into the
essence of _immaterial_ causality. They belonged to the highest Gnôsis.
And surely this could have never obtained its name and fame solely on
account of its penetration into physiological and especially feminine
functions!

As a symbol, the Serpent had as many aspects and occult meanings as the
Tree itself; the “Tree of Life,” with which it was emblematically and
almost indissolubly connected. Whether viewed as a metaphysical or a
physical symbol, the Tree and Serpent, jointly, or separately, have never
been so degraded by antiquity as they are now, in this our age of the
breaking of idols, not for truth’s sake, but to glorify the most gross
matter. The revelations and interpretations in General Forlong’s _Rivers
of Life_ would have astounded the worshippers of the Tree and Serpent in
the days of archaic Chaldean and Egyptian wisdom; and even the early
Shaivas would have recoiled in horror at the theories and suggestions of
the author of the said work. “The notion of Payne Knight and Inman that
the Cross or Tau is simply a copy of the male organs in a triadic form is
radically false,” writes Mr. G. Massey, who proves what he says. But this
is a statement that could be as justly applied to almost all the modern
interpretations of ancient symbols. _The Natural Genesis_, a monumental
work of research and thought, the most complete on that subject that has
ever been published, covering as it does a wider field, and explaining
much more than all the Symbologists who have hitherto written, does not
yet go beyond the “psycho‐theistic” stage of ancient thought. Nor were
Payne Knight and Inman altogether wrong; except in entirely failing to see
that their interpretations of the Tree of Life, as the Cross and Phallus,
fitted the symbol only in the lowest and latest stage of the evolutionary
development of the idea of the Giver of Life. It was the last and the
grossest physical transformation of Nature, in animal, insect, bird and
even plant; for bi‐une, creative magnetism, in the form of the attraction
of contraries, or sexual polarization, acts in the constitution of reptile
and bird as it does in that of man. Moreover, the modern Symbologists and
Orientalists, from first to last, being ignorant of the real Mysteries
revealed by Occultism, can necessarily see but this last stage. If told
that this mode of procreation, which the whole world of being has now in
common on this Earth, is but a passing phase, a physical means of
furnishing the conditions to and producing the phenomena of life, and that
it will alter with this and disappear with the next Root‐Race, they would
laugh at such a superstitious and unscientific idea. But the most learned
Occultists assert this because _they know it_. The universe of living
beings, of all those which procreate their species, is the living witness
to the various modes of procreation in the evolution of animal and human
species and races; and the Naturalist ought to sense this truth
intuitionally, even though he is yet unable to demonstrate it. How could
he, indeed, with the present modes of thought! The landmarks of the
archaic history of the Past are few and scarce, and those that men of
Science come across are mistaken for finger‐posts of our little era. Even
so‐called “universal (?) history” embraces but a tiny field in the almost
boundless space of the unexplored regions of our latest, Fifth Root‐Race.
Hence, every fresh sign‐post, every new glyph of the hoary Past that is
discovered, is added to the old stock of information, to be interpreted on
the same lines of preëxisting conceptions, and without any reference to
the special cycle of thought which that particular glyph may belong to.
How can Truth ever come to light if this method is never changed!

Thus, in the beginning of their joint existence as a glyph of Immortal
Being, the Tree and Serpent were divine imagery, truly. The Tree was
_reversed_, and its roots were generated in Heaven and grew out of the
Rootless Root of All‐Being. Its trunk grew and developed; crossing the
planes of the Plerôma, it shot out crossways its luxuriant branches, first
on the plane of hardly differentiated matter, and then downward till they
touched the terrestrial plane. Thus, the Ashvattha Tree of Life and Being,
whose destruction alone leads to immortality, is said in the
_Bhagavadgîtâ_ to grow with its roots above and its branches below.(654)
The roots represent the Supreme Being, or First Cause, the Logos; but one
has to go beyond those roots to _unite oneself with Krishna_, who, says
Arjuna, is “greater than Brahman, and First Cause ... the indestructible,
that which is, that which is not, and what is beyond them.”(655) Its
boughs are Hiranyagarbha (Brahmâ or Brahman in its highest manifestations,
say Shrîdhara Svâmin and Madhusûdana), the highest Dhyân Chohans or Devas.
The _Vedas_ are its leaves. He only who goes _beyond_ the roots shall
never return; that is to say, shall reïncarnate no more during this Age of
Brahmâ.

It is only when its pure boughs had touched the terrestrial mud of the
Garden of Eden, of our Adamic Race, that this Tree became soiled by the
contact and lost its pristine purity; and that the Serpent of Eternity,
the Heaven‐Born Logos, was finally degraded. In days of old, of the Divine
Dynasties on Earth, the now dreaded reptile was regarded as the first beam
of light that radiated from the abyss of Divine Mystery. Various were the
forms which it was made to assume, and numerous the natural symbols
adapted to it, as it crossed the æons of Time; as from Infinite Time
(Kâla) itself it fell into the space and time evolved out of human
speculation. These forms were cosmic and astronomical, theistic and
pantheistic, abstract and concrete. They became in turn the Polar Dragon
and the Southern Cross, the Alpha Draconis of the Pyramid, and the
Hindû‐Buddhist Dragon, which ever threatens, yet never swallows the Sun
during its eclipses. Till then, the Tree remained ever green, for it was
sprinkled by the Waters of Life; the Great Dragon remained ever divine, so
long as it was kept within the precincts of the sidereal fields. But the
Tree grew and its lower boughs at last touched the Infernal Regions—our
Earth. Then the Great Serpent Nidhögg—he who devours the corpses of the
evil‐doers in the “Hall of Misery” (human life), so soon as they are
plunged into Hwergelmir, the roaring cauldron (of human passions)—gnawed
the reversed World‐Tree. The worms of materiality covered the once healthy
and mighty roots, and are now ascending higher and higher along the trunk;
while the Midgard Snake coiled at the bottom of the Seas, encircles the
Earth, and, through its venomous breath, makes her powerless to defend
herself.

The Dragons and Serpents of Antiquity are all seven‐headed—one head for
each Race, and “every head with seven hairs on it,” as the allegory has
it. Aye, from Ananta, the Serpent of Eternity, which carries Vishnu
through the Manvantara; from the original primordial Shesha, whose seven
heads become “one thousand heads” in the Purânic fancy, down to the seven‐
headed Akkadian Serpent. This typifies the Seven Principles throughout
Nature and in man; the highest or middle head being the seventh. It is not
of the Mosaic, Jewish Sabbath that Philo speaks, in his _Creation of the
World_, when saying that the world was completed “according to the perfect
nature of number 6.” For:


    _When that Reason_ [_Nous_] _which is holy in accordance with the
    number 7, has entered the soul_ [the living body rather], the
    number 6 is thus arrested and all the mortal things which that
    number makes.


And again:


    Number 7 is the festival day of all the earth, the _birthday of
    the world_. I know not whether any one would be able to celebrate
    the number 7 in adequate terms.(656)


The author of _The Natural Genesis_ thinks that:


    The septenary of stars seen in the Great Bear [the Saptarshis] and
    seven‐headed Dragon furnished a visible origin for the symbolic
    seven of time above. The goddess of the seven stars was the mother
    of time, as Kep; whence Kepti and Sebti for the two times and
    number 7. So this is the star of the Seven by name. Sevekh
    (Kronus), the son of the goddess, has the name of the seven or
    seventh. So has Sefekh Abu who builds the house on high, as Wisdom
    (Sophia) built hers with seven pillars.... The primary kronotypes
    were seven, and thus the beginning of time in heaven is based on
    the number and the name of seven, on account of the starry
    demonstrators. The seven stars as they turned round annually kept
    pointing, as it were, with the forefinger of the right hand, and
    describing a circle in the upper and lower heaven.(657) The number
    7 naturally suggested a measure by seven, that led to what may be
    termed _Sevening_, and to the marking and mapping out of the
    circle in seven corresponding divisions which were assigned to the
    seven great constellations; and thus was formed the celestial
    heptanomis of Egypt in the heavens.

    When the stellar heptanomis was broken up and divided into four
    quarters, it was multiplied by four, and the twenty‐eight signs
    took the place of the primary seven constellations; the lunar
    zodiac of twenty‐eight signs being the registered result of
    reckoning twenty‐eight days to the moon, or a lunar month.(658) In
    the Chinese arrangement, the four sevens are given to four Genii
    that preside over the four cardinal points,(659) or rather the
    seven northern constellations make up the Black Warrior; the seven
    eastern (Chinese autumn) constitute the White Tiger; the seven
    southern are the Vermilion Bird; and the seven western (called
    vernal) are the Azure Dragon. Each of these four spirits presides
    over its heptanomis during one lunar week. The genitrix of the
    first heptanomis (Typhon of the seven stars) now took a lunar
    character.... In this phase we find the goddess Sefekh, whose name
    signifies number 7, is the feminine word, or logos in place of the
    mother of time, who was the earlier _Word_, as goddess of the
    Seven Stars.(660)


The author shows that it was the Goddess of the Great Bear and Mother of
Time who was in Egypt from the earliest times the “Living Word,” and that
Sevekh‐Kronus, whose type was the Crocodile‐Dragon, the pre‐planetary form
of Saturn, was called her son and consort; he was her Word‐Logos.(661)

The above is quite plain, but it was not the knowledge of astronomy only
that led the Ancients to the process of _Sevening_. The primal cause goes
far deeper and will be explained in its place.

The above quotations are no digressions. They are brought forward as
showing (_a_) the reason why a full Initiate was called a Dragon, a Snake,
a Nâga; and (_b_) that our septenary division was used by the priests of
the earliest dynasties in Egypt, for the same reason, and on the same
basis, as by us. This needs further elucidation, however. As already
stated, what Mr. Gerald Massey calls the Four Genii of the four cardinal
points; and the Chinese, the Black Warrior, White Tiger, Vermilion Bird,
and Azure Dragon, are called in the Secret Books, the “Four Hidden Dragons
of Wisdom” and the “Celestial Nâgas.” Now, the seven‐headed or septenary
Dragon‐Logos is shown to have, in course of time, been split up, so to
speak, into _four_ heptanomic parts or twenty‐eight portions. Each week
has a distinct Occult character in the lunar month; each day of the
twenty‐eight has its special characteristics; for each of the twelve
constellations, whether separately or in combination with other signs, has
an Occult influence either for good or for evil. This represents the sum
of knowledge that men can acquire on this earth; yet few are those who
acquire it, and still fewer are the wise men who get to the root of
knowledge symbolized by the great Root‐Dragon, the Spiritual Logos of
these visible signs. But those who do, receive the name of Dragons, and
they are the “Arhats of the Four Truths of the Twenty‐eight Faculties,” or
attributes, and have always been so called.

The Alexandrian Neo‐Platonists asserted that to become real Chaldees or
Magi, one had to master the science or knowledge of the periods of the
Seven Rectors of the World, in whom is all wisdom. And Jamblichus is
credited with another version, which does not, however, alter the meaning,
for he says:


    The Assyrians have not only preserved the records of seven and
    twenty myriads of years, as Hipparchus says they have, but
    likewise of the whole apocatastases and periods of the Seven
    Rulers of the World.(662)


The legends of every nation and tribe, whether civilized or savage, point
to the once universal belief in the great wisdom and cunning of the
Serpents. They are “charmers.” They hypnotize the bird with their eye, and
man himself very often does not overcome their fascinating influence;
therefore the symbol is a most fitting one.

The Crocodile is the Egyptian Dragon. It was the dual symbol of Heaven and
Earth, of Sun and Moon, and was made sacred, in consequence of its
amphibious nature, to Osiris and Isis. According to Eusebius, the
Egyptians represented the Sun in a Ship as its pilot, this ship being
carried along by a Crocodile, “to show the motion of the Sun in the Moist
(Space).”(663) The Crocodile was, moreover, the symbol of Lower Egypt
herself, the Lower being the more swampy of the two countries. The
Alchemists claim another interpretation. They say that the symbol of the
Sun in the Ship on the Ether of Space meant that the Hermetic Matter is
the principle, or basis, of Gold, or again the _philosophical_ Sun; the
Water, within which the Crocodile is swimming, is that Water, or Matter,
made liquid; the Ship herself, finally, representing the Vessel of Nature,
in which the Sun, or the sulphuric, igneous principle, acts as a pilot,
because it is the Sun which conducts the work by his action upon the Moist
or Mercury. The above is only for the Alchemists.

The Serpent became the type and symbol of evil, and of the Devil, only
during the Middle Ages. The early Christians as well as the Ophite
Gnostics, had their dual Logos: the Good and the Bad Serpent, the
Agathodæmon and the Kakodæmon. This is demonstrated by the writings of
Marcus, Valentinus, and many others, and especially in _Pistis‐
Sophia_—certainly a document of the earliest centuries of Christianity. On
the marble sarcophagus of a tomb, discovered in 1852 near the Porta Pia,
one sees the scene of the adoration of the Magi, “or else,” remarks the
late C. W. King, in _The Gnostics and their Remains_, “the prototype of
that scene, the ‘Birth of the New Sun’.” The mosaic floor exhibited a
curious design which might have represented either Isis suckling the babe
Harpocrates, or the Madonna nursing the infant Jesus. In the smaller
sarcophagi that surrounded the larger one, many leaden plates rolled like
scrolls were found, eleven of which can still be deciphered. The contents
of these ought to be regarded as final proof of a much‐vexed question, for
they show that either the early Christians, up to the VIth Century, were
_bonâ fide_ Pagans, or that dogmatic Christianity was borrowed wholesale,
and passed in full into the Christian Church—Sun, Tree, Serpent, Crocodile
and all.


    On the first is seen Anubis ... holding out a scroll; at his feet
    are two female busts: below all are two serpents entwined about
    ... a corpse swathed up like a mummy. In the second scroll ... is
    Anubis, holding out a cross, the “Sign of Life.” Under his feet
    lies the corpse encircled in the numerous folds of a huge serpent,
    the Agathodæmon, guardian of the deceased.... In the third scroll
    ... the same Anubis bears on his arm an oblong object, ... held so
    as to convert the outline of the figure into a complete Latin
    cross. ... At the god’s foot is a rhomboid, the Egyptian “Egg of
    the World,” towards which crawls a serpent coiled into a
    circle.... Under the ... busts ... is the letter ω, repeated
    _seven_ times in a line, reminding one of the “Names.” ... Very
    remarkable also is the line of characters, apparently Palmyrene,
    upon the legs of the first Anubis. As for the figure of the
    _serpent_, supposing these talismans to emanate not from the Isiac
    but the newer Ophite creed, it may well stand for that “True and
    perfect Serpent,” who “leads forth the souls of all that put their
    trust in him out of the Egypt of the body, and through the Red Sea
    of Death into the Land of Promise, saving them on their way from
    the Serpents of the Wilderness, that is, from the Rulers of the
    Stars.”(664)


And this “true and perfect Serpent” is the seven‐lettered God who is now
credited with being Jehovah, and Jesus _one with him_. To this seven‐
vowelled God the candidate for Initiation is sent by the “First Mystery,”
in the _Pistis‐Sophia_, a work earlier than St. John’s _Revelation_, and
evidently of the same school. “The (Serpent of the) Seven Thunders uttered
these seven vowels,” but “seal up those things which the Seven Thunders
uttered, and write them not,” says _Revelation_. “Do ye seek after these
mysteries?”—inquires Jesus in _Pistis‐Sophia_. “No mystery is more
excellent than they [the seven vowels]; for they shall bring your souls
unto the Light of Lights”—_i.e._, true Wisdom. “Nothing, therefore, is
more excellent than the mysteries which ye seek after, saving only the
mystery of the _Seven Vowels_ and their _forty and nine_ Powers, and the
numbers thereof.”

In India, it was the mystery of the _Seven Fires_ and their Forty‐nine
Fires or aspects, or “the numbers thereof.”

These Seven Vowels are represented by the Svastika signs on the crowns of
the seven heads of the Serpent of Eternity, in India, among Esoteric
“Buddhists,” in Egypt, in Chaldæa, etc., and among the Initiates of every
other country. They are the Seven Zones of _post mortem_ ascent, in the
Hermetic writings, in each of which the “Mortal” leaves one of his Souls,
or Principles; until arrived on the plane above all Zones, he remains as
the great Formless Serpent of Absolute Wisdom, or the Deity Itself. The
seven‐headed Serpent has more than one signification in the arcane
teachings. It is the seven‐headed Draco, each of whose heads is a star of
the Lesser Bear; but it was also, and preëminently, the Serpent of
Darkness, inconceivable and incomprehensible, whose seven heads were the
seven Logoi, the reflections of the one and first‐manifested Light—the
Universal Logos.




Section XI. Demon est Deus Inversus.


This symbolical sentence, in its many‐sided forms, is certainly most
dangerous and iconoclastic in the face of all the dualistic later
religions, or rather theologies, and especially so in the light of
Christianity. Yet it is neither just nor correct to say that it is
Christianity which has conceived and brought forth Satan. As an
“Adversary,” the opposing Power required by the equilibrium and harmony of
things in Nature, as Shadow is required to make still brighter the Eight,
as Night to bring into greater relief the Day, and as Cold to make one
appreciate the more the comfort of Heat, so has Satan ever existed.
Homogeneity is one and indivisible. But if the homogeneous One and
Absolute is no mere figure of speech, and if Heterogeneity, in its
dualistic aspect, is its offspring, its bifurcous shadow or reflection,
then even that divine Homogeneity must contain in itself the essence of
both good and evil. If “God” is Absolute, Infinite, and the Universal Root
of all and everything in Nature and its Universe, whence comes Evil or
D’Evil if not from the same Golden Womb of the Absolute? Thus we are
forced either to accept the emanation of good and evil, of Agathodæmon and
Kakodæmon, as offshoots from the same trunk of the Tree of Being, or to
resign ourselves to the absurdity of believing in two eternal Absolutes!

Having to trace the origin of the idea to the very beginnings of the human
mind, it is but just, meanwhile, to give his due even to the proverbial
Devil. Antiquity knew of no isolated, thoroughly and absolutely bad “God
of evil.” Pagan thought represented good and evil as twin brothers, born
from the same mother—Nature; so soon as that thought ceased to be archaic,
Wisdom passed into Philosophy. In the beginning the symbols of good and
evil were mere abstractions, Light and Darkness; later their types were
chosen among the most natural and ever‐recurrent periodical cosmic
phenomena—the Day and Night, or the Sun and Moon. Then the Hosts of the
Solar and Lunar Deities were made to represent them, and the Dragon of
Darkness was contrasted with the Dragon of Light. The Host of Satan is a
Son of God, no less than the Host of the B’ne Alhim, the Children of God
who came to “present themselves before the Lord,” their Father.(665) “The
Sons of God” become the “Fallen Angels” only after perceiving that the
daughters of men _were fair_.(666) In the Indian philosophy, the Suras are
among the earliest and the brightest Gods, and become Asuras only when
dethroned by Brâhmanical fancy, Satan never assumed an anthropomorphic,
individualized shape, until the creation by man, of a “one _living_
personal God,” had been accomplished; and then merely as a matter of prime
necessity. A screen was needed; a scape‐goat to explain the cruelty,
blunders, and but too‐evident injustice, perpetrated by him for whom
absolute perfection, mercy and goodness were claimed. This was the first
Karmic effect of abandoning a philosophical and logical Pantheism, to
build, as a prop for lazy man, “a merciful Father in Heaven,” whose daily
and hourly actions, as Natura Naturans, the “comely Mother but stone
cold,” belie the assumption. This led to the primal twins, Osiris‐Typhon,
Ormazd‐Ahriman, and finally Cain‐Abel and the _tutti quanti_ of
contraries.

Having commenced by being synonymous with Nature, “God,” the Creator,
ended by being made its author. Pascal settles the difficulty very
cunningly by saying:


    Nature has perfections, in order to show that she is the image of
    God; and defects, in order to show that she is _only_ his image.


The further back one recedes into the darkness of the prehistoric ages,
the more philosophical does the prototypic figure of the later Satan
appear. The first “Adversary,” in individual human form, that one meets
with in old Purânic literature, is one of her greatest Rishis and
Yogis—Nârada, surnamed the “Strife‐maker.”

And he is a Brahmaputra, a son of Brahmâ, the male. But of him later on.
Who the great “Deceiver” really is, one can ascertain by searching for
him, _with open eyes_ and an unprejudiced mind, in every old Cosmogony and
Scripture.

It is the anthropomorphized Demiurge, the Creator of Heaven and Earth,
when separated from the collective Hosts of his Fellow‐Creators, whom, so
to speak, he represents and synthesizes. It is _now_ the God of
Theologies. “The wish is father to the thought.” Once upon a time, a
philosophical symbol left to perverse human fancy; afterwards, fashioned
into a fiendish, deceiving, cunning, and jealous God.

As the Dragons and other Fallen Angels are described in other parts of
this work, a few words upon the much‐slandered Satan will be sufficient.
The student will do well to remember that, with every people, except the
Christian nations, the Devil is to this day no worse an entity than the
opposite aspect, in the dual nature of the so‐called Creator. This is only
natural. One cannot claim God as the synthesis of the whole Universe, as
Omnipresent and Omniscient and Infinite, and then divorce him from Evil.
As there is far more Evil than Good in the world, it follows on logical
grounds that either God must include Evil, or stand as the direct cause of
it, or else surrender his claims to Absoluteness. The Ancients understood
this so well that their philosophers, now followed by the Kabalists,
defined Evil as the “lining” of God or Good; _Demon est Deus inversus_,
being a very old adage. Indeed, Evil is but an antagonizing blind force in
Nature; it is reäction, opposition, and contrast—evil for some, good for
others. There is no _malum in se_; only the Shadow of Light, without which
Light could have no existence, even in our perceptions. If Evil
disappeared, Good would disappear along with it from Earth. The “Old
Dragon” was pure Spirit before he became Matter, _passive_ before he
became _active_. In the Syro‐Chaldean Magic both Ophis and Ophiomorphos
are joined in the Zodiac in the sign of the Androgyne Virgo‐Scorpio.
Before its fall on earth the Serpent was Ophis‐Christos, and after its
fall it became Ophiomorphos‐Chrestos. Everywhere the speculations of the
Kabalists treat of Evil as a _Force_, which is antagonistic, but at the
same time essential, to Good, as giving it vitality and existence, which
it could never have otherwise. There would be no _Life_ possible (in the
mâyâvic sense) without _Death_; no regeneration and reconstruction without
destruction. Plants would perish in eternal sunlight, and so would man,
who would become an automaton without the exercise of his free will, and
his aspiring towards that sunlight, which would lose its being and value
for him had he nothing but light. Good is infinite and eternal only in the
eternally concealed from us, and this is why we imagine it eternal. On the
manifested planes, one equilibrates the other. Few are those Theists,
believers in a Personal God, who do not make of Satan the shadow of God;
or who, confounding both, do not believe they have a right to pray to
their idol, asking its help and protection for the exercise of and
immunity for their evil and cruel deeds. “Lead us not into temptation” is
addressed daily to “our Father, in Heaven,” and not to the Devil, by
millions of Christian hearts. This they do, repeating the very words put
into the mouth of their Saviour, and yet do not give one thought to the
fact that their meaning is contradicted point blank by James, “the brother
of the Lord”:


    Let do man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God
    cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man.(667)


Why, then, say that it is the Devil who tempts us, when the Church teaches
us, _on the authority of Christ_, that it is God who does so? Open any
pious volume in which the word “temptation” is defined in its theological
sense, and forthwith you find two definitions:


    (1) Those afflictions and troubles _whereby God tries his people_;
    (2) Those means and enticements which the Devil makes use of to
    _ensnare_ and allure mankind.(668)


Accepted literally, the teachings of Christ and James contradict each
other, and what dogma can reconcile the two if the Occult meaning is
rejected?

Between the alternative allurements, wise will be that philosopher who
will be able to decide where God disappears to make room for the Devil!
Therefore, when we read that “the Devil is a liar and the father of it,”
that is an _incarnate lie_, and are also told in the same breath that
Satan, the Devil, was a Son of God and the most beautiful of his
Archangels, rather than believe that Father and Son are a gigantic,
personified and eternal Lie, we prefer to turn to Pantheism and to Pagan
philosophy for information.

Once that the key to _Genesis_ is in our hands, the scientific and
symbolical Kabalah unveils the secret. The Great Serpent of the Garden of
Eden and the “Lord God” are identical, and so are Jehovah and Cain—that
Cain who is referred to in Theology as the “murderer” and the Liar to God!
Jehovah tempts the King of Israel to number the people, and Satan tempts
him to do the same in another place. Jehovah turns into the Fiery Serpents
to bite those he is displeased with; and Jehovah informs the Brazen
Serpent that heals them.

These short, and seemingly contradictory, statements in the _Old
Testament_—contradictory because the two Powers are separated instead of
being regarded as the two faces of one and the same thing—are the echoes,
distorted out of recognition by exotericism and theology, of the universal
and philosophical dogmas in Nature, so well understood by the primitive
Sages. We find the same groundwork in several personifications in the
_Purânas_, only far more ample and philosophically suggestive.

Thus Pulastya, a “Son of God,” one of the first progeny, is made the
progenitor of Demons, the Râkshasas, the tempters and the devourers of
men. Pishâchâ, a female Demon, is a daughter of Daksha, a “Son of God”
too, and a God, and the mother of all the Pishâchas.(669) The Demons, so‐
called in the _Purânas_, are very extraordinary Devils when judged from
the standpoint of European and orthodox views, since all of them, Dânavas,
Daityas, Pishâchas, and Râkshasas, are represented as extremely pious,
following the precepts of the _Vedas_, some of them even being great
Yogins. But they oppose the clergy and ritualism, sacrifices and forms,
just as the head Yogins do to this day in India, and are no less respected
for it, though they are permitted to follow neither caste nor ritual;
hence all those Purânic Giants and Titans are called Devils. The
missionaries, ever on the watch to show, if they can, that the Hindû
traditions are nothing better than a reflection of the Jewish _Bible_,
have evolved a whole romance on the alleged identity of Pulastya with
Cain, and of the Râkshasas with the Cainites, the “Accursed,” the cause of
the “Noachian” Deluge. (See the work of Abbé Gorresio, who “etymologizes”
Pulastya’s name as meaning the “rejected,” hence Cain, if you please).
Pulastya dwells in Kedara, he says, which means a “dug‐up place,” a
“mine,” and Cain is shown, in tradition and the _Bible_, as the first
worker in metals and a miner thereof!

While it is very probable that the Gibborim, or Giants, of the _Bible_ are
the Râkshasas of the Hindûs, it is still more certain that both are
Atlanteans, and belong to the submerged races. However it may be, no Satan
could be more persistent in slandering his enemy, or more spiteful in his
hatred, than the Christian Theologians are in cursing him as the father of
every evil. Compare their vituperation and their opinions about the Devil
with the philosophical views of the Purânic Sages and their Christ‐like
mansuetude. When Parâshara, whose father was devoured by a Râkshasa, was
preparing himself to destroy, by magic arts, the whole race, his
grandsire, Vasishtha, after showing the irate Sage, on his own confession,
that there is Evil and Karma, but no “evil Spirits” speaks the following
suggestive words:


    Let thy wrath be appeased: the Râkshasas are not culpable; thy
    father’s death _was the work of Destiny_ [_Karma_]. Anger is the
    passion of fools; it becometh not a wise man. _By whom, it may be
    asked, is any one killed?_ Every man _reaps the consequences of
    his own acts_. Anger, my son, is the destruction of all that man
    obtains ... and prevents the attainment ... of emancipation. The
    ... sages shun wrath: be not thou, my child, subject to its
    influence. Let no more of those _unoffending_ spirits of darkness
    be consumed; let this thy sacrifice cease. Mercy is the might of
    the righteous.(670)


Thus, every such “sacrifice” or prayer to God for help is no better than
_an act of Black Magic_. That which Parâshara prayed for, was the
destruction of the Spirits of Darkness, for his personal revenge. He is
called a Pagan, and the Christians have doomed him, as such, to Eternal
Hell. Yet, in what respect is the prayer of sovereigns and generals, who
pray before every battle for the destruction of their enemy, any better?
Such a prayer is in every case Black Magic of the worst kind, concealed
like a demon “Mr. Hyde” under a sanctimonious “Dr. Jekyll.”

In human nature, evil denotes only the polarity of Matter and Spirit, a
“struggle for life” between the two manifested Principles in Space and
Time, which Principles are one _per se_, inasmuch as they are rooted in
the Absolute. In Cosmos, the equilibrium must be preserved. The operations
of the two contraries produce harmony, like the centripetal and
centrifugal forces, which, being mutually inter‐dependent, are necessary
to each other, “in order that both should live.” If one should be
arrested, the action of the other would become immediately self‐
destructive.

Since the personification called Satan has been amply analyzed from its
triple aspect, in the _Old Testament_, Christian Theology and the ancient
Gentile attitude of thought, those who would learn more of the subject are
referred to _Isis Unveiled_(671) and the Second Part of Volume II of the
present work. The subject is here touched upon, and fresh explanations are
attempted, for a very good reason. Before we can approach the evolution of
Physical and Divine Man, we have first to master the idea of Cyclic
Evolution, to acquaint ourselves with the philosophies and beliefs of the
four Races which preceded our present Race, and to learn what were the
ideas of those Titans and Giants—Giants, verily, mentally, as well as
physically. The whole of antiquity was imbued with that philosophy which
teaches the involution of Spirit into Matter, the progressive, downward
cyclic descent, or active, self‐conscious evolution. The Alexandrian
Gnostics have sufficiently divulged the secrets of Initiations, and their
records are full of the “falling down of the Æons,” in their double
qualification of Angelic Beings and Periods; the one the natural evolution
of the other. On the other hand, Oriental traditions on both sides of the
“Black Water,” the Oceans that separate the two “Easts,” are equally full
of allegories about the downfall of the Plerôma, or that of the Gods and
Devas. One and all, they allegorized and explained the Fall as _the desire
to learn and acquire knowledge—the desire to know_. This is the natural
sequence of mental evolution, the Spiritual becoming transmuted into the
Material or Physical. The same law of descent into Materiality and of
reäscent into Spirituality asserted itself during the Christian era, the
reäction having only stopped just now, in our own special Sub‐race.

That which was allegorized in _Pymander_, perhaps ten millenniums ago, for
a triune mode of interpretation, and intended for a record of an
astronomical, anthropological, and even alchemical fact, namely, the
allegory of the Seven Rectors breaking through the Seven Circles of Fire,
was dwarfed into one material and anthropomorphic interpretation—the
Rebellion and Fall of the Angels. The multivocal, profoundly philosophical
narrative, under its poetical form of the “Marriage of Heaven with Earth,”
the love of Nature for Divine Form, and the Heavenly Man enraptured with
his own beauty mirrored in Nature, that is to say, Spirit attracted into
Matter, has now become, under theological handling, the Seven Rectors
disobeying Jehovah, self‐admiration generating Satanic pride, followed by
their Fall, Jehovah permitting no worship to be lost save upon himself. In
short, the beautiful Planet‐Angels, the glorious Cyclic Æons of the
Ancients, have become synthesized in their most orthodox shape in Samael,
the Chief of the Demons in the _Talmud_, “that Great Serpent with Twelve
Wings that draws down after himself, in his Fall, the Solar System, or the
Titans.” But Schemal—the _alter ego_ and the Sabean type of Samael—in his
philosophical and esoteric aspect, meant the “Year,” in its astrological
evil aspect, with its twelve months or “Wings” of unavoidable evils, in
Nature. In Esoteric Theogony both Schemal and Samael represented a
particular divinity.(672) With the Kabalists they are the “Spirit of the
Earth,” the Personal God that governs it, and therefore _de facto_
identical with Jehovah. For the Talmudists themselves admit that Samael is
a god‐name of one of the seven Elohim. The Kabalists, moreover, show the
two, Schemal and Samael, as a symbolical form of Saturn, Cronus; the
“Twelve Wings” standing for the twelve months, and the symbol in its
collectivity representing _a racial cycle_. Jehovah and Saturn are also
glyphically identical.

This leads, in its turn, to a very curious deduction from a Roman Catholic
dogma. Many renowned writers belonging to the Latin Church admit that a
difference exists, and should be made, between the Uranian Titans, the
antediluvian Giants, who were also Titans, and those post‐diluvian Giants,
in whom the Roman Catholics persist in seeing the descendants of the
mythical Ham. In clearer words, there is a difference to be made between
the cosmic, _primordial_ opposing Forces, guided by Cyclic Law, the
Atlantean human Giants, and the post‐diluvian great Adepts, whether of the
Right or the Left‐hand. At the same time they show that Michael, “the
_generalissimo_ of the fighting Celestial Host, the _bodyguard of
Jehovah_,” as it would seem, according to de Mirville, is also a Titan,
only with the adjective of “divine” before the cognomen. Thus those
“Uranides” who are called everywhere “Divine Titans”—and who, having
rebelled against Cronus, or Saturn, are therefore also shown to be the
enemies of Samael, also one of the Elohim, and synonymous with Jehovah in
his collectivity—are identical with Michael and his Host. In short, the
_rôles_ are reversed, all the combatants are confused, and no student is
able to distinguish clearly which is which. Esoteric explanation may,
however, bring some order into this confusion, in which Jehovah becomes
Saturn, and Michael and his Army, Satan and the Rebellious Angels, owing
to the indiscreet endeavours of the too faithful zealots to see a Devil in
every Pagan God. The true meaning is far more philosophical, and the
legend of the first “Fall” of the Angels assumes a scientific colouring
when correctly understood.

Cronus stands for endless, and hence immovable Duration, without
beginning, without end, beyond divided Time and beyond Space. Those
Angels, Genii, or Devas, who were born _to act in space and time_, that
is, to break through the _Seven Circles_ of the super‐spiritual planes
into the phenomenal, or circumscribed, super‐terrestrial regions, are said
allegorically to have _rebelled_ against Cronus, and fought the Lion who
was then the one living and highest God. When Cronus, in his turn, is
represented as mutilating Uranus, his father, the meaning of the allegory
is very simple. Absolute Time is made to become the finite and
conditioned; a portion is robbed from the whole, thus showing that Saturn,
the Father of the Gods, has been transformed from Eternal Duration into a
limited period. Cronus with his scythe cuts down even the longest and, to
us, seemingly endless cycles, which, for all that, are limited in
Eternity, and with the same scythe destroys the mightiest rebels. Aye, not
one will escape the scythe of Time! Praise the God or Gods, or flout one
or both, that scythe will not tremble one millionth of a second in its
ascending or descending course.

The Titans of Hesiod’s _Theogony_ were copied in Greece from the Suras and
Asuras of India. These Hesiodic Titans, the Uranides, which were once upon
a time numbered as only six, have been recently discovered, in an old
fragment relating to the Greek myth, to be _seven_, the seventh being
called Phoreg. Thus their identity with the Seven Rectors is fully
demonstrated. The origin of the War in Heaven and the Fall has, in our
mind, to be traced unavoidably to India, and perhaps far earlier than the
Purânic accounts thereof. For the Târakâmaya was in a later age, and there
are accounts of three distinct Wars to be traced in almost every
Cosmogony.

The first War happened in the night of time, between the Gods and
(A)‐suras, and lasted for the period of one Divine Year.(673) On this
occasion the Deities were defeated by the Daityas, under the leadership of
Hrâda. But afterwards, owing to a device of Vishnu, to whom the conquered
Gods applied for help, the latter defeated the Asuras. In the _Vishnu
Purâna_ no interval is found between the two Wars. In the Esoteric
Doctrine, however, one War takes place before the building of the Solar
System; another, on Earth, at the “creation” of man; and a third War is
mentioned as taking place at the close of the Fourth Race, between its
Adepts and those of the Fifth Race; that is, between the Initiates of the
“Sacred Island” and the Sorcerers of Atlantis. We shall notice the first
contest, as recounted by Parâshara, and endeavour to separate the two
accounts, which are purposely blended together.

It is there stated that as the Daityas and Asuras were engaged in the
duties of their respective Orders (Varnas) and followed the paths
prescribed by holy writ, practising also religious penance—a queer
employment for _Demons_ if they are identical with our _Devils_, as it is
claimed—it was impossible for the Gods to destroy them. The prayers
addressed by the Gods to Vishnu are curious, as showing the ideas involved
in an anthropomorphic Deity. Having, after their defeat, “fled to the
northern shore of the Milky Ocean [Atlantic Ocean],”(674) the discomfited
Gods address many supplications “to the first of Beings, the divine
Vishnu,” and among others the following:


    Glory to thee, who art one with the Saints, whose perfect nature
    is ever blessed, and traverses, unobstructed, all permeable
    elements. Glory to thee, _who art one with the Serpent‐Race,
    double‐tongued, impetuous, cruel, insatiate of enjoyment_ and
    abounding with wealth.... Glory to thee, ... O Lord, _who hast
    neither colour nor extension_, nor bulk (_ghana_), _nor any
    predicable qualities_, and whose essence (_rûpa_), purest of the
    pure, is appreciable only by holy Paramarshis [the greatest of
    Sages or Rishis]. We bow to thee, in the nature of Brahma,
    uncreated, undecaying (_avyaya_); who _art in our bodies_, and _in
    all other bodies, and in all living creatures_; and beside whom
    nothing exists. We glorify that Vâsudeva, the lord (of all), who
    is without soil, the seed of all things, exempt from dissolution,
    unborn, eternal; being, in essence, Paramapadâtmavat [beyond the
    condition of Spirit], and, in substance (_rûpa_), the whole of
    this (Universe).(675)


The above is quoted as an illustration of the vast field offered by the
_Purânas_ to adverse and erroneous criticism, by every European bigot who
forms an estimate of an alien religion on mere external evidence. Any man
accustomed to subject what he reads to thoughtful analysis, will see at a
glance the incongruity of addressing the accepted “Unknowable,” the
formless, and attributeless Absolute, such as the Vedântins define
Brahman, as being “one with the Serpent‐Race, double‐tongued, cruel and
insatiable,” thus associating the abstract with the concrete, and
bestowing adjectives on that which is free from any limitations, and
conditionless. Even Professor Wilson, who, after living surrounded by
Brâhmans and Pandits in India for so many years, ought to have known
better—even that scholar lost no opportunity of criticizing the Hindû
Scriptures on this account. Thus, he exclaims:


    The _Purânas_ constantly teach incompatible doctrines! According
    to this passage,(676) the Supreme Being is not the inert cause of
    creation only, but exercises the functions of an active
    providence. The Commentator quotes a text of the _Veda_ in support
    of this view: “Universal Soul entering into men, governs their
    conduct.” Incongruities, however, are as frequent in the _Vedas_
    as in the _Purânas_.


Less frequent, in sober truth, than in the Mosaic _Bible_. But prejudice
is great in the hearts of our Orientalists, especially in those of
“reverend” scholars. Universal Soul is _not_ the inert Cause of Creation
or (Para) Brahman, but simply that which we call the Sixth Principle of
_Intellectual_ Kosmos, on the manifested plane of being. It is Mahat, or
Mahâbuddhi, the Great Soul, the Vehicle of Spirit, the first primeval
reflection of the formless CAUSE, and that which is even _beyond_ Spirit.
So much for Professor Wilson’s uncalled‐for fling at the _Purânas_. As for
the apparently incongruous appeal to Vishnu by the defeated Gods, the
explanation is there, in the text of _Vishnu Purâna_, if Orientalists
would only notice it. There is Vishnu as Brahmâ, and Vishnu _in his two
aspects_, philosophy teaches. There is but one Brahman, “essentially
Prakriti and Spirit.”

This ignorance is truly and beautifully expressed in the praise of the
Yogins to Brahmâ, “the upholder of the earth,” when they say:


    Those who have not practised devotion conceive erroneously of the
    nature of the world. The ignorant, who do not perceive that this
    Universe is of the nature of Wisdom, and judge of it as an object
    of perception only, are lost in the ocean of spiritual ignorance.
    But they who know true Wisdom, and whose minds are pure, behold
    this whole world _as one with Divine Knowledge_, as one with thee,
    O God! Be favourable, O universal Spirit!(677)


Therefore, it is not Vishnu, “the inert cause of creation,” which
exercised the functions of an _Active_ Providence, but the Universal Soul,
that which, in its material aspect, Éliphas Lévi calls Astral Light. And
this Soul is, in its dual aspect of Spirit and Matter, the true
anthropomorphic God of the Theists; for this God is a _personification_ of
that Universal Creative Agent, both pure and impure, owing to its
manifested condition and differentiation in this Mâyâvic World—_God_ and
_Devil_, truly. But Professor Wilson failed to see how Vishnu, in this
character, closely resembles the Lord God of Israel, “especially in his
policy of deception, temptation, and cunning.”

In the _Vishnu Purâna_ this is made as plain as can be. For it is said
there, that:


    At the conclusion of their prayers (_stotra_) the Gods beheld the
    Sovereign Deity Hari (Vishnu) armed with the shell, the discus,
    and the mace, _riding on Garuda._


Now Garuda is the Manvantaric Cycle, as will be shown in its place.
Vishnu, therefore, is the Deity _in Space and Time_, the peculiar God of
the Vaishnavas. Such Gods are called in Esoteric Philosophy _tribal_ or
_racial_; that is to say, one of the many Dhyânis or Gods, or Elohim, one
of whom was generally chosen for some special reason by a nation or a
tribe, and thus became gradually a “God _above all_ Gods,”(678) the
“highest God,” as Jehovah, Osiris, Bel, or any other of the Seven Regents.

“The tree is known by its fruit”; the nature of a God by his actions. We
must either judge these actions by the dead‐letter narratives, or must
accept them allegorically. If we compare the two—Vishnu, as the defender
and champion of the defeated Gods; and Jehovah, the defender and champion
of the “chosen” people, so called by antiphrasis, no doubt, as it is the
Jews who had chosen that “jealous” God—we shall find that both use deceit
and cunning. They do so on the principle of “the end justifying the
means,” in order to have the best of their respective opponents and
foes—the Demons. Thus while, according to the Kabalists, Jehovah assumes
the shape of the tempting Serpent in the Garden of Eden, sends Satan with
a special mission to tempt Job, harasses and wearies Pharaoh with Saraï,
Abraham’s wife, and “hardens” another Pharaoh’s heart against Moses, lest
there should be no opportunity for plaguing his victims “with great
plagues,” Vishnu is made in his _Purâna_ to resort to a trick no less
unworthy of any respectable God.

The defeated Gods addressed Vishnu as follows:


    Have compassion upon us, O Lord, and protect us, who have come to
    thee for succour from the Daityas (Demons)! They have seized upon
    the three worlds, and appropriated the offerings which are our
    portion, _taking care not to transgress the precepts of the Veda_.
    Although _we, as well as they, are parts of thee_(679) ... engaged
    [as they are] ... in the paths prescribed by the holy writ ... it
    is impossible for us to destroy them. Do thou, whose wisdom is
    immeasurable (Ameyâtman) instruct us _in some device_ by which we
    may be able to exterminate the enemies of the Gods!

    When the mighty Vishnu heard their request, he emitted from his
    body an _illusory_ form (Mâyâmoha, the “deluder by illusion”)
    which he gave to the Gods and thus spake: “This Mâyâmoha shall
    _wholly beguile_ the Daityas, so that, being led astray from the
    path of the _Vedas_, they may be put to death.... Go then and fear
    not. Let this delusive vision precede you. It shall this day be of
    great service unto you, O Gods!”

    After this, the great Delusion (Mâyâmoha) having proceeded (to
    earth), beheld the Daityas, engaged in ascetic penances, and
    approaching them, in the semblance of a Digambara (naked
    mendicant) with his head shaven ... he thus addressed them, in
    gentle accents: “Ho, lords of the Daitya race, wherefore is it
    that you practise these acts of penances?” etc.(680)


Finally the Daityas were seduced by the wily talk of Mâyâmoha, as Eve was
seduced by the advice of the Serpent. They became apostates to the
_Vedas_. As Dr. Muir translates the passage:


    The great Deceiver, practising illusion, next beguiled other
    Daityas, by means of many other sorts of heresy. In a very short
    time, these Asuras (Daityas), deluded by the Deceiver [_who was
    Vishnu_] abandoned the entire system founded on the ordinances of
    the triple _Veda_. Some reviled the _Vedas_; others, the
    ceremonial of sacrifice; and others, the Brâhmans. This (they
    exclaimed), is a doctrine which will not bear discussion: the
    slaughter (of animals, in sacrifice), is not conducive to
    religious merit. (To say, that) oblations of butter consumed in
    the fire produce any future reward, is the assertion of a
    child.... If it be a fact that a beast slain in sacrifice is
    exalted to heaven, why does not the worshipper slaughter his own
    father?... Infallible utterances do not, great Asuras, fall from
    the skies; it is only assertions founded on reasoning that are
    accepted by me and by other [intelligent] persons like yourselves!
    Thus by numerous methods the Daityas were unsettled by the great
    Deceiver [_Reason_].... When the Daityas had entered on the path
    of error, the Deities mustered all their energies and approached
    to battle. Then followed a combat between the Gods and the Asuras;
    and the latter, who had abandoned the right road, were smitten by
    the former. In previous times they had been defended by the armour
    of righteousness which they bore; but, when that had been
    destroyed, they, also, perished.(681)


Whatever may be thought of the Hindûs, no enemy of theirs can regard them
as fools. A people, whose holy men and sages have left to the world the
greatest and most sublime philosophies that ever emanated from the minds
of men, must have known the difference between right and wrong. Even a
savage can discern white from black, good from bad, and deceit from
sincerity and truthfulness. Those who had narrated this event in the
biography of their God, must have seen that in this case it was that God
who was the Arch‐Deceiver, and the Daityas, who “never transgressed the
precepts of the _Vedas_,” who had the sunny side in the transaction, and
who were the true “Gods.” Thence there must have been, and _there is_ a
secret meaning hidden under this allegory. In no class of society, in no
nation, are deceit and craft considered as _divine_ virtues—except perhaps
in the clerical classes of Theologians and modern Jesuitism.

The _Vishnu Purâna_,(682) like all other works of this kind, passed at a
later period into the hands of the Temple‐Brâhmans, and the old MSS. have,
no doubt, been further tampered with by sectarians. But there was a time
when the _Purânas_ were esoteric works, and so they are still for the
Initiates who can read them with the key that is in their possession.

Whether the Brâhman Initiates will ever give out the full meaning of these
allegories, is a question with which the writer is not concerned. The
present object is to show that, while honouring the _Creative Powers_ in
their multiple forms, no philosopher could have, or ever has, accepted the
allegory for its true spirit, except, perhaps, some philosophers belonging
to the present “superior and civilized” Christian races. For, as shown,
Jehovah is not one whit the superior of Vishnu on the plane of ethics.
This is why the Occultists, and even some Kabalists, whether or not they
regard those creative Forces _as living and conscious Entities_—and one
does not see why they should not be so accepted—will never confuse the
Cause with the Effect, and accept the Spirit of the Earth for Parabrahman,
or Ain Suph. At all events they know well the true nature of what was
called by the Greeks Father‐Æther, Jupiter‐Titan, etc. They know that the
Soul of the Astral Light is divine, and its Body—the Light‐waves on the
lower planes—infernal. This Light is symbolized by the “Magic Head” in the
_Zohar_, the Double Face on the Double Pyramid; the black Pyramid rising
against a pure white ground, with _a white Head and Face within its black
Triangle_; the White Pyramid, inverted—the reflection of the first in the
dark Waters—showing the _black reflection of the white Face_.

This is the Astral Light, or _Demon est Deus Inversus_.




Section XII. The Theogony of the Creative Gods.


To thoroughly comprehend the idea underlying every ancient Cosmology
necessitates the study and comparative analysis of all the great religions
of antiquity; for it is only by this method that the root‐idea can be made
plain. Exact Science, could it soar so high, in tracing the operations of
Nature to their ultimate and original sources, would call this idea the
Hierarchy of Forces. The original, transcendental and philosophical
conception was one. But as systems began to reflect more and more with
every age the idiosyncrasies of nations, and as the latter, after
separating, settled into distinct groups, each evolving along its own
national or tribal groove, the main idea gradually became veiled by the
overgrowth of human fancy. While in some countries the Forces, or rather
the intelligent Powers of Nature, received divine honours to which they
were hardly entitled, in others—as now in Europe and the other _civilized_
lands—the very thought of such Forces being endowed with intelligence
seems absurd, and is proclaimed _unscientific_. Therefore one finds relief
in such statements as are found in the Introduction to _Asgard and the
Gods_; “Tales and Traditions of our Northern Ancestors,” edited by W. S.
W. Anson, who says:


    Although in Central Asia, or on the banks of the Indus, in the
    Land of the Pyramids, and in the Greek and Italian peninsulas, and
    even in the North, whither Kelts, Teutons and Slavs wandered, the
    religious conceptions of the people have taken different forms,
    _yet their common origin_ is still perceptible. We point out this
    connection between the stories of the Gods, and the deep thought
    contained in them, and their importance, in order that the reader
    may see that _it is not a magic world of erratic fancy_ which
    opens out before him, but that ... _Life and Nature_ formed the
    basis of the existence and action of these divinities.(683)


And though it is impossible for any Occultist or student of Eastern
Esotericism to concur in the strange idea that, “the religious conceptions
of the most famous nations of antiquity are connected with the beginnings
of civilization amongst the Germanic races,”(684) he is yet glad to find
such truths expressed as that: “These fairy tales are not senseless
stories written for the amusement of the idle; they embody the profound
religion of our forefathers.”(685)

Precisely so. Not only their Religion, but likewise their History. For a
myth, in Greek μῦθος, means oral tradition, passed from mouth to mouth
from one generation to the other; and even in the modern etymology the
term stands for a _fabulous_ statement conveying some important truth; a
tale of some extraordinary personage whose biography has become overgrown,
owing to the veneration of successive generations, with rich popular
fancy, but which is no _wholesale_ fable. Like our ancestors, the
primitive Âryans, we believe firmly in the personality and intelligence of
more than one phenomenon‐producing Force in Nature.

As time rolled on, the archaic teaching grew dimmer; and the nations more
or less lost sight of the Highest and One Principle of all things, and
began to transfer the abstract attributes of the Causeless Cause to the
caused effects, which became in their turn causative, the Creative Powers
of the Universe; the great nations thus acted from fear of profaning the
Idea; the smaller, because they either failed to grasp it, or lacked the
power of philosophic conception needed to preserve it in all its
immaculate purity. But one and all, with the exception of the latest
Âryans, now become Europeans and Christians, show this veneration in their
Cosmogonies. As Thomas Taylor,(686) the most intuitional of all the
translators of the Greek Fragments, shows, no nation has ever conceived
the One Principle as the immediate creator of the visible Universe, for no
sane man would credit a planner and architect with having built with his
own hands the edifice he admires. On the testimony of Damascius in his
work, _On First Principles_ (Περὶ Πρώτων Ἀρχῶν), they referred to it as
the “Unknown Darkness.” The Babylonians passed over this principle in
silence. “To that God,” says Porphyry, in his _On Abstinence_ (Περί ἀποχῆς
τῶν ἐμψύχων), “who is above all things, neither external speech ought to
be addressed, nor yet that which is inward.” Hesiod begins his _Theogony_
with the words, “Chaos of all things was the first produced,”(687) thus
allowing the inference that its Cause or Producer must be passed over in
reverential silence. Homer in his poems ascends no higher than Night,
which he represents Zeus as reverencing. According to all the ancient
theologists, and the doctrines of Pythagoras and Plato, Zeus, or the
immediate Artificer of the Universe, _is not the highest God_; any more
than Sir Christopher Wren in his physical, human aspect is the Mind in him
which produced his great works of art. Homer, therefore, is not only
silent with respect to the First Principle, but likewise with respect to
those two Principles immediately posterior to the First, the Æther and
Chaos of Orpheus and Hesiod, and the Bound and Infinity of Pythagoras and
Plato.(688) Proclus says of this Highest Principle that it is “the Unity
of Unities, and beyond the first Adyta ... more ineffable than all
Silence, and more occult than all Essence ... concealed amidst the
intelligible Gods.”(689)

To what was written by Thomas Taylor in 1797—namely, that the “Jews appear
to have ascended no higher ... than the _immediate_ Artificer of the
Universe,” as “Moses introduces a darkness on the face of the deep,
without even insinuating that there was any cause of its existence,”(690)
one might add something more. Never have the Jews in their _Bible_—a
purely esoteric, symbolical work—so profoundly degraded their metaphorical
deity as have the Christians, by accepting Jehovah as their one living yet
_personal_ God.

This First, or rather One, Principle was called the “Circle of Heaven,”
symbolized by the hierogram of a Point within a Circle or Equilateral
Triangle, the Point being the Logos. Thus, in the _Rig Veda_, wherein
Brahmâ is not even named. Cosmogony is preluded with the Hiranyagarbha,
the “Golden Egg,” and Prajâpati (later on Brahmâ), from whom emanate all
the Hierarchies of “Creators.” The Monad, or Point, is the original and is
the Unit from which follows the entire numeral system. This Point is the
First Cause, but THAT from which it emanates, or of which, rather, it is
the expression, the Logos, is passed over in silence. In its turn, the
universal symbol, the _Point __ within the Circle_, was not yet the
Architect, but the Cause of that Architect; and the latter stood to it in
precisely the same relation as the Point itself stood to the Circumference
of the Circle, which cannot be defined, according to Hermes Trismegistus.
Porphyry shows that the Monad and the Duad of Pythagoras are identical
with Plato’s Infinite and Finite, in _Philebus_, or what Plato calls the
ἄπειρον and πέρας. It is the latter only, the Mother, which is
substantial, the former being the “Cause of all Unity and measure of all
things”;(691) the Duad, Mûlaprakriti, the Veil of Parabrahman, being thus
shown to be the Mother of the Logos and, at the same time, his
Daughter—that is to say, the object of his perception—the produced
producer and the secondary cause of it. With Pythagoras, the Monad returns
into Silence and Darkness, as soon as it has evolved the Triad, from which
emanate the remaining 7 numbers of the 10 numbers which are at the base of
the Manifested Universe.

In the Norse Cosmogony it is again the same.


    In the beginning was a great Abyss (Chaos), neither Day nor Night
    existed; the Abyss was Ginnungagap, the yawning gulf, without
    beginning, without end. All‐Father, the Uncreated, the Unseen,
    dwelt in the Depth of the Abyss (Space) and _willed_, and what was
    willed came into being.(692)


As in the Hindû Cosmogony, the evolution of the Universe is divided into
two acts, which are called in India the Prâkrita and Pâdma Creations.
Before the warm rays pouring from the Home of Brightness awaken life in
the Great Waters of Space, the Elements of the First Creation come into
view, and from them is formed the Giant Ymir, or Örgelmir (literally,
Seething Clay), Primordial Matter differentiated from Chaos. Then comes
the Cow Audumla, the Nourisher,(693) from whom is born Buri, the Producer,
whose son Bör (Born), by Bestla, the daughter of the Frost‐Giants, the
sons of Ymir, had three sons, Odin, Willi and We, or Spirit, Will, and
Holiness. This was when Darkness still reigned throughout Space, when the
Ases, the Creative Powers, or Dhyân Chohans, were not yet evolved, and the
Yggdrasil, the Tree of the Universe of Time and of Life, had not yet
grown, and there was, as yet, no Walhalla, or Hall of Heroes. The
Scandinavian legends of Creation, of our Earth and World, begin with Time
and human Life. All that precedes it is for them Darkness, wherein All‐
Father, the Cause of all, dwells. As observed by the editor of _Asgard and
the Gods_, though these legends have in them the idea of that All‐Father,
the original cause of all, “he is scarcely more than mentioned in the
poems,” not, as he thinks, because before the preaching of the Gospel, the
idea “could not rise to distinct conceptions of the Eternal,” but on
account of its deep esoteric character. Therefore, all the Creative Gods,
or _Personal_ Deities, begin at the secondary stage of Cosmic Evolution.
Zeus is born _in_, and _out_ of Cronus—Time. So is Brahmâ the production
and emanation of Kâla, “Eternity and Time,” Kâla being one of the names of
Vishnu. Hence we find Odin, the Father of _the Gods and of the Ases_, as
Brahmâ is the Father of _the Gods and of the Asuras_; and hence also the
androgyne character of all the chief Creative Gods, from the second Monad
of the Greeks down to the Sephira Adam Kadmon, the Brahmâ or Prajâpati‐
Vâch of the _Vedas_, and the androgyne of Plato, which is but another
version of the Indian symbol.

The best metaphysical definition of primeval Theogony, in the spirit of
the Vedântins, may be found in the “Notes on the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_”, by T.
Subba Row. Parabrahman, the Unknown and the Incognizable, as the lecturer
tells his audience:


    Is not Ego, it is not Non‐Ego, nor is it consciousness ... it is
    not even Âtmâ ... but though not itself an object of knowledge, it
    is yet capable of supporting and giving rise to every kind of
    object and every kind of existence which becomes an object of
    knowledge.... [It is] the one essence from which starts into
    existence a centre of energy ... [which he calls the Logos].(694)


This Logos is the Shabda Brahman of the Hindûs, which he will not even
call Îshvara (the “Lord” God), lest the term should create confusion in
the people’s minds. It is the Avalokiteshvara of the Buddhists, the Verbum
of the Christians in its real _esoteric_ meaning, not in its theological
disfigurement.


    It is, the first Jñâta, or the Ego in the Kosmos, and every other
    Ego ... is but its reflection and manifestation.... It exists in a
    latent condition in the bosom of Parabrahman, at the time of
    Pralaya.... [During Manvantara] it has a consciousness and an
    individuality of its own.... [It is a centre of energy, but] such
    centres of energy are almost innumerable in the bosom of
    Parabrahman. It must not be supposed, that [even] this Logos is
    [_the_ Creator, or that it is] but a single centre of energy....
    Their number is almost infinite.... [This] is the first Ego that
    appears in Kosmos, and is the end of all evolution. [It is the
    abstract Ego].... This is the _first_ manifestation [or aspect] of
    Parabrahman.... When once it starts into existence as a conscious
    being, ... from its objective standpoint, Parabrahman appears to
    it as Mûlaprakriti. Please bear this in mind ... for here is the
    root of the whole difficulty about Purusha and Prakriti felt by
    the various writers on Vedântic philosophy.... This Mûlaprakriti
    is material to it [the Logos], as any material object is material
    to us. This Mûlaprakriti is no more Parabrahman than the bundle of
    attributes of a pillar is the pillar itself; Parabrahman is an
    unconditioned and absolute reality, and Mûlaprakriti is a sort of
    veil thrown over it. Parabrahman by itself cannot be seen as it
    is. It is seen by the Logos with a veil thrown over it, and that
    veil is the mighty expanse of Cosmic Matter.... Parabrahman, after
    having appeared on the one hand as the Ego, and on the other as
    Mûlaprakriti, acts as the one energy through the Logos.(695)


And the lecturer explains what he means by this acting of Something which
is _Nothing_, though it is the ALL, by a fine simile. He compares the
Logos to the Sun through which light and heat radiate, but whose energy,
light and heat, exist in some unknown condition in Space and are diffused
in Space only as _visible_ light and heat, the Sun being only the agent
thereof. This is the first triadic hypostasis. The quaternary is made up
by the _energizing light_ shed by the Logos.

The Hebrew Kabalists stated it in a manner which is esoterically identical
with the Vedântic. Ain Suph, they taught, could not be comprehended, could
not be located, nor named, though the Causeless Cause of all. Hence its
name, Ain Suph, is a term of negation, “the Inscrutable, the Incognizable,
and the Unnameable.” They made of it, therefore, a Boundless Circle, a
Sphere, of which human intellect, with the utmost stretch, could only
perceive the vault. In the words of one who has unriddled much in the
Kabalistical system most thoroughly, in one of its meanings, in its
numerical and geometrical esotericism:


    Close your eyes, and from your own consciousness of perception try
    and think outward to the extremest limits in every direction. You
    will find that equal lines or rays of perception extend out evenly
    in all directions, so that the utmost effort of perception will
    terminate in the _vault of a sphere_. The limitation of this
    sphere will, of necessity, be a great Circle, and the direct rays
    of thought in any and every direction must be right line radii of
    the circle. This, then, _must_ be, humanly speaking, the extremest
    all‐embracing conception of the Ain Suph _manifest_, which
    formulates itself as a geometrical figure, viz., of a circle, with
    its elements of curved circumference and right line diameter
    divided into radii. Hence, a geometrical shape is the first
    recognizable means of connection between the Ain Suph and the
    intelligence of man.(696)


This Great Circle, which Eastern Esotericism reduces to the Point within
the Boundless Circle, is the Avalokiteshvara, the Logos, or Verbum, of
which T. Subba Row speaks. But this Circle or manifested God is as unknown
to us, except through its _manifested_ Universe, as is the ONE, though
easier, or rather more possible to our highest conceptions. This Logos
which sleeps in the bosom of Parabrahman, during Pralaya, as our “Ego is
latent [in us] at the time of Sushupti,” or sleep, which cannot cognize
Parabrahman otherwise than as Mûlaprakriti—the latter being a Cosmic Veil
which is “the mighty expanse of Cosmic Matter”—is thus only an organ in
Cosmic Creation, through which radiate the Energy and Wisdom of
Parabrahman, _unknown to the Logos, as it is to ourselves_. Moreover, as
the Logos is as unknown to us as Parabrahman is unknown in reality to the
Logos, both Eastern Esotericism and the Kabalah, in order to bring the
Logos within the range of our conceptions, have resolved the abstract
synthesis into concrete images; viz., into the reflections or multiplied
aspects of that Logos, or Avalokiteshvara, Brahmâ Ormazd, Osiris, Adam
Kadmon, call it by any of such names you will; which aspects, or
manvantaric emanations, are the Dhyân Chohans, the Elohim, the Devas, the
Amshaspends, etc. Metaphysicians explain the root and germ of the latter,
according to T. Subba Row, as the first manifestation of Parabrahman, “the
highest trinity that we are capable of understanding,” which is
Mûlaprakriti, the Veil, the Logos, and the Conscious Energy of the latter,
or its Power and Light, called in the _Bhagavad Gîtâ_, Daiviprakriti; or
“Matter, Force and the Ego, or the one root of Self, of which every other
kind of self is but a manifestation or a reflection.” It is then only in
this Light of consciousness, of mental and physical perception, that
_practical_ Occultism can throw the Logos into visibility by geometrical
figures, which, when closely studied, will yield not only a scientific
explanation of the real, objective, existence(697) of the “Seven Sons of
the Divine Sophia,” which is this Light of the Logos, but will show, by
means of other yet undiscovered keys, that, with regard to Humanity, these
“Seven Sons” and their numberless emanations, centres of energy
personified, are an absolute necessity. Make away with them, and the
Mystery of Being and Mankind _will never be unriddled, nor even closely
approached_.

It is through this Light that everything is created. This Root of mental
SELF is also the root of physical _Self_, for this Light is the
permutation, in our manifested world, of Mûlaprakriti, called Aditi in the
_Vedas_. In its third aspect it becomes Vâch,(698) the Daughter and the
Mother of the Logos, as Isis is the Daughter and the Mother of Osiris, who
is Horns, and Moot, the Daughter, Wife, and Mother, of Ammon, in the
Egyptian Moon‐glyph. In the _Kabalah_, Sephira is the same as Shekinah,
and is, in another synthesis, the Wife, Daughter, and Mother of the
Heavenly Man, Adam Kadmon, and is even identical with him, just as Vâch is
identical with Brahmâ, and is called the female Logos. In the _Rig Veda_,
Vâch is “Mystic Speech,” by whom Occult Knowledge and Wisdom are
communicated to man, and thus Vâch is said to have “entered the Rishis.”
She is “generated by the Gods”; she is the Divine Vâch, the “Queen of
Gods”; and she is associated, like Sephira with the Sephiroth, with the
Prajâpatis in their work of creation. Moreover, she is called the “Mother
of the _Vedas_,” “since it is through her powers, [as Mystic _Speech_]
that Brahmâ revealed them, and also owing to her power that he produced
the Universe”; that is to say, through Speech, and words, synthesized by
the “Word” and numbers.(699)

But when Vâch is also spoken of as the daughter of Daksha, “the God who
lives in all the Kalpas,” her mâyâvic character is shown; during the
Pralaya she disappears, absorbed in the One, all‐devouring Ray.

But there are two distinct aspects in universal Esotericism, Eastern and
Western, in all these personations of the female Power in Nature, or
Nature the _noumenal_ and the _phenomenal_. One is its purely metaphysical
aspect, as described by the learned lecturer in his “Notes on the
_Bhagavad Gîtâ_”; the other terrestrial and physical, and at the same time
_divine_ from the stand‐point of practical human conception and Occultism.
They are all the symbols and personifications of Chaos, the Great Deep, or
the Primordial Waters of Space, the impenetrable Veil between the
INCOGNIZABLE and the Logos of Creation. “Connecting himself through his
mind with Vâch, Brahmâ [the Logos] created the Primordial Waters.” In the
_Katha Upanishad_ it is stated still more clearly:


    Prajâpati was this Universe. _Vâch was a second to him._ He
    associated with her ... she produced these creatures and again
    reëntered Prajâpati.


This connects Vâch and Sephira with the Goddess Kwan‐Yin, the “Merciful
Mother,” the Divine Voice of the Soul, even in exoteric Buddhism, and with
the female aspect of Kwan‐Shai‐Yin, the Logos, the Verbum of Creation, and
at the same time with the Voice that speaks audibly to the Initiate,
according to Esoteric Budhism. Bath Kol, the Filia Vocis, the Daughter of
the Divine Voice of the Hebrews, responding from the Mercy Seat within the
Veil of the Temple is—a result.

And here we may incidentally point out one of the many unjust slurs thrown
by the “good and pious” missionaries in India on the religion of the land.
The allegory, in the _Shatapatha Brâhmana_, that Brahmâ, as the Father of
men, performed the work of procreation by incestuous intercourse with his
own daughter Vâch, also called Sandhyâ, Twilight, and Shatarûpâ, of a
hundred forms, is incessantly thrown in the teeth of the Brâhmans, as
condemning their “detestable, false religion.” Besides the fact,
conveniently forgotten by the Europeans, that the Patriarch Lot is shown
guilty of the same crime under the _human form_, whereas it was under the
form of a buck that Brahmâ, or rather Prajâpati, accomplished the incest
with his daughter, who had that of a hind (_rohit_), the esoteric reading
of the third chapter of _Genesis_ shows the same. Moreover, there is
certainly a _cosmic_, and not a physiological, meaning attached to the
Indian allegory, since Vâch is a permutation of Aditi and Mûlaprakriti, or
Chaos, and Brahmâ a permutation of Nârâyana, the Spirit of God entering
into, and fructifying Nature; and, therefore, there is nothing phallic in
the conception at all.

As already stated, Aditi‐Vâch is the female Logos, or Verbum, the Word;
and Sephira in the _Kabalah_ is the same. These feminine Logoi are all
correlations, in their _noumenal_ aspect, of Light, and Sound, and Æther,
showing how well‐informed were the Ancients both in Physical Science, as
now known to the moderns, and also as to the birth of that Science in the
Spiritual and Astral spheres.


    Our old writers said that Vâch is of four kinds. These are called
    Parâ, Pashyantî, Madhyamâ, Vaikharî. This statement you will find
    in the _Rig Veda_ itself and in several of the _Upanishads_.
    Vaikharî Vâch is what we utter.


It is Sound, _Speech_, that again which becomes comprehensive and
objective to one of our physical senses and may be brought under the laws
of perception. Hence:


    Every kind of Vaikharî Vâch exists in its Madhyamâ ... Pashyantî
    and ultimately in its Parâ form.... The reason why this
    Pranava(700) is called Vâch is this, that these four principles of
    the great Kosmos correspond to these four forms of Vâch.... The
    whole Kosmos in its objective form is Vaikharî Vâch; the Light of
    the Logos is the Madhyamâ form; and the Logos itself the Pasyantî
    form; while Parabrahman is the Parâ [beyond the Noumenon of all
    Noumena] aspect of that Vâch.(701)


Thus Vâch, Shekinah, or the “Music of the Spheres” of Pythagoras, are one,
if we take for our example instances in the three most (apparently)
dissimilar religious philosophies in the world, the Hindû, the Greek and
the Chaldean Hebrew. These personations and allegories may be viewed under
_four_ chief and _three_ lesser aspects, or _seven_ in all, as in
Esotericism. The Parâ form is the ever subjective and latent Light and
Sound, which exist eternally in the bosom of the INCOGNIZABLE; when
transferred into the ideation of the Logos, or its latent Light, it is
called Pasyantî, and when it becomes that Light _expressed_, it is
Madhyamâ.

Now the _Kabalah_ gives the definition thus:


    There are three kinds of Light, and that [the fourth] which
    interpenetrates the others; (1) the clear and the penetrating, the
    _objective_ Light, (2) the _reflected_ Light, and (3) the
    _abstract_ Light.


The ten Sephiroth, the Three and the Seven, are called in the _Kabalah_
the Ten Words, DBRIM (Dabarim), the Numbers and the Emanations of the
Heavenly Light, which is both Adam Kadmon and Sephira, Prajâpati‐Vâch, or
Brahmâ. Light, Sound, Number, are the three factors of creation in the
_Kabalah_. Parabrahman cannot be known except through the luminous Point,
the Logos, which knows not Parabrahman but only Mûlaprakriti. Similarly
Adam Kadmon knew only Shekinah, though he was the Vehicle of Ain Suph.
And, as Adam Kadmon, he is, in the Esoteric interpretation, the total of
the Number Ten, the Sephiroth, himself being a Trinity, or the three
attributes of the Incognizable Deity in One.(702) “When the Heavenly Man
(or Logos) first assumed the form of the Crown(703) [Kether] and
identified himself with Sephira, he caused Seven splendid Lights to
emanate from it [the Crown],” which made in their totality Ten; so
Brahmâ‐Prajâpati, once he became separated from, yet identical with Vâch,
caused the seven Rishis, the seven Manus or Prajâpatis, to issue from that
Crown. In _exotericism_ one will always find 10 and 7, of either Sephira
or Prajâpati; in _esoteric_ rendering always 3 and 7, which yield also 10.
Only when divided, in the manifested sphere, into 3 and 7, they form
[circle with vertical line], the androgyne, and [circle containing an X],
or the figure X manifested and differentiated.

This will help the student to understand why Pythagoras esteemed the
Deity, the Logos, to be the Centre of Unity and Source of Harmony. We say
this Deity was the Logos, not the Monad that dwelleth in Solitude and
Silence, because Pythagoras taught that Unity being indivisible is _no
number_. And this is also why it was required of the candidate, who
applied for admittance into his school, that he should have already
studied as a preliminary step, the sciences of Arithmetic, Astronomy,
Geometry and _Music_, which were held to be the four divisions of
Mathematics.(704) Again, this explains why the Pythagoreans asserted that
the doctrine of Numbers, the chief of all in Esotericism, had been
revealed to man by the Celestial Deities; that the World had been called
forth out of Chaos by Sound, or Harmony, and constructed according to the
principles of musical proportion; that the seven planets which rule the
destiny of mortals have a harmonious motion and, as Censorinus says:


    Intervals corresponding to musical diastemes, rendering various
    sounds, so perfectly consonant, that they produce the sweetest
    melody, which is inaudible to us, only by reason of the greatness
    of the sound, which our ears are incapable of receiving.


In the Pythagorean Theogony, the Hierarchies of the Heavenly Host and Gods
were numbered, and also expressed numerically. Pythagoras had studied
Esoteric Science in India; therefore we find his pupils saying:


    The Monad [the manifested One] is the principle of all things.
    From the Monad and the indeterminate Duad (Chaos), Numbers; from
    Numbers, Points; from Points, Lines; from Lines, Superficies; from
    Superficies, Solids; from these, Solid Bodies, whose elements are
    four, Fire, Water, Air, Earth; of all which transmuted
    [correlated], and totally changed, the World consists.(705)


And this, if it does not unriddle the mystery altogether, may at any rate
lift a corner of the veil off those wondrous allegories that have been
thrown over Vâch, the most mysterious of all the Brâhmanical Goddesses;
she who is termed “the _melodious_ Cow who milked forth sustenance and
Water”—the Earth with all her mystic powers; and again she “who yields us
nourishment and sustenance”—the physical Earth. Isis is also mystic Nature
and also Earth; and her cow’s horns identify her with Vâch, who, after
being recognized in her highest form as Parâ, becomes, at the lower or
material end of creation, Vaikharî. Hence she is mystic, though physical,
Nature, with all her magic ways and properties.

Again, as Goddess of Speech and of Sound, and a permutation of Aditi, she
is Chaos, in one sense. At any rate, she is the “Mother of the Gods,” and
it is from Brahmâ, Îshvara or the Logos, and Vâch, as from Adam Kadmon and
Sephira, that the real _manifested_ Theogony has to start. Beyond, all is
Darkness and abstract speculation. With the Dhyân Chohans or the Gods, the
Seers, the Prophets and the Adepts in general are on firm ground. Whether
as Aditi, or the Divine Sophia of the Greek Gnostics, she is the mother of
the Seven Sons, the Angels of the Face, of the Deep, or the Great Green
One of the _Book of the Dead_. Says the _Book of Dzyan_, or Real
Knowledge, obtained through meditation:


    _The Great Mother lay with the [triangle], and the |, and the
    [square], the second | and the [five‐pointed star],_(_706_)_ in
    her Bosom, ready to bring them forth, the valiant Sons of the
    [square] [triangle] || [or 4,320,000, the Cycle], whose two Elders
    are the [circle] [Circle] and the · [Point]._


At the beginning of every Cycle of 4,320,000, the Seven, or as some
nations had it Eight, Great Gods, descend to establish the new order of
things and to give the impetus to the new cycle. That _eighth_ God was the
unifying Circle, or Logos, separated and made distinct from its Host, in
exoteric dogma, just as the three divine _hypostases_ of the ancient
Greeks are now considered in the Churches as three distinct _personæ_. As
a Commentary says:


    _The Mighty Ones perform their great works, and leave behind them
    __ everlasting monuments to commemorate their visit, every time
    they penetrate within our mâyâvic veil [atmosphere]._(707)


Thus we are taught that the great Pyramids were built under their direct
supervision, “when Dhruva [the then Pole‐star], was at his lowest
culmination, and the Krittikâs [Pleiades] looked over his head [were on
the same meridian but above] to watch the work of the Giants.” Thus, as
the first Pyramids were built at the beginning of a Sidereal Year, under
Dhruva (Alpha Polaris), it must have been over 31,000 years (31,105) ago.
Bunsen was right in admitting for Egypt an antiquity of over 21,000 years,
but this concession hardly exhausts truth and fact in this question. As
Mr. Gerald Massey says:


    The stories told by Egyptian priests and others of time‐keeping in
    Egypt are now beginning to look less like lies in the sight of all
    who have escaped from biblical bondage. Inscriptions have lately
    been found at Sakkarah, making mention of two Sothiac cycles ...
    registered at that time, now some 6,000 years ago. Thus when
    Herodotus was in Egypt, the Egyptians had—as now known—observed at
    least five different Sothiac cycles of 1,461 years....

    The priests informed the Greek enquirer that time had been
    reckoned by them for so long that the sun had twice risen where it
    then set, and twice set where it then arose. This ... can only be
    realized as a fact in nature by means of two cycles of Precession,
    or a period of 51,736 years.(708)


Mor Isaac(709) shows the ancient Syrians defining their World of the
“Rulers” and “Active Gods” in the same way as the Chaldeans. The lowest
World was the Sublunary—our own—watched by the _Angels_ of the first or
lower order; the one that came next in rank, was Mercury, ruled by the
_Archangels_: then came Venus, whose Gods were the _Principalities_; the
fourth was that of the Sun, the domain and region of the highest and
mightiest Gods of our system, the solar Gods of all nations; the fifth was
Mars, ruled by the _Virtues_; the sixth, that of Bel or Jupiter, was
governed by the _Dominions_; the seventh, the World of Saturn, by the
_Thrones_. These are the Worlds of Form. Above come the Four higher ones,
making Seven again, since the Three _highest_ are “unmentionable and
unpronounceable.” The eighth, composed of 1,122 stars, is the domain of
the _Cherubs_; the ninth, belonging to the _walking_ and numberless stars
on account of their distance, has the _Seraphs_; as to the tenth, Kircher,
quoting Mor Isaac, says that it is composed “of invisible stars that could
be taken, they said, for clouds, so massed are they in the zone that we
call Via Straminis, the Milky Way”; and he hastens to explain that “these
are the stars of Lucifer, engulfed with him in his terrible shipwreck.”
That which comes after and beyond the ten Worlds (our Quaternary), or the
Arûpa World, the Syrians could not tell. “All they knew was that it is
there that begins the vast and incomprehensible Ocean of the Infinite, the
abode of the True Divinity, without boundary or end.”

Champollion shows the same belief among the Egyptians. Hermes having
spoken of the Father‐Mother and Son, whose Spirit—collectively the Divine
Fiat—shapes the Universe, says: “Seven Agents [Media] were also formed, to
contain the Material [or manifested] Worlds within their respective
Circles, and the action of these Agents was named Destiny.” He further
enumerates seven and ten and twelve orders, but it would take too long to
detail them here.

As the _Rig Vidhâna_ together with the _Brahmânda Purâna_ and all such
works, whether describing the magic efficacy of the Rig Vedic _Mantras_,
or the future Kalpas, are declared by Dr. Weber and others to be modern
compilations “belonging probably only to the time of the _Purânas_,” it is
useless to refer the reader to their mystic explanations; and one may as
well simply quote from the archaic books utterly unknown to the
Orientalists. These works explain that which so puzzles the scholars,
namely that the Saptarshis, the “Mind‐born Sons” of Brahmâ, are referred
to in the _Shatapatha Brâhmana_ under one set of names; in the
_Mahâbhârata_ under another set; and that the _Vâyu Purâna_ makes even
_nine_ instead of _seven_ Rishis, by adding the names of Bhrigu and Daksha
to the list. But the same occurs in every exoteric Scripture. The Secret
Doctrine gives a long genealogy of Rishis, but separates them into many
classes. Like the Gods of the Egyptians, who were divided into seven, and
even twelve, Classes, so are the Indian Rishis in their Hierarchies. The
first three Groups are the Divine, the Cosmical and the Sublunary. Then
come the Solar Gods of our System, the Planetary, the Submundane, and the
purely Human—the Heroes and the Mânushi.

At present, however, we are only concerned with the Pre‐cosmic, Divine
Gods, the Prajâpatis, or the Seven Builders. This Group is found
unmistakably in every Cosmogony. Owing to the loss of Egyptian archaic
documents, since, according to M. Maspero, “the materials and historical
data on hand to study the history of the religious evolution in Egypt are
neither complete nor very often intelligible,” the ancient Hymns and
inscriptions on the tombs must be appealed to, in order to have the
statements brought forward from the Secret Doctrine partially and
indirectly corroborated. One such shows that Osiris, like
Brahmâ‐Prajâpati, Adam Kadmon, Ormazd, and so many other Logoi, was the
chief and synthesis of the Group of “Creators” or Builders. Before Osiris
became the “One” and the _Highest_ God of Egypt, he was worshipped at
Abydos as the Head, or Leader, of the Heavenly Host of the Builders
belonging to the higher of the three Orders. The Hymn engraved on the
votive stele of a tomb from Abydos (3rd register) addresses Osiris thus:


    Salutations to thee, O Osiris, elder son of Seb; thou the greatest
    over the six Gods issued from the Goddess Noo [Primordial Water],
    thou the great favourite of thy father Ra; Father of Fathers, King
    of Duration, Master in the Eternity ... who, as soon as these
    issued from thy Mother’s Bosom, gathered all the Crowns and
    attached the Uræus [serpent or _naja_](710) on thy head; multiform
    God, _whose name is unknown_ and who has many names in towns and
    provinces.


Coming out from the Primordial Water crowned with the Uræus, which is the
serpent‐emblem of Cosmic Fire, and himself the _seventh_ over the six
Primary Gods, issued from Father‐Mother, Noo and Noot, the Sky, who can
Osiris be, but the chief Prajâpati, the chief Sephira, the chief
Amshaspend, Ormazd! That this latter Solar and Cosmic God stood, in the
beginning of religious evolution, in the same position as the Archangel,
“whose name was secret,” is certain. This Archangel was Michael, the
representative on earth of the _Hidden_ Jewish God; in short, it is his
“Face” that is said to have gone before the Jews like a “Pillar of Fire.”
Burnouf says: “The seven Amshaspends, who are most assuredly our
Archangels, designate also the personifications of the Divine
Virtues.”(711) And these Archangels, therefore, are as certainly the
Saptarshis of the Hindus, though it is next to impossible to class each
with its Pagan prototype and parallel, since, as in the case of Osiris,
they have all so “many names in towns and provinces.” Some of the most
important, however, will be shown in their order.

One thing is thus undeniably proven. The more we study their Hierarchies
and find out their identity, the more proofs we acquire that there is not
one of the past or present _personal_ Gods, known to us from the earliest
days of history, that does not belong to the third stage of cosmic
manifestation. In every religion we find the Concealed Deity forming the
ground work; then the Ray therefrom, that falls into primordial Cosmic
Matter, the _first_ manifestation; then the Androgyne result, the dual
Male and Female abstract Force personified, the _second_ stage; this
finally separates itself, in the _third_, into Seven Forces, called the
Creative Powers by all the ancient religions, and the Virtues of God by
the Christians. The later explanations and abstract metaphysical
qualifications have not prevented the Roman and Greek Churches from
worshipping these “Virtues” under the personifications and distinct names
of the Seven Archangels. In the _Book of Druschim_,(712) in the _Talmud_,
a distinction between these groups is given which is the correct
Kabalistical explanation. It says:


    There are three Groups (or Orders) of Sephiroth. 1st. The
    Sephiroth called the “Divine Attributes” [abstract]. 2nd. The
    Physical or Sidereal Sephiroth [personal]—one group of _seven_,
    the other of _ten_. 3rd. The metaphysical Sephiroth, or
    periphrasis of Jehovah, who are the first three Sephiroth [Kether,
    Chokmah and Binah], the rest of the seven being the (personal)
    seven Spirits of the Presence [also of the planets].


The same division has to be applied to the primary, secondary and tertiary
evolution of Gods in every Theogony, if one wishes to translate the
meaning esoterically. We must not confuse the purely metaphysical
personifications of the _abstract_ attributes of Deity, with their
reflection—the Sidereal Gods. This reflection, however, is in reality the
objective expression of the abstraction; _living_ Entities and the models
formed on that divine Prototype. Moreover, the three metaphysical
Sephiroth, or the “periphrasis of Jehovah,” are _not_ Jehovah. It is the
latter himself, with the additional titles of Adonai, Elohim, Sabbaoth,
and the numerous names lavished on him, who is the periphrasis of the
Shaddai (שדי), the Omnipotent. The name is a circumlocution, indeed, a too
abundant figure of Jewish rhetoric, and has always been denounced by the
Occultists. To the Jewish Kabalists, and even the Christian Alchemists and
Rosicrucians, Jehovah was a convenient _screen_, unified by the folding of
its many panels, and adopted as a substitute; one name of an individual
Sephira being as good as another name, for those who had the secret. The
Tetragrammaton, the Ineffable, the Sidereal “Sum Total,” was invented for
no other purpose than to mislead the profane and to symbolize life and
generation.(713) The real secret and _unpronounceable_ Name, the “Word
that is no word,” has to be sought in the seven names of the first Seven
Emanations, or the “Sons of the Fire,” in the secret Scriptures of all the
great nations, and even in the _Zohar_, the Kabalistic lore of the
smallest of all of them, viz., the Jewish. This word, composed of seven
letters in every tongue, is found embodied in the architectural remains of
every great sacred building in the world; from the Cyclopean remains on
Easter Island—part of a Continent buried under the seas nearer 4,000,000
years ago(714) than 20,000—down to the earliest Egyptian pyramids.

We shall have to enter more fully into this subject later on, and to bring
practical illustrations to prove the statements made in the text.

For the present it is sufficient to show, by a few instances, the truth of
what has been asserted at the beginning of this work, namely, that no
Cosmogony, the world over, with the sole exception of the Christian, has
ever attributed to the One Highest Cause, the Universal Deific Principle,
the immediate creation of our earth, or man, or anything connected with
these. This statement holds as well for the Hebrew or Chaldean _Kabalah_
as it does for _Genesis_, had the latter been ever thoroughly understood
and, what is still more important, correctly translated.(715) Everywhere
there is either a Logos—a “Light shining in Darkness,” truly—or the
Architect of the Worlds is esoterically in the plural number. The Latin
Church, paradoxical as ever, while applying the epithet of Creator to
Jehovah alone, adopts a whole Kyriel of names for the _working_ Forces of
the latter, names which betray the secret. For if the said Forces had
nought to do with “Creation” so‐called, why call them Elohim (Alhim), a
plural word; Divine Workmen and Energies (Ἐνέργειαι), incandescent
celestial stones (_lapides igniti cœlorum_); and especially Supporters of
the World (Κοσμοκράτορες), Governors or Rulers of the World (Rectores
Mundi), Wheels of the World (Rotæ), Auphanim, Flames and Powers, Sons of
God (B’ne Alhim), Vigilant Counsellors, etc.?

It is often asserted, and unjustly, as usual, that China, nearly as old a
country as India, had no Cosmogony. It was unknown to Confucius, and the
Buddhists extended their Cosmogony without introducing a Personal
God,(716) it is complained. The _Yi‐King_, “the very essence of ancient
thought and the combined work of the most venerated sages,” fails to show
a distinct Cosmogony. Nevertheless, one existed, and a very distinct one.
Only as Confucius did not admit of a future life(717) and the Chinese
Buddhists reject the idea of _One_ Creator, accepting one Cause and its
numberless effects, they are misunderstood by the believers in a Personal
God. The “Great Extreme,” as the commencement of “changes”
(transmigrations), is the shortest and, perhaps, the most suggestive of
all Cosmogonies for those who, like the Confucianists, love virtue for its
own sake and try to do good unselfishly without perpetually looking to
reward and profit. The “Great Extreme” of Confucius produces “Two
Figures.” These Two produce in their turn the “Four Images”; these again
the “Eight Symbols.” It is complained that though the Confucianists see in
them “heaven, earth and man in miniature,” we can see in them anything we
like. No doubt, and so it is with regard to many symbols, especially those
of the latest religions. But they who know something of Occult numerals,
see in these “Figures” the symbol, however rude, of a harmonious
progressive Evolution of Kosmos and its Beings, both Heavenly and
Terrestrial. And any one who has studied the numerical evolution in the
primeval Cosmogony of Pythagoras—a contemporary of Confucius—can never
fail to find in his Triad, Tetraktys and Decad, emerging from the One and
solitary Monad, the same idea. Confucius is laughed at by his Christian
biographer for “talking of divination,” before and after this passage, and
is represented as saying:


    The eight symbols determine good and ill fortune, and these lead
    to great deeds. There are no imitable images greater than heaven
    and earth. There are no changes greater than the four seasons
    [meaning North, South, East and West, etc.]. There are no
    suspended images brighter than the sun and moon. In preparing
    things for use, there is none greater than the sage. In
    determining good and ill‐luck there is nothing greater than the
    _divining straws_ and the _tortoise_.(718)


Therefore, the “divining straws” and the “tortoise,” the “symbolic sets of
lines,” and the great sage who looks at them as they become one and two,
and two become four, and four become eight, and the other sets “three and
six,” are laughed to scorn, only because his wise symbols are
misunderstood.

So the author of the volume cited and his colleagues will no doubt scoff
at the Stanzas given in our text, for they represent _precisely the same
idea_. The old archaic map of Cosmogony is full of lines in the Confucian
style, of concentric circles and dots. Yet all these represent the most
abstract and philosophical conceptions of the Cosmogony of our Universe.
At all events it may, perhaps, answer better to the requirements and the
scientific purposes of our age, than the cosmogonical essays of St.
Augustine and the Venerable Bede, though these were published over a
millennium later than the Confucian.

Confucius, one of the greatest sages of the ancient world, believed in
ancient magic, and practised it himself, “if we take for granted the
statements of _Kià‐yü_” and “he praised it to the skies in the _Yi‐king_,”
we are told by his reverend critic. Nevertheless, even in his age, 600
B.C., Confucius and his school taught the sphericity of the earth and even
the heliocentric system; while, at about thrice 600 years after the
Chinese philosopher, the Popes of Rome threatened and even burnt
“heretics” for asserting the same. He is laughed at for speaking of the
“Sacred Tortoise.” No unprejudiced person can see any great difference
between a Tortoise and a Lamb as candidates for sacredness, as both are
symbols and no more. The Ox, the Eagle,(719) and the Lion, and
occasionally the Dove are the “sacred animals” of the Western _Bible_; the
first three are found grouped round the Evangelists; the fourth,
associated with these, a human face, is a Seraph, _i.e._, a “fiery
serpent,” the Gnostic Agathodæmon probably.

The choice is curious, and shows how paradoxical were the first Christians
in their selections. For why should they have chosen these symbols of
Egyptian Paganism, when the Eagle is never mentioned in the _New
Testament_ save once, when Jesus refers to it as a _carrion_ eater,(720)
and in the _Old Testament_ it is called _unclean_; when the Lion is made a
point of comparison with Satan, both roaring for men to devour; and the
Oxen are driven out of the Temple? On the other hand the Serpent, brought
in as an exemplar of wisdom, is now regarded as the symbol of the Devil.
The esoteric pearl of Christ’s religion, degraded into Christian theology,
may indeed be said to have chosen a strange and unfitting _shell_ to be
born in and evolved from.

As explained, the Sacred Animals and the Flames or Sparks, within the Holy
Four, refer to the Prototypes of all that is found in the Universe in the
Divine Thought, in the Root, which is the Perfect Cube, or the Foundation
of the Kosmos, collectively and individually. They have all an occult
reference to primordial Cosmic Forms, and the first concretions, work, and
evolution of Kosmos.

In the earliest Hindû exoteric Cosmogonies, it is not even the Demiurge
who creates. For it is said in one of the _Purânas_:


    The great Architect of the World gives the first impulse to the
    rotatory motion of our planetary system by stepping in turn over
    each planet and body.


It is this action “that causes each sphere to turn around itself, and all
around the Sun.” After which action, “it is the Brahmândika,” the Solar
and Lunar Pitris, the Dhyân Chohans, “who take charge of their respective
spheres [earths and planets], to the end of the Kalpa.” The Creators are
the Rishis, most of whom are credited with the authorship of the Mantras,
or Hymns, of the _Rig Veda_. They are sometimes _seven_, sometimes _ten_,
when they become Prajâpati, the Lord of Beings; then they rebecome the
_seven_ and the _fourteen_ Manus, as the representatives of the seven and
fourteen Cycles of Existence, or Days of Brahmâ, thus answering to the
seven Æons, when, at the end of the first stage of Evolution, they are
transformed into the seven stellar Rishis, the Saptarshis; while their
_human_ Doubles appear as Heroes, Kings and Sages on this earth.

The Esoteric Doctrine of the East having thus furnished and struck the
key‐note, which, under its allegorical garb, is, as may be seen, as
scientific as it is philosophical and poetical, every nation has followed
its lead. It is from the exoteric religions that we have to dig out the
root‐idea before we turn to esoteric truths, lest the latter should be
rejected. Furthermore, every symbol, in _every_ national religion, may be
read esoterically; and the proof of its being correctly read when
transliterated into its corresponding numerals and geometrical forms, may
be obtained from the extraordinary agreement of all glyphs and symbols,
however much they may externally vary among themselves. For in the origin
those symbols were all identical. Take, for instance, the opening
sentences in various Cosmogonies; in every case it is a Circle, an Egg, or
a Head. Darkness is always associated with this first symbol and surrounds
it, as is shown in the Hindû, the Egyptian, the Chaldeo‐Hebrew and even
the Scandinavian systems. Hence black ravens, black doves, black waters
and even black flames; the seventh tongue of Agni, the Fire‐God being
called Kâlî, the “Black,” since it was a black flickering flame. Two
“black” doves flew from Egypt and, settling on the oaks of Dodona, gave
their names to the Grecian Gods. Noah sends out a “black” raven after the
Deluge, which is a symbol for the Cosmic Pralaya, after which began the
real creation or evolution of our Earth and Humanity. Odin’s “black”
ravens fluttered round the Goddess Saga and “whispered to her of the past
and of the future.” Now what is the inner meaning of all those black
birds? It is that they are all connected with the primeval Wisdom, which
flows out of the pre‐cosmic Source of All, symbolized by the Head, the
Circle or the Egg; and they all have an identical meaning and relate to
the primordial Archetypal Man, Adam Kadmon, the Creative Origin of all
things, which is composed of the Host of Cosmic Powers—the Creative Dhyân
Chohans, beyond which all is Darkness.

Let us enquire of the wisdom of the Kabalah, even veiled and distorted as
it now is, to explain in its numerical language an approximate meaning, at
least of the word “raven.” This is its number value as given in the
_Source of Measures_:


    The term Raven is used but once, and taken as Eth‐h’ orebv
    את־הערב=678, or 113 × 6; while the Dove is mentioned five times.
    Its value is 71, and 71 × 5=355. Six diameters, or the Raven,
    crossing, would divide the circumference of a circle of 355 into
    12 parts or compartments; and 355 subdivided for each unit by 6,
    would equal 213‐0, or the Head [“beginning”] in the first verse of
    _Genesis_. This divided, or subdivided, after the same fashion, by
    2, or the 355 by 12, would give 213‐2, or the word B’râsh, ב־ראש,
    or the first word of _Genesis_, with its prepositional prefix,
    signifying the same concreted general form, astronomically, with
    the one here intended.


Now the secret reading of the first verse in _Genesis_ being: “In Râsh
(B’râsh) or Head, developed Gods, the Heavens and the Earth”—it is easy to
comprehend the esoteric meaning of the Raven, once that the like meaning
of the Flood, or Noah’s Deluge, is ascertained. Whatever the many other
meanings of this emblematical allegory may be, its _chief_ meaning is that
of a new Cycle and a new Round—our Fourth Round.(721) The Raven, or the
Eth‐h’ orebv, yields the same numerical value as the Head, and returned
not to the Ark, while the Dove returned, carrying the olive‐branch; when
Noah, the new man of the new Race—whose prototype is Vaivasvata Manu,
prepared to leave the Ark, the Womb, or Argha, of terrestrial Nature, he
is the symbol of the purely spiritual, sexless and androgyne man of the
first three Races, who vanished from Earth for ever. Numerically, in the
_Kabalah_, Jehovah, Adam, Noah, are one. At best, then, it is Deity
descending on Ararat and later, on Sinai, to incarnate henceforth in man,
his _image_, through the natural process, the mother’s womb, whose symbols
are the Ark, the Mount (Sinai), etc., in _Genesis_. The Jewish allegory is
astronomical and physiological, rather than anthropomorphic.

And here lies the abyss between the Âryan and Semitic systems, though both
are built on the same foundation. As shown by an expounder of the
_Kabalah_:


    The basic idea underlying the philosophy of the Hebrews was that
    God contained all things within himself and that man was _his
    image_; man, including woman [as androgynes; and that] geometry
    (and numbers and measures applicable to astronomy) are contained
    in the terms _man_ and _woman_; and the apparent incongruity of
    such a mode was eliminated by showing the connection of man and
    woman with a particular system of numbers and measures and
    geometry, by the parturient time‐periods, which furnished the
    connecting link between the terms used and the facts shown, and
    perfected the mode used.(722)


It is argued that, the primal cause being absolutely incognizable, “the
symbol of its first _comprehensible manifestation_ was the conception of a
circle with its diameter line, so as at once to carry the idea of
geometry, phallicism, and astronomy”; and this was finally applied to the
“signification of simply human generative organs.” Hence the whole cycle
of events from Adam and the Patriarchs down to Noah is made to apply to
phallic and astronomical uses, the one regulating the other, as the lunar
periods, for instance. Hence, too, the _Genesis_ of the Hebrews begins
after their coming out of the Ark, and the end of the Flood, _i.e._, at
the Fourth Race. With the Aryan people it is different.

Eastern Esotericism has never degraded the One Infinite Deity, the
Container of all things, to such uses; and this is shown by the absence of
Brahmâ from the _Rig Veda_ and the modest positions occupied therein by
Rudra and Vishnu, who became the powerful and great Gods, the “Infinites”
of the exoteric creeds, ages later. But even they, “Creators” as they all
three maybe, are not the direct “Creators” and “forefathers of men.” The
latter are shown occupying a still lower scale, and are called the
Prajâpatis, the Pitris, our Lunar Ancestors, etc., but never the One
Infinite God. Esoteric Philosophy shows only _physical_ man as created in
the _image_ of the Deity; which Deity, however, is only the “_minor
Gods_.” It is the HIGHER‐SELF, the real EGO, who alone is divine and GOD.




Section XIII. The Seven Creations.


    There was neither day nor night, nor sky nor earth, nor darkness
    nor light, nor any other thing save only One, unapprehensive by
    intellect, or That which is Brahma and Pums (Spirit) and Pradhâna
    ([crude] Matter).(723)

    VISHNU PURÂNA (I. ii.)


In _Vishnu Purâna_, Parâshara says to Maitreya, his pupil:


    I have thus explained to you, excellent Muni, six creations ...
    the creation of the Arvâksrotas beings was the seventh, and was
    that of man.(724)


Then he proceeds to speak of two additional and very mysterious creations,
variously interpreted by the commentators.

Origen, commenting upon the books written by Celsus, his Gnostic
opponent—books which were all destroyed by the prudent Church
Fathers—evidently answers the objections of his contradictor and reveals
his system at the same time. This was clearly _septenary_. But the
theogony of Celsus, the genesis of the stars or planets, and of sound and
colour, found as an answer satire, and no more. Celsus, you see, “desiring
to exhibit his learning,” speaks of a ladder of creation with _seven
gates_, and on the top of it the eighth, ever closed. The mysteries of the
Persian Mithras are explained and “musical reasons, moreover, are added.”
And to these again he strives “to add a second explanation connected also
with musical considerations,”(725) that is to say with the seven notes of
the scale, the seven Spirits of the Stars, etc.

Valentinus expatiates upon the power of the great Seven, who were summoned
to bring forth this universe after Ar(r)hetos, or the Ineffable, whose
name is composed of seven letters, had represented the first Hebdomad. The
name Ar(r)hetos indicates the sevenfold nature of the One, the Logos. “The
Goddess Rhea,” says Proclus, “is a Monad, Duad, and Heptad,” comprehending
in herself all the Titanidæ, “who are seven.”(726)

The Seven Creations are found in almost every _Purâna_. They are all
preceded by what Wilson translates as the “Indiscrete Principle,” Absolute
Spirit, independent of any relation with objects of sense.

They are: (1) Mahattattva, the Universal Soul, Infinite Intellect, or
Divine Mind; (2) Tanmâtras, Bhûta or Bhûtasarga, Elemental Creation the
first differentiation of Universal Indiscrete Substance; (3) Indriya or
Aindriyaka, Organic Evolution. “These three were the Prâkrita Creations,
the _developments of indiscrete nature_, preceded by the Indiscrete
Principle”; (4) Mukhya, “the Fundamental Creation (of perceptible things)
was that of inanimate bodies”;(727) (5) Tairyagyonya or Tiryaksrotas, was
that of animals; (6) Ûrdhvasrotas, or that of divinities(?);(728) (7)
Arvâksrotas, was that of man.(729)

This is the order given in the _exoteric_ texts. According to esoteric
teaching there are seven Primary, and seven Secondary “Creations”; the
former being the Forces _self‐evolving_ from the one _causeless_ FORCE;
the latter showing the manifested Universe emanating from the already
differentiated _divine_ Elements.

Esoterically, as well as exoterically, all the above enumerated Creations
stand for the seven periods of Evolution, whether after an Age or a Day of
Brahmâ. This is the teaching _par excellence_ of Occult Philosophy, which,
however, never uses the term “creation,” nor even that of evolution, with
regard to _Primary_ “Creation”; but calls all such Forces the “_aspects_
of the Causeless Force.” In the _Bible_, the seven periods are dwarfed
into the six Days of Creation and the seventh Day of Rest, and the
Westerns adhere to the letter. In the Hindû Philosophy, when the active
Creator has produced the World of Gods, the _Germs_ of all the
undifferentiated Elements, and the Rudiments of future Senses—the World of
Noumena, in short—the Universe remains unaltered for a Day of Brahmâ, a
period of 4,320,000,000 years. This is the _seventh_ passive Period, or
the “Sabbath” of Eastern Philosophy, following six periods of active
evolution. In the _Shatapatha Brâhmana_, Brahma (neuter), the Absolute
Cause of all Causes, _radiates_ the Gods. Having radiated the Gods,
through its inherent nature, the work is interrupted. In the First Book of
_Manu_ it is said:


    At the expiration of each Night (Pralaya), Brahma, having been
    asleep, awakes, and, _through the sole energy of the motion_,
    causes to emanate from _itself_ the Spirit [or mind], which in its
    essence is, and yet is not.


In the _Sepher Yetzirah_, the Kabalistic “Book of Creation,” the author
has evidently reëchoed the words of Manu. In it the Divine Substance is
represented as having alone existed from the eternity, boundless and
absolute; and as having emitted from itself the Spirit.


    One is the Spirit of the living God, blessed be his Name, who
    liveth for ever! Voice, Spirit, and Word, this is the Holy
    Spirit.(730)


And this is the Kabalistic abstract Trinity, so unceremoniously
anthropomorphized by the Fathers. From this triple One emanated the whole
Kosmos. First from One emanated number Two, or Air, the creative element;
and then number Three, Water, proceeded from the Air; Ether or Fire
completes the mystic Four, the Arba‐il. In the Eastern doctrine, Fire is
the first Element—Ether, synthesizing the whole, since it contains all of
them.

In the _Vishnu Purâna_, the whole seven periods are given; and the
progressive Evolution of the “Spirit‐Soul,” and of the seven Forms of
Matter, or Principles, is shown. It is impossible to enumerate them in
this work. The reader is asked to peruse one of the _Purânas_.


    R. Yehudah began, it is written: “Elohim said: Let there be a
    firmament, in the midst of waters.” Come, see! At the time that
    the Holy ... created the world, He [they] created 7 heavens Above.
    He created 7 earths Below, 7 seas, 7 days, 7 rivers, 7 weeks, 7
    years, 7 times, and 7,000 years that the world has been, ... the
    seventh of all (the millennium).... So here are 7 earths Below,
    they are all inhabited except those which are above, and those
    which are below. And ... between each earth, a heaven (firmament)
    is spread out between each other.... And there are in them [these
    earths] creatures who look different one from the other; ... but
    if you object and say that all the children of the world came out
    from Adam, it is not so.... And the lower earths, where do they
    come from? They are from _the chain of the earth_, and from the
    Heaven above.(731)


Irenæus also is our witness—and a very unwilling one—that the Gnostics
taught the same system, veiling very carefully the true esoteric meaning.
This “veiling,” however, is identical with that of the _Vishnu Purâna_ and
others. Thus Irenæus writes of the Marcosians:


    They maintain that first of all the four elements, fire, water,
    earth and air, were produced after the image of the primary Tetrad
    above, and that then if we add their operations, namely, heat,
    cold, moisture and dryness, an exact likeness of the Ogdoad is
    presented.(732)


Only this “likeness” and the Ogdoad itself is a blind, just as in the
seven creations of the _Vishnu Purâna_, to which two more are added, of
which the eighth, termed Anugraha, “possesses both the qualities of
goodness and darkness,” a Sânkhyan more than a Purânic idea. For Irenæus
says again, that:


    They [the Gnostics] had a like eighth creation which was good and
    bad, divine and human. They affirm that man was formed on the
    _eighth day_. Sometimes they affirm that he was made on the
    _sixth_ day, and at others on the eighth; unless, perchance, they
    mean that his earthly part was formed on the sixth day and his
    fleshly part [?] on the eighth day; these two being distinguished
    by them.(733)


They were so “distinguished,” but not as Irenæus gives it. The Gnostics
had a superior, and an inferior Hebdomad in Heaven; and a third
terrestrial Hebdomad, on the plane of matter. Iaô, the Mystery God and the
Regent of the Moon, as given in Origen’s Chart, was the chief of these
superior “Seven Heavens,”(734) hence identical with the chief of the Lunar
Pitris, that name being given by them to the Lunar Dhyân Chohans. “They
affirm that these seven heavens are intelligent, and _speak of them as
being angels_,” writes the same Irenæus; and adds that on this account
they termed Iaô Hebdomas, while his mother was called Ogdoas, because, as
he explains, “she preserved the number of _the first begotten and primary
Ogdoad of the Plerôma_.”(735)

This “first begotten Ogdoad” was in Theogony the Second Logos, the
Manifested, because it was born of the Seven‐fold First Logos, hence it is
the eighth on this manifested plane; and in Astrolatry, it was the Sun,
Mârttânda, the eighth Son of Aditi, whom she rejects while preserving her
Seven Sons, _the planets_. For the Ancients have never regarded the Sun as
a planet, but as _a central and fixed Star_. This, then, is the second
Hebdomad born of the Seven‐rayed One, Agni, the Sun and what not, only not
the seven planets, which are Sûrya’s _Brothers_, not his _Sons_. With the
Gnostics, these Astral Gods were the Sons of Ialdabaoth(736) (from _ilda_,
child, and _baoth_ egg), the Son of Sophia Achamôth, the daughter of
Sophia or Wisdom, whose region is the Plerôma. Ialdabaoth produces from
himself these six stellar Spirits: Iaô (Jehovah), Sabaôth, Adoneus,
Eloæus, Oreus, Astaphæus,(737) and it is they who are the second, or
inferior Hebdomad. As to the third, it is composed of the seven primeval
men, the shadows of the Lunar Gods, projected by the first Hebdomad. In
this the Gnostics did not, as seen, differ much from the Esoteric
Doctrine, except that they veiled it. As to the charge made by Irenæus,
who was evidently ignorant of the true tenets of the “Heretics,” with
regard to man being created on the _sixth_ day, and man being created on
the _eighth_, this relates to the mysteries of the _inner_ man. It will
become comprehensible to the reader only after he has read Volume II, and
understood well the Anthropogenesis of the Esoteric Doctrine.

Ialdabaoth is a copy of Manu, who boasts:


    O best of twice‐born men! Know that I (Manu) am he, the creator of
    all this world, whom that male Virâj ... spontaneously
    produced.(738)


He first creates the ten Lords of Being, the Prajâpatis, who, as verse 36
tells us, “produce seven other Manus.” Ialdabaoth boasts likewise: “I am
Father and God, and there is no one above me,” he exclaims. For which his
Mother coolly puts him down by saying: “Do not lie, Ialdabaoth, for the
Father of all, the _First_ Man (Anthrôpos) is above thee, and so is
Anthrôpos, the Son of Anthrôpos.”(739) This is a good proof that there
were three Logoi—besides the Seven born of the First—one of these being
the Solar Logos. And, again, who was that Anthrôpos himself, so much
higher than Ialdabaoth? The Gnostic records alone can solve this riddle.
In _Pistis‐Sophia_ the four‐vowelled name Ieou is generally accompanied by
the epithet of “the Primal, or First Man.” This shows again that the
Gnôsis was but an echo of our Archaic Doctrine. The names answering to
Parabrahman, to Brahmâ, and Manu, the first _thinking_ Man, are composed
of one‐vowelled, three‐vowelled and seven‐vowelled sounds. Marcus, whose
philosophy was certainly more Pythagorean than anything else, speaks of a
revelation to him of the seven Heavens sounding each one vowel, as they
pronounced the seven names of the seven Angelic Hierarchies.

When Spirit has permeated every minutest atom of the Seven Principles of
Kosmos, then the _Secondary_ Creation, after the above‐mentioned period of
rest, begins.

“The Creators [Elohim] outline in the _second_ ‘Hour’ the shape of man,”
says Rabbi Simeon in _The Nuchthemeron of the Hebrews_. “There are twelve
hours in the day,” says the _Mishna_, “and it is during these that
creation is accomplished.” The “twelve hours of the day” are again the
dwarfed copy, the faint, yet faithful, echo of primitive Wisdom. They are
like the 12,000 Divine Years of the Gods, a cyclic blind. Every Day of
Brahmâ has 14 Manus, which the Hebrew Kabalists, following, however, in
this the Chaldeans, have disguised into 12 “Hours.”(740) The
_Nuchthemeron_ of Apollonius of Tyana is the same thing. “The Dodecahedron
lies concealed in the perfect Cube,” say the Kabalists. The mystic meaning
of this is, that the twelve great transformations of Spirit into
Matter—the 12,000 Divine Years—take place during the four great Ages, or
the first Mahâyuga. Beginning with the metaphysical and the supra‐human,
it ends in the physical and purely human natures of Kosmos and Man.
Eastern Philosophy can give the number of mortal years that run along the
line of spiritual and physical evolutions of the seen and the unseen, if
Western Science fails to do so.

Primary Creation is called the Creation of Light (Spirit); and the
Secondary, that of Darkness (Matter).(741) Both are found in
_Genesis_.(742) The first is the emanation of self‐born Gods (Elohim); the
second of physical Nature.

This is why it is said in the _Zohar_:


    Oh, companions, companions, man as emanation was both man and
    woman; as well on the side of the Father as on the side of the
    Mother. And this is the sense of the words: And Elohim spake: “Let
    there be Light and it was Light!” ... And this is the “two‐fold
    Man”!


Light, however, on our plane, is Darkness in the higher spheres.

“Man and woman ... on the side of the FATHER” (Spirit) refers to Primary
Creation; and on the side of the Mother (Matter), to the Secondary. The
two‐fold Man is Adam Kadmon, the male and female abstract prototype and
the differentiated Elohim. Man proceeds from the Dhyân Chohan, and is a
“Fallen Angel,” a God in exile, as will be shown.

In India these creations were described as follows:(743)

(I) _The First Creation_: Mahattattva Creation, so‐called because it was
the primordial self‐evolution of that which had to become Mahat, the
“Divine Mind, conscious and intelligent”; esoterically, the “Spirit of the
Universal Soul.”


    Worthiest of ascetics, through its potency (_the potency of that
    cause_), every _produced_ cause comes by its proper nature.


And again:


    Seeing that the potencies of all beings are understood _only_
    through the knowledge of That (Brahma), which is beyond reasoning,
    creation, and the like, such potencies are referable to Brahma.


THAT, then precedes the manifestation. “The first was Mahat,” says _Linga
Purâna_; for the One (the That) is neither _first_ nor _last_, but _all_.
Exoterically, however, this manifestation is the _work_ of the “Supreme
One”—a natural _effect_, rather, of an Eternal Cause; or, as the
Commentator says, it might have been understood to mean that Brahmâ was
then _created_ (?), being identified with Mahat, active intelligence, or
the operating will of the Supreme. Esoteric Philosophy renders it the
“operating _Law_.”

It is on the right comprehension of this tenet in the _Brâhmanas_ and
_Purânas_ that hangs, we believe, the apple of discord between the three
Vedântin Sects: the Advaita, Dvaita, and the Vishishthâdvaita. The first
argues rightly that Parabrahman, having no relation, as the absolute ALL,
to the manifested World, the Infinite having no connection with the
Finite, can neither _will_ nor _create_; that, therefore, Brahmâ, Mahat,
Îshvara, or whatever name the Creative Power may be known by, Creative
Gods and all, are simply an illusive aspect of Parabrahman in the
conception of the conceivers; while the other sects identify the
Impersonal Cause with the Creator, or Îshvara.

Mahat, or Mahâ‐Buddhi, is, with the Vaishnavas, however, Divine Mind, _in
active operation_, or, as Anaxagoras has it, “an ordering and disposing
Mind, which was the cause of all things”—Νοῦς ὁ διακοσμῶν τε καὶ πάντων
ἀίτιος.

Wilson saw at a glance the suggestive connection between Mahat and the
Phœnician Môt, or Mut, who was female with the Egyptians, the Goddess
Moot, the Mother, “which, like Mahat,” he says, “was the first product of
the mixture(?) of Spirit and Matter, and the first rudiment of Creation.”
“Ex connexione autem ejus Spiritus prodidit Môt.... Hinc ... seminium
omnis creaturæ et omnium rerum creatio,” says Brucker,(744) giving it a
still more materialistic and anthropomorphic colouring.

Nevertheless, the esoteric sense of the doctrine is seen, through every
exoteric sentence, on the very face of the old Sanskrit texts that treat
of primordial Creation.


    The Supreme Soul, the _All‐permeant_ (Sarvaga) Substance of the
    World, having entered [been drawn] into Matter [Prakriti] and
    Spirit [Purusha], _agitated_ the _mutable and the immutable
    principles_, the season of Creation [Manvantara] being arrived.


The Nous of the Greeks, which is (spiritual or divine) Mind, or Mens,
Mahat, operates upon Matter in the same way; it “enters into” and
“_agitates_” it:


    Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus,
    Mens agitat molem, et magno se corpore miscet.


In the Phœnician Cosmogony also, “Spirit mixing with its own principles
gives rise to creation”;(745) the Orphic Triad shows an identical
doctrine; for there Phanes, or Erôs, Chaos, containing crude
_undifferentiated_ Cosmic Matter, and Chronos, Time, are the three co‐
operating principles, emanating from the Concealed and Unknowable Point,
which produce the work of “Creation.” And they are the Hindû Purusha
(Phanes), Pradhâna (Chaos) and Kâla (Chronos). The good Professor Wilson
does not like the idea, as no Christian clergyman, however liberal, would.
He remarks that: “the _mixture_ [of the Supreme Spirit or Soul with its
own principles] _is not mechanical_; it is _an influence or effect exerted
upon intermediate agents_ which produce effects.” The sentence in _Vishnu
Purâna_, “as fragrance affects the mind from its proximity merely, _and
not from any immediate operation upon mind itself_, so the Supreme
influenced the elements of creation,” the reverend and erudite Sanskritist
correctly explains by: “as perfumes do not delight the mind by actual
contact, but by the impression they make upon the sense of smelling, which
communicates it to the mind”; adding, “the entrance of the Supreme ...
into Spirit, as well as Matter, _is less intelligible_ than the view
elsewhere taken of it, as the _infusion_ of Spirit, identified with the
Supreme, into Prakriti or Matter alone.” He prefers the verse in _Pâdma
Purâna_: “He who is called the _male_ (spirit) of Prakriti ... that same
divine Vishnu entered into Prakriti.” This view is certainly more akin to
the plastic character of certain verses in the _Bible_ concerning the
Patriarchs, such as Lot and even Adam,(746) and others of a still more
anthropomorphic nature. But it is just that which led Humanity to
_Phallicism_; the Christian religion being honeycombed with it, from the
first chapter of _Genesis_ down to the _Revelation_.

The Esoteric Doctrine teaches that the Dhyân Chohans are the collective
aggregate of Divine Intelligence or Primordial Mind, and that the first
Manus, the seven “mind‐born” Spiritual Intelligences, are identical with
the former. Hence the Kwan‐Shi‐Yin, the “_Golden Dragon in whom are the
Seven_,” of Stanza III, is the Primordial Logos, or Brahmâ, the first
manifested Creative Power; and the Dhyânic Energies are the Manus, or Manu
Svâyambhuva _collectively_. The direct connection, moreover, between the
Manus and Mahat is easy to see. Manu is from the root _man_, to think; and
thinking proceeds from the mind. It is, in Cosmogony, the Pre‐nebular
Period.

(II) _The Second Creation_, Bhûta, was of the Rudimental Principles or
Tanmâtras; thence termed the Elemental Creation or Bhûtasarga. It is the
period of the first breath of the differentiation of the Pre‐cosmic
Elements, or Matter. Bhûtâdi means the “origin of the Elements,” and
precedes Bhûtasarga, the “creation,” or differentiation, of those Elements
in Primordial Âkâsha, Chaos or Vacuity.(747) In the _Vishnu Purâna_ it is
said to proceed along, and belong to, the triple aspect of Ahankâra,
translated Egotism, but meaning rather that untranslatable term “I‐am‐
ness,” that which first issues from Mahat, or Divine Mind; the first
shadowy outline of Self‐hood, for “pure” Ahankâra becomes “passionate” and
finally “rudimental” or initial: it is “the origin of conscious as of all
_unconscious_ being,” though the Esoteric school rejects the idea of
anything being “unconscious,” save on our plane of illusion and ignorance.
At this stage of the Second Creation, the Second Hierarchy of the Manus
appear, the Dhyân Chohans or Devas, who are the origin of Form (Rûpa), the
Chitrashikhandinas, “Bright‐crested,” or Rikshas; those Rishis who have
become the informing Souls of the Seven Stars (of the Great Bear).(748) In
astronomical and cosmogonical language, this Creation relates to the Fire‐
Mist Period, the first stage of Cosmic Life, after its Chaotic state,(749)
when Atoms issue from Laya.

(III) _The Third Creation_: the Third or Indriya Creation was the modified
form of Ahankâra, the conception of “I” (from Aham, “I”), termed the
Organic Creation, or Creation of the Senses, Aindriyaka. “These three were
the Prâkrita Creation, the [discrete] developments of indiscrete nature
preceded by the indiscrete principle.” “Preceded by,” ought to be replaced
here with “beginning with Buddhi”; for the latter is neither a discrete
nor an indiscrete quantity, but partakes of the nature of both, in man as
in Kosmos. A unit or human Monad on the plane of illusion, when once freed
from the three forms of Ahankâra and liberated from its terrestrial Manas,
Buddhi indeed becomes a continued quantity, both in duration and
extension, for it is eternal and immortal. Earlier it is stated, that the
Third Creation “abounding with the quality of goodness,” is termed
Ûrdhvasrotas; and a page or two further the Ûrdhvasrotas Creation is
referred to as “the sixth creation ... or that of the divinities.” This
shows plainly that earlier as well as later Manvantaras have been
purposely confused, to prevent the profane from perceiving the truth. This
is called “incongruity” and “contradictions” by the Orientalists. “The
three creations beginning with Intelligence are elemental, but the six
creations which proceed from the series of which Intellect is the first,
are the work of Brahmâ.”(750) Here “creations” mean everywhere _stages of
evolution_. Mahat, “Intellect” or Mind, which corresponds with Manas, the
former being on the cosmic, and the latter on the human plane, stands
here, too, lower than Buddhi or supra‐divine Intelligence. Therefore, when
we read in _Linga Purâna_ that “the first Creation was that of Mahat,
Intellect being the first in manifestation,” we must refer that
(specified) creation to the first evolution of our System or even our
Earth, none of the preceding ones being discussed in the _Purânas_, but
only occasionally hinted at.

This Creation of the first Immortals, or Devasarga, is the last of the
series, and has a universal meaning; it refers, namely, to Evolution in
general, and not specifically to our Manvantara, which begins with the
same over and over again, thus showing that it refers to several distinct
Kalpas. For it is said “at the close of the past [Pâdma] Kalpa the divine
Brahmâ awoke from his night of sleep and beheld the Universe void.” Then
Brahmâ is shown going once more over the “Seven Creations,” in the
secondary stage of evolution, repeating the first three on the objective
plane.

(IV) _The Fourth Creation_: the Mukhya or Primary, as it begins the series
of four. Neither the term “inanimate” bodies nor “immovable things,” as
translated by Wilson, gives a correct idea of the Sanskrit words used.
Esoteric Philosophy is not alone in rejecting the idea of any atom being
“inorganic,” for it is found also in orthodox Hindûism. Moreover, Wilson
himself says: “All the Hindû systems consider vegetable bodies as endowed
with life.”(751) Charâchara, or the synonymous sthâvara and jangama, is,
therefore, inaccurately rendered by “animate and inanimate,” “sentient
beings” and “unconscious,” or “conscious and unconscious beings,” etc.
“Locomotive and fixed” would be better, “since trees are considered to
possess souls.” The Mukhya is the “creation,” or rather organic evolution,
of the vegetable kingdom. In this Secondary Period, the three degrees of
the elemental or rudimental kingdoms are evolved in this World,
corresponding, _inversely_ in order, to the three Prâkritic Creations,
during the Primary Period of Brahmâ’s activity. As in that Period, in the
words of _Vishnu Purâna_, “the first creation was that of Mahat or
Intellect.... The second was that of the Rudimental Principles
(Tanmâtras).... The third was ... the creation of the senses
(Aindriyaka)”; so in this one, the order of the Elemental Forces stands
thus: (1) the _nascent_ Centres of Force, intellectual and physical; (2)
the Rudimentary Principles, _nerve force_, so to say; and (3) nascent
Apperception, which is the Mahat of the lower kingdoms, and is especially
developed in the third order of Elementals; these are succeeded by the
objective kingdom of minerals, in which this “apperception” is entirely
latent, to re‐develop only in the plants. The Mukhya Creation, then, is
the middle point between the three lower and the three higher kingdoms,
which represent the seven esoteric kingdoms of Kosmos, and of Earth.

(V) _The Fifth Creation_: the Tiryaksrotas or Tairyagyonya Creation,(752)
that of the “(sacred) animals,” corresponding on Earth only to the dumb
animal creation. That which is meant by “animals,” in the Primary
Creation, is the germ of awakening consciousness, or of “apperception,”
that which is faintly traceable in some sensitive plants on Earth and more
distinctly in the protistic Monera.(753) On our Globe, during the First
Round, animal “creation” precedes that of man, while the mammalian animals
evolve from man in our Fourth Round, on the physical plane. In the First
Round, the animal atoms are drawn into a cohesion of human physical form;
while in the Fourth, the reverse occurs according to magnetic conditions
developed during life. And this is “metempsychosis.”(754) This fifth Stage
of Evolution, called exoterically “Creation,” may be viewed in both the
Primary and Secondary Periods, one as the spiritual and cosmic, the other
as the material and terrestrial. It is archebiosis, or life‐origination;
“origination,” so far, of course, as the _manifestation_ of life on all
the seven planes is concerned. It is at this period of evolution that the
absolutely eternal universal motion, or vibration, that which is called in
Esoteric language the “Great Breath,” differentiates into the primordial,
first manifested Atom. More and more, as chemical and physical sciences
progress, does this Occult axiom find its corroboration in the world of
knowledge; the scientific hypothesis, that even the simplest elements of
matter are identical in their nature, and differ from each other only in
consequence of the various distributions of atoms in the molecule or speck
of substance, or of the modes of its atomic vibration, gains more ground
every day.

Thus, as the differentiation of the primordial germ of life has to precede
the evolution of the Dhyân Chohan of the _Third_ Group or Hierarchy of
Being in Primary Creation, before those Gods can become embodied in their
first ethereal form (rûpa), so animal creation has for the same reason to
_precede_ “divine man” on Earth. And this is why we find in the _Purânas_,
“the fifth, the Tairyagyonya Creation, was that of animals.”

(VI) _The Sixth Creation_: the Ûrdhvasrotas Creation, or that of
Divinities. But these Divinities are simply the Prototypes of the First
Race, the Fathers of their “mind‐born” progeny with the “soft bones.” It
is these who became the Evolvers of the “Sweat‐born”—an expression
explained in Volume II.

“Created beings,” explains the _Vishnu Purâna_, “although they are
destroyed [in their individual forms] at the periods of dissolution, yet
being affected by the good or evil acts of _former existences_, are never
exempted from their consequences. And when Brahmâ produces the world anew,
they are the progeny of his will.”

“_Collecting his mind into itself_ [yoga‐willing], Brahmâ creates the four
Orders of Beings, termed Gods, Demons, Progenitors, and Men”; Progenitors
here meaning the Prototypes and Evolvers of the first Root‐Race of men.
The Progenitors are the Pitris, and are of Seven Classes. They are said,
in _exoteric_ mythology, to be born of “Brahmâ’s side,” like Eve from the
rib of Adam.

Finally, the Sixth Creation is followed, and “Creation” in general closed
by:

(VII) _The Seventh Creation_: the evolution of the Arvâksrotas Beings,
“which was ... that of man.”

The “Eighth Creation” mentioned is no Creation at all: it is a “blind,”
for it refers to a purely mental process, the cognition of the “Ninth
Creation,” which, in its turn, is an effect, manifesting in the Secondary,
of that which was a “Creation” in the Primary (Prâkrita) Creation.(755)
The Eighth, then, called Anugraha, the Pratyayasarga or Intellectual
Creation of the Sânkhyas,(756) is “the creation of which _we have a
notion_ [in its esoteric aspect], or to which we give intellectual assent
(Anugraha), in contradistinction to _organic creation_.” It is the correct
perception of our relations to the whole range of “Gods,” and especially
of those we bear to the Kumâras, the so‐called “Ninth Creation,” which is
in reality an aspect, or reflection, of the Sixth in our Manvantara (the
Vaivasvata). “There is a _ninth_, the Kaumâra Creation, which is both
primary and secondary,” says the _Vishnu Purâna_, the oldest of such
texts.(757) As an Esoteric text explains:

_The Kumâras, are the Dhyânis, derived immediately from the Supreme
Principle, who reäppear in the Vaivasvata Manu period, for the progress of
mankind._(758)

The translator of the _Vishnu Purâna_ corroborates it, by remarking that
“these sages ... live as long as Brahmâ; and they are only created by him
in the _First_ Kalpa, although their generation is very commonly, but
inconsistently, introduced in the [_Secondary_] Vârâha, or Pâdma Kalpa.”
Thus, the Kumâras are, exoterically, “the creation of Rudra or Nîlalohita,
a form of Shiva, by Brahmâ ... and of certain other mind‐born sons of
Brahmâ.” But, in the Esoteric teaching, they are the Progenitors of the
true spiritual Self in the physical man, the higher Prajâpatis, while the
Pitris, or lower Prajâpatis, are no more than the Fathers of the model, or
type of his physical form, made “in _their_ image.” Four (and occasionally
_five_) are mentioned freely in the exoteric texts, three of the Kumâras
being secret.

“The four Kumâras [are] the mind‐born Sons of Brahmâ. Some specify
_seven_.”(759) All these seven Vaidhâtra, the patronymic of the Kumâras,
the “Maker’s Sons,” are mentioned and described in Îshvara Krishna’s
_Sânkhya Kârikâ_ with the Commentary of Gaudapâdâchârya (Shankarâchvrya’s
Paraguru) attached to it. It discusses the nature of the Kumâras, though
it refrains from mentioning _by name_ all the seven Kumâras, but calls
them instead the “seven sons of Brahmâ,” which they are, as they are
created by Brahmâ in Rudra. The list of names it gives us is: Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanâtana, Kapila, Ribhu, and Panchashikha. But these again are
all _aliases_.

The exoteric four are Sanatkumâra, Sananda, Sanaka, and Sanâtana; and the
esoteric three Sana, Kapila, and Sanatsujâta. Special attention is once
more drawn to this class of Dhyân Chohans, for herein lies the mystery of
generation and heredity hinted at in the Commentary on Stanza VII, in
treating of the Four Orders of Angelic Beings. Volume II explains their
position in the Divine Hierarchy. Meanwhile, let us see what the exoteric
texts say about them.

They say little; and to him who fails to read between the lines—nothing.
“We must have recourse, here, to other _Purânas_ for the elucidation of
this term,” remarks Wilson, who does not suspect for one moment that he is
in the presence of the “Angels of Darkness,” the mythical “great enemy” of
his Church. Therefore, he contrives to “elucidate” no more than that
“these [Divinities] _declining to create progeny_, [and thus rebelling
against Brahmâ], remained, as the name of the first [Sanatkumâra] implies,
ever boys, Kumâras; that is, ever pure and innocent, whence their creation
is called the Kaumâra.” The _Purânas_, however, may afford a little more
light. “Being ever as he was born, he is here called a youth; and hence
his name is well known as Sanatkumâra.”(760) In the _Shaiva Purânas_, the
Kumâras are always described as Yogins. The _Kurma Purâna_, after
enumerating them, says: “These five, O Brâhmans, were Yogins, who acquired
entire exemption from passion.” They are _five_, because two of the
Kumâras _fell_.

So untrustworthy are some translations of the Orientalists that in the
French translation of the _Hari Vamsha_, it is said: “The seven Prajâpati,
Rudra, Skanda (his son) and Sanatkumâra proceeded to create beings.”
Whereas, as Wilson shows, the original is: “These seven ... created
progeny; and so did Rudra, but Skanda and Sanatkumâra, _restraining their
power, abstained_ (from creation).” The “four orders of beings” are
referred to sometimes as Ambhâmsi, which Wilson renders as “literally
Waters” and believes it “a mystic term.” It is one, no doubt; but he
evidently failed to catch the _real_ Esoteric meaning. “Waters” and
“Water” stand as the symbol for Âkâsha, the “Primordial Ocean of Space,”
on which Nârâyana, the self‐born Spirit, moves, reclining on that _which
is its progeny_.(761) “Water is the body of Nara; thus we have heard the
name of Water explained. Since Brahmâ rests on the Water, therefore he is
termed Nârâyana.”(762) “Pure, Purusha created the Waters pure.” At the
same time Water is the _Third_ Principle in material Kosmos, and the third
in the realm of the Spiritual: _Spirit_ of Fire, Flame, Âkâsha, Ether,
Water, Air, Earth, are the cosmic, sidereal, psychic, spiritual and mystic
principles, _preëminently occult_, on every _plane_ of being. “Gods,
Demons, Pitris and Men,” are the four orders of beings to whom the term
Ambhâmsi is applied, because they are all the product of _Waters_
(mystically), of the Âkâshic Ocean, and of the _Third_ principle in
Nature. In the _Vedas_ it is a synonym of Gods. Pitris and Men on Earth
are the transformations or rebirths of Gods and Demons (Spirits) on a
higher plane. Water is, in another sense, the feminine principle. Venus
Aphrodite is the personified Sea, and the Mother of the God of Love, the
Generatrix of all the Gods, as much as the Christian Virgin Mary is Mare,
the Sea, the Mother of the Western God of Love, Mercy and Charity. If the
student of Esoteric Philosophy thinks deeply over the subject, he is sure
to find out all the suggestiveness of the term Ambhâmsi, in its manifold
relations to the Virgin in Heaven, to the Celestial Virgin of the
Alchemists, and even to the “Waters of Grace” of the modern Baptist.

Of all the seven great divisions of Dhyân Chohans, or Devas, there is none
with which humanity is more concerned than with the Kumâras. Imprudent are
the Christian Theologians who have degraded them into _Fallen_ Angels, and
now call them Satan and Demons; as among these heavenly denizens who
“refuse to create,” the Archangel Michael, the greatest patron Saint of
the Western and Eastern Churches, under his double name of St. Michael and
his supposed copy on earth, St. George conquering the Dragon, has to be
given one of the most prominent places.

The Kumâras, the Mind‐born Sons of Brahmâ‐Rudra, or Shiva, mystically the
howling and terrific _destroyer of human passions and physical senses_,
which are ever in the way of the development of the higher spiritual
perceptions and the growth of the _inner_ eternal man, are the progeny of
Shiva, the Mahâyogî, the great patron of all the Yogîs and Mystics of
India.

Shiva‐Rudra is the Destroyer, as Vishnu is the Preserver; and both are the
Regenerators of spiritual as well as of physical Nature. To live as a
plant, the _seed_ must die. To live as a conscious entity in the Eternity,
the passions and senses of man must die before his body does. “That to
live is to die and to die is to live,” has been too little understood in
the West. Shiva, the Destroyer, is the Creator and the Saviour of
Spiritual Man, as he is the good gardener of Nature. He weeds out the
plants, human and cosmic, and kills the passions of the physical, to call
to life the perceptions of the spiritual, man.

The Kumâras, themselves then, being the “virgin ascetics,” refuse to
create the _material_ being Man. Well may they be suspected of a direct
connection with the Christian Archangel Michael, the “virgin combatant” of
the Dragon Apophis, whose victim is every Soul united too loosely to its
immortal Spirit, the Angel who, as shown by the Gnostics, _refused to
create_ just as the Kumâras did. Does not that patron Angel of the Jews
_preside_ over Saturn (Shiva or Rudra), and the Sabbath, the day of
Saturn? Is he not shown of the same essence with his Father (Saturn), and
called the Son of Time, Cronus, or Kâla, a form of Brahmâ (Vishnu and
Shiva)? And is not Old Time of the Greeks, with its scythe and sand‐glass,
identical with the Ancient of Days of the Kabalists; the latter “Ancient”
being one with the Hindû Ancient of Days, Brahmâ, in his _triune_ form,
whose name is also Sanat, the Ancient? Every Kumâra bears the prefix of
Sanat and Sana. And Shanaishchara is Saturn, the planet Shani, the King
Saturn, whose Secretary in Egypt was Thot‐Hermes the first. They are thus
identified both with the planet and the God (Shiva), who are, in their
turn, shown to be the prototypes of Saturn, who is the same as Bel, Baal,
Shiva, and Jehovah Sabbaoth, the Angel of the Face of whom is
Mikael—מיכאל, “who [is] as God.” He is the patron, and guardian Angel of
the Jews, as Daniel tells us; and, before the Kumâras were degraded, by
those who were ignorant of their very name, into Demons and Fallen Angels,
the Greek Ophites, the occultly inclined predecessors and precursors of
the Roman Catholic Church after its secession and separation from the
primitive Greek Church, had identified Michael with their Ophiomorphos,
the rebellious and opposing spirit. This means nothing more than the
reverse aspect, symbolically, of Ophis, the Divine Wisdom or Christos. In
the _Talmud_, Mikael is “Prince of Water” and the chief of the Seven
Spirits, for the same reason that one of his many prototypes, Sanatsujâta,
the chief of the Kumâras, is called Ambhâmsi, “Waters,” according to the
commentary on _Vishnu Purâna_. Why? Because the Waters is another name of
the Great Deep, the Primordial Waters of Space, or Chaos, and also means
Mother, Ambâ, meaning Aditi and Akâsha, the Celestial Virgin‐Mother of the
visible Universe. Furthermore, the “Waters of the Flood” are also called
the “Great Dragon,” or Ophis, Ophiomorphos.

The Rudras will be noticed in their septenary character of “Fire‐Spirits”
in the “Symbolism” attached to the Stanzas in Volume II. There we shall
also consider the Cross (3 + 4) under its primeval and later forms, and
shall use for purposes of comparison the Pythagorean numbers side by side
with Hebrew metrology. The immense importance of the number _seven_ will
thus become evident, as the root number of Nature. We shall examine it
from the standpoint of the _Vedas_ and the Chaldean Scriptures; as it
existed in Egypt thousands of years B.C., and as treated in the Gnostic
records; we shall show how its importance as a basic number has gained
recognition in Physical Science; and we shall endeavour to prove that the
importance attached to the number _seven_ throughout all antiquity was due
to no fanciful imaginings of uneducated priests, but to a profound
knowledge of Natural Law.




Section XIV. The Four Elements.


Metaphysically and esoterically, there is but _One Element_ in Nature, and
at the root of it is the Deity; and the so‐called _seven_ Elements, of
which _five_ have already manifested and asserted their existence, are the
garment, the veil, of that Deity, direct from the essence whereof comes
Man, whether considered physically, psychically, mentally or spiritually.
Four Elements only are generally spoken of in later antiquity, while five
only are admitted in philosophy. For the body of Ether is not fully
manifested yet, and its noumenon is still the “Omnipotent Father Æther,”
the synthesis of the rest. But what are these Elements, whose compound
bodies have now been discovered by Chemistry and Physics to contain
numberless sub‐elements, even the sixty or seventy of which no longer
embrace the whole number suspected? Let us follow their evolution from the
_historical_ beginnings, at any rate.

The Four Elements were fully characterized by Plato when he said that they
were _that_ “which _composes_ and _decomposes_ the _compound bodies_.”
Hence Cosmolatry was never, even in its worst aspect, the fetichism which
adores or worships the passive external form and matter of any object, but
looked ever to the Noumenon therein. Fire, Air, Water, Earth, were but the
visible garb, the symbols of the informing, invisible Souls or Spirits,
the Cosmic Gods, to whom worship was offered by the ignorant, and simple,
but respectful, recognition by the wiser. In their turn, the phenomenal
subdivisions of the noumenal Elements were informed by the Elementals, so‐
called, the “Nature Spirits” of lower grades.

In the Theogony of Môchus, we find Ether first, and then the Air; the two
principles from which Ulom, the Intelligible (νοητὸς) God, the visible
Universe of Matter, is born.(763)

In the Orphic hymns, the Erôs‐Phanes evolves from the Spiritual Egg, which
the Æthereal Winds impregnate, Wind being the “Spirit of God,” which is
said to move in Æther, “brooding over the Chaos,” the Divine Idea. In the
Hindû _Kathopanishad_, Purusha, the Divine Spirit, already stands before
the Original Matter, and from their union springs the great Soul of the
World, “Mahâ‐Âtmâ, Brahman, the Spirit of Life”;(764) these latter
appellations being again identical with the Universal Soul, or Anima
Mundi; the Astral Light of the Theurgists and Kabalists being its last and
lowest division.

The Elements (στοιχεῖα) of Plato and Aristotle were thus the _incorporeal
principles_ attached to the four great divisions of our Cosmic World, and
it is with justice that Creuzer defines these primitive beliefs as “a
_species of magism_, a _psychic paganism_, and a _deification of
potencies_; a _spiritualization_ which placed the believers in a close
community with these potencies.”(765) So close, indeed, that the
Hierarchies of these Potencies, or Forces, have been classified on a
graduated scale of seven from the ponderable to the imponderable. They are
septenary, not as an artificial aid to facilitate their comprehension, but
in their real _cosmic_ gradation, from their chemical, or physical, to
their purely spiritual composition. Gods with the ignorant masses; Gods
independent and supreme; Demons with the fanatics, who, intellectual as
they often may be, are unable to understand the _spirit_ of the
philosophical sentence, _in pluribus unum_. With the Hermetic philosopher
they are Forces _relatively_ “blind” or “intelligent,” according to which
of the principles in them he deals with. It required long millenniums
before they found themselves finally, in our cultured age, degraded into
simple chemical elements.

At any rate, good Christians, and especially the Biblical Protestants,
ought to show more reverence for the Four Elements, if they would maintain
any for Moses. For the _Bible_ manifests the consideration and mystic
significance in which they were held by the Hebrew Lawgiver, on every page
of the _Pentateuch_. The tent which contained the Holy of Holies was a
Cosmic Symbol, sacred, in one of its meanings, to the Elements, the four
cardinal points, and Ether. Josephus shows it built in white, the colour
of Ether. And this explains also why, in the Egyptian and the Hebrew
temples, according to Clemens Alexandrinus,(766) a gigantic curtain,
supported by five pillars, separated the _sanctum sanctorum_—now
represented by the altar in Christian churches—wherein the priests alone
were permitted to enter, from the part accessible to the profane. By its
_four_ colours this curtain symbolized the four principal Elements, and
with the five pillars signified the knowledge of the divine that the
_five_ senses can enable man to acquire with the help of the _four_
Elements.

In Cory’s _Ancient Fragments_, one of the “Chaldean Oracles” expresses
ideas about the elements and Ether in language singularly like that of
_The Unseen Universe_, written by two eminent Scientists of our day.

It states that from Ether have come all things, and to it all will return;
that the images of all things are indelibly impressed upon it; and that it
is the store‐house of the germs, or of the remains of all visible forms,
and even ideas. It appears as if this case strangely corroborates our
assertion that whatever discoveries may be made in our days will be found
to have been anticipated by many thousand years by our “simple‐minded
ancestors.”

Whence came the Four Elements and the Malachim of the Hebrews? They have
been made to merge, by a theological sleight of hand on the part of the
Rabbins and the later Fathers of the Church, into Jehovah, but their
origin is identical with that of the Cosmic Gods of all other nations.
Their symbols, whether born on the shores of the Oxus, on the burning
sands of Upper Egypt, or in the wild forests, weird and glacial, which
cover the slopes and peaks of the sacred snowy mountains of Thessaly, or
again, in the pampas of America—their symbols, we repeat, when traced to
their source, are ever one and the same. Whether Egyptian or Pelasgian,
Âryan or Semitic, the Genius Loci, the Local God, embraced in its unity
all Nature; but not especially the four elements any more than one of
their creations, such as trees, rivers, mounts or stars. The Genius Loci,
a very late afterthought of the last sub‐races of the Fifth Root‐Race,
when the primitive and grandiose meaning had become nearly lost, was ever
the representative, in his accumulated titles, of all his colleagues. It
was the God of Fire, symbolized by thunder, as Jove or Agni; the God of
Water, symbolized by the fluvial bull, or some sacred river or fountain,
as Varuna, Neptune, etc.; the God of Air, manifesting in the hurricane and
tempest, as Vâyu and Indra; and the God or Spirit of the Earth, who
appeared in earthquakes, like Pluto, Yama, and so many others.

These were the Cosmic Gods, ever synthesizing all in one, as found in
every cosmogony or mythology. Thus, the Greeks had their Dodonean Jupiter,
who included in himself the four Elements and the four cardinal points,
and who was recognized, therefore, in old Rome under the pantheistic title
of Jupiter Mundus; and who now, in modern Rome, has become the Deus
Mundus, the one Mundane God, who is made to swallow all others, in the
latest theology, by the arbitrary decision of his special ministers.

As Gods of Fire, Air, and Water, they were _Celestial_ Gods; as Gods of
the Lower Region, they were _Infernal_ Deities; the latter adjective
applying simply to the _Earth_. They were “Spirits of the Earth” under
their respective names of Yama, Pluto, Osiris, the “Lord of the Lower
Kingdom,” etc., and their tellurial character sufficiently proves it. The
Ancients knew of no worse abode after death than the Kâma Loka, the Limbus
on this Earth.(767) If it is argued that the Dodonean Jupiter was
identified with Dis, or the Roman Pluto with the Dionysus Chthonius, the
Subterranean, and with Aïdoneus, the King of the Subterranean World,
wherein, according to Creuzer,(768) oracles were rendered, then it will
become the pleasure of the Occultists to prove that both Aïdoneus and
Dionysus are the bases of Adonaï, or Iurbo‐Adonaï, as Jehovah is called in
the _Codex Nazaræus_. “Thou shalt not worship the Sun, who is named
Adonaï, whose name is also Kadush and El‐El,”(769) and also “Lord
Bacchus.” Baal‐Adonis of the Sôds, or Mysteries, of the pre‐Babylonian
Jews became the Adonaï by the Massorah, the later vowelled Jehovah. Hence
the Roman Catholics are right. All these Jupiters are of the same family;
but Jehovah has to be included therein to make it complete. The Jupiter
Aërius or Pan, the Jupiter‐Ammon, and the Jupiter‐Bel‐Moloch, are all
correlations and one with Iurbo‐Adonaï, because they are all one Cosmic
Nature. It is that Nature and Power which creates the specific terrestrial
symbol, and the physical and material fabric of the latter, which proves
the Energy manifesting through it as _extrinsic_.

For primitive religion was something better than simple preöccupation
about physical phenomena, as remarked by Schelling; and principles, more
elevated than we modern Sadducees know of, “were hidden under the
transparent veil of such merely natural divinities as thunder, the winds,
and rain.” The Ancients knew and could distinguish the _corporeal_ from
the _spiritual_ Elements in the Forces of Nature.

The four‐fold Jupiter, as the four‐faced Brahmâ, the aërial, the
fulgurant, the terrestrial, and the marine God, the lord and master of the
four Elements, may stand as a representative for the great Cosmic Gods of
every nation. Although deputing power over the fire to Hephæstus‐Vulcan,
over the sea to Poseidon‐Neptune, and over the Earth to Pluto‐Aïdoneus,
the Aërial Jove was still all these; for Æther, from the first, had
preëminence over, and was the synthesis of, all the Elements.

Tradition tells of a grotto, a vast cave in the deserts of Central Asia,
whereinto light pours, through four seemingly natural apertures, or clefts
placed crossways at the four cardinal points. From noon till an hour
before sunset the light streams in, of four different colours, as averred,
red, blue, orange‐gold, and white, owing to some either natural or
artificially prepared conditions of vegetation and soil. The light
converges in the centre round a pillar of white marble with a globe upon
it, which represents our earth. It is named the “Grotto of Zarathustra.”

Included under the arts and sciences of the Fourth Race, the Atlanteans,
the phenomenal manifestation of the Four Elements, which were justly
attributed by these believers to the intelligent interference of the
Cosmic Gods, assumed a scientific character. The Magic of the ancient
priests consisted, in those days, in addressing _their Gods in their own
language_.

_The speech of the men of the Earth cannot reach the Lords. Each must be
addressed in the language of his respective Element._

So says _The Book of Rules_, in a sentence which will be shown pregnant
with meaning, adding as an explanation of the nature of that
_element_‐language:

_It is composed of_ SOUNDS, _not words; of sounds, numbers and figures. He
who knows how to blend the three, will call forth the response of the
superintending Power_ [_the Regent‐God of the specific Element needed_].

Thus this “language” is that of _incantations_ or of _mantras_, as they
are called in India; sound being _the most potent and effectual magic
agent, and the first of the keys which opens the door of communication
between Mortals and Immortals_. He who believes in the words and teachings
of St. Paul, has no right to pick out from the latter those sentences only
which he chooses to accept, to the rejection of others; and St. Paul
teaches most undeniably the existence of Cosmic Gods and their presence
among us. Paganism preached a dual and simultaneous evolution, a
“creation” _spiritualem ac mundanum_, as the Roman Church has it, ages
before the advent of that Roman Church. Exoteric phraseology has changed
little with respect to Divine Hierarchies since the most palmy days of
Paganism, or “Idolatry.” Names alone have changed, together with claims
which have now become false pretences. For when, for instance, Plato put
in the mouth of the Highest Principle (Father Æther or Jupiter) the words,
“the Gods of the Gods of whom I am the _maker_, as I am the father of all
their works,” he knew the spirit of this sentence as fully, we suspect, as
St. Paul did, when saying: “For though there be that are called Gods,
whether in Heaven or in Earth, as there be Gods many and Lords
many....”(770) Both knew the sense and the meaning of what they put
forward in such guarded terms.

We cannot be taken to task by the Protestants for interpreting the verse
from the _Corinthians_ as we do; for, if the translation in the English
_Bible_ is made ambiguous, it is not so in the original texts, and the
Roman Catholic Church accepts the words of the Apostle in their true
sense. For a proof see St. Dionysius, the Areopagite, who was “_directly
inspired_ by the Apostle,” and “who wrote under his dictation,” as we are
assured by the Marquis de Mirville, whose works are approved by Rome, and
who says, commenting on that special verse: “And, though there are (in
fact) they who are called Gods, for it seems there are really _several
Gods_, withal and for all that, the _God‐Principle_ and the Superior God
ceases not to remain essentially _one_ and indivisible.”(771) Thus spoke
the old Initiates also, knowing that the worship of minor Gods could never
affect the “_God Principle_.” (772)

Says Sir W. Grove, F.R.S., speaking of the correlation of forces:


    The ancients when they witnessed a natural phenomenon, removed
    from ordinary analogies, and unexplained by any mechanical action
    known to them, referred it to a soul, a spiritual or preternatural
    power.... Air and gases were also at first deemed spiritual, but
    subsequently they became invested with a more material character;
    and the same words πνεῦμα, spirit, etc., were used to signify the
    soul or a gas; the very word gas, from _geist_, a ghost or spirit,
    affords us an instance of the gradual transmutation of a spiritual
    into a physical conception.(773)


This, the great man of Science, in his preface to the sixth edition of his
work, considers to be the _only_ concern of exact Science, which has no
business to meddle with the _causes_.


    Cause and effect are, therefore, in their abstract relation to
    these forces, words solely of convenience. We are totally
    unacquainted _with the ultimate generating power_ of each and all
    of them, and probably shall ever remain so; we can only ascertain
    the normal of their actions; we must humbly refer their causation
    to one omnipresent influence, and content ourselves with studying
    their effects and developing, by experiment, their mutual
    relations.(774)


This policy once accepted, and the system virtually admitted in the above‐
quoted words, namely, the _spirituality_ of the “ultimate generating
power,” it would be more than illogical to refuse to recognize this
quality which is inherent in the _material elements_, or rather, in their
compounds, as present in the fire, air, water or earth. The Ancients knew
these powers so well, that, while concealing their true nature under
various allegories, for the benefit, or to the detriment, of the
uneducated rabble, they never departed from the multiple object in view,
while inverting them. They contrived to throw a thick veil over the
nucleus of truth concealed by the symbol, but they ever tried to preserve
the latter as a _record_ for future generations, sufficiently transparent
to allow their wise men to discern the truth behind the fabulous form of
the glyph or allegory. These ancient sages are accused of _superstition_
and _credulity_; and this too by the very nations, which, though learned
in all the modern arts and sciences, and cultured and wise in their
generation, accept to this day as their one living and infinite God, the
anthropomorphic “Jehovah” of the Jews!

What were some of these alleged “superstitions”? Hesiod believed, for
instance, that “the winds were the sons of the Giant Typhôeus,” who were
chained and unchained at will by Æolus, and the polytheistic Greeks
accepted it along with Hesiod. Why should they not, since the monotheistic
Jews had the same beliefs, with other names for their _dramatis personæ_,
and since Christians believe in the same to this day? The Hesiodic Æolus,
Boreas, etc., were named Kedem, Tzephum, Derum, and Ruach Hayum by the
“chosen people” of Israel. What is, then, the fundamental difference?
While the Hellenes were taught that Æolus tied and untied the winds, the
Jews believed as fervently that their Lord God, _with __“__smoke__”__
coming __“__out of his nostrils and fire out of his mouth, ... rode upon a
cherub and did fly; and he was seen upon the wings of the wind__”_.(775)
The expressions of the two nations are either both figures of speech, or
both _superstitions_. We think they are neither; but only arise from a
keen sense of oneness with Nature, and a perception of the mysterious and
the intelligent behind every natural phenomenon, which the moderns no
longer possess. Nor was it “superstitious” in the Greek Pagans to listen
to the oracle of Delphi, when, at the approach of the fleet of Xerxes,
that oracle advised them to “sacrifice to the winds,” if the same has to
be regarded as _divine_ worship in the Israelites, who sacrificed as often
to the wind and also especially to the fire. Do they not say that their
“God is a consuming fire,”(776) who appeared generally as fire and
“encompassed by fire”? and did not Elijah seek for the “Lord” in the
“great strong wind, and in the earthquake”? Do not the Christians repeat
the same after them? Do not they, moreover, sacrifice to this day, to the
same “God of Wind and Water”? They do; because special prayers for rain,
dry weather, trade‐winds and the calming of storms on the seas, exist to
this hour in the prayer‐books of the three Christian Churches; and the
several hundred sects of the Protestant religion offer them to their God
upon every threat of calamity. The fact that they are no more answered by
Jehovah, than they were, probably, by Jupiter Pluvius, does not alter the
fact of these prayers being addressed to the Power, or Powers, supposed to
rule over the Elements, or of these Powers being identical in Paganism and
Christianity; or have we to believe that such prayers are crass idolatry
and absurd “superstition” _only_ when addressed by a Pagan to his “idol,”
and that the same superstition is suddenly transformed into “praiseworthy
piety” and “religion” whenever the name of the celestial addressee is
changed? But the tree _is_ known by its fruit. And the fruit of the
Christian tree being no better than that of the tree of Paganism, why
should the former command more reverence than the latter?

Thus, when we are told by the Chevalier Drach, a converted Jew, and by the
Marquis de Mirville, a Roman Catholic fanatic of the French aristocracy,
that in Hebrew “lightning” is a synonym of “fury,” and is always handled
by the “evil” Spirit; that Jupiter Fulgur or Fulgurans is also called by
the Christians Elicius, and denounced as the “soul of lightning,” its
Dæmon;(777) we have either to apply the same explanation and definitions
to the “Lord God of Israel,” under the same circumstances, or renounce our
right of abusing the Gods and creeds of other nations.

The foregoing statements, emanating as they do from two ardent and learned
Roman Catholics, are, to say the least, _dangerous_, in the presence of
the _Bible_ and its prophets. Indeed, if Jupiter, the “chief Dæmon of the
Pagan Greeks,” hurled his deadly thunder‐bolts and lightnings at those who
excited his wrath, so did the Lord God of Abraham and Jacob. For we read
that:


    The Lord thundered from heaven, and the most High uttered his
    voice. And he sent out arrows [thunder‐bolts] and scattered them
    [Saul’s armies]; lightning, and discomfited them.(778)


The Athenians are accused of having sacrificed to Boreas; and this “Dæmon”
is charged with having submerged and wrecked 400 ships of the Persian
fleet on the rocks of Mount Pelion, and of having become so furious that
all the Magi of Xerxes could hardly counteract him by offering contra‐
sacrifices to Thetis.(779) Very fortunately, no authenticated instance is
on the records of Christian wars, showing a like catastrophe on the same
scale happening to one Christian fleet, owing to the “prayers” of its
enemy—another Christian nation. But this is from no fault of theirs, for
each prays as ardently to Jehovah for the destruction of the other, as the
Athenians prayed to Boreas. Both resorted to a neat little piece of black
magic _con amore_. Such abstinence from divine interference being hardly
due to lack of prayers, sent to a _common_ Almighty God for mutual
destruction, where, then, shall we draw the line between Pagan and
Christian? And who can doubt that all Protestant England would rejoice and
offer thanks to the Lord, if during some future war, 400 ships of the
hostile fleet were to be wrecked owing to such holy prayers? What is,
then, the difference, we ask again, between a Jupiter, a Boreas, and a
Jehovah? No more than this: The crime of one’s own next‐of‐kin, say of
one’s father, is always excused and often exalted, whereas the crime of
our neighbour’s parent is ever gladly punished by hanging. Yet the crime
is the same.

So far the “blessings of Christianity” do not seem to have made any
appreciable advance on the morals of the converted Pagans.

The above is not a defence of Pagan Gods, nor is it an attack on the
Christian Deity, nor does it mean belief in either. The writer is quite
impartial, and rejects the testimony in favour of both, neither praying
to, believing in, nor dreading any such “personal” and anthropomorphic
God. The parallels are brought forward simply as one more curious
exhibition of the illogical and blind fanaticism of the civilized
theologian. For, so far, there is not a very great difference between the
two beliefs, and there is none in their respective effects upon
_morality_, or spiritual nature. The “light of Christ” shines upon as
hideous features of the animal man now, as the “light of Lucifer” did in
days of old. Says the missionary Lavoisier, in the _Journal des Colonies_:


    These unfortunate heathens in their superstition regard even the
    Elements as something that has comprehension!... They still have
    faith in their idol Vâyu—the God or, rather, Demon of the Wind and
    Air ... they firmly believe in the efficacy of their prayers, and
    in the powers of their Brâhmans over the winds and storms.


In reply to this, we may quote from _Luke_: “And he [Jesus] arose and
_rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased and there
was a calm_.”(780) And here is another quotation from a Prayer Book: “O
Virgin of the Sea, blessed Mother and Lady of the Waters, stay thy waves.”
This prayer of the Neapolitan and Provençal sailors, is copied textually
from that of the Phœnician mariners to their Virgin‐Goddess Astarte. The
logical and irrepressible conclusion arising from the parallels brought
forward, and the denunciation of the missionary, is that the _commands_ of
the Brâhmans to their Element‐Gods _not remaining_ “ineffectual,” the
power of the Brâhmans is thus placed on a par with that of Jesus.
Moreover, Astarte is shown not a whit weaker in potency than the “Virgin
of the Sea” of Christian sailors. It is not enough to give a dog a bad
name, and then hang him; the dog has to be proven guilty. Boreas and
Astarte may be “Devils” in theological fancy, but, as just remarked, the
tree has to be judged by its fruit. And once the Christians are shown to
be as immoral and as wicked as the Pagans ever were, what benefit has
Humanity derived from its change of Gods and Idols?

That which God and the Christian Saints are justified in doing, becomes in
simple mortals a crime, if successful. Sorcery and incantations are now
regarded as fables; yet from the Institutes of Justinian down to the laws
of England and America against witchcraft—obsolete but not repealed to
this day—such incantations, even when only suspected, were punished as
criminal. Why punish a chimera? And still we read of Constantine, the
Emperor, sentencing to death the philosopher Sopatrus for “unchaining the
winds,” and thus preventing ships laden with grain from arriving in time
to put an end to famine. Pausanias is derided when he affirms that he saw
with his own eyes “men who by simple prayers and incantations” stopped a
strong hail‐storm. This does not prevent modern Christian writers from
advising prayer during storm and danger, and believing in its efficacy.
Hoppo and Stadlein, two magicians and sorcerers, were sentenced to death
for “throwing charms on fruit” and transferring a harvest by magic arts
from one field to another, hardly a century ago, if we can believe
Sprenger, the famous writer, who vouches for it: “_Qui fruges excantassent
segetem pellicentes incantando_.”

Let us close by reminding the reader that, without the smallest shadow of
superstition, one may believe in the dual nature of every object on Earth,
in spiritual and material, in visible and invisible Nature, and that
Science virtually proves this, while denying its own demonstration. For
if, as Sir William Grove says, the electricity we handle is but the
_result_ of ordinary matter affected by something invisible, the
“_ultimate_ generating power” of every Force, the “one omnipresent
influence,” then it only becomes natural that one should believe as the
Ancients did; namely, that every Element is _dual_ in its nature.
“Ethereal Fire is the emanation of the Kabir proper; the Aërial is but the
union [correlation] of the former with Terrestrial Fire, and its guidance
and application on our earthly plane belongs to a Kabir of a lesser
dignity”—an Elemental, perhaps, as an Occultist would call it; and the
same may be said of every Cosmic Element.

No one will deny that the human being is possessed of various forces,
magnetic, sympathetic, antipathetic, nervous, dynamical, occult,
mechanical, mental, in fact of every kind of force; and that the physical
forces are all biological in their essence, seeing that they intermingle
with, and often merge into, those forces that we have named intellectual
and moral, the first being the vehicles, so to say, the upâdhis, of the
second. No one, who does not deny soul in man, would hesitate in saying
that their presence and commingling are the very essence of our being;
that they constitute the Ego in man, in fact. These potencies have their
physiological, physical, mechanical, as well as their nervous, ecstatic,
clairaudient, and clairvoyant phenomena, which are now regarded and
recognized as perfectly natural, even by Science. Why should man be the
only exception in Nature, and why cannot even the Elements have their
Vehicles, their Vâhanas, in what we call the Physical Forces? And why,
above all, should such beliefs be called “superstition” along with the
religions of old?




Section XV. On Kwan‐Shi‐Yin and Kwan‐Yin.


Like Avalokiteshvara, Kwan‐Shi‐Yin has passed through several
transformations, but it is an error to say of him that he is a modern
invention of the Northern Buddhists, for under another appellation he has
been known from the earliest times. The Secret Doctrine teaches that: “_He
who is the first to appear at Renovation will be the last to come before
Reäbsorption_ [_Pralaya_]”. Thus the Logoi of all nations, from the Vedic
Vishvakarman of the Mysteries down to the Saviour of the present civilized
nations, are the “Word” who was in the “Beginning,” or the reäwakening of
the energizing Powers of Nature, with the One ABSOLUTE. Born of Fire and
Water, before these became distinct Elements, It was the “Maker,” the
fashioner or modeller, of all things. “Without him was not anything made
that was made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men,” who
finally may be called as he ever has been, the Alpha and the Omega of
Manifested Nature. “The great Dragon of Wisdom is born of Fire and Water,
and into Fire and Water will all be reäbsorbed with him.”(781) As this
Bodhisattva is said “to assume any form he pleases,” from the beginning of
a Manvantara to its end, though his special birthday, or memorial day, is
celebrated according to the _Kin‐kwang‐ming‐King_, or “Luminous Sûtra of
Golden Light,” in the second month on the nineteenth day, and that of
Maitreya Buddha, in the first month on the first day, yet the two are one.
He will appear as Maitreya Buddha, the last of the Avatâras and Buddhas,
in the Seventh Race. This belief and expectation are universal throughout
the East. Only it is not in the Kali Yuga, our present terrifically
materialistic age of Darkness, the “Black Age,” that a new Saviour of
Humanity can ever appear. The Kali Yuga is “l’Age d’Or” (!) only in the
_mystic_ writings of some French pseudo‐Occultists.(782)

Hence the ritual in the exoteric worship of this Deity was founded on
magic. The Mantras are all taken from special books kept secret by the
priests, and each is said to work a magical effect; as the reciter or
reader, by simply chanting them, produces a secret causation which results
in immediate effects. Kwan‐Shi‐Yin is Avalokiteshvara, and both are forms
of the Seventh Universal Principle; while in its highest metaphysical
character this Deity is the synthetic aggregation of all the Planetary
Spirits, Dhyân Chohans. He is the “Self‐Manifested”; in short, the “Son of
the Father.” Crowned with seven dragons, above his statue there appears
the inscription Pu‐tsi‐k’iun‐ling, “the universal Saviour of all living
beings.”

Of course the name given in the archaic volume of the Stanzas is quite
different, but Kwan‐Yin is a perfect equivalent. In a temple of P’u‐to,
the sacred island of the Buddhists in China, Kwan‐Shi‐Yin is represented
floating on a black aquatic bird (Kâlahamsa), and pouring on the heads of
mortals the elixir of life, which, as it flows, is transformed into one of
the chief Dhyâni‐Buddhas, the Regent of a star called the “Star of
Salvation.” In his third transformation Kwan‐Yin is the informing Spirit
or Genius of Water. In China the Dalaï‐Lama is believed to be an
incarnation of Kwan‐Shi‐Yin, who in his third terrestrial appearance was a
Bodhisattva, while the Teshu Lama is an incarnation of Amitâbha Buddha, or
Gautama.

It may be remarked _en passant_ that a writer must indeed have a diseased
imagination to discover phallic worship everywhere, as do McClatchey and
Hargrave Jennings. The first discovers “the old phallic gods, represented
under two evident symbols, the Kheen or Yang, which is the _membrum
virile_, and the Khw‐an or Yin, the _pudendum muliebre_.”(783) Such a
rendering seems the more strange as Kwan‐Shi‐Yin (Avalokiteshvara) and
Kwan‐Yin, besides being now the patron Deities of the Buddhist ascetics,
the Yogîs of Tibet, are the Gods of chastity, and are, in their esoteric
meaning, not even that which is implied in the rendering of Mr. Rhys
Davids’ _Buddhism_: “The name Avalokiteshvara ... means ‘the Lord who
looks down from on high’.”(784) Nor is Kwan‐Shi‐Yin the “Spirit of the
Buddhas present in the Church,” but, literally interpreted, it means “the
Lord that is seen.” and in one sense, “the Divine Self perceived by
Self”—the human Self—that is, the Âtman or Seventh Principle, merged in
the Universal, perceived by, or the object of perception to, Buddhi, the
Sixth Principle, or Divine Soul in man. In a still higher sense,
Avalokiteshvara‐Kwan‐Shi‐Yin, referred to as the seventh Universal
Principle, is the Logos perceived by the Universal Buddhi, or Soul, as the
synthetic aggregate of the Dhyâni‐Buddhas; and is not the “Spirit of
Buddha present in the Church,” but the Omnipresent Universal Spirit
manifested in the temple of Kosmos or Nature. This Orientalistic etymology
of Kwan and Yin is on a par with that of Yoginî, which, we are told by Mr.
Hargrave Jennings, is a Sanskrit word, “in the dialects pronounced Jogi or
Zogee (!), and is ... equivalent with Sena, and exactly the same as Duti
or Dutica,” _i.e._, a sacred prostitute of the temple, worshipped as Yoni
or Shakti.(785) “The books of morality [in India] direct a faithful wife
to shun the society of Yogini or females who have been adored as
Sacti.”(786) Nothing should surprise us after this. And it is, therefore,
with hardly a smile that we find another preposterous absurdity quoted
about “Budh,” as being a name “which signifies not only the sun as the
source of generation but also the male organ.”(787) Max Müller, in
treating of “False Analogies,” says that “the most celebrated Chinese
scholar of his time, Abel Rémusat ... maintains that the three syllables I
Hi Wei [in the fourteenth chapter of the _Tao‐te‐King_] were meant for Je‐
ho‐vah”;(788) and again, Father Amyot “felt certain that the three persons
of the Trinity could be recognized” in the same work. And if Abel Rémusat,
why not Hargrave Jennings? Every scholar will recognize the absurdity of
ever seeing in Budh, the “enlightened” and the “awakened,” a “phallic
symbol.”

Kwan‐Shi‐Yin, then, is “the Son identical with his Father,” mystically, or
the Logos, the Word. He is called the “Dragon of Wisdom,” in Stanza III,
for all the Logoi of all the ancient religious systems are connected with,
and symbolized by, serpents. In old Egypt, the God Nahbkoon, “he who
unites the doubles,” was represented as a serpent on human legs, either
with or without arms. This was the Astral Light reüniting by its dual
physiological and spiritual potency the Divine‐Human to its purely Divine
Monad, the Prototype in “Heaven” or Nature. It was the emblem of the
resurrection of Nature; of Christ with the Ophites; and of Jehovah as the
brazen serpent healing those who looked at him. The serpent was also an
emblem of Christ with the Templars, as is shown by the Templar degree in
Masonry. The symbol of Knooph (Khnoom also), or the Soul of the World,
says Champollion, “is represented among other forms under that of a huge
serpent on human legs; this reptile, being the emblem of the Good Genius
and the veritable Agathodæmon, is sometimes bearded.”(789) This sacred
animal is thus identical with the serpent of the Ophites, and is figured
on a great number of engraved stones, called Gnostic or Basilidean gems.
It appears with various heads, human and animal, but its gems are always
found inscribed with the name ΧΝΟΥΒΙΣ (ChNOUBIS). This symbol is identical
with one which; according to Jamblichus and Champollion, was called the
“First of the Celestial Gods,” the God Hermes, or Mercury, with the
Greeks, to which God Hermes Trismegistus attributes the invention of, and
the first initiation of men into, Magic; and Mercury is Budh, Wisdom,
Enlightenment, or “Reäwakening” into the divine Science.

To close, Kwan‐Shi‐Yin and Kwan‐Yin are the two aspects, male and female,
of the same principle in Kosmos, Nature and Man, of Divine Wisdom and
Intelligence. They are the Christos‐Sophia of the mystic Gnostics, the
Logos and its Shakti. In their longing for the expression of some
mysteries never to be wholly comprehended by the profane, the Ancients,
knowing that nothing could be preserved in human memory without some
outward symbol, have chosen the, to us, often ridiculous images of the
Kwan‐Yins to remind man of his origin and inner nature. To the impartial,
however, the Madonnas in crinolines and the Christs in white kid gloves
must appear far more absurd than the Kwan‐Shi‐Yin and Kwan‐Yin in their
dragon‐garb. The subjective can hardly be expressed by the objective.
Therefore, since the symbolic formula attempts to characterize that which
is above scientific reasoning, and is as often far beyond our intellects,
it must needs go beyond that intellect in some shape or other, or else it
will fade out from human remembrance.





