THE ACCOUNT OF THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE LACEDAEMONIANS.[46]


1. It was a singular instance of the wisdom of this nation, in that
they took the greatest care they could, by an early sober education,
to instil into their youth the principles of virtue and good manners,
that so, by a constant succession of prudent and valiant men, they
might the better provide for the honor and security of their state, and
lay in the minds of every one a solid and good foundation of love and
friendship, of prudence and knowledge, of temperance and frugality,
of courage and resolution. And therefore their great lawgiver thought
it necessary for the ends of government to institute several distinct
societies and conventions of the people; amongst which was that of
their solemn and public living together at one table, where their
custom was to admit their youth into the conversation of their wise
and elderly men, that so by daily eating and drinking with them they
might insensibly, as it were, be trained up to a right knowledge
of themselves, to a just submission to their superiors, and to the
learning of whatever might conduce to the reputation of their laws
and the interest of their country. For here they were taught all the
wholesome rules of discipline, and daily instructed how to demean
themselves from the example and practice of their great ones; and
though they did not at this public meeting confine themselves to set
and grave discourses concerning the civil government, but allowed
themselves a larger freedom, by mingling sometimes with their politics
the easy and familiar entertainments of mirth and satire, yet this was
ever done with the greatest modesty and discretion, not so much to
expose the person of any one, as to reprove the fault he had committed.
Whatever was transacted at these stated and common feasts was to be
locked up in every one’s breast with the greatest silence and secrecy,
insomuch as the eldest among them at these assemblies, pointing to the
door, acquainted him who entered the room that nothing of what was done
or spoken there was to be talked of afterwards.

2. At all these public meetings they used a great deal of moderation,
they being designed only for schools of temperance and modesty, not
for luxury and indecency; their chief dish and only delicacy being a
sort of pottage (called by them their black broth, and made of some
little pieces of flesh, with a small quantity of blood, salt, and
vinegar), and this the more ancient among them generally preferred
to any sort of meat whatsoever, as the more pleasing entertainment
and of a more substantial nourishment. The younger sort contented
themselves with flesh and other ordinary provisions, without tasting of
this dish, which was reserved only for the old men. It is reported of
Dionysius, the Sicilian tyrant, that having heard of the great fame and
commendation of this broth, he hired a certain cook of Lacedaemon, who
was thoroughly skilled in the make and composition of it, to furnish
his table every day with so great and curious a dainty; and that he
might have it in the greatest perfection, enjoined him to spare no cost
in the making it agreeable and pleasant to his palate. But it seems
the end answered not the pains he took in it; for after all his care
and niceness, the king, as soon as he had tasted of it, found it both
fulsome and nauseous to his stomach, and spitting it out with great
distaste, as if he had taken down a vomit, sufficiently expressed his
disapprobation of it. But the cook, not discouraged at this dislike of
his master, told the tyrant that he humbly conceived the reason of this
disagreeableness to him was not in the pottage, but rather in himself,
who had not prepared his body for such food according to the Laconic
mode and custom. For hard labors and long exercises and moderate
abstinence (the best preparatives to a good and healthy appetite) and
frequent bathings in the river Eurotas were the only necessaries for a
right relish and understanding of the excellency of this entertainment.

3. ’Tis true, their constant diet was very mean and sparing; not what
might pamper their bodies or make their minds soft and delicate, but
such only as would barely serve to supply the common necessities of
nature. This they accustomed themselves to, that so they might become
sober and governable, active and bold in the defence of their country;
they accounting only such men serviceable to the state, who could best
endure the extremes of hunger and cold, and with cheerfulness and vigor
run through the fatigues of labor and the difficulties of hardship.
Those who could fast longest after a slender meal, and with the least
provision satisfy their appetites, were esteemed the most frugal and
temperate, and most sprightly and healthful, the most comely and well
proportioned; nature, through such a temperance and moderation of
diet, not suffering the constitution to run out into an unwieldy bulk
or greatness of body (the usual consequence of full tables and too
much ease), but rather rendering it thereby nervous and sinewy, of a
just and equal growth, and consolidating and knitting together all the
several parts and members of it. A very little drink did serve their
turn, who never drank but when an extreme thirst provoked them to
it; for at all their common entertainments they studied the greatest
measures of sobriety, and took care they should be deprived of all
kinds of compotations whatsoever. And at night when they returned home,
they went cheerfully to their sleep, without the assistance of any
light to direct them to their lodging; that being prohibited them as
an indecent thing, the better to accustom them to travel in the dark,
without any sense of fear or apprehensions of danger.

4. They never applied their minds to any kind of learning, further
than what was necessary for use and service; nature indeed having
made them more fit for the purposes of war than for the improvements
of knowledge. And therefore for speculative sciences and philosophic
studies, they looked upon them as foreign to their business and
unserviceable to their ends of living, and for this reason they would
not tolerate them amongst them, nor suffer the professors of them to
live within their government. They banished them their cities, as
they did all sorts of strangers, esteeming them as things that did
debase the true worth and excellency of virtue, which they made to
consist only in manly actions and generous exercises, and not in vain
disputations and empty notions. So that the whole of what their youth
was instructed in was to learn obedience to the laws and injunctions
of their governors, to endure with patience the greatest labors, and
where they could not conquer, to die valiantly in the field. For this
reason likewise it was, that all mechanic arts and trades, all vain
and insignificant employments, such as regarded only curiosity or
pleasure, were strictly prohibited them, as things that would make
them degenerate into idleness and covetousness, would render them vain
and effeminate, useless to themselves, and unserviceable to the state;
and on this account it was that they would never suffer any scenes or
interludes, whether of comedy or tragedy, to be set up among them, lest
there should be any encouragement given to speak or act any thing that
might savor of contempt or contumely against their laws and government,
it being customary for the stage to assume an indecent liberty of
taxing the one with faults and the other with imperfections.

5. As to their apparel, they were as thinly clad as they were dieted,
never exceeding one garment, which they wore for the space of a
whole year. And this they did, the better to inure them to hardship
and to bear up against all the injuries of the weather, that so the
extremities of heat and cold should have no influence at all upon their
constitution. They were as regardless of their selves as they were
negligent of their clothes, denying themselves (unless it were at some
stated time of the year) the use of ointments and bathings to keep them
clean and sweet, as too expensive and signs of a too soft and delicate
temper of body.

6. Their youth, as they were instructed and ate in public together, so
at night slept in distinct companies in one common chamber, and on no
other beds than what were made of reeds, which they had gathered out of
the river Eurotas, near the banks of which they grew. This was the only
accommodation they had in the summer, but in winter they mingled with
the reeds a certain soft and downy thistle, having much more of heat
and warmth in it than the other.

7. It was freely allowed them to place an ardent affection upon
those whose excellent endowments recommended them to the love
and consideration of any one; but then this was always done with
the greatest innocency and modesty, and every way becoming the
strictest rules and measures of virtue, it being accounted a base and
dishonorable passion in any one to love the body and not the mind, as
those did who in their young men preferred the beauty of the one before
the excellency of the other. Chaste thoughts and modest discourses were
the usual entertainments of their loves; and if any one was accused at
any time either of wanton actions or impure discourse, it was esteemed
by all so infamous a thing, that the stains it left upon his reputation
could never be wiped out during his whole life.

8. So strict and severe was the education of their youth, that whenever
they were met with in the streets by your grave and elderly persons,
they underwent a close examination; it being their custom to enquire
of them upon what business and whither they were going, and if they
did not give them a direct and true answer to the question demanded
of them, but shamed them with some idle story or false pretence,
they never escaped without a rigorous censure and sharp correction.
And this they did to prevent their youth from stealing abroad upon
any idle or bad design, that so, through the uneasy fears of meeting
these grave examiners, and the impossibility of escaping punishment
upon their false account and representations of things, they might
be kept within due compass, and do nothing that might entrench upon
truth or offend against the rules of virtue. Nor was it expected
only from their superiors to censure and admonish them upon any
miscarriage or indecency whatsoever, but it was strictly required of
them under a severe penalty; for he who did not reprove a fault that
was committed in his presence, and showed not his just resentments
of it by a verbal correction, was adjudged equally culpable with the
guilty, and obnoxious to the same punishment. For they could not
imagine that person had a serious regard for the honor of their laws
and the reputation of their government, who could carelessly pass by
any immorality and patiently see the least corruption of good manners
in their youth; by which means they took away all occasions of
fondness, partiality, and indulgence in the aged, and all presumption,
irreverence, and disobedience, and especially all impatiency of
reproof, in the younger sort. For not to endure the reprehension of
their superiors in such cases was highly disgraceful to them, and ever
interpreted as an open renunciation of their authority, and a downright
opposing of the justice of their proceedings.

9. Besides, when any was surprised in the commission of some notorious
offence, he was presently sentenced to walk round a certain altar in
the city, and publicly to shame himself by singing an ingenious satire,
composed by himself, upon the crime and folly he had been guilty of,
that so the punishment might be inflicted by the same hand which had
contracted the guilt.

10. Their children were brought up in a strict obedience to their
parents, and taught from their infancy to pay a profound reverence
to all their dictates and commands. And no less were they enjoined
to show an awful regard and observance to all their superiors in age
and authority, so as to rise up before the hoary head, and to honor
the face of the old man, to give him the way when they met him in the
streets, and to stand still and remain silent till he was passed by;
insomuch as it was indulged them, as a peculiar privilege due to their
age and wisdom, not only to have a paternal authority over their own
children, servants, and estates, but over their neighbors too, as if
they were a part of their own family and propriety; that so in general
there might be a mutual care, and an united interest, zealously carried
on betwixt them for the private good of every one in particular, as
well as for the public good of the communities they lived in. By this
means they never wanted faithful counsellors to assist with good advice
in all their concerns, nor hearty friends to prosecute each other’s
interest as it were their own; by this means they never wanted careful
tutors and guardians for their youth, who were always at hand to
admonish and instruct them in the solid principles of virtue.

11. No one durst show himself refractory to their instructions, nor at
the least murmur at their reprehensions; insomuch that, whenever any of
their youth had been punished by them for some ill that had been done,
and a complaint thereupon made by them to their parents of the severity
they had suffered, hoping for some little relief from their indulgence
and affection, it was accounted highly dishonorable in them not to add
to their punishment by a fresh correction for the folly and injustice
of their complaint. For by the common interest of discipline, and that
great care that every one was obliged to take in the education of their
youth, they had a firm trust and assurance in one another, that they
never would enjoin their children the performance of any thing that was
in the least unnecessary or unbecoming them.

12. Though it might seem very strange and unaccountable in this wise
nation, that any thing which had the least semblance of baseness or
dishonesty should be universally approved, commended, and encouraged
by their laws, yet so it was in the case of theft, whereby their young
children were allowed to steal certain things, as particularly the
fruit of their orchards or their messes at their feasts. But then this
was not done to encourage them to the desires of avarice and injustice,
but to sharpen their wits, and to make them crafty and subtle, and
to train them up in all sorts of wiles and cunning, watchfulness and
circumspection, whereby they were rendered more apt to serve them
in their wars, which was upon the matter the whole profession of
this commonwealth. And if at any time they were taken in the act of
stealing, they were most certainly punished with rods and the penance
of fasting; not because they esteemed the stealth criminal, but because
they wanted skill and cunning in the management and concealing of
it.[47]

14. They spent a great part of their studies in poetry and music,
which raised their minds above the ordinary level, and by a kind of
artificial enthusiasm inspired them with generous heats and resolutions
for action. Their compositions, consisting only of very grave and moral
subjects, were easy and natural, in a plain dress, and without any
paint or ornament, containing nothing else but the just commendations
of those great personages whose singular wisdom and virtue had made
their lives famous and exemplary, and whose courage in defence of their
country had made their deaths honorable and happy. Nor were the valiant
and virtuous only the subject of these songs; but the better to make
men sensible of what rewards and honors are due to the memory of such,
they made invectives in them upon those who were signally vicious and
cowards, as men who died with as much contempt as they had lived with
infamy. They generally concluded their poem with a solemn profession of
what they would be, boasting of their progress in virtue, agreeable to
the abilities of their nature and the expectations of their age.

15. At all their public festivals these songs were a great part of
their entertainment, where there were three companies of singers,
representing the three several ages of nature. The old men made up the
first chorus, whose business was to present what they had been after
this manner:—

    That active courage youthful blood contains
    Did once with equal vigor warm our veins.

To which the chorus, consisting of young men only, thus answers:—

    Valiant and bold we are, let who will try:
    Who dare accept our challenge soon shall die.

The third, which were of young children, replied to them in this
manner:—

    Those seeds which Nature in our breast did sow
    Shall soon to generous fruits of virtue grow;
    Then all those valiant deeds which you relate
    We will excel, and scorn to imitate.[48]

16. They made use of a peculiar measure in their songs, when their
armies were in their march towards an enemy, which being sung in a
full choir to their flutes seemed proper to excite in them a generous
courage and contempt of death. Lycurgus was the first who brought this
warlike music into the field, that so he might moderate and soften
the rage and fury of their minds in an engagement by solemn musical
measures, and that their valor (which should be no boisterous and
unruly thing) might always be under the government of their reason, and
not of passion. To this end it was always their custom before the fight
to sacrifice to the Muses, that they might behave themselves with as
much good conduct as with courage, and do such actions as were worthy
of memory, and which might challenge the applauses and commendations of
every one.

17. And indeed so great an esteem and veneration had they for the
gravity and simplicity of their ancient music, that no one was allowed
to recede in the least from the established rules and measures of it,
insomuch as the Ephori, upon complaint made to them, laid a severe
mulct upon Terpander (a musician of great note and eminency for his
incomparable skill and excellency in playing upon the harp, and who,
as he had ever professed a great veneration for antiquity, so ever
testified by his eulogiums and commendations the esteem he always had
of virtuous and heroic actions), depriving him of his harp, and (as
a peculiar punishment) exposing it to the censure of the people, by
fixing it upon a nail, because he had added one string more to his
instrument than was the usual and stated number, though done with no
other design and advantage than to vary the sound, and to make it more
useful and pleasant. That music was ever accounted among them the best,
which was most grave, simple, and natural. And for this reason too,
when Timotheus in their Carnean feasts, which were instituted in honor
of Apollo, contended for a preference in his art, one of the Ephori
took a knife in his hand, and cut the strings of his harp, for having
exceeded the number of seven in it. So severely tenacious were they of
their ancient customs and practices, that they would not suffer the
least innovation, though in things that were indifferent and of no
great importance, lest an indulgence in one thing might have introduced
another, till at length by gradual and insensible alterations the whole
body of their laws might be disregarded and contemned, and so the main
pillar which did support the fabric of their government be weakened and
undermined.

18. Lycurgus took away that superstition, which formerly indeed had
been the practice among them, concerning their sepulchre and funeral
solemnities, by permitting them to bury the remains of their departed
friends within the city, that so they might the better secure them
from the rude and barbarous violence of an enemy, and to erect their
monuments for them in separated places joining to their temples; that,
having their graves and tombs always before their eyes, they might
not only remember but imitate the worthy actions they had done, and
so lessen the fears and apprehensions of death with the consideration
of those honors they paid their memories when they put off their
mortalities. He took away those pollutions which they formerly looked
upon as arising from their dead bodies, and prohibited all costly
and sumptuous expenses at their funerals, it being very improper for
those who while alive generally abstained from whatever was vain and
curious to be carried to the grave with any pomp and magnificence.
Therefore without the use of drugs and ointments, without any rich
odors and perfumes, without any art or curiosity, save only the little
ornament of a red vestment and a few olive-leaves, they carried him
to the place of burying, where he was, without any formal sorrows and
public lamentations, honorably and securely laid up in a decent and
convenient sepulchre. And here it was lawful for any one who would be
at the trouble to erect a monument for the person deceased, but not to
engrave the least inscription on it; this being the peculiar reward of
such only who had signalized themselves in war, and died gallantly in
defence of their country.

19, 20. It was not allowed any of them to travel into foreign
countries, lest their conversation should be tinctured with the customs
of those places, and they at their return introduce amongst them new
modes and incorrect ways of living, to the corruption of good manners
and the prejudice of their own laws and usage; for which reason they
expelled all strangers from Sparta, lest they should insinuate their
vices and their folly into the affections of the people, and leave in
the minds of their citizens the bad principles of softness and luxury,
ease and covetousness.

21. Nothing could sooner forfeit the right and privilege of a citizen,
than refusing their children that public education which their
laws and country demanded of them. For as none of them were on any
account exempt from obedience to their laws, so, if any one out of an
extraordinary tenderness and indulgence would not suffer his sons to be
brought up according to their strict discipline and institutions, he
was straightways disfranchised. For they could not think that person
could ever prove serviceable to their government, who had not been
educated with the same care and severity with his fellow-subjects. And
it was no less a shame and reproach to the parents themselves, who
could be of such mean and abject spirits as to prefer the love of their
children to the love of their country, and the satisfaction of a fond
and imprudent passion to the honor and security of their state.

23. Nay further, as there was a community of children, so there was of
their goods and estates, it being free for them in case of necessity
to make use of their neighbor’s servants, as if they were their own;
and not only so, but of their horses and dogs too, unless the owners
stood in need of them themselves, whenever they designed the diversion
of hunting, an exercise peculiar to this nation, and to which they were
accustomed from their youth. And if upon any extraordinary occasion any
one was pressed with the want of what his neighbors were possessed of,
he went freely to them and borrowed, as though he had been the right
proprietary of their storehouses; and being supplied answerably to his
necessities, he carefully sealed them up again and left them secure.

24. In all their warlike expeditions they generally clothed themselves
with a garment of a purple color, as best becoming the profession of
soldiers, and carrying in them a signification of that blood they
were resolved to shed in the service of their country. It was of use
likewise, not only to cast a greater terror into their adversaries
and to secure from their discovery the wounds they should receive,
but likewise for distinction’s sake, that in the heat and fury of the
battle they might discriminate each other from the enemy. They always
fought with consideration and cunning, craft being many times of more
advantage to them than downright blows; for it is not the multitude
of men, nor the strongest arm and the sharpest sword, that make men
masters of the field.

25. Whenever a victory was gained through a well-contrived stratagem,
and thereby with little loss of men and blood, they always sacrificed
an ox to Mars; but when the success was purely owing to their valor
and prowess, they only offered up a cock to him; it being in their
estimation more honorable for their generals and commanders to overcome
their enemies by policy and subtlety than by mere strength and courage.

26, 27. One great part of their religion lay in their solemn prayers
and devotion, which they daily offered up to their Gods, heartily
requesting of them to enable them to bear all kinds of injuries with
a generous and unshaken mind, and to reward them with honor and
prosperity, according to their performances of piety and virtue.

28. Besides, it was a great part of that honor they paid their Gods,
of whatever sex they were, to adorn them with military weapons and
armor, partly out of superstition and an extraordinary reverence they
had for the virtue of fortitude, which they preferred to all others,
and which they looked upon as an immediate gift of the Gods, as being
the greatest lovers and patrons of those who were endued with it; and
partly to encourage every one to address his devotions to them for
it; insomuch as Venus herself, who in other nations was generally
represented naked, had her armor too, as well as her particular altars
and worshippers.

29. Whenever they take any business of moment in hand, they generally
pray to Fortune in a set form of words for their success in it;[49] it
being no better in their esteem than profaneness and irreverence to
their Gods to invoke them upon slight and trivial emergencies.

30. No discovery of what is bad and vicious comes with greater evidence
to the spirits and apprehensions of children, who are unable to bear
the force of reason, than that which is offered to them by way of
example. Therefore the Spartan discipline did endeavor to preserve
their youth (on whom philosophical discourses would have made but
small impression) from all kinds of intemperance and excess of wine,
by presenting before them all the indecencies of their drunken Helots,
persons indeed who were their slaves, and employed not only in all
kinds of servile offices, but especially in tilling of their fields
and manuring of their ground, which was let out to them at reasonable
rates, they paying in every year their returns of rent, according to
what was anciently established and ordained amongst them at the first
general division of their lands. And if any did exact greater payments
from them, it was esteemed an execrable thing amongst them; they being
desirous that the Helots might reap gain and profit from their labors,
and thereupon be obliged faithfully to serve their masters as well
as their own interest with greater cheerfulness and industry. And
therefore their lords never required more of them than what bare custom
and contracts exacted of them.

33. They adjudged it necessary for the preservation of that gravity
and seriousness of manners which was required of their youth for the
attainments of wisdom and virtue, never to admit of any light and
wanton, any ludicrous or effeminate poetry; which made them allow of
no poets among them but such only who for their grave and virtuous
compositions were approved by the public magistrate; that being hereby
under some restraint, they might neither act nor write any thing to
the prejudice of good manners, or to the dishonor of their laws and
government.

34. And therefore it was, that when they heard of Archilochus’s arrival
at Sparta (though a Lacedaemonian, and of an excellent wit), yet they
presently commanded him to depart the city, having understood how that
in a poem of his he had affirmed it was greater wisdom for a man to
throw his arms away and secure himself by flight, than to stand to his
own defence with the hazard of his life, or therein to die valiantly in
the field. His words were after this manner:—

    Let who will boast their courage in the field,
    I find but little safety from my shield.
    Nature’s not Honor’s laws we must obey;
    This made me cast my useless shield away,
    And by a prudent flight and cunning save
    A life, which valor could not, from the grave.
    A better buckler I can soon regain,
    But who can get another life again?[50]

35. It was a received opinion amongst many nations, that some of their
Gods were propitious only to their men, and others only to their women,
which made them sometimes prohibit the one and sometimes the other
from being present at their sacred rites and solemnities. But the
Lacedaemonians took away this piece of superstition by not excluding
either sex from their temples and religious services; but, as they
were always bred up to the same civil exercises, so they were to the
same common performances of their holy mysteries, so that by an early
knowledge of each other there might be a real love and friendship
established betwixt them, which ever stood most firm upon the basis of
religion.

36. Their virtuous man, as he was to do no wrong, so likewise was not
to suffer any without a due sense and modest resentment of it; and
therefore the Ephori laid a mulct upon Sciraphidas, because he could
so tamely receive the many injuries and affronts that were offered
him,—concluding that he who was so insensible of his own interest as
not to stand up in a bold and honest vindication of himself from the
wrongs and injustice that may be done to his good name and honor,
would without all doubt be as dull and listless, when an opportunity
should invite him to it, in appearing for the defence of the fame and
reputation of his country.

39. Action and not speaking was the study and commendation of a
Spartan, and therefore polite discourses and long harangues were
not with them the character of a wise or learned man, their speech
being always grave and sententious, without any ornament or tedious
argumentation. They accustomed themselves to brevity, and upon every
subject to express themselves in the finest words, with as much satire
and smartness as possible; insomuch as they had a law among them for
the instruction of their youth, by which they were enjoined to practise
a close and compendious style in all their orations; which made them
banish one Cephisophon, a talkative rhetorician, for boasting publicly
that he could upon any subject whatsoever entertain his auditory for
a whole day together; alleging this as a sufficient reason for their
justification, that it was the part of a good orator to adjust his
discourse according to the weight and dignity of the matter he was to
treat of.

40. There was indeed a strange and unnatural custom amongst them,
annually observed at the celebration of the bloody rites of Diana
Orthia, where there was a certain number of children, not only of the
vulgar sort but of the gentry and nobility, who were whipped almost
to death with rods before the altar of the goddess; their parents and
relations standing by, and all the while exhorting them to patience
and constancy in suffering. Although this ceremony lasted for the
space of a whole day, yet they underwent this barbarous rite with such
a prodigious cheerfulness and resolution of mind as never could be
expected from the softness and tenderness of their age. They did not so
much as express one little sigh or groan during the whole solemnity,
but out of a certain emulation and desire of glory there was a
great contention among them, who should excel his companions in the
constancy of enduring the length and sharpness of their pains; and he
who held out the longest was ever the most esteemed and valued person
amongst them, and the glory and reputation wherewith they rewarded his
sufferings rendered his after life much more eminent and illustrious.

42. They had a very slight regard to maritime affairs, on the account
of an ancient law amongst them, whereby they were prohibited from
applying of themselves to the becoming of good seamen or engaging
themselves in any sea-fight. Afterwards indeed, through the necessity
of affairs and the security of their country, they judged it
convenient, when they were invaded by the Athenians and other nations,
to furnish themselves with a navy; by which it was that Lysander, who
was then the general in that expedition, obtained a great victory
over the Athenians, and thereby for a considerable time secured the
sovereignty of the seas to themselves. But finding afterwards this
grievance arising from it, that there was a very sensible corruption
of good manners and decay of discipline amongst them, from the
conversation of their rude and debauched mariners, they were obliged
to lay this profession wholly aside, and by a revival of this law
endeavor to retrieve their ancient sobriety, and, by turning the bent
and inclinations of the people into their old channel again, to make
them tractable and obedient, modest and virtuous. Though indeed they
did not long hold to their resolution herein, any more than they were
wont to do in other matters of moment, which could not but be variable,
according to the circumstances of affairs and the necessities of their
government. For though great riches and large possessions were things
they hated to death, it being a capital crime and punishment to have
any gold or silver in their houses, or to amass up together heaps of
money (which was generally made with them of iron or leather),—for
which reason several had been put to death, according to that law which
banished covetousness out of the city, on the account of an answer of
their oracle to Alcamenes and Theopompus, two of their Spartan kings,

    That the love of money should be the ruin of Sparta,—

yet notwithstanding the severe penalty annexed to the heaping up much
wealth, and the example of those who had suffered for it, Lysander
was highly honored and rewarded for bringing in a great quantity of
gold and silver to Lacedaemon, after the victory he had gained over
the Athenians, and the taking of the city of Athens itself, wherein an
inestimable treasure was found. So that what had been a capital crime
in others was a meritorious act in him. It is true indeed that as long
as the Spartans did adhere closely to the observation of the laws and
rules of Lycurgus, and keep their oath religiously to be true to their
own government, they outstripped all the other cities of Greece for
prudence and valor, and for the space of five hundred years became
famous everywhere for the excellency of their laws and the wisdom of
their policy. But when the honor of these laws began to lessen and
their citizens grew luxurious and exorbitant, when covetousness and
too much liberty had softened their minds and almost destroyed the
wholesome constitution of their state, their former greatness and power
began by little and little to decay and dwindle in the estimation
of men. And as by reason of these vices and ill customs they proved
unserviceable to themselves, so likewise they became less formidable
to others; insomuch as their several allies and confederates, who had
with them jointly carried on their common good and interest, were
wholly alienated from them. But although their affairs were in such a
languishing posture, when Philip of Macedon, after his great victory at
Chaeronea, was by the Grecians declared their general both by land and
sea, as likewise his son Alexander after the conquest of the Thebans;
yet the Lacedaemonians, though their cities had no other walls for
their security, but only their own courage, though by reason of their
frequent wars they were reduced to low measures and small numbers of
men, and thereby become so weak as to be an easy prey to any powerful
enemy, yet retaining amongst them some reverence for those few remains
of Lycurgus’s institution and government, they could not be brought
to assist these two, or any other of their Macedonian kings in their
wars and expeditions; neither could they be prevailed with to assist
at their common assemblies and consults with them, nor pay any tribute
or contributions to them. But when all those laws and customs (which
are the main pillars that support a state) enacted by Lycurgus, and so
highly approved of by the government, were now universally despised
and unobserved, they immediately became a prey to the ambition and
usurpation, to the cruelty and tyranny of their fellow-citizens; and
having no regard at all to their ancient virtues and constitution, they
utterly lost their ancient glory and reputation, and by degrees, as
well as weaker nations, did in a very little time everywhere degenerate
into poverty, contempt, and servitude; being at present subject to the
Romans, like all the other cities of Greece.




