
Transcriber’s notes:

Italic text is denoted _thus_.

The spelling, hyphenation, punctuation and accentuation are as the
original, except for apparent typographical errors which have been
corrected.




[Illustration: _Pandora’s Box._

_From the painting by Dante Gabriel Rossetti._]




PLUTARCH’S ESSAYS AND MISCELLANIES

Comprising all his Works Collected under the Title of “Morals” ·
Translated from the Greek by Several Hands Corrected and Revised by
WILLIAM W. GOODWIN, Ph.D., Professor of Greek Literature in Harvard
University In Five Volumes · Volume One


[Illustration: HONOS ET VIRTVS]


  BOSTON · LITTLE, BROWN
  AND COMPANY · MCMXI


  Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1870, By LITTLE,
  BROWN, AND COMPANY, In the office of the Librarian of Congress at
  Washington.


  Copyright, 1898, 1905, By LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.


  Printers S. J. PARKHILL & CO., BOSTON, U. S. A.




  EDITOR’S PREFACE.


The translation of Plutarch’s Morals “by Several Hands” was first
published in London in 1684-1694. The fifth edition, “revised and
corrected from the many errors of the former editions,” published in
1718, is the basis of the present translation. The earlier translation
made by Philemon Holland, Doctor of Physick, published in London in
1603 and again in 1657, has often been of great use in the revision. It
hardly need be stated, that the name “Morals” is used by tradition to
include all the works of Plutarch except the Lives.

The original editions of the present work contained translations of
every grade of merit. Some of the essays were translated by eminent
scholars like William Baxter (nephew of Richard Baxter) and Thomas
Creech, whose work generally required merely such revision as every
translation of such an age would now need. But a large number,
including some of the longest and most difficult treatises, were
translated by men whose ignorance of Greek—or whatever language was
the immediate ancestor of their own version—was only one of their
many defects as translators. Perhaps we may gain a better idea than we
have had of the scholars of Oxford whom Bentley delighted to torment,
from these specimens of the learning of their generation; and it may
have been a fortunate thing for some of our translators that Bentley
was too much occupied with the wise heads of Christ Church to be able
to notice the blunders of men who could write notes saying that the
Parthenon is “a Promontory shooting into the Black Sea, where stood a
Chappel dedicated to some Virgin God-head, and famous for some Victory
thereabout obtain’d;” or who could torture a plain statement that a
certain water when stirred produced _bubbles_ (πομφόλυγες) into a story
of a new substance called _Pompholyx_, “made by Mixture of Brass with
the Air”! See Vol. V. p. 337, and Vol. III. p. 517, of the original
translation.

Besides the great variety of scholarship and ignorance, each translator
had his own theory of translation. While some attempted a literal
version, so as even to bracket all words not actually represented
in the Greek, others gave a mere paraphrase, which in one case
(Mr. Pulleyn’s “Customs of the Lacedaemonians”) became an original
essay on the subject, based on the facts supplied by Plutarch. The
present editor’s duty, of course, changed with each new style of
translation. It would have been impossible to bring the whole work to
a uniform standard of verbal correctness, unless essentially a new
translation had been made. The original version was often so hopelessly
incorrect that no revision was possible; and here the editor cannot
flatter himself that he has succeeded in patching the English of the
seventeenth century with his own without detriment. Fortunately,
the earlier translation of Holland supplied words, and even whole
sentences, in many cases in which the other was beyond the help of mere
revision. The translation of Holland is generally more accurate than
the other, and, on the whole, a more conscientious work; its antiquated
style and diffuseness, however, render it less fitted for republication
at the present time. Notwithstanding all the defects of the translation
which is here revised, it is beyond all question a more readable
version than could be made now; and the liveliness of its style will
more than make up to most readers for its want of literal correctness.
It need not be stated to professional scholars, that translations made
in the seventeenth century cannot, even by the most careful revision,
be made to answer the demands of modern critical scholarship.

One of the greatest difficulties in preparing the present work has been
to decide how much of the antiquated language of the old translation
should be retained. On this point the editor has fortunately been
able to consult the wisest and most experienced advisers, to whose
aid he has been constantly indebted; but even the highest authorities
occasionally disagree on the first principles. He is fully aware,
therefore, that he has dissatisfied a large number of the friends
of Plutarch in this respect; but he is equally sure that he should
have dissatisfied an equal number by any other course which he might
have followed. The general principle adopted has been to retain such
expressions as were in good use when the translation was made, provided
the meaning is obvious or easy to be learned from a dictionary, and
to discard such as would be unintelligible to ordinary readers. It
has, in some cases, been assumed that the use of a phrase of obvious
meaning in this translation is of itself authority for accepting it.
On these principles many words and expressions are retained, which
are decidedly weaker than their modern equivalents, especially many
Latinisms and Gallicisms which now seem pedantic. Even here consistency
has been impossible, where the duty of a reviser changed with every
new treatise. Perhaps the editor cannot state his own object more
correctly, than by saying that he has tried to make each treatise what
the original translator would have made it if he had carried out his
own purpose conscientiously and thoroughly. Where so many errors were
to be corrected, it would be absurd to hope that many have not remained
still unnoticed.

The corrupt state of the Greek text of many parts of Plutarch’s
Morals must not be overlooked. No complete edition of the Greek has
been published since Wyttenbach’s (1795-1800), except the French one
by Dübner in the Didot collection. The latter gives no manuscript
readings; and although it professes to be based partly on a new
collation of the manuscripts in the public library of Paris, nothing
distinguishes the changes made on this authority from conjectures of
the editor and his predecessors. A slight glance at Wyttenbach will
show that many parts of the text are restored by conjecture; and many
of the conjectures, though plausible and ingenious, are not such as
would be accepted by modern scholarship if they were made in earlier
classic authors. A translator must accept many of these under silent
protest; to enumerate one-half of them would introduce a critical
commentary entirely out of place in a translation. In fact, no critical
translation of these treatises is possible, until a thorough revision
of the text, with the help of the best manuscripts, has been made; and
this is a task from which most scholars would shrink in dismay. In
many cases in this edition, blanks have been preferred to uncertain
conjectures or traditional nonsense. The treatises on Music, on the
Procreation of the Soul, and the two on the Stoics, have many of their
dark corners made darker by the utter uncertainty of the Greek text.

The essays in this edition follow the same order as in the old
translation; but those on Fortune, and on Virtue and Vice, with the
Conjugal Precepts, are transferred from the beginning of volume
third to the end of volume second. The sections have been numbered
in accordance with the modern editions of the Greek text. References
to most of the classic authors quoted by Plutarch are given in the
foot-notes, except where a quotation is a mere fragment of an unknown
work. The tragic fragments are numbered according to the edition of
Nauck (Leipsic, 1856). All notes (except these references) introduced
by the editor are marked G. A few notes are taken from Holland; and all
which are not otherwise marked are retained from the old translation.

In conclusion, the editor must express his warmest thanks to his
colleagues at the University and other friends who have kindly aided
him with their advice and skill. Without their help, the undertaking
would sometimes have seemed hopeless.

  WILLIAM W. GOODWIN.




INTRODUCTION.


It is remarkable that of an author so familiar as Plutarch, not only
to scholars, but to all reading men, and whose history is so easily
gathered from his works, no accurate memoir of his life, not even the
dates of his birth and death, should have come down to us. Strange that
the writer of so many illustrious biographies should wait so long for
his own. It is agreed that he was born about the year 50 A. D. He has
been represented as having been the tutor of the Emperor Trajan, as
dedicating one of his books to him, as living long in Rome in great
esteem, as having received from Trajan the consular dignity, and as
having been appointed by him the governor of Greece. He was a man whose
real superiority had no need of these flatteries. Meantime, the simple
truth is, that he was not the tutor of Trajan, that he dedicated no
book to him, was not consul in Rome, nor governor of Greece; appears
never to have been in Rome but on two occasions, and then on business
of the people of his native city, Chæronæa; and though he found or made
friends at Rome, and read lectures to some friends or scholars, he did
not know or learn the Latin language there; with one or two doubtful
exceptions, never quotes a Latin book; and though the contemporary in
his youth, or in his old age, of Persius, Juvenal, Lucan, and Seneca,
of Quintilian, Martial, Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny the Elder, and
the Younger, he does not cite them, and in return his name is never
mentioned by any Roman writer. It would seem that the community of
letters and of personal news was even more rare at that day than the
want of printing, of railroads and telegraphs, would suggest to us.

But this neglect by his contemporaries has been compensated by an
immense popularity in modern nations. Whilst his books were never
known to the world in their own Greek tongue, it is curious that the
“Lives” were translated and printed in Latin, thence into Italian,
French, and English, more than a century before the original “Works”
were yet printed. For whilst the “Lives” were translated in Rome in
1471, and the “Morals,” part by part, soon after, the first printed
edition of the Greek “Works” did not appear until 1572. Hardly current
in his own Greek, these found learned interpreters in the scholars
of Germany, Spain, and Italy. In France, in the middle of the most
turbulent civil wars, Amyot’s translation awakened general attention.
His genial version of the “Lives” in 1559, of the “Morals” in 1572, had
signal success. King Henry IV. wrote to his wife, Marie de Medicis:
“_Vive Dieu._ As God liveth, you could not have sent me any thing which
could be more agreeable than the news of the pleasure you have taken
in this reading. Plutarch always delights me with a fresh novelty.
To love him is to love me; for he has been long time the instructor
of my youth. My good mother, to whom I owe all, and who would not
wish, she said, to see her son an illustrious dunce, put this book
into my hands almost when I was a child at the breast. It has been
like my conscience, and has whispered in my ear many good suggestions
and maxims for my conduct, and the government of my affairs.” Still
earlier, Rabelais cites him with due respect. Montaigne, in 1589, says:
“We dunces had been lost, had not this book raised us out of the dirt.
By this favor of his we dare now speak and write. The ladies are able
to read to schoolmasters. ’Tis our breviary.” Montesquieu drew from him
his definition of law, and, in his _Pensées_, declares, “I am always
charmed with Plutarch; in his writings are circumstances attached to
persons, which give great pleasure;” and adds examples. Saint Evremond
read Plutarch to the great Condé under a tent. Rollin, so long the
historian of antiquity for France, drew unhesitatingly his history
from him. Voltaire honored him, and Rousseau acknowledged him as his
master. In England, Sir Thomas North translated the “Lives” in 1579,
and Holland the “Morals” in 1603, in time to be used by Shakspeare in
his plays, and read by Bacon, Dryden, and Cudworth.

Then, recently, there has been a remarkable revival, in France, in
the taste for Plutarch and his contemporaries, led, we may say, by
the eminent critic Saint-Beuve. M. Octave Gréard, in a critical work
on the “Morals,” has carefully corrected the popular legends, and
constructed from the works of Plutarch himself his true biography. M.
Levéque has given an exposition of his moral philosophy, under the
title of “A Physician of the Soul,” in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_; and
M. C. Martha, chapters on the genius of Marcus Aurelius, of Persius,
and Lucretius, in the same journal; whilst M. Fustel de Coulanges has
explored from its roots in the Aryan race, then in their Greek and
Roman descendants, the primeval religion of the household.

Plutarch occupies a unique place in literature as an encyclopædia of
Greek and Roman antiquity. Whatever is eminent in fact or in fiction,
in opinion, in character, in institutions, in science—natural,
moral, or metaphysical, or in memorable sayings, drew his attention
and came to his pen with more or less fulness of record. He is, among
prose-writers, what Chaucer is among English poets, a repertory for
those who want the story without searching for it at first hand,—a
compend of all accepted traditions. And all this without any supreme
intellectual gifts. He is not a profound mind; not a master in any
science; not a lawgiver, like Lycurgus or Solon; not a metaphysician,
like Parmenides, Plato, or Aristotle; not the founder of any sect
or community, like Pythagoras or Zeno; not a naturalist, like Pliny
or Linnæus; not a leader of the mind of a generation, like Plato or
Goethe. But if he had not the highest powers, he was yet a man of rare
gifts. He had that universal sympathy with genius which makes all its
victories his own; though he never used verse, he had many qualities
of the poet in the power of his imagination, the speed of his mental
associations, and his sharp, objective eyes. But what specially marks
him, he is a chief example of the illumination of the intellect by
the force of morals. Though the most amiable of boon-companions, this
generous religion gives him _aperçus_ like Goethe’s.

Plutarch was well-born, well-taught, well-conditioned; a
self-respecting, amiable man, who knew how to better a good education
by travels, by devotion to affairs private and public; a master of
ancient culture, he read books with a just criticism; eminently social,
he was a king in his own house, surrounded himself with select friends,
and knew the high value of good conversation; and declares in a letter
written to his wife that “he finds scarcely an erasure, as in a book
well-written, in the happiness of his life.”

The range of mind makes the glad writer. The reason of Plutarch’s vast
popularity is his humanity. A man of society, of affairs; upright,
practical; a good son, husband, father, and friend,—he has a taste
for common life, and knows the court, the camp, and the judgment-hall,
but also the forge, farm, kitchen, and cellar, and every utensil and
use, and with a wise man’s or a poet’s eye. Thought defends him from
any degradation. He does not lose his way, for the attractions are from
within, not from without. A poet in verse or prose must have a sensuous
eye, but an intellectual co-perception. Plutarch’s memory is full, and
his horizon wide. Nothing touches man but he feels to be his; he is
tolerant even of vice, if he finds it genial; enough a man of the world
to give even the devil his due, and would have hugged Robert Burns,
when he cried.

    “O wad ye tak’ a thought and mend!”

He is a philosopher with philosophers, a naturalist with naturalists,
and sufficiently a mathematician to leave some of his readers, now and
then, at a long distance behind him, or respectfully skipping to the
next chapter. But this scholastic omniscience of our author engages a
new respect, since they hope he understands his own diagram.

He perpetually suggests Montaigne, who was the best reader he has ever
found, though Montaigne excelled his master in the point and surprise
of his sentences. Plutarch had a religion which Montaigne wanted,
and which defends him from wantonness; and though Plutarch is as
plain-spoken, his moral sentiment is always pure. What better praise
has any writer received than he whom Montaigne finds “frank in giving
things, not words,” dryly adding, “it vexes me that he is so exposed
to the spoil of those that are conversant with him.” It is one of the
felicities of literary history, the tie which inseparably couples
these two names across fourteen centuries. Montaigne, whilst he grasps
Étienne de la Boèce with one hand, reaches back the other to Plutarch.
These distant friendships charm us, and honor all the parties, and make
the best example of the universal citizenship and fraternity of the
human mind.

I do not know where to find a book—to borrow a phrase of Ben
Jonson’s—“so rammed with life,” and this in chapters chiefly ethical,
which are so prone to be heavy and sentimental. No poet could
illustrate his thought with more novel or striking similes or happier
anecdotes. His style is realistic, picturesque, and varied; his sharp
objective eyes seeing every thing that moves, shines, or threatens in
nature or art, or thought or dreams. Indeed, twilights, shadows, omens,
and spectres have a charm for him. He believes in witchcraft and the
evil eye, in demons and ghosts,—but prefers, if you please, to talk
of these in the morning. His vivacity and abundance never leave him to
loiter or pound on an incident. I admire his rapid and crowded style,
as if he had such store of anecdotes of his heroes that he is forced to
suppress more than he recounts, in order to keep up with the hasting
history.

His surprising merit is the genial facility with which he deals with
his manifold topics. There is no trace of labor or pain. He gossips of
heroes, philosophers, and poets; of virtues and genius; of love and
fate and empires. It is for his pleasure that he recites all that is
best in his reading: he prattles history. But he is no courtier, and
no Boswell: he is ever manly, far from fawning, and would be welcome
to the sages and warriors he reports, as one having a native right
to admire and recount these stirring deeds and speeches. I find him
a better teacher of rhetoric than any modern. His superstitions are
poetic, aspiring, affirmative. A poet might rhyme all day with hints
drawn from Plutarch, page on page. No doubt, this superior suggestion
for the modern reader owes much to the foreign air, the Greek wine,
the religion and history of antique heroes. Thebes, Sparta, Athens,
and Rome charm us away from the disgust of the passing hour. But his
own cheerfulness and rude health are also magnetic. In his immense
quotation and allusion, we quickly cease to discriminate between what
he quotes and what he invents. We sail on his memory into the ports of
every nation, enter into every private property, and do not stop to
discriminate owners, but give him the praise of all. ’Tis all Plutarch,
by right of eminent domain, and all property vests in this emperor.
This facility and abundance make the joy of his narrative, and he is
read to the neglect of more careful historians. Yet he inspires a
curiosity, sometimes makes a necessity, to read them. He disowns any
attempt to rival Thucydides; but I suppose he has a hundred readers
where Thucydides finds one, and Thucydides must often thank Plutarch
for that one. He has preserved for us a multitude

of precious sentences, in prose or verse, of authors whose books are
lost; and these embalmed fragments, through his loving selection alone,
have come to be proverbs of later mankind. I hope it is only my immense
ignorance that makes me believe that they do not survive out of his
pages,—not only Thespis, Polemos, Euphorion, Ariston, Evenus, &c., but
fragments of Menander and Pindar. At all events, it is in reading the
fragments he has saved from lost authors that I have hailed another
example of the sacred care which has unrolled in our times, and still
searches and unrolls _papyri_ from ruined libraries and buried cities,
and has drawn attention to what an ancient might call the politeness of
Fate,—we will say, more advisedly, the benign Providence which uses
the violence of war, of earthquakes, and changed watercourses, to save
underground through barbarous ages the relics of ancient art, and thus
allows us to witness the upturning of the alphabets of old races, and
the deciphering of forgotten languages, so to complete the annals of
the forefathers of Asia, Africa, and Europe.

His delight in poetry makes him cite with joy the speech of Gorgias,
“that the tragic poet who deceived was juster than he who deceived not,
and he that was deceived was wiser than he who was not deceived.”

It is a consequence of this poetic trait in his mind, that I confess
that, in reading him, I embrace the particulars, and carry a faint
memory of the argument or general design of the chapter; but he is not
less welcome, and he leaves the reader with a relish and a necessity
for completing his studies. Many examples might be cited of nervous
expression and happy allusion, that indicate a poet and an orator,
though he is not ambitious of these titles, and cleaves to the security
of prose narrative, and only shows his intellectual sympathy with
these; yet I cannot forbear to cite one or two sentences which none who
reads them will forget. In treating of the style of the Pythian Oracle,
he says,—

  “Do you not observe, some one will say, what a grace there is in
  Sappho’s measures, and how they delight and tickle the ears and
  fancies of the hearers? Whereas the Sibyl, with her frantic grimaces,
  uttering sentences altogether thoughtful and serious, neither fucused
  nor perfumed, continues her voice a thousand years through the favor
  of the Divinity that speaks within her.”

Another gives an insight into his mystic tendencies,—

  “Early this morning, asking Epaminondas about the manner of
  Lysis’s burial, I found that Lysis had taught him as far as the
  incommunicable mysteries of our sect, and that the same Dæmon that
  waited on Lysis, presided over him, if I can guess at the pilot from
  the sailing of the ship. The paths of life are large, but in few are
  men directed by the Dæmons. When Theanor had said this, he looked
  attentively on Epaminondas, as if he designed a fresh search into his
  nature and inclinations.”

And here is his sentiment on superstition, somewhat condensed in Lord
Bacon’s citation of it: “I had rather a great deal that men should say,
There was no such man at all as Plutarch, than that they should say,
that there was one Plutarch that would eat up his children as soon as
they were born, as the poets speak of Saturn.”

The chapter “On Fortune” should be read by poets, and other wise men;
and the vigor of his pen appears in the chapter “Whether the Athenians
were more Warlike or Learned,” and in his attack upon Usurers.

There is, of course, a wide difference of time in the writing of these
discourses, and so in their merit. Many of them are mere sketches
or notes for chapters in preparation, which were never digested or
finished. Many are notes for disputations in the lecture-room. His poor
indignation against Herodotus was perhaps a youthful prize essay: it
appeared to me captious and labored; or perhaps, at a rhetorician’s
school, the subject of Herodotus being the lesson of the day, Plutarch
was appointed by lot to take the adverse side.

The plain-speaking of Plutarch, as of the ancient writers generally,
coming from the habit of writing for one sex only, has a great gain
for brevity, and, in our new tendencies of civilization, may tend to
correct a false delicacy.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are always interested in the man who treats the intellect well.
We expect it from the philosopher,—from Plato, Aristotle, Spinoza,
and Kant; but we know that metaphysical studies in any but minds of
large horizon and incessant inspiration have their dangers. One asks
sometimes whether a metaphysician can treat the intellect well. The
central fact is the superhuman intelligence pouring into us from its
unknown fountain, to be received with religious awe, and defended
from any mixture of our will. But this high Muse comes and goes; and
the danger is that, when the Muse is wanting, the student is prone to
supply its place with microscopic subtleties and logomachy. It is fatal
to spiritual health to lose your admiration. “Let others wrangle,” said
St. Augustine: “I will wonder.” Plato and Plotinus are enthusiasts,
who honor the race; but the logic of the sophists and materialists,
whether Greek or French, fills us with disgust. Whilst we expect this
awe and reverence of the spiritual power from the philosopher in his
closet, we praise it in the man of the world,—the man who lives on
quiet terms with existing institutions, yet indicates his perception of
these high oracles, as do Plutarch, Montaigne, Hume, and Goethe. These
men lift themselves at once from the vulgar, and are not the parasites
of wealth. Perhaps they sometimes compromise, go out to dine, make and
take compliments; but they keep open the source of wisdom and health.
Plutarch is uniformly true to this centre. He had not lost his wonder.
He is a pronounced idealist, who does not hesitate to say, like another
Berkeley, “Matter is itself privation;” and again, “The Sun is the
cause that all men are ignorant of Apollo, by sense withdrawing the
rational intellect from that which is to that which appears.” He thinks
that “souls are naturally endowed with the faculty of prediction;” he
delights in memory, with its miraculous power of resisting time. He
thinks that “Alexander invaded Persia with greater assistance from
Aristotle than from his father Philip.” He thinks that “he who has
ideas of his own is a bad judge of another man’s, it being true that
the Eleans would be the most proper judges of the Olympic games, were
no Eleans gamesters.” He says of Socrates, that he endeavored to bring
reason and things together, and make truth consist with sober sense. He
wonders with Plato at that nail of pain and pleasure which fastens the
body to the mind. The mathematics give him unspeakable pleasure, but he
chiefly liked that proportion which teaches us to account that which is
just, equal; and not that which is equal, just.

Of philosophy he is more interested in the results than in the method.
He has a just instinct of the presence of a master, and prefers to
sit as a scholar with Plato, than as a disputant; and, true to his
practical character, he wishes the philosopher not to hide in a corner,
but to commend himself to men of public regards and ruling genius:
“for, if he once possess such a man with principles of honor and
religion, he takes a compendious method, by doing good to one, to
oblige a great part of mankind.” ’Tis a temperance, not an eclecticism,
which makes him adverse to the severe Stoic, or the Gymnosophist, or
Diogenes, or any other extremist. That vice of theirs shall not hinder
him from citing any good word they chance to drop. He is an eclectic
in such sense as Montaigne was,—willing to be an expectant, not a
dogmatist.

In many of these chapters it is easy to infer the relation between
the Greek philosophers and those who came to them for instruction.
This teaching was no play nor routine, but strict, sincere, and
affectionate. The part of each of the class is as important as that of
the master. They are like the base-ball players, to whom the pitcher,
the bat, the catcher, and the scout are equally important. And Plutarch
thought, with Ariston, “that neither a bath nor a lecture served any
purpose, unless they were purgative.” Plutarch has such a keen pleasure
in realities that he has none in verbal disputes; he is impatient of
sophistry, and despises the Epicharmian disputations: as, that he who
ran in debt yesterday owes nothing to-day, as being another man; so, he
that was yesterday invited to supper, the next night comes an unbidden
guest, for that he is quite another person.

       *       *       *       *       *

Except as historical curiosities, little can be said in behalf of
the scientific value of the “Opinions of the Philosophers,” the
“Questions,” and the “Symposiacs.” They are, for the most part, very
crude opinions; many of them so puerile that one would believe that
Plutarch in his haste adopted the notes of his younger auditors, some
of them jocosely misreporting the dogma of the professor, who laid
them aside as _memoranda_ for future revision, which he never gave,
and they were posthumously published. Now and then there are hints of
superior science. You may cull from this record of barbarous guesses
of shepherds and travellers statements that are predictions of facts
established in modern science. Usually, when Thales, Anaximenes, or
Anaximander are quoted, it is really a good judgment. The explanation
of the rainbow, of the floods of the Nile, and of the _remora_, &c.,
are just; and the bad guesses are not worse than many of Lord Bacon’s.

His Natural History is that of a lover and poet, and not of a
physicist. His humanity stooped affectionately to trace the virtues
which he loved in the animals also. “Knowing and not knowing is the
affirmative or negative of the dog; knowing you is to be your friend;
not knowing you, your enemy.” He quotes Thucydides, saying, “that
not the desire of honor only never grows old, but much less also the
inclination to society and affection to the State, which continue even
in ants and bees to the very last.”

       *       *       *       *       *

But though curious in the questions of the schools on the nature and
genesis of things, his extreme interest in every trait of character,
and his broad humanity, lead him constantly to Morals, to the study of
the Beautiful and Good. Hence his love of heroes, his rule of life,
and his clear convictions of the high destiny of the soul. La Harpe
said “that Plutarch is the genius the most naturally moral that ever
existed.”

’Tis almost inevitable to compare Plutarch with Seneca, who, born fifty
years earlier, was for many years his contemporary, though they never
met, and their writings were perhaps unknown to each other. Plutarch
is genial, with an endless interest in all human and divine things;
Seneca, a professional philosopher, a writer of sentences, and, though
he keep a sublime path, is less interesting, because less humane;
and when we have shut his book, we forget to open it again. There is
a certain violence in his opinions, and want of sweetness. He lacks
the sympathy of Plutarch. He is tiresome through perpetual didactics.
He is not happily living. Cannot the simple lover of truth enjoy the
virtues of those he meets, and the virtues suggested by them, so to
find himself at some time purely contented? Seneca was still more a man
of the world than Plutarch; and, by his conversation with the Court
of Nero, and his own skill, like Voltaire’s, of living with men of
business, and emulating their address in affairs by great accumulation
of his own property, learned to temper his philosophy with facts. He
ventured far—apparently too far—for so keen a conscience as he inly
had. Yet we owe to that wonderful moralist illustrious maxims; as
if the scarlet vices of the times of Nero had the natural effect of
driving virtue to its loftiest antagonisms. “Seneca,” says L’Estrange,
“was a pagan Christian, and is very good reading for our Christian
pagans.” He was Buddhist in his cold abstract virtue, with a certain
impassibility beyond humanity. He called “pity, that fault of narrow
souls.” Yet what noble words we owe to him: “God divided man into men,
that they might help each other;” and again, “The good man differs from
God in nothing but duration.” His thoughts are excellent, if only he
had a right to say them. Plutarch, meantime, with every virtue under
heaven, thought it the top of wisdom to philosophize, yet not appear to
do it, and to reach in mirth the same ends which the most serious are
proposing.

Plutarch thought “truth to be the greatest good that man can receive,
and the goodliest blessing that God can give.” “When you are persuaded
in your mind that you cannot either offer or perform any thing more
agreeable to the gods than the entertaining a right notion of them, you
will then avoid superstition as a no less evil than atheism.” He cites
Euripides to affirm, “If gods do aught dishonest, they are no gods,”
and the memorable words of Antigone, in Sophocles, concerning the moral
sentiment:—

    “For neither now nor yesterday began
    These thoughts, which have been ever, nor yet can
    A man be found who their first entrance knew.”

His faith in the immortality of the soul is another measure of his deep
humanity. He reminds his friends that the Delphic oracles have given
several answers the same in substance as that formerly given to Corax
the Naxian:—

    “It sounds profane impiety
    To teach that human souls e’er die.”

He believes that the doctrine of the Divine Providence, and that of the
immortality of the soul, rest on one and the same basis. He thinks it
impossible either that a man beloved of the gods should not be happy,
or that a wise and just man should not be beloved of the gods. To him
the Epicureans are hateful, who held that the soul perishes when it is
separated from the body. “The soul, incapable of death, suffers in the
same manner in the body, as birds that are kept in a cage.” He believes
“that the souls of infants pass immediately into a better and more
divine state.”

I can easily believe that an anxious soul may find in Plutarch’s
chapter called “Pleasure not attainable by Epicurus,” and his “Letter
to his Wife Timoxena,” a more sweet and reassuring argument on the
immortality than in the Phædo of Plato; for Plutarch always addresses
the question on the human side, and not on the metaphysical; as Walter
Scott took hold of boys and young men, in England and America, and
through them of their fathers. His grand perceptions of duty lead him
to his stern delight in heroism; a stoic resistance to low indulgence;
to a fight with fortune; a regard for truth; his love of Sparta, and
of heroes like Aristides, Phocion, and Cato. He insists that the
highest good is in action. He thinks that the inhabitants of Asia came
to be vassals to one only, for not having been able to pronounce one
syllable; which is, No. So keen is his sense of allegiance to right
reason, that he makes a fight against Fortune whenever she is named. At
Rome he thinks her wings were clipped: she stood no longer on a ball,
but on a cube as large as Italy. He thinks it was by superior virtue
that Alexander won his battles in Asia and Africa, and the Greeks
theirs against Persia.

But this Stoic in his fight with Fortune, with vices, effeminacy, and
indolence, is gentle as a woman when other strings are touched. He is
the most amiable of men. “To erect a trophy in the soul against anger
is that which none but a great and victorious puissance is able to
achieve.”—“Anger turns the mind out of doors, and bolts the door.”
He has a tenderness almost to tears when he writes on “Friendship,”
on “Marriage,” on “the Training of Children,” and on the “Love of
Brothers.” “There is no treasure,” he says, “parents can give to their
children, like a brother; ’tis a friend given by nature, a gift nothing
can supply; once lost, not to be replaced. The Arcadian prophet, of
whom Herodotus speaks, was obliged to make a wooden foot in place
of that which had been chopped off. A brother, embroiled with his
brother, going to seek in the street a stranger who can take his place,
resembles him who will cut off his foot to give himself one of wood.”

All his judgments are noble. He thought, with Epicurus, that it is more
delightful to do than to receive a kindness. “This courteous, gentle,
and benign disposition and behavior is not so acceptable, so obliging
or delightful to any of those with whom we converse, as it is to those
who have it.” There is really no limit to his bounty: “It would be
generous to lend our eyes and ears, nay, if possible, our reason and
fortitude to others, whilst we are idle or asleep.” His excessive and
fanciful humanity reminds one of Charles Lamb, whilst it much exceeds
him. When the guests are gone, he “would leave one lamp burning, only
as a sign of the respect he bore to fires, for nothing so resembles
an animal as fire. It is moved and nourished by itself, and by its
brightness, like the soul, discovers and makes every thing apparent,
and in its quenching shows some power that seems to proceed from a
vital principle, for it makes a noise and resists, like an animal
dying, or violently slaughtered;” and he praises the Romans, who, when
the feast was over, “dealt well with the lamps, and did not take away
the nourishment they had given, but permitted them to live and shine by
it.”

I can almost regret that the learned editor of the present
republication has not preserved, if only as a piece of history,
the preface of Mr. Morgan, the editor and in part writer of this
Translation of 1718. In his dedication of the work to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Wm. Wake, he tells the Primate that “Plutarch was the
wisest man of his age, and, if he had been a Christian, one of the
best too; _but it was his severe fate to flourish in those days of
ignorance, which, ’tis a favorable opinion to hope that the Almighty
will sometime wink at; that our souls may be with these philosophers
together in the same state of bliss_.” The puzzle in the worthy
translator’s mind between his theology and his reason well re-appears
in the puzzle of his sentence.

       *       *       *       *       *

I know that the chapter of “Apothegms of Noble Commanders” is rejected
by some critics as not a genuine work of Plutarch; but the matter is
good, and is so agreeable to his taste and genius, that if he had found
it, he would have adopted it. If he did not compile the piece, many,
perhaps most, of the anecdotes were already scattered in his works.
If I do not lament that a work not his should be ascribed to him, I
regret that he should have suffered such destruction of his own. What
a trilogy is lost to mankind in his Lives of Scipio, Epaminondas, and
Pindar!

His delight in magnanimity and self-sacrifice has made his books, like
Homer’s Iliad, a bible for heroes; and wherever the Cid is relished,
the legends of Arthur, Saxon Alfred, and Richard the Lion-hearted,
Robert Bruce, Sydney, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Cromwell, Nelson,
Bonaparte, and Walter Scott’s Chronicles in prose or verse,—there will
Plutarch, who told the story of Leonidas, of Agesilaus, of Aristides,
Phocion, Themistocles, Demosthenes, Epaminondas, Cæsar, Cato, and
the rest, sit as the bestower of the crown of noble knighthood, and
laureate of the ancient world.

The chapters “On the Fortune of Alexander,” in the “Morals,” are
an important appendix to the portrait in the “Lives.” The union in
Alexander of sublime courage with the refinement of his pure tastes,
making him the carrier of civilization into the East, are in the
spirit of the ideal hero, and endeared him to Plutarch. That prince
kept Homer’s poems, not only for himself under his pillow in his tent,
but carried these for the delight of the Persian youth, and made them
acquainted also with the tragedies of Euripides and Sophocles. He
persuaded the Sogdians not to kill, but to cherish their aged parents;
the Persians to reverence, not marry their mothers; the Scythians to
bury, and not eat their dead parents. What a fruit and fitting monument
of his best days was his city Alexandria to be the birthplace or home
of Plotinus, St. Augustine, Synesius, Posidonius, Ammonius, Jamblichus,
Porphyry, Origen, Aratus, Apollonius, and Apuleius.

If Plutarch delighted in heroes, and held the balance between the
severe Stoic and the indulgent Epicurean, his humanity shines not less
in his intercourse with his personal friends. He was a genial host and
guest, and delighted in bringing chosen companions to the supper-table.
He knew the laws of conversation and the laws of good-fellowship quite
as well as Horace, and has set them down with such candor and grace as
to make them good reading to-day. The guests not invited to a private
board by the entertainer, but introduced by a guest as his companions,
the Greeks called _shadows_; and the question is debated whether it
was civil to bring them, and he treats it candidly, but concludes:
“Therefore, when I make an invitation, since it is hard to break the
custom of the place, I give my guests leave to bring shadows; but when
I myself am invited as a shadow, I assure you I refuse to go.” He
has an objection to the introduction of music at feasts. He thought
it wonderful that a man having a muse in his own breast, and all the
pleasantness that would fit an entertainment, would have pipes and
harps play, and by that external noise destroy all the sweetness that
was proper and his own.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot close these notes without expressing my sense of the valuable
service which the Editor has rendered to his Author and to his
readers. Professor Goodwin is a silent benefactor to the book, wherever
I have compared the editions. I did not know how careless and vicious
in parts the old book was, until in recent reading of the old text, on
coming on any thing absurd or unintelligible, I referred to the new
text, and found a clear and accurate statement in its place. It is the
vindication of Plutarch. The correction is not only of names of authors
and of places grossly altered or misspelled, but of unpardonable
liberties taken by the translators, whether from negligence or freak.

One proof of Plutarch’s skill as a writer is that he bears translation
so well. In spite of its carelessness and manifold faults, which, I
doubt not, have tried the patience of its present learned editor and
corrector, I yet confess my enjoyment of this old version for its
vigorous English style. The work of some forty or fifty University men,
some of them imperfect in their Greek, it is a monument of the English
language at a period of singular vigor and freedom of style. I hope the
Commission of the Philological Society in London, charged with the duty
of preparing a Critical Dictionary, will not overlook these volumes,
which show the wealth of their tongue to greater advantage than many
books of more renown as models. It runs through the whole scale of
conversation in the street, the market, the coffee-house, the law
courts, the palace, the college, and the church. There are, no doubt,
many vulgar phrases, and many blunders of the printer; but it is the
speech of business and conversation, and in every tone, from lowest to
highest.

We owe to these translators many sharp perceptions of the wit and humor
of their author, sometimes even to the adding of the point. I notice
one, which, although the translator has justified his rendering in a
note, the severer criticism of the Editor has not retained. “Were there
not a sun, we might, for all the other stars, pass our days in Reverend
Dark, as Heraclitus calls it.” I find a humor in the phrase which might
well excuse its doubtful accuracy.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a service to our Republic to publish a book that can force
ambitious young men, before they mount the platform of the county
conventions, to read the “Laconic Apothegms” and the “Apothegms of
Great Commanders.” If we could keep the secret, and communicate it
only to a few chosen aspirants, we might confide that, by this noble
infiltration, they would easily carry the victory over all competitors.
But, as it was the desire of these old patriots to fill with their
majestic spirit all Sparta or Rome, and not a few leaders only, we
hasten to offer them to the American people.

Plutarch’s popularity will return in rapid cycles. If over-read in
this decade, so that his anecdotes and opinions become commonplace,
and to-day’s novelties are sought for variety, his sterling values
will presently recall the eye and thought of the best minds, and his
books will be reprinted and read anew by coming generations. And thus
Plutarch will be perpetually rediscovered from time to time as long as
books last.

  RALPH WALDO EMERSON




  CONTENTS OF VOLUME FIRST.

  WITH THE TRANSLATORS’ NAMES.


  A DISCOURSE TOUCHING THE TRAINING OF CHILDREN.

  BY SIMON FORD, D.D.

  Effect on children of impurity in the parents, 3; of intemperance
  in the parents, 4. Instruction and training necessary, 5. Training
  must assist nature, 5. Defective natural parts may be improved by
  instruction, 5, 6. Diligent effort may supply native deficiencies,
  6. A virtuous character partly the effect of custom and habit, 7.
  Mothers should nurse their own children, 7, 8. Manners of children
  to be well-formed from the beginning, 8. Care to be taken of their
  associates, 9. Teachers of children to be carefully chosen, 9,
  10. Moral character of teachers to be carefully regarded, 10, 11.
  Unhappy consequences of the ill-training of children, 11, 12. A good
  education preferable to the gifts of fortune, 12, 13. Learning better
  than bodily strength, 13. Children should be trained to think before
  they speak, 14, 15. A pompous style of speech to be avoided, 16.
  Tameness of speech to be avoided, 16. The principal study of youth
  should be philosophy, 17, 18. Bodily exercise not to be neglected,
  19. Gymnastic and military exercises, 19. Corporal and disgraceful
  punishments not to be used, 20. Motives to be addressed to the
  understanding and conscience, 20. Severe tasks not to be imposed
  on children, 21. Relaxation to be allowed them, 21. Memory to be
  cultivated, 22. A courteous manner of speaking to be inculcated.
  22. Self-control to be taught, 23, 24. Restraint of the tongue,
  23, 24. Sotades punished for free speech, 25. Severity to children
  unwise, 26. Young men to be restrained from vicious company, 28, 29.
  Flatterers to be avoided, 29. Allowance should be made for youthful
  impetuosity, 30. Marriage a security for young men, 31. Fathers not
  to be severe and harsh, but examples to their children, 30, 31.


  CONCERNING THE CURE OF ANGER.

  BY WILLIAM DILLINGHAM, D.D.

  How may a tendency to anger be overcome? i. 34. Not by the
  interference of other persons, 35. The mind being then under the
  influence of stormy passion, 36. The aid of reason and judgment is
  more effectual, 37. Resist the beginning of anger, 37. When inclined
  to anger, try to be quiet and composed, 38, 39. Anger is unreasonable
  and foolish, 39. It disfigures the countenance, 40. Tends to one’s
  dishonor and discredit, 41. Produces absurd and insulting speeches,
  42. Is disingenuous and unmanly, 42. Indicates a weak mind, 42.
  Discovers meanness of spirit, 43. Fortitude consists with a mild
  temper, 44. Anger can destroy, it cannot restore, 46. It often
  overreaches itself, 47. Excessive urgency often fails of success, 47.
  Forbearance towards servants urged, 48. Anger towards servants makes
  them worse, 48. Never punish in anger, 49. Allow anger to cool, 49.
  No harm arises from deferring anger, 49. Causes of anger examined;
  we think we incur contempt without it, 50; it arises from self-love,
  52; and a spirit of fault-finding, 52. The absence of these makes a
  man gentle towards others, 53, 54. Nobody can dwell with an angry
  man, 54. Anger, the essence of all bad passions, 56. Good temper in
  us will disarm others, 55. Moderate expectations prevent anger, 56.
  Knowledge of human nature softens anger, 57. Make trial for a few
  days of abstinence from anger, 59.


  OF BASHFULNESS.

  BY THOMAS HOY, FELLOW OF ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE IN OXFORD.

  Bashfulness defined, 60. Two extremes: too much or too little
  modesty; both to be avoided, 61. Bashfulness, an excess of modesty,
  61, 62. It is injurious, 62; leaves a person at the mercy of others,
  63; a bashful person is liable to imposition, 63; many are thus
  ruined, 64. Deny an unreasonable request, 65. The fear of giving
  offence—bashfulness—hinders the proper care of our health, and of
  our property, 67, 68; exposes to the very evils it seeks to avoid,
  69. The people of Asia are slaves, because they cannot say, “No,” 69.
  Deny recommendation to those not known to be worthy, 71. Undertake
  no services to which you are not competent, 72. Cheerfully render
  good offices to those that deserve them, 72; but deny them to the
  unworthy, 73. We may not violate law and justice to please anybody,
  74. Men who would dread to blunder in a matter of literature,
  often violate law, 74. Err not from the right, either from fear or
  flattery, 76. Remember what bashfulness has cost us, 77.


  THAT VIRTUE MAY BE TAUGHT.

  BY MR. PATRICK, OF THE CHARTERHOUSE.

  If men may be taught to sing, dance, and read; to be skilful
  husbandmen and good riders,—why not to order their lives aright?
  78. The practice of virtue is immensely more important than graceful
  speech and manners, 79. If things of trifling moment may be taught,
  much more things of the deepest concern, 80.


  THE ACCOUNT OF THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE LACEDAEMONIANS.

  BY MR. JOHN PULLEYN, OF TRINITY COLLEGE IN CAMBRIDGE.

  Institutions of Lycurgus, 82. The citizens ate at one table, 82.
  Conversation at the table, 82. The food: black broth, 83; spare diet,
  84. Learning, philosophy, mechanic trades, theatrical performances,
  utterly banished, 85. Scanty apparel, 86; hard beds, 86; social
  attachments, 86. A strict watch kept over the young, 87. Respect to
  the aged, 88. Control by the aged of other people’s children, 88, 89.
  Children allowed to steal, if the theft were carefully concealed,
  89. The Spartan poetry and music, 90; martial music, 91. Tenacity
  of ancient customs, 92. Funerals, 92, 93; inscriptions, 93. Foreign
  travel prohibited, 98. A community of children, 93; and of goods and
  estates, 94. Their warlike expeditions, 94. Their religious worship,
  95. The Helots, when drunk, exhibited before the children, 96. None
  but grave poetry allowed, 96. Meekness and forgiveness of injuries
  not tolerated, 97. A laconic style of speaking practised, 98.
  Whipping of boys annually before the altar of Diana, 98. Neglect of
  maritime affairs, 99. Gold and silver banished, 99. Final overthrow
  of the institutions of Lycurgus, 100.


  CONCERNING MUSIC.

  BY JOHN PHILIPS, GENT.

  Principles of Greek music: the tetrachord, heptachord, octachord;
  scale of fifteen notes, 102, 103, _note_. History of music, 104,
  _et seq._ The lyre, 105. Amphion, Linus, Anthes, Pierus, Philammon,
  Thamyras, &c., 105. Terpander, an inventor, 105, 106, 109, 112, 122.
  Olympus, 107, 109, 123; Hyagnis, 107; Clonas, 107. History of wind
  instruments, 108; the flute, _ib._ Three musical moods,—the Dorian,
  the Phrygian, the Lydian, 109. Makers of paeans, 110. The enharmonic
  species of music, 110. Its relations to the diatonic and chromatic,
  111. Varieties of rhythm, 112. The harp an invention of Apollo, 113.
  His statue at Delos a proof of this, _ib._ Manly and grave music
  used by the ancients for its worth, 114. The moderns have introduced
  an inferior sort, 114. The Lydian mood, 114; the Dorian, 115. The
  chromatic more ancient than the enharmonic scale, 116; though many
  of the ancient musicians did not use it, 117. Plato’s remarks
  on harmony, 118. Music a mathematical science, 119. Harmony as
  related to the senses, 121. Why the Greeks were so careful to teach
  their children music, 121. The high purposes of music, 121, 122.
  Archilochus, his improvements, 122, 123. Improvements of Polymnestus,
  107, 123. Improvements of Lasus, 123. Decline of the ancient music,
  123-125. To learn music, philosophy is needful, 126. Music too
  much a thing of chance, 126. A sound judgment is necessary, 127. A
  perfect judgment of music not derived from a partial knowledge, 129.
  Degeneracy of modern music, 130. Benefits of a proper acquaintance
  with music, 132; facts in proof of this, 133.


  OF THE TRANQUILLITY OF THE MIND.

  BY MATTHEW MORGAN, A.M., OF ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE IN OXFORD.

  Plutarch salutes his friend Paccius, 136. Worldly honor or wealth
  cannot procure quietness of mind, 137. We should fortify ourselves
  against trouble, _ib._ Tranquillity of mind not to be procured by
  neglect of public or private duty, _ib._ Idleness is to many an
  affliction, 138. Changes in life do not remove causes of disquiet,
  140. The mind itself renders life pleasant or otherwise, 141. Make
  the best of our circumstances, 142. Wise men derive benefit even
  from affliction, 142. No trouble can arise, but good may come of it,
  143. Be not soured with the perverseness of others, 144; nor fret at
  their failings, 145. A consideration of the good we enjoy may help
  us bear our afflictions, 146. Thus balancing one against the other,
  147. Consider what the loss would be of our present enjoyments, 148.
  Cultivate a contented mind, 148, 149. The want of which creates
  suffering, 149. Look at those worse off than ourselves, 150. Every
  one has his particular trouble, 151; therefore give no place to envy,
  _ib._ Do not repine because some things are beyond your reach, 152.
  Let every man know what he can do and be contented with doing it,
  154. Let alone what you are not capable of, 155. It is wise to call
  to mind past enjoyment, 156. Do not distress yourself by dwelling
  on past sorrows, nor give way to despondency of the future, 157,
  158. Neither be too sanguine in your hopes, 159. Afflictions come
  as a matter of necessity, 161. Outward sufferings do not reach our
  nobler part, the mind, 162. Death not a real, ultimate evil, 163. The
  wise man may look down on things terrible to the vulgar, 164. Guilt
  produces remorse, 165. A clear conscience a rich possession, 165.
  Life should be full of joy, 166. That it is not to some is their own
  fault, 167.


  OF SUPERSTITION, OR INDISCREET DEVOTION.

  BY WILLIAM BAXTER, GENT.

  Ignorance respecting God may lead either to atheism or superstition,
  168. Atheism and superstition compared, 168, _et seq._ Atheism tends
  to indifference, superstition to terror, 169. Superstition infuses
  into the mind a constant alarm and dread, 170. Superstition allows
  of no escape from fear, it permits no hope, 172. It perverts the
  moral sense, 173, 174. The atheist may be fretful and impatient; the
  superstitious man charges all his misfortunes and troubles to God,
  175. Is full of unreasonable apprehensions, 176. Converts tolerable
  evils into fatal ones, 177. Misinterprets the course of nature, 177.
  Is afraid of things that will not hurt him, 177. Allows himself no
  enjoyment, 178. Entertains dishonorable thoughts of God, 180; and
  thus is morally wrong, 181. He secretly hates God, and would have
  no God, 181. Superstition affords an apology for atheism, 152.
  Superstition of the Gauls, Scythians, and Carthaginians; they offered
  human sacrifices, 182, 183. In avoiding superstition do not fall into
  atheism, 184.


  THE APOPHTHEGMS OR REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF KINGS AND GREAT COMMANDERS,
  185-250.

  BY E. HINTON, OF WITNEY IN OXFORDSHIRE.


  RULES FOR THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH.

  BY MATTHEW POOLE, D.D., OF NORTHAMPTON.

  Introduction, 251. The hands to be kept always warm, 252. Accustom
  yourself in health to the food proper in sickness, 253. Avoid
  all excess in eating and drinking, especially at feasts, 254. Be
  prepared to excuse yourself if invited to drink to excess, 255.
  Partake of agreeable food and drink, when needful; otherwise not,
  256. Lean to the side of moderation and abstinence, rather than the
  gratification of appetite, 257. Intemperance is as destructive of
  pleasure as of health, 258. Sickness may be avoided by the use of a
  moderate diet, 259. A luxurious course of living adds to the force
  of other causes of disease, 260. Be especially careful of what you
  do, when threatened with illness, 261. When the body is out of order,
  things that are otherwise pleasant become disgusting, 262. Extreme
  carefulness in our diet should be avoided, 263. Disturbed sleep and
  distressing dreams show a diseased state of body, 264. Avoid things
  which have proved causes of disease to others, 264, 265. Reading or
  speaking aloud is to a scholar conducive to health, 266. Yet this
  must not be carried to excess, 267. The cold bath not to be used
  after exercise; use the warm bath, 268. Use solid food cautiously
  and sparingly; light food more freely, 268. Drink wine diluted with
  water, or water simply, 269, 270. After supper, there should be a
  considerable interval, to be occupied with gentle exercise either
  of body or mind, 271, 272. Sufferers from gluttony or excess should
  not attempt to relieve themselves by physic but by abstinence, 273.
  Do not fast when there is no need, 274. Idleness is not conducive to
  health, 275. After severe labor, allow the body to rest, even from
  pleasure, 276. A man should well study his own case, and know what he
  can bear, 277. The body and the mind must deal carefully with each
  other, 278, 279.


  HOW A MAN MAY RECEIVE ADVANTAGE AND PROFIT FROM HIS ENEMIES.

  BY JOHN HARTCLIFFE, FELLOW OF KING’S COLLEGE IN CAMBRIDGE.

  Ill-will always to be expected, 280. It is not enough that our
  enemies do us no harm, 281. We may not be able to change bad men into
  good men, 282. But it is possible to derive good even from bad men,
  283. An enemy, in order to discover our failings, carefully watches
  all our movements and affairs, 283. Learn from this to be wary and
  circumspect, 284. Learn to be discreet and sober, and to give offence
  to nobody, 285. Live above reproach, 286, 287. When censured and
  accused, examine if there be just cause for it, 288. Be willing
  to hear the truth even from the lips of enemies, 289. If accused
  unjustly, avoid even the appearance of the supposed wrong, 290.
  Have you given any occasion for the false accusation? 291. Learn to
  keep the tongue in subjection, 292. Be magnanimous and kind to your
  enemy, 293. Indulge no malignant passion, 294. Envy not your enemy’s
  success, 297.


  CONSOLATION TO APOLLONIUS.

  BY MATTHEW MORGAN, A.M., OF ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE IN OXFORD.

  The son of Apollonius had died, 299. Apathy and excessive grief are
  alike unnatural and improper, 300. Avoid both of these extremes,
  300. Uninterrupted happiness is not to be expected, 302. Every thing
  is subject to change, 303. Evil is to be expected, 304, 305. Sorrow
  will not remove suffering, 306, 307, Others are in trouble besides
  ourselves, 308. Why should death be considered so great an evil?
  308. Death is but the debt of nature, 309. Death is inevitable, and
  the termination of all human calamity, 310. Death is the brother of
  sleep, 311. Death divests us of the body, and thus frees us from
  great evil, 312. The gods have often sent death as a reward for
  distinguished piety; illustrated by the cases of Biton and Cleobis,
  of Agamedes and Trophonius, of Pindar and Euthynous, 313, 314. Even
  if death be the extinction of our being, it is no evil, and why,
  315. Even untimely death may shield from evil, 317. Not long life,
  but virtuous is desirable, 317, 318. Sorrow for the dead may proceed
  from selfish considerations, 319. Does the mourner intend to cherish
  grief as long as he lives? 320. Excessive grief is unmanly, 321.
  An untimely death differs not much from that which is timely, 322.
  It may be desirable, 323, 324. Excessive grief is unreasonable,
  325. The state of the dead is better than that of the living, 326.
  The evil in the world far exceeds the good, 327. Life is a loan,
  soon to be recalled, 327. Some people are querulous and can never
  be satisfied, 329. Death is fixed by fate, 331. Life is short, and
  should not be wasted in unavailing sorrow, 332. Derive comfort from
  the example of those who have borne the death of their sons bravely,
  332, 333. Providence wisely disposes, 335. Your son died at the
  best time for him, 335. He is now numbered with the blest, 336. The
  conclusion; a touching appeal to Apollonius, 339.


  CONCERNING THE VIRTUES OF WOMEN.

  BY ISAAC CHAUNCY, OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, LONDON.

  It is right to praise virtuous women, 340. Virtue in man and woman is
  the same, 340; even as the poetic art in man and woman is the same,
  341. There may be variety, yet unity, 341. Virtue of the Trojan women
  after landing in Italy, 342. Of the Phocian women in the war with the
  Thessalians, 343. Of the women of Chios, 344. Of the Argive women and
  their repulse of the Spartan army, 346. Of the Persian women, 347.
  Of the Celtic women, 347. Of the Melian women, 348. Of the Tyrrhene
  women, 349. Of the Lycian women, 351. Of the women of Salmantica in
  Spain, 352. Of the maidens of Miletus, bent on self-murder, and how
  this was prevented, 354. Of the maids of Cios, 354. Of the women of
  Phocis during the Sacred War, 355. Of the Roman Lucretia, Valeria,
  and Cloelia, 355-357. Of Micca and Megisto, and other women of Elis,
  during the tyranny of Aristotimus, 357-363. Of Pieria and other women
  of Myus, at Miletus, 363, 364. Of Polycrita in the war between Naxos
  and Miletus, 364-366. Of Lampsace, 366. Of Aretaphila, and how she
  delivered Cyrene from tyranny, 367-371. Of Camma the Galatian, 372.
  Of Stratonica of Galatia, 373. Of Chiomara of Galatia, 374. Of the
  women of Pergamus, 374. Of Timoclea at the taking of Thebes, 376.
  Of Eryxo of Cyrene, 378. Of Xenocrita of Cumae, 380. Of Pythes the
  Lydian and his wife, 382.


  LACONIC APOPHTHEGMS; OR, REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF THE SPARTANS.

  BY THOMAS CREECH, A.M., OF WADHAM COLLEGE IN OXFORD.


  OF HEARING.

  BY THOMAS HOY, FELLOW OF ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE IN OXFORD.

  Introduction, addressed to Nicander, a young man, 441. Remarks on
  hearing in general, 442. Of the sense of hearing, as an inlet of
  thought and feeling, 442. A guard to be placed over it, 443. How
  to hear with benefit, 443. Faults to be avoided, 444. In hearing
  a discourse, hear with attention to the close, 445. Guard against
  envy and ill-nature, 445, 446. Hear with calmness and candor, 446.
  Endeavor to reap advantage from the speaker’s faults, 447. Yield not
  to undue admiration, 448. Examine the argument of the speaker apart
  from his expression, 449. Separate the substance of a discourse from
  its accessories, 450, 451. Interrupt not the speaker with trifling
  questions, 452. Propose no impertinent questions, 453. Wait till
  the proper time for asking, 453. Withhold not praise when it is
  due, 454. Yet bestow not inordinate praise, 455. Something worthy
  of praise may be found in every discourse, 456. The hearer owes a
  duty to the speaker no less than the speaker to the hearer, 457. Be
  not indiscriminate in your praises, 458. Bear admonition in a proper
  spirit, 459. If you find difficulties in the lecturer’s instructions,
  ask him to explain, 460, 461. Concluding exhortation, 462, 463.


  OF LARGE ACQUAINTANCE: OR, AN ESSAY TO PROVE THE FOLLY OF SEEKING
  MANY FRIENDS.

  BY W. G.

  True friendship a thing of rare occurrence, 464. In the early times,
  friends went in pairs, Orestes and Pylades, &c., 465. True friendship
  cannot embrace a multitude, 466. If we have numerous acquaintances,
  there should be one eminently a friend, 466. The requisites to a
  true friendship, 467. The difficulty of finding a true friend, 467.
  Be not hasty in getting friends, 468. Admit none to your confidence
  without long and thorough trial, 468. As true friendship cements two
  hearts into one, so a large acquaintance divides and distracts the
  heart, 469. We cannot discharge the obligations of friendship to
  a multitude, 470; therefore do not attempt it, 471. Joining one’s
  self intimately to another involves one in his calamities, 472. Real
  friendship always has its origin in likeness, even in brutes, 472.
  There must be a substantial oneness, 473. Therefore it is next to a
  miracle to find a constant and sure friend, 474.


  CONCERNING THE FORTUNE OR VIRTUE OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT.

  BY JOHN PHILIPS, GENT.

  Did he receive his empire as the gift of Fortune? By no means, 475.
  It was acquired at the expense of many severe wounds, 476, 507; of
  many hardships and much daring, 477; as the issue of his training
  under Aristotle, 478. He was himself a great philosopher, 479. He
  was the great civilizer of Asia, 480. He realized the dreams of
  philosophers by making the world his country, 481. Uniting the Greeks
  and the barbarians, 482. Gaining the affection of the vanquished,
  483. Aiming to establish universal brotherhood, 484. His philosophy
  as exhibited in his recorded sayings, 485-489. His generous conduct,
  490. His patronage of learned men, 491. So different from other
  monarchs, 492. His magnanimity, 495. Such a man owes little to
  Fortune, 496. Contrasted with Sardanapalus, 497. His greatness as
  seen in the confusion which followed his death, 498. Fortune cannot
  make an Alexander, 499. His silly imitators attest his greatness,
  501. His self-government, 502. The Persian empire was overthrown, not
  by Fortune, but by the superior genius and virtue of Alexander, 503.
  Alexander owed nothing to Fortune, 506. His wisdom, his prowess, his
  many wounds, his constancy and energy, procured his great success,
  507-511. Compared with the ablest men of antiquity, he is superior
  to all, 512, 513. His daring courage, great dangers, and marvellous
  escape, while besieging a town of the Oxydracae, 513-516.

  INDEX




  PLUTARCH’S MORALS.

  VOL. I.




  PLUTARCH’S MORALS.




