ROMAN APOPHTHEGMS.


M.’ CURIUS. When some blamed M.’ Curius for distributing but a small
part of a country he took from the enemy, and preserving the greater
part for the commonwealth, he prayed there might be no Roman who would
think that estate little which was enough to maintain him. The Samnites
after an overthrow came to him to offer him gold, and found him boiling
rape-roots. He answered the Samnites that he that could sup so wanted
no gold, and that he had rather rule over those who had gold than have
it himself.

C. FABRICIUS. C. Fabricius, hearing Pyrrhus had overthrown the
Romans, told Labienus, it was Pyrrhus, not the Epirots, that beat the
Romans. He went to treat about exchange of prisoners with Pyrrhus,
who offered him a great sum of gold, which he refused. The next day
Pyrrhus commanded a very large elephant should secretly be placed
behind Fabricius, and discover himself by roaring; whereupon Fabricius
turned and smiled, saying, I was not astonished either at your gold
yesterday or at your beast to-day. Pyrrhus invited him to tarry with
him, and to accept of the next command under him: That, said he, will
be inconvenient for you; for, when the Epirots know us both, they will
rather have me for their king than you. When Fabricius was consul,
Pyrrhus’s physician sent him a letter, wherein he promised him that, if
he commanded him, he would poison Pyrrhus. Fabricius sent the letter
to Pyrrhus, and bade him conclude that he was a very bad judge both
of friends and enemies. The plot was discovered; Pyrrhus hanged his
physician, and sent the Roman prisoners he had taken without ransom
as a present to Fabricius. He, however, refused to accept them, but
returned the like number, lest he might seem to receive a reward.
Neither did he disclose the conspiracy out of kindness to Pyrrhus, but
that the Romans might not seem to kill him by treachery, as if they
despaired to conquer him in open war.

FABIUS MAXIMUS. Fabius Maximus would not fight, but chose to spin away
the time with Hannibal,—who wanted both money and provision for his
army,—by pursuing and facing him in rocky and mountainous places.
When many laughed at him and called him Hannibal’s schoolmaster, he
took little notice of them, but pursued his own design, and told his
friends: He that is afraid of scoffs and reproaches is more a coward
than he that flies from the enemy. When Minucius, his fellow-consul,
upon routing a party of the enemy, was highly extolled as a man worthy
of Rome; I am more afraid, said he, of Minucius’s success than of
his misfortune. And not long after he fell into an ambush, and was
in danger of perishing with his forces, until Fabius succored him,
slew many of the enemy, and brought him off. Whereupon Hannibal told
his friends: Did I not often presage that cloud on the hills would
some time or other break upon us? After the city received the great
overthrow at Cannae, he was chosen consul with Marcellus, a daring
person and much desirous to fight Hannibal, whose forces, if nobody
fought him, he hoped would shortly disperse and be dissolved. Therefore
Hannibal said, he feared fighting Marcellus less than Fabius who would
not fight. He was informed of a Lucanian soldier that frequently
wandered out of the camp by night after a woman he loved, but otherwise
an admirable soldier; he caused his mistress to be seized privately and
brought to him. When she came, he sent for the soldier and told him:
It is known you lie out a nights, contrary to the law; but your former
good behavior is not forgotten, therefore your faults are forgiven to
your merits. Henceforwards you shall tarry with me, for I have your
surety. And he brought out the woman to him. Hannibal kept Tarentum
with a garrison, all but the castle; and Fabius drew the enemy far
from it, and by a stratagem took the town and plundered it. When his
secretary asked what was his pleasure as to the holy images, Let us
leave, said he, the Tarentines their offended Gods. When M. Livius, who
kept a garrison in the castle, said he took Tarentum by his assistance,
others laughed at him; but said Fabius, You say true, for if you had
not lost the city, I had not re-took it. When he was ancient, his son
was consul, and as he was discharging his office publicly with many
attendants, he met him on horseback. The young man sent a sergeant to
command him to alight; when others were at a stand, Fabius presently
alighted, and running faster than for his age might be expected,
embraced his son. Well done, son, said he, I see you are wise, and know
whom you govern, and the grandeur of the office you have undertaken.

SCIPIO THE ELDER. Scipio the Elder spent on his studies what leisure
the campaign and government would allow him, saying, that he did most
when he was idle. When he took Carthage by storm, some soldiers took
prisoner a very beautiful virgin, and came and presented her to him. I
would receive her, said he, with all my heart, if I were a private man
and not a governor. While he was besieging the city of Badia, wherein
appeared above all a temple of Venus, he ordered appearances to be
given for actions to be tried before him within three days in that
temple of Venus; and he took the city, and was as good as his word.
One asked him in Sicily, on what confidence he presumed to pass with
his navy against Carthage. He showed him three hundred disciplined men
in armor, and pointed to a high tower on the shore; There is not one
of these, said he, that would not at my command go to the top of that
tower, and cast himself down headlong. Over he went, landed, and burnt
the enemy’s camp, and the Carthaginians sent to him, and covenanted to
surrender their elephants, ships, and a sum of money. But when Hannibal
was sailed back from Italy, their reliance on him made them repent of
those conditions. This coming to Scipio’s ear, Nor will I, said he,
stand to the agreement if they will, unless they pay me five thousand
talents more for sending for Hannibal. The Carthaginians, when they
were utterly overthrown, sent ambassadors to make peace and league
with him; he bade those that came return immediately, as refusing to
hear them before they brought L. Terentius with them, a good man,
whom the Carthaginians had taken prisoner. When they brought him, he
placed him in the council next himself, on the judgment-seat, and then
he transacted with the Carthaginians and put an end to the war. And
Terentius followed him when he triumphed, wearing the cap of one that
was made free; and when he died, Scipio gave wine mingled with honey
to those that were at the funeral, and performed other funeral rites
in his honor. But these things were done afterwards. King Antiochus,
after the Romans invaded him, sent to Scipio in Asia for peace; That
should have been done before, said he, not now when you have received
a bridle and a rider. The senate decreed him a sum of money out of the
treasury, but the treasurers refused to open it on that day. Then, said
he, I will open it myself, for the moneys with which I filled it caused
it to be shut. When Paetilius and Quintus accused him of many crimes
before the people,—On this very day, said he, I conquered Hannibal and
Carthage; I for my part am going with my crown on to the Capitol to
sacrifice; and let him that pleaseth stay and pass his vote upon me.
Having thus said, he went his way; and the people followed him, leaving
his accusers declaiming to themselves.

T. QUINCTIUS. T. Quinctius was eminent so early, that before he had
been tribune, praetor, or aedile, he was chosen consul. Being sent
as general against Philip, he was persuaded to come to a conference
with him. And when Philip demanded hostages of him, because he was
accompanied with many Romans while the Macedonians had none but
himself; You, said Quinctius, have created this solitude for yourself,
by killing your friends and kindred. Having overcome Philip in battle,
he proclaimed in the Isthmian games that the Grecians were free and to
be governed by their own laws. And the Grecians redeemed all the Roman
prisoners that in Hannibal’s days were sold for slaves in Greece, each
of them with two hundred drachms, and made him a present of them; and
they followed him in Rome in his triumph, wearing caps on their heads
such as they use to wear who are made free. He advised the Achaeans,
who designed to make war upon the Island Zacynthus, to take heed lest,
like a tortoise, they should endanger their head by thrusting it out
of Peloponnesus. When King Antiochus was coming upon Greece with great
forces, and all men trembled at the report of his numbers and equipage,
he told the Achaeans this story: Once I dined with a friend at Chalcis,
and when I wondered at the variety of dishes, said my host, “All these
are pork, only in dressing and sauces they differ.” And therefore be
not you amazed at the king’s forces, when you hear talk of spearmen and
men-at-arms and choice footmen and horse-archers, for all these are but
Syrians, with some little difference in their weapons. Philopoemen,
general of the Achaeans, had good store of horses and men-at-arms, but
could not tell what to do for money; and Quinctius played upon him,
saying, Philopoemen had arms and legs, but no belly; and it happened
his body was much after that shape.

CNEUS DOMITIUS. Cneus Domitius,—whom Scipio the Great sent in his
stead to attend his brother Lucius in the war against Antiochus,—when
he had viewed the enemy’s army, and the commanders that were with him
advised him to set upon them presently, said to them: We shall scarce
have time enough now to kill so many thousands, plunder their baggage,
return to our camp, and refresh ourselves too; but we shall have time
enough to do all this to-morrow. The next day he engaged them, and slew
fifty thousand of the enemy.

PUBLIUS LICINIUS. Publius Licinius, consul and general being worsted
in a horse engagement by Perseus king of Macedon, with what were slain
and what were took prisoners, lost two thousand eight hundred men.
Presently after the fight, Perseus sent ambassadors to make peace and
league with him; and although he was overcome, yet he advised the
conqueror to submit himself and his affairs to the pleasure of the
Romans.

PAULUS AEMILIUS. Paulus Aemilius, when he stood for his second
consulship, was rejected. Afterwards, the war with Perseus and the
Macedonians being prolonged by the ignorance and effeminacy of the
commanders, they chose him consul. I thank, said he, the people for
nothing; they choose me general, not because I want the office, but
because they want an officer. As he returned from the hall to his own
house, and found his little daughter Tertia weeping, he asked her what
she cried for? Perseus, said she (so her little dog was called), is
dead. Luckily hast thou spoken, girl, said he, and I accept the omen.
When he found in the camp much confident prating among the soldiers,
who pretended to advise him and busy themselves as if they had been all
officers, he bade them be quiet and only whet their swords, and leave
other things to his care.

He ordered night-guards should be kept without swords or spears, that
they might resist sleep, when they had nothing wherewith to resist the
enemy. He invaded Macedonia by the way of the mountains; and seeing the
enemy drawn up, when Nasica advised him to set upon them presently,
he replied: So I should, if I were of your age; but long experience
forbids me, after a march, to fight an army marshalled regularly.
Having overcome Perseus, he feasted his friends for joy of the victory,
saying, it required the same skill to make an army very terrible to the
enemy, and a banquet very acceptable to our friends. When Perseus was
taken prisoner, he told Paulus that he would not be led in triumph.
That, said he, is as you please,—meaning he might kill himself. He
found an infinite quantity of money, but kept none for himself; only
to his son-in-law Tubero he gave a silver bowl that weighed five
pounds, as a reward of his valor; and that, they say, was the first
piece of plate that belonged to the Aemilian family. Of the four sons
he had, he parted with two that were adopted into other families;
and of the two that lived with him, one of them died at the age of
fourteen years, but five days before his triumph; and five days after
the triumph, at the age of twelve years died the other. When the people
that met him bemoaned and compassionated his calamities, Now, said he,
my fears and jealousies for my country are over, since Fortune hath
discharged her revenge for our success on my house, and I have paid for
all.

CATO THE ELDER. Cato the Elder, in a speech to the people, inveighed
against luxury and intemperance. How hard, said he, is it to persuade
the belly, that hath no ears? And he wondered how that city was
preserved wherein a fish was sold for more than an ox! Once he scoffed
at the prevailing imperiousness of women: All other men, said he,
govern their wives; but we command all other men, and our wives us.
He said he had rather not be rewarded for his good deeds than not
punished for his evil deeds; and at any time he could pardon all other
offenders besides himself. He instigated the magistrates to punish all
offenders, saying, that they that did not prevent crimes when they
might encouraged them. Of young men, he liked them that blushed better
than those who looked pale; and hated a soldier that moved his hands
as he walked and his feet as he fought, and whose sneeze was louder
than his outcry when he charged. He said, he was the worst governor
who could not govern himself. It was his opinion that every one ought
especially to reverence himself; for every one was always in his own
presence. When he saw many had their statues set up, I had rather, says
he, men should ask why Cato had no statue, than why he had one. He
exhorted those in power to be sparing of exercising their power, that
they might continue in power. They that separate honor from virtue,
said he, separate virtue from youth. A governor, said he, or judge
ought to do justice without entreaty, not injustice upon entreaty. He
said, that injustice, if it did not endanger the authors, endangered
all besides. He requested old men not to add the disgrace of wickedness
to old age, which was accompanied with many other evils. He thought
an angry man differed from a madman only in the shorter time which
his passion endured. He thought that they who enjoyed their fortunes
decently and moderately, were far from being envied; For men do not
envy us, said he, but our estates. He said, they that were serious in
ridiculous matters would be ridiculous in serious affairs. Honorable
actions ought to succeed honorable sayings; Lest, said he, they lose
their reputation. He blamed the people for always choosing the same men
officers; For either you think, said he, the government little worth,
or very few fit to govern. He pretended to wonder at one that sold an
estate by the seaside, as if he were more powerful than the sea; for he
had drunk up that which the sea could hardly drown. When he stood for
the consulship, and saw others begging and flattering the people for
votes, he cried out aloud: The people have need of a sharp physician
and a great purge; therefore not the mildest but the most inexorable
person is to be chosen. For which word he was chosen before all others.
Encouraging young men to fight boldly, he oftentimes said, The speech
and voice terrify and put to flight the enemy more than the hand and
sword. As he warred against Baetica, he was outnumbered by the enemy,
and in danger. The Celtiberians offered for two hundred talents to send
him a supply, and the Romans would not suffer him to engage to pay
wages to barbarians. You are out, said he; for if we overcome, not we
but the enemy must pay them; if we are routed, there will be nobody to
demand nor to pay either. Having taken more cities, as he saith, than
he stayed days in the enemies’ country, he reserved no more of the prey
for himself than what he ate or drank. He distributed to every soldier
a round of silver, saying, It was better many should return out of the
campaign with silver than a few with gold; for governors ought to gain
nothing by their governments but honor. Five servants waited on him in
the army, whereof one had bought three prisoners; and understanding
Cato knew it, before he came into his presence he hanged himself. Being
requested by Scipio Africanus to befriend the banished Achaeans, that
they might return to their own country, he made as if he would not be
concerned in that business; but when the matter was disputed in the
senate, rising up, he said: We sit here, as if we had nothing else to
do but to argue about a few old Grecians, whether they shall be carried
to their graves by our bearers or by those of their own country.
Posthumus Albinus wrote a history in Greek, and in it begs the pardon
of his readers. Said Cato, jeering him, If the Amphictyonic Council
commanded him to write it, he ought to be pardoned.

SCIPIO JUNIOR. It is reported that Scipio Junior never bought nor sold
nor built any thing for the space of fifty-four years, and so long as
he lived; and that of so great an estate, he left but thirty-three
pounds of silver, and two of gold behind him, although he was lord
of Carthage, and enriched his soldiers more than other generals. He
observed the precept of Polybius, and endeavored never to return from
the forum, until by some means or other he had engaged some one he
lighted on to be his friend or companion. While he was yet young, he
had such a repute for valor and knowledge, that Cato the Elder, being
asked his opinion of the commanders in Africa, of whom Scipio was one,
answered in that Greek verse,—

    Others like shadows fly;
    He only is wise.[113]

When he came from the army to Rome, the people preferred him, not
to gratify him, but because they hoped by his assistance to conquer
Carthage with more ease and speed. After he was entered the walls,
the Carthaginians defended themselves in the castle, separated by the
sea, not very deep. Polybius advised him to scatter caltrops in the
water, or planks with iron spikes, that the enemy might not pass over
to assault their bulwark. He answered, that it was ridiculous for those
who had taken the walls and were within the city to contrive how they
might not fight with the enemy. He found the city full of Greek statues
and presents brought thither from Sicily, and made proclamation that
such as were present from those cities might claim and carry away what
belonged to them. When others plundered and carried away the spoil, he
would not suffer any that belonged to him, either slave or freeman, to
take, nor so much as to buy any of it. He assisted C. Laelius, his most
beloved friend, when he stood to be consul, and asked Pompey (who was
thought to be a piper’s son) whether he stood or not. He replied, No;
and besides promised to join with them in going about and procuring
votes, which they believed and expected, but were deceived; for news
was brought that Pompey was in the forum, fawning on and soliciting the
citizens for himself; whereat others being enraged, Scipio laughed.
We may thank our own folly for this, said he, that, as if we were not
to request men but the Gods, we lose our time in waiting for a piper.
When he stood to be censor, Appius Claudius, his rival, told him that
he could salute all the Romans by their names, whereas Scipio scarce
knew any of them. You say true, said he, for it hath been my care not
to know many, but that all might know me. He advised the city, which
then had an army in Celtiberia, to send them both to the army, either
as tribunes or lieutenants, that thus the soldiers might be witnesses
and judges of the valor of each of them. When he was made censor, he
took away his horse from a young man, who, in the time while Carthage
was besieged, made a costly supper, in which was a honey-cake, made
after the shape of that city, which he named Carthage and set before
his guests to be plundered by them; and when the young man asked the
reason why he took his horse from him, he said, Because you plundered
Carthage before me. As he saw C. Licinius coming towards him, I
know, said he, that man is perjured; but since nobody accuses him, I
cannot be his accuser and judge too. The senate sent him thrice, as
Clitomachus saith, to take cognizance of men, cities, and manners, as
an overseer of cities, kings, and countries. As he came to Alexandria
and landed, he went with his head covered, and the Alexandrians running
about him entreated he would gratify them by uncovering and showing
them his desirable face. When he uncovered his head, they clapped
their hands with a loud acclamation. The king, by reason of his
laziness and corpulency, making a hard shift to keep pace with them,
Scipio whispered softly to Panaetius: The Alexandrians have already
received some benefit of our visit, for upon our account they have
seen their king walk. There travelled with him one friend, Panaetius
the philosopher, and five servants, whereof one dying in the journey,
he would not buy another, but sent for one to Rome. The Numantines
seemed invincible, and having overcome several generals, the people
the second time chose Scipio general in that war. When great numbers
strived to list them in his army, even that the senate forbade, as if
Italy thereby would be left destitute. Nor did they allow him money
that was in bank, but ordered him to receive the revenues of tributes
that were not yet payable. As to money, Scipio said he wanted none,
for of his own and by his friends he could be supplied; but of the
decree concerning the soldiers he complained, for the war (he said) was
a hard and difficult one, whether their defeat had been caused by the
valor of the enemy or by the cowardice of their own men. When he came
to the army, he found there much disorder, intemperance, superstition,
and luxury. Immediately he drove away the soothsayers, priests, and
panders. He ordered them to send away their household stuff, all except
kettles, a spit, and an earthen cup. He allowed a silver cup, weighing
not more than two pounds, to such as desired it. He forbade them to
bathe; and those that anointed themselves were to rub themselves too;
for horses wanted another to rub them, he said, only because they had
no hand of their own. He ordered them to eat their dinner standing, and
to have only such food as was dressed without fire; but they might sit
down at supper, to bread, plain porridge, and flesh boiled or roasted.
He himself walked about clothed in a black cassock, saying, he mourned
for the disgrace of the army. He met by chance with the pack-horses of
Memmius, a tribune that carried wine-coolers set with precious stones,
and the best Corinthian vessels. Since you are such a one, said he, you
have made yourself useless to me and to your country for thirty days,
but to yourself all your life long. Another showed him a shield well
adorned. The shield, said he, young man, is a fine one, but it becomes
a Roman to have his confidence placed rather in his right hand than
in his left. To one that was building the rampart, saying his burthen
was very heavy, And deservedly, said he, for you trust more to this
wood than to your sword. When he saw the rash confidence of the enemy,
he said that he bought security with time; for a good general, like a
good physician, useth iron as his last remedy. And yet he fought when
he saw it convenient, and routed the enemy. When they were worsted,
the elder men chid them, and asked why they fled from those they had
pursued so often. It is said a Numantine answered, The sheep are the
same still, but they have another shepherd. After he had taken Numantia
and triumphed a second time, he had a controversy with C. Gracchus
concerning the senate and the allies; and the abusive people made a
tumult about him as he spake from the pulpit; The outcry of the army,
said he, when they charge, never disturbed me, much less the clamor
of a rabble of new-comers, to whom Italy is a step-mother (I am well
assured) and not a mother. And when they of Gracchus’s party cried out,
Kill the Tyrant,—No wonder, said he, that they who make war upon their
country would kill me first; for Rome cannot fall while Scipio stands,
nor can Scipio live when Rome is fallen.

CAECILIUS METELLUS. Caecilius Metellus designing to reduce a strong
fort, a captain told him he would undertake to take it with the loss
only of ten men; and he asked him, whether he himself would be one of
those ten. A young colonel asked him what design he had in the wheel.
If I thought my shirt knew, said he, I would pluck it off and burn it.
He was at variance with Scipio in his lifetime, but he lamented at his
death, and commanded his sons to assist at the hearse; and said, he
gave the Gods thanks in the behalf of Rome, that Scipio was born in no
other country.

C. MARIUS. C. Marius was of obscure parentage, pursuing offices by his
valor. He pretended to the chief aedileship, and perceiving he could
not reach it, the same day he stood for the lesser, and missing of that
also, yet for all that he did not despair of being consul. Having a wen
on each leg, he suffered one to be cut, and endured the surgeon without
binding, not so much as sighing or once contracting his eyebrows; but
when the surgeon would cut the other, he did not suffer him, saying
the cure was not worth the pain. In his second consulship, Lucius his
sister’s son offered unchaste force to Trebonius, a soldier, who slew
him; when many pleaded against him, he did not deny but confessed he
killed the colonel, and told the reason why. Hereupon Marius called for
a crown, the reward of extraordinary valor, and put it upon Trebonius’s
head. He had pitched his camp, when he fought against the Teutons, in
a place where water was wanting; when the soldiers told him they were
thirsty, he showed them a river running by the enemy’s trench. Look
you, said he, there is water for you, to be bought for blood; and they
desired him to conduct them to fight, while their blood was fluent and
not all dried up with thirst. In the Cimbrian war, he gave a thousand
valiant Camertines the freedom of Rome, which no law did allow; and
to such as blamed him for it he said, I could not hear the laws for
the clash of arrows. In the civil war, he lay patiently entrenched and
besieged, waiting for a fit opportunity; when Popedius Silon called to
him, Marius, if you are so great a general come down and fight. And
do you, said he, if you are so great a commander, force me to fight
against my will, if you can.

LUTATIUS CATULUS. Lutatius Catulus in the Cimbrian war lay encamped by
the side of the river Athesis, and his soldiers, seeing the barbarians
attempting to pass the river, gave back; when he could not make them
stand, he hastened to the front of them that fled, that they might not
seem to fly from their enemies but to follow their commander.

SYLLA. Sylla, surnamed the Fortunate, reckoned these two things as the
chiefest of his felicities,—the friendship of Metellus Pius, and that
he had spared and not destroyed the city of Athens.

C. POPILIUS. C. Popilius was sent to Antiochus with a letter from
the senate, commanding him to withdraw his army out of Egypt, and
to renounce the protection of that kingdom during the minority of
Ptolemy’s children. When he came towards him in his camp, Antiochus
kindly saluted him at a distance, but without returning his salutation
he delivered his letter; which being read, the king answered, that he
would consider, and give his answer. Whereupon Popilius with his wand
made a circle round him, saying, Consider and answer before you go
out of this place; and when Antiochus answered that he would give the
Romans satisfaction, then at length Popilius saluted and embraced him.

LUCULLUS. Lucullus in Armenia, with ten thousand foot in armor and a
thousand horse, was to fight Tigranes and his army of a hundred and
fifty thousand, the day before the nones of October, the same day on
which formerly Scipio’s army was destroyed by the Cimbrians. When one
told him, The Romans dread and abominate that day; Therefore, said
he, let us fight to-day valiantly, that we may change this day from a
black and unlucky one to a joyful and festival day for the Romans. His
soldiers were most afraid of their men-at-arms; but he bade them be of
good courage, for it was more labor to strip than to overcome them. He
first came up to their counterscarp, and perceiving the confusion of
the barbarians, cried out, Fellow-soldiers, the day’s our own! And when
nobody stood him, he pursued, and, with the loss of five Romans, slew
above a hundred thousand of them.

CN. POMPEIUS. Cn. Pompeius was as much beloved by the Romans as his
father was hated. When he was young, he wholly sided with Sylla, and
before he had borne many offices or was chosen into the senate, he
enlisted many soldiers in Italy. When Sylla sent for him, he returned
answer, that he would not muster his forces in the presence of his
general, unfleshed and without spoils; nor did he come before that
in several fights he had overcome the captains of the enemy. He was
sent by Sylla lieutenant-general into Sicily, and being told that the
soldiers turned out of the way and forced and plundered the country,
he sealed the swords of such as he sent abroad, and punished all other
stragglers and wanderers. He had resolved to put the Mamertines, that
were of the other side, all to the sword; but Sthenius the orator told
him, He would do injustice if he should punish many that were innocent
for the sake of one that was guilty; and that he himself was the person
that persuaded his friends and forced his enemies to side with Marius.
Pompey admired the man, and said, he could not blame the Mamertines
for being inveigled by a person who preferred his country beyond his
own life; and forgave both the city and Sthenius too. When he passed
into Africa against Domitius and overcame him in a great battle, the
soldiers saluted him Imperator. He answered, he could not receive
that honor, so long as the fortification of the enemy’s camp stood
undemolished; upon this, although it rained hard, they rushed on and
plundered the camp. At his return, among other courtesies and honors
wherewith Sylla entertained him, he styled him The Great; yet when he
was desirous to triumph, Sylla would not consent, because he was not
yet chosen into the senate. But when Pompey said to those that were
about him, Sylla doth not know that more worship the rising than the
setting sun, Sylla cried aloud, Let him triumph. Hereat Servilius, one
of the nobles, was displeased; the soldiers also withstood his triumph,
until he had bestowed a largess among them. But when Pompey replied, I
would rather forego my triumph than flatter them,—Now, said Servilius,
I see Pompey is truly great and worthy of a triumph. It was a custom
in Rome, that knights who had served in the wars the time appointed by
the laws should bring their horse into the forum before the censors,
and there give an account of their warfare and the commanders under
whom they had served. Pompey, then consul, brought also his horse
before the censors, Gellius and Lentulus; and when they asked him, as
the manner is, whether he had served all his campaigns, All, said he,
and under myself as general. Having gotten into his hands the writings
of Sertorius in Spain, among which were letters from several leading
men in Rome, inviting Sertorius to Rome to innovate and change the
government, he burnt them all, by that means giving opportunity to
ill-affected persons to repent and mend their manners. Phraates, king
of Parthia, sent to him requesting that the river Euphrates might be
his bounds. He answered, the Romans had rather the right should be
their bounds towards Parthia. L. Lucullus, after he left the army,
gave himself up to pleasure and luxury, jeering at Pompey for busying
himself in affairs unsuitable to his age. He answered, that government
became old age better than luxury. In a fit of sickness, his physician
prescribed him to eat a thrush; but when none could be gotten, because
they were out of season, one said, that Lucullus had some, for he kept
them all the year. It seems then, said he, Pompey must not live, unless
Lucullus play the glutton; and dismissing the physician, he ate such
things as were easy to be gotten. In a great dearth at Rome, he was
chosen by title overseer of the market, but in reality lord of sea and
land, and sailed to Africa, Sardinia, and Sicily. Having procured great
quantities of wheat, he hastened back to Rome; and when by reason of a
great tempest the pilots were loath to hoist sail, he went first aboard
himself, and commanding the anchor to be weighed, cried out aloud,
There is a necessity of sailing, but there is no necessity of living.
When the difference betwixt him and Caesar broke out, and Marcellinus,
one of those whom he had preferred, revolted to Caesar and inveighed
much against Pompey in the senate; Art thou not ashamed, said he,
Marcellinus, to reproach me, who taught you to speak when you were
dumb, and fed you full even to vomiting when you were starved? To Cato,
who severely blamed him because, when he had often informed him of the
growing power of Caesar, such as was dangerous to a democracy, he took
little notice of it, he answered, Your counsels were more presaging,
but mine more friendly. Concerning himself he freely professed, that
he entered all his offices sooner than he expected, and resigned them
sooner than was expected by others. After the fight at Pharsalia, in
his flight towards Egypt, as he was going out of the ship into the
fisher-boat the king sent to attend him, turning to his wife and son,
he said nothing to them beside those two verses of Sophocles:

    Whoever comes within a tyrant’s door
    Becomes his slave, though he were free before.

As he came out of the boat, when he was struck with a sword, he said
nothing; but gave one groan, and covering his head submitted to the
murderers.

CICERO. Cicero the orator, when his name was played upon and his
friends advised him to change it, answered, that he would make the name
of Cicero more honorable than the name of the Catos, the Catuli, or the
Scauri. He dedicated to the Gods a silver cup with a cover, with the
first letters of his other names, and instead of Cicero a chick-pea
(_cicer_) engraven. Loud bawling orators, he said, were driven by their
weakness to noise, as lame men to take horse. Verres had a son that
in his youth had not well secured his chastity; yet he reviled Cicero
for his effeminacy, and called him catamite. Do you not know, said he,
that children are to be rebuked at home within doors? Metellus Nepos
told him he had slain more by his testimony than he had saved by his
pleadings. You say true, said he, my honesty exceeds my eloquence.
When Metellus asked him who his father was, Your mother, said he,
hath made that question a harder one for you to answer than for me.
For she was unchaste, while Metellus himself was a light, inconstant,
and passionate man. The same Metellus, when Diodotus his master in
rhetoric died, caused a marble crow to be placed on his monument; and
Cicero said, he returned his master a very suitable gratuity, who had
taught him to fly but not to declaim. Hearing that Vatinius, his enemy
and otherwise a lewd person, was dead, and the next day that he was
alive, A mischief on him, said he, for lying. To one that seemed to be
an African, who said he could not hear him when he pleaded, And yet,
said he, your ears are of full bore. He had summoned Popilius Cotta,
an ignorant blockhead that pretended to the law, as a witness in a
cause; and when he told the court he knew nothing of the business, On
my conscience, I’ll warrant you, said Cicero, he thinks you ask him
a question in the law. Verres sent a golden sphinx as a present to
Hortensius the orator, who told Cicero, when he spoke obscurely, that
he was not skilled in riddles. That’s strange, said he, since you have
a sphinx in your house. Meeting Voconius with his three daughters that
were hard favored, he told his friends softly that verse,—

    Children he hath got,
    Though Apollo favored not.

When Faustus the son of Sylla, being very much in debt, set up a
writing that he would sell his goods by auction, he said, I like this
proscription better than his father’s. When Pompey and Caesar fell
out, he said, I know whom to fly from, but I know not whom to fly to.
He blamed Pompey for leaving the city, and for imitating Themistocles
rather than Pericles, when his affairs did not resemble the former’s
but the latter’s. He changed his mind and went over to Pompey, who
asked him where he left his son-in-law Piso. He answered, With your
father-in-law Caesar. To one that went over from Caesar to Pompey,
saying that in his haste and eagerness he had left his horse behind
him, he said, You have taken better care of your horse than of
yourself. To one that brought news that the friends of Caesar looked
sourly, You do as good as call them, said he, Caesar’s enemies. After
the battle in Pharsalia, when Pompey was fled, one Nonius said they had
seven eagles left still, and advised to try what they would do. Your
advice, said he, were good, if we were to fight with jackdaws. Caesar,
now conqueror, honorably restored the statues of Pompey that were
thrown down; whereupon Cicero said, that Caesar by erecting Pompey’s
statues had secured his own. He set so high a value on oratory, and
did so lay out himself especially that way, that having a cause to
plead before the centumviri, when the day approached and his slave Eros
brought him word it was deferred until the day following, he presently
made him free.

C. CAESAR. Caius Caesar, when he was a young man, fled from Sylla, and
fell into the hands of pirates, who first demanded of him a sum of
money; and he laughed at the rogues for not understanding his quality,
and promised them twice as much as they asked him. Afterwards, when he
was put into custody until he raised the money, he commanded them to
be quiet and silent while he slept. While he was in prison, he made
speeches and verses which he read to them, and when they commended them
but coldly, he called them barbarians and blockheads, and threatened
them in jest that he would hang them. But after a while he was as
good as his word; for when the money for his ransom was brought and
he discharged, he gathered men and ships out of Asia, seized the
pirates and crucified them. At Rome he stood to be chief priest against
Catulus, a man of great interest among the Romans. To his mother, who
brought him to the gate, he said, To-day, mother, you will have your
son high priest or banished. He divorced his wife Pompeia, because she
was reported to be over familiar with Clodius; yet when Clodius was
brought to trial upon that account, and he was cited as a witness,
he spake no evil against his wife; and when the accuser asked him,
Why then did you divorce her?—Because, said he, Caesar’s wife ought
to be free even from suspicion. As he was reading the exploits of
Alexander, he wept and told his friends, He was of my age when he
conquered Darius, and I hitherto have done nothing. He passed by a
little inconsiderable town in the Alps, and his friends said, they
wondered whether there were any contentions and tumults for offices in
that place. He stood, and after a little pause answered, I had rather
be the first in this town than second in Rome. He said, great and
surprising enterprises were not to be consulted upon, but done. And
coming against Pompey out of his province of Gaul, he passed the river
Rubicon, saying, Let every die be thrown. After Pompey fled to sea
from Rome, he went to take money out of the treasury: when Metellus,
who had the charge of it, forbade him and shut it against him, he
threatened to kill him; whereupon Metellus being astonished, he said
to him, This, young man, is harder for me to say than to do. When his
soldiers were having a tedious passage from Brundisium to Dyrrachium,
unknown to all he went aboard a small vessel, and attempted to pass the
sea; and when the vessel was in danger of being overset, he discovers
himself to the pilot, crying out, Trust Fortune, and know that you
carry Caesar. But the tempest being vehement, his soldiers coming
about him and expostulating passionately with him, asking whether he
distrusted them and was looking for another army, would not suffer him
to pass at that time. They fought, and Pompey had the better of it;
but instead of following his blow he retreated to his camp. To-day,
said Caesar, the enemy had the victory, but none of them know how to
conquer. Pompey commanded his army to stand in array at Pharsalia in
their place, and to receive the charge from the enemy. In this Caesar
said he was out, thereby suffering the eagerness of his soldiers’
spirits, when they were up and inspired with rage and success, in the
midst of their career to languish and expire. After he routed Pharnaces
Ponticus at the first assault, he wrote thus to his friends, I came, I
saw, I conquered.[114] After Scipio was worsted in Africa and fled, and
Cato had killed himself, he said: I envy thee thy death, O Cato! since
thou didst envy me the honor of saving thee. Antonius and Dolabella
were suspected by his friends, who advised him to secure them; he
answered, I fear none of those fat and lazy fellows, but those pale
and lean ones,—meaning Brutus and Cassius. As he was at supper, the
discourse was of death, which sort was the best. That, said he, which
is unexpected.

CAESAR AUGUSTUS. Caesar, who was the first surnamed Augustus, being
yet young, demanded of Antony the twenty-five millions of money[115]
which he had taken out of the house of Julius Caesar when he was slain,
that he might pay the Romans the legacies he had left them, every man
seventy-five drachms. But when Antony detained the money, and bade him,
if he were wise, let fall his demand, he sent the crier to offer his
own paternal estate for sale, and therewith discharged the legacies;
by which means he procured a general respect to himself, and to Antony
the hatred of the Romans. Rymetalces, king of Thrace, forsook Antony
and went over to Caesar; but bragging immoderately in his drink, and
nauseously reproaching his new confederates, Caesar drank to one of the
other kings, and told him, I love treason but do not commend traitors.
The Alexandrians, when he had taken their city, expected great severity
from him; but when he came upon the judgment-seat, he placed Arius the
Alexandrian by him, and told them: I spare this city, first because
it is great and beautiful, secondly for the sake of its founder,
Alexander, and thirdly for the sake of Arius my friend. When it was
told him that Eros, his steward in Egypt, having bought a quail that
beat all he came near and was never worsted by any, had roasted and
eaten it, he sent for him; and when upon examination he confessed the
fact, he ordered him to be nailed on the mast of the ship. He removed
Theodorus, and in his stead made Arius his factor in Sicily, whereupon
a petition was presented to him, in which was written, Theodorus of
Tarsus is either a baldpate or a thief, what is your opinion? Caesar
read it, and subscribed, I think so. Mecaenas, his intimate companion,
presented him yearly on his birthday with a piece of plate. Athenodorus
the philosopher, by reason of his old age, begged leave that he might
retire from court, which Caesar granted; and as Athenodorus was taking
his leave of him, Remember, said he, Caesar, whenever you are angry, to
say or do nothing before you have repeated the four-and-twenty letters
to yourself. Whereupon Caesar caught him by the hand and said, I have
need of your presence still; and he kept him a year longer, saying, The
reward of silence is a secure reward. He heard Alexander at the age of
thirty-two years had subdued the greatest part of the world and was at
a loss what he should do with the rest of his time. But he wondered
Alexander should not think it a lesser labor to gain a great empire
than to set in order what he had gotten. He made a law concerning
adulterers, wherein was determined how the accused were to be tried and
how the guilty were to be punished. Afterwards, meeting with a young
man that was reported to have been familiar with his daughter Julia,
being enraged he struck him with his hands; but when the young man
cried out, O Caesar! you have made a law, he was so troubled at it that
he refrained from supper that day. When he sent Caius his daughter’s
son into Armenia, he begged of the Gods that the favor of Pompey, the
valor of Alexander, and his own fortune might attend him. He told
the Romans he would leave them one to succeed him in the government
that never consulted twice in the same affair, meaning Tiberius. He
endeavored to pacify some young men that were imperious in their
offices; and when they gave little heed to him, but still kept a stir,
Young men, said he, hear an old man to whom old men hearkened when
he was young. Once, when the Athenians had offended him, he wrote to
them from Aegina: I suppose you know I am angry with you, otherwise I
had not wintered at Aegina. Besides this, he neither said nor did any
thing to them. One of the accusers of Eurycles prated lavishly and
unreasonably, proceeding so far as to say, If these crimes, O Caesar,
do not seem great to you, command him to repeat to me the seventh book
of Thucydides; wherefore Caesar being enraged commanded him to prison.
But afterwards, when he heard he was descended from Brasidas, he sent
for him again, and dismissed him with a moderate rebuke. When Piso
built his house from top to bottom with great exactness, You cheer my
heart, said he, who build as if Rome would be eternal.




