THE APOPHTHEGMS OR REMARKABLE SAYINGS OF KINGS AND GREAT COMMANDERS.


PLUTARCH TO TRAJAN THE EMPEROR WISHETH PROSPERITY.

Artaxerxes, King of Persia, O Caesar Trajan, greatest of princes,
esteemed it no less royal and bountiful kindly and cheerfully to accept
small, than to make great presents; and when he was in a progress,
and a common country laborer, having nothing else, took up water with
both his hands out of the river and presented it to him, he smiled
and received it pleasantly, measuring the kindness not by the value
of the gift, but by the affection of the giver. And Lycurgus ordained
in Sparta very cheap sacrifices, that they might always worship the
Gods readily and easily with such things as were at hand. Upon the
same account, when I bring a mean and slender present of the common
first-fruits of philosophy, accept also (I beseech you) with my good
affection these short memorials, if they may contribute any thing to
the knowledge of the manners and dispositions of great men, which
are more apparent in their words than in their actions. My former
treatise contains the lives of the most eminent princes, lawgivers,
and generals, both Romans and Grecians; but most of their actions
admit a mixture of fortune, whereas such speeches and answers as
happened amidst their employments, passions, and events afford us (as
in a looking-glass) a clear discovery of each particular temper and
disposition. Accordingly Siramnes the Persian, to such as wondered
that he usually spoke like a wise man and yet was unsuccessful in his
designs, replied: I myself am master of my words, but the king and
fortune have power over my actions. In the former treatise speeches
and actions are mingled together, and require a reader that is at
leisure; but in this the speeches, being as it were the seeds and the
illustrations of those lives, are placed by themselves, and will not
(I think) be tedious to you, since they will give you in a few words a
review of many memorable persons.

CYRUS. The Persians affect such as are hawk-nosed and think them most
beautiful, because Cyrus, the most beloved of their kings, had a
nose of that shape. Cyrus said that those that would not do good for
themselves ought to be compelled to do good for others; and that nobody
ought to govern, unless he was better than those he governed. When the
Persians were desirous to exchange their hills and rocks for a plain
and soft country, he would not suffer them, saying that both the seeds
of plants and the lives of men resemble the soil they inhabit.

DARIUS. Darius the father of Xerxes used to praise himself, saying
that he became even wiser in battles and dangers. When he laid a tax
upon his subjects, he summoned his lieutenants, and asked them whether
the tax was burthensome or not? When they told him it was moderate,
he commanded them to pay half as much as was at first demanded. As he
was opening a pomegranate, one asked him what it was of which he would
wish for a number equal to the seeds thereof. He said, Of men like
Zopyrus,—who was a loyal person and his friend. This Zopyrus, after
he had maimed himself by cutting off his nose and ears, beguiled the
Babylonians; and being trusted by them, he betrayed the city to Darius,
who often said that he would not have had Zopyrus maimed to gain a
hundred Babylons.

SEMIRAMIS. Semiramis built a monument for herself, with this
inscription: Whatever king wants treasure, if he open this tomb, he
may be satisfied. Darius therefore opening it found no treasure, but
another inscription of this import: If thou wert not a wicked person
and of insatiable covetousness, thou wouldst not disturb the mansions
of the dead.

XERXES. Arimenes came out of Bactria as a rival for the kingdom with
his brother Xerxes, the son of Darius. Xerxes sent presents to him,
commanding those that brought them to say: With these your brother
Xerxes now honors you; and if he chance to be proclaimed king, you
shall be the next person to himself in the kingdom. When Xerxes was
declared king, Arimenes immediately did him homage and placed the crown
upon his head; and Xerxes gave him the next place to himself. Being
offended with the Babylonians, who rebelled, and having overcome them,
he forbade them weapons, but commanded they should practise singing and
playing on the flute, keep brothel-houses and taverns, and wear loose
coats. He refused to eat Attic figs that were brought to be sold, until
he had conquered the country that produced them. When he caught some
Grecian scouts in his camp, he did them no harm, but having allowed
them to view his army as much as they pleased, he let them go.

ARTAXERXES. Artaxerxes, the son of Xerxes, surnamed Longimanus (or
_Long-hand_) because he had one hand longer than the other, said, it
was more princely to add than to take away. He first gave leave to
those that hunted with him, if they would and saw occasion, to throw
their darts before him. He also first ordained that punishment for
his nobles who had offended, that they should be stripped and their
garments scourged instead of their bodies; and whereas their hair
should have been plucked out, that the same should be done to their
turbans. When Satibarzanes, his chamberlain, petitioned him in an
unjust matter, and he understood he did it to gain thirty thousand
pieces of money, he ordered his treasurer to bring the said sum, and
gave them to him, saying: O Satibarzanes! take it; for when I have
given you this, I shall not be poorer, but I had been more unjust if I
had granted your petition.

CYRUS THE YOUNGER. Cyrus the Younger, when he was exhorting the
Lacedaemonians to side with him in the war, said that he had a stronger
heart than his brother, and could drink more wine unmixed than he, and
bear it better; that his brother, when he hunted, could scarce sit
his horse, or when ill news arrived, his throne. He exhorted them to
send him men, promising he would give horses to footmen, chariots to
horsemen, villages to those that had farms, and those that possessed
villages he would make lords of cities; and that he would give them
gold and silver, not by tale but by weight.

ARTAXERXES MNEMON. Artaxerxes, the brother of Cyrus the Younger, called
Mnemon, did not only give very free and patient access to any that
would speak with him, but commanded the queen his wife to draw the
curtains of her chariot, that petitioners might have the same access
to her also. When a poor man presented him with a very fair and great
apple, By the Sun, said he, ’tis my opinion, if this person were
entrusted with a small city, he would make it great. In his flight,
when his carriages were plundered, and he was forced to eat dry figs
and barley-bread, Of how great pleasure, said he, have I hitherto lived
ignorant!

PARYSATIS. Parysatis, the mother of Cyrus and Artaxerxes, advised him
that would discourse freely with the king, to use words of fine linen.

ORONTES. Orontes, the son-in-law of King Artaxerxes, falling into
disgrace and being condemned, said: As arithmeticians count sometimes
myriads on their fingers, sometimes units only; in like manner the
favorites of kings sometimes can do every thing with them, sometimes
little or nothing.

MEMNON. Memnon, one of King Darius’s generals against Alexander, when a
mercenary soldier excessively and impudently reviled Alexander, struck
him with his spear, adding, I pay you to fight against Alexander, not
to reproach him.

EGYPTIAN KINGS. The Egyptian kings, according unto their law, used to
swear their judges that they should not obey the king when he commanded
them to give an unjust sentence.

POLTYS. Poltys king of Thrace, in the Trojan war, being solicited both
by the Trojan and Grecian ambassadors, advised Alexander to restore
Helen, promising to give him two beautiful women for her.

TERES. Teres, the father of Sitalces, said, when he was out of the army
and had nothing to do, he thought there was no difference between him
and his grooms.

COTYS. Cotys, when one gave him a leopard, gave him a lion for it. He
was naturally prone to anger, and severely punished the miscarriages
of his servants. When a stranger brought him some earthen vessels,
thin and brittle, but delicately shaped and admirably adorned with
sculptures, he requited the stranger for them, and then brake them
all in pieces, Lest (said he) my passion should provoke me to punish
excessively those that brake them.

IDATHYRSUS. Idathyrsus, King of Scythia, when Darius invaded him,
solicited the Ionian tyrants that they would assert their liberty by
breaking down the bridge that was made over the Danube: which they
refusing to do because they had sworn fealty to Darius, he called them
good, honest, lazy slaves.

ATEAS. Ateas wrote to Philip: You reign over the Macedonians, men
that have learned fighting; and I over the Scythians, which can fight
with hunger and thirst. As he was rubbing his horse, turning to the
ambassadors of Philip, he asked whether Philip did so or not. He took
prisoner Ismenias, an excellent piper, and commanded him to play; and
when others admired him, he swore it was more pleasant to hear a horse
neigh.

SCILURUS. Scilurus on his death-bed, being about to leave fourscore
sons surviving, offered a bundle of darts to each of them, and bade
them break them. When all refused, drawing out one by one, he easily
broke them; thus teaching them that, if they held together, they would
continue strong, but if they fell out and were divided, they would
become weak.

GELO. Gelo the tyrant, after he had overcome the Carthaginians at
Himera, made peace with them, and among other articles compelled
them to subscribe this,—that they should no more sacrifice their
children to Saturn. He often marched the Syracusans out to plant their
fields, as if it had been to war, that the country might be improved
by husbandry, and they might not be corrupted by idleness. When he
demanded a sum of money of the citizens, and thereupon a tumult was
raised, he told them he would but borrow it; and after the war was
ended, he restored it to them again. At a feast, when a harp was
offered, and others one after another tuned it and played upon it, he
sent for his horse, and with an easy agility leaped upon him.

HIERO. Hiero, who succeeded Gelo in the tyranny, said he was not
disturbed by any that freely spoke against him. He judged that those
that revealed a secret did an injury to those to whom they revealed it;
for we hate not only those who tell, but them also that hear what we
would not have disclosed. One upbraided him with his stinking breath,
and he blamed his wife that never told him of it; but she said, I
thought all men smelt so. To Xenophanes the Colophonian, who said he
had much ado to maintain two servants, he replied: But Homer, whom you
disparage, maintains above ten thousand, although he is dead. He fined
Epicharmus the comedian, for speaking unseemly when his wife was by.

DIONYSIUS. Dionysius the Elder, when the public orators cast lots to
know in what order they should speak, drew as his lot the letter M. And
when one said to him, Μωρολογεῖς, You will make a foolish speech, O
Dionysius, You are mistaken, said he, Μοναρχήσω, I shall be a monarch.
And as soon as his speech was ended, the Syracusans chose him general.
In the beginning of his tyranny, the citizens rebelled and besieged
him; and his friends advised him to resign the government, rather
than to be taken and slain by them. But he, seeing a cook butcher an
ox and the ox immediately fall down dead, said to his friends: Is
it not a hateful thing, that for fear of so short a death we should
resign so great a government? When his son, whom he intended to make
his successor in the government, had been detected in debauching a
freeman’s wife, he asked him in anger, When did you ever know me guilty
of such a crime? But you, sir, replied the son, had not a tyrant for
your father. Nor will you, said he, have a tyrant for your son, unless
you mend your manners. And another time, going into his son’s house and
seeing there abundance of silver and gold plate, he cried out: Thou art
not capable of being a tyrant, who hast made never a friend with all
the plate I have given thee. When he exacted money of the Syracusans,
and they lamenting and beseeching him pretended they had none, he still
exacted more, twice or thrice renewing his demands, until he heard them
laugh and jeer at him as they went to and fro in the market-place,
and then he gave over. Now, said he, since they contemn me, it is a
sign they have nothing left. When his mother, being ancient, requested
him to find a husband for her, I can, said he, overpower the laws of
the city, but I cannot force the laws of Nature. Although he punished
other malefactors severely, he favored such as stole clothes, that
the Syracusans might forbear feasting and drunken clubs. A certain
person told him privately, he could show him a way how he might know
beforehand such as conspired against him. Let us know, said he, going
aside. Give me, said the person, a talent, that everybody may believe
that I have taught you the signs and tokens of plotters; and he gave it
him, pretending he had learned them, much admiring the subtilty of the
man. Being asked whether he was at leisure, he replied: God forbid that
it should ever befall me. Hearing that two young men very much reviled
him and his tyranny in their cups, he invited both of them to supper;
and perceiving that one of them prattled freely and foolishly, but the
other drank warily and sparing, he dismissed the first as a drunken
fellow whose treason lay no deeper than his wine, and put the other
to death as a disaffected and resolved traitor. Some blaming him for
rewarding and preferring a wicked man, and one hated by the citizens;
I would have, said he, somebody hated more than myself. When he gave
presents to the ambassadors of Corinth, and they refused them because
their law forbade them to receive gifts from a prince to whom they
were sent in embassy, he said they did very ill to destroy the only
advantage of tyranny, and to declare that it was dangerous to receive
a kindness from a tyrant. Hearing that a citizen had buried a quantity
of gold in his house, he sent for it; and when the party removed to
another city, and bought a farm with part of his treasure which he had
concealed, Dionysius sent for him and bade him take back the rest,
since he had now begun to use his money, and was no longer making a
useful thing useless.

DIONYSIUS THE YOUNGER said that he maintained many Sophists; not that
he admired them, but that he might be admired for their sake. When
Polyxenus the logician told him he had baffled him; Yes, said he,
in words, but I have caught you in deeds; for you, leaving your own
fortune, attend me and mine. When he was deposed from his government,
and one asked him what he got by Plato and philosophy, he answered,
That I may bear so great a change of fortune patiently. Being asked how
it came to pass that his father, a private and poor man, obtained the
government of Syracuse, and he already possessed of it, and the son of
a tyrant, lost it,—My father, said he, entered upon affairs when the
democracy was hated, but I, when tyranny was become odious. To another
that asked him the same question, he replied: My father bequeathed to
me his government, but not his fortune.

AGATHOCLES was the son of a potter. When he became lord and was
proclaimed king of Sicily, he was wont to place earthen and golden
vessels together, and show them to young men, telling them, Those I
made first, but now I make these by my valor and industry. As he was
besieging a city, some from the walls reviling him, saying, Do you
hear, potter, where will you have money to pay your soldiers?—he
gently answered, I’ll tell you, if I take this city. And having taken
it by storm, he sold the prisoners, telling them, If you reproach me
again, I will complain to your masters. Some inhabitants of Ithaca
complained of his mariners, that making a descent on the island they
had taken away some cattle; But your king, said he, came to Sicily, and
did not only take away sheep, but put out the shepherd’s eyes, and went
his way.

DION. Dion, that deposed Dionysius from the tyranny, when he heard
Callippus, whom of all his friends and attendants he trusted most,
conspired against him, refused to question him for it, saying: It is
better for him to die than to live, who must be weary not only of his
enemies, but of his friends too.

ARCHELAUS. Archelaus, when one of his companions (and none of the
best) begged a golden cup of him, bade the boy give it Euripides; and
when the man wondered at him, You, said he, are worthy to ask, but
he is worthy to receive it without asking. A prating barber asked him
how he would be trimmed. He answered, In silence. When Euripides at a
banquet embraced fair Agatho and kissed him, although he was no longer
beardless, he said, turning to his friends: Do not wonder at it, for
the beauty of such as are handsome lasts after autumn.

Timotheus the harper, receiving of him a reward less than his
expectation, twitted him for it not obscurely; and once singing the
short verse of the chorus, You commend earth-born silver, directed it
to him. And Archelaus answered him again singing, But you beg it. When
one sprinkled water upon him, and his friends would have had him punish
the man, You are mistaken, said he, he did not sprinkle me, but some
other person whom he took me to be.

PHILIP. Theophrastus tells us that Philip, the father of Alexander,
was not only greater in his port and success, but also freer from
luxury than other kings of his time. He said the Athenians were happy,
if they could find every year ten fit to be chosen generals, since in
many years he could find but one fit to be a general, and that was
Parmenio. When he had news brought him of divers and eminent successes
in one day, O Fortune, said he, for all these so great kindnesses do me
some small mischief. After he had conquered Greece, some advised him
to place garrisons in the cities. No, said he, I had rather be called
merciful a great while, than lord a little while. His friends advised
him to banish a railer his court. I will not do it, said he, lest he
should go about and rail in many places. Smicythus accused Nicanor for
one that commonly spoke evil of King Philip; and his friends advised
him to send for him and punish him. Truly, said he, Nicanor is not the
worst of the Macedonians; we ought therefore to consider whether we
have given him any cause or not. When he understood therefore that
Nicanor, being slighted by the king, was much afflicted with poverty,
he ordered a boon should be given him. And when Smicythus reported
that Nicanor was continually abounding in the king’s praises, You see
then, said he, that whether we will be well or ill spoken of is in
our own power. He said he was beholden to the Athenian orators, who
by reproaching him made him better both in speech and behavior; for
I will endeavor, said he, both by my words and actions to prove them
liars. Such Athenians as he took prisoners in the fight at Chaeronea he
dismissed without ransom. When they also demanded their garments and
quilts, and on that account accused the Macedonians, Philip laughed and
said, Do ye not think these Athenians imagine we beat them at cockal?
In a fight he broke his collar-bone, and the surgeon that had him in
cure requested him daily for his reward. Take what you will, said he,
for you have the key.[109] There were two brothers called Both and
Either; perceiving Either was a good understanding busy fellow and
Both a silly fellow and good for little, he said: Either is Both, and
Both is Neither. To some that advised him to deal severely with the
Athenians he said: You talk absurdly, who would persuade a man that
suffers all things for the sake of glory, to overthrow the theatre of
glory. Being arbitrator betwixt two wicked persons, he commanded one to
fly out of Macedonia and the other to pursue him. Being about to pitch
his camp in a likely place, and hearing there was no hay to be had for
the cattle, What a life, said he, is ours, since we must live according
to the convenience of asses! Designing to take a strong fort, which
the scouts told him was exceeding difficult and impregnable, he asked
whether it was so difficult that an ass could not come at it laden with
gold. Lasthenes the Olynthian and his friends being aggrieved, and
complaining that some of Philip’s retinue called them traitors, These
Macedonians, said he, are a rude and clownish people, that call a spade
a spade. He exhorted his son to behave himself courteously toward the
Macedonians, and to acquire influence with the people, while he could
be affable and gracious during the reign of another. He advised him
also to make friends of men of interest in the cities, both good and
bad, that afterwards he might make use of these, and suppress those.
To Philo the Theban, who had been his host and given him entertainment
while he remained an hostage at Thebes, and afterwards refused to
accept any present from him, he said: Do not take from me the title of
invincible, by making me inferior to you in kindness and bounty. Having
taken many prisoners, he was selling them, sitting in an unseemly
posture, with his tunic tucked up; when one of the captives to be sold
cried out, Spare me, Philip, for our fathers were friends. When Philip
asked him, Prithee, how or from whence? Let me come nearer, said he,
and I’ll tell you. When he was come up to him, he said: Let down your
cloak a little lower, for you sit indecently. Whereupon said Philip:
Let him go, in truth he wisheth me well and is my friend, though I
did not know him. Being invited to supper, he carried many he took up
by the way along with him; and perceiving his host troubled (for his
provision was not sufficient), he sent to each of his friends, and
bade them reserve a place for the cake. They, believing and expecting
it, ate little, and so the supper was enough for all. It appeared he
grieved much at the death of Hipparchus the Euboean. For when somebody
said it was time for him to die,—For himself, said he, but he died
too soon for me, preventing me by his death from returning him the
kindness his friendship deserved. Hearing that Alexander blamed him
for having children by several women, Therefore, saith he to him,
since you have many rivals with you for the kingdom, be just and
honorable, that you may not receive the kingdom as my gift, but by
your own merit. He charged him to be observant of Aristotle, and study
philosophy, That you may not, said he, do many things which I now
repent of doing. He made one of Antipater’s recommendation a judge;
and perceiving afterwards that his hair and beard were colored, he
removed him, saying, I could not think one that was faithless in his
hair could be trusty in his deeds. As he sate judge in the cause of one
Machaetas, he fell asleep, and for want of minding his arguments, gave
judgment against him. And when being enraged he cried out, I appeal;
To whom, said he, wilt thou appeal? To you yourself, O king, said he,
when you are awake to hear me with attention. Then Philip rousing and
coming to himself, and perceiving Machaetas was injured, although he
did not reverse the sentence, he paid the fine himself. When Harpalus,
in behalf of Crates his kinsman and intimate friend, who was charged
with disgraceful crimes, begged that Crates might pay the fine and so
cause the action to be withdrawn and avoid public disgrace;—It is
better, said he, that he should be reproached upon his own account,
than we for him. His friends being enraged because the Peloponnesians,
to whom he had shown favor, hissed at him in the Olympic games, What
then, said he, would they do if we should abuse them? Awaking after
he had overslept himself in the army; I slept, said he, securely, for
Antipater watched. Another time, being asleep in the day-time, while
the Grecians fretting with impatience thronged at the gates; Do not
wonder, said Parmenio to them, if Philip be now asleep, for while you
slept he was awake. When he corrected a musician at a banquet, and
discoursed with him concerning notes and instruments, the musician
replied: Far be that dishonor from your majesty, that you should
understand these things better than I do. While he was at variance with
his wife Olympia and his son, Demaratus the Corinthian came to him, and
Philip asked him how the Grecians held together. Demaratus replied:
You had need to enquire how the Grecians agree, who agree so well
with your nearest relations. Whereupon he let fall his anger, and was
reconciled to them. A poor old woman petitioned and dunned him often
to hear her cause; and he answered, I am not at leisure; the old woman
bawled out, Do not reign then. He admired the speech, and immediately
heard her and others.

ALEXANDER. While Alexander was a boy, Philip had great success in
his affairs, at which he did not rejoice, but told the children that
were brought up with him, My father will leave me nothing to do. The
children answered, Your father gets all this for you. But what good,
saith he, will it do me, if I possess much and do nothing? Being
nimble and light-footed, his father encouraged him to run in the
Olympic race; Yes, said he, if there were any kings there to run with
me. A wench being brought to lie with him late in the evening, he
asked why she tarried so long. She answered, I staid until my husband
was abed; and he sharply reproved his pages, because through their
carelessness he had almost committed adultery. As he was sacrificing
to the Gods liberally, and often offered frankincense, Leonidas his
tutor standing by said, O son, thus generously will you sacrifice, when
you have conquered the country that bears frankincense. And when he
had conquered it, he sent him this letter: I have sent you an hundred
talents of frankincense and cassia, that hereafter you may not be
niggardly towards the Gods, when you understand I have conquered the
country in which perfumes grow. The night before he fought at the river
Granicus, he exhorted the Macedonians to sup plentifully and to bring
out all they had, as they were to sup the next day at the charge of
their enemies. Perillus, one of his friends, begged of him portions for
his daughters; and he ordered him to receive fifty talents. And when he
said, Ten were enough, Alexander replied: Enough for you to receive,
but not for me to give. He commanded his steward to give Anaxarchus
the philosopher as much as he should ask for. He asketh, said the
steward, for an hundred talents. He doth well, said he, knowing he
hath a friend that both can and will bestow so much on him. Seeing at
Miletus many statues of wrestlers that had overcome in the Olympic and
Pythian games, And where, said he, were these lusty fellows when the
barbarians assaulted your city? When Ada queen of Caria was ambitious
often to send him sauces and sweetmeats delicately prepared by the best
cooks and artists, he said, I have better confectioners of my own,
viz., my night-travelling for my breakfast, and my spare breakfast for
my dinner. All things being prepared for a fight, his captains asked
him whether he had any thing else to command them. Nothing, said he,
but that the Macedonians should shave their beards. Parmenio wondering
at it, Do you not know, said he, there is no better hold in a fight
than the beard? When Darius offered him ten thousand talents, and to
divide Asia equally with him; I would accept it, said Parmenio, were I
Alexander. And so truly would I, said Alexander, if I were Parmenio.
But he answered Darius, that the earth could not bear two suns, nor
Asia two kings. When he was going to fight for the world at Arbela,
against ten hundred thousand enemies set in array against him, some of
his friends came to him, and told him the discourse of the soldiers
in their tents, who had agreed that nothing of the spoils should be
brought into the treasury, but they would have all themselves. You tell
me good news, said he, for I hear the discourse of men that intend to
fight, and not to run away. Several of his soldiers came to him and
said: O King! be of good courage, and fear not the multitude of your
enemies, for they will not be able to endure the very stink of our
sweat. The army being marshalled, he saw a soldier fitting his thong
to his javelin, and dismissed him as a useless fellow, for fitting his
weapons when he should use them. As he was reading a letter from his
mother, containing secrets and accusations of Antipater, Hephaestion
also (as he was wont) read it along with him. Alexander did not hinder
him; but when the letter was read, he took his ring off his finger, and
laid the seal of it upon Hephaestion’s mouth. Being saluted as the son
of Jupiter in the temple of Ammon by the chief priest; It is no wonder,
said he, for Jupiter is by nature the father of all, and calls the best
men his sons. When he was wounded with an arrow in the ankle, and many
ran to him that were wont to call him a God, he said smiling: That is
blood, as you see, and not, as Homer saith,—

    Such humor as distils from blessed Gods.[110]

To some that commended the frugality of Antipater, whose diet was sober
and without luxury; Outwardly, said he, Antipater wears white clothes,
but within he is all purple. In a cold winter day one of his friends
invited him to a banquet, and there being a little fire on a small
hearth, he bid him fetch either wood or frankincense. Antipatridas
brought a beautiful singing woman to supper with him; Alexander, being
taken with her visage, asked Antipatridas whether she was his miss
or not. And when he confessed she was; O villain, said he, turn her
immediately out from the banquet. Again, when Cassander forced a kiss
from Pytho, a boy beloved by Evius the piper, and Alexander perceived
that Evius was concerned at it, he was extremely enraged at Cassander,
and said with a loud voice, It seems nobody must be loved if you can
help it. When he sent such of the Macedonians as were sick and maimed
to the sea, they showed him one that was in health and yet subscribed
his name among the sick; being brought into the presence and examined,
he confessed he used that pretence for the love of Telesippa, who was
going to the sea. Alexander asked, of whom he could make inquiries
about this Telesippa, and hearing she was a free woman, he said.
Therefore, my Antigenes, let us persuade her to stay with us, for to
force her to do so when she is a free woman is not according to my
custom. Of the mercenary Grecians that fought against him he took many
prisoners. He commanded the Athenians should be kept in chains, because
they served for wages when they were allowed a public maintenance; and
the Thessalians, because when they had a fruitful country they did not
till it; but he set the Thebans free, saying, To them only I have left
neither city nor country. He took captive an excellent Indian archer
that said he could shoot an arrow through a ring, and commanded him
to show his skill; and when the man refused to do this, he commanded
him in a rage to be put to death. The man told them that led him to
execution that, not having practised for many days, he was afraid he
should miss. Alexander, hearing this, wondered at him and dismissed
him with rewards, because he chose rather to die than show himself
unworthy of his reputation. Taxiles, one of the Indian kings, met
Alexander, and advised him not to make war nor fight with him, but if
he were a meaner person than himself, to receive kindness from him, or
if he were a better man, to show kindness to him. He answered, that
was the very thing they must fight for, who should exceed the other
in bounty. When he heard the rock called Aornus in India was by its
situation impregnable, but the commander of it was a coward; Then, said
he, the place is easy to be taken. Another, commanding a rock thought
to be invincible, surrendered himself and the rock to Alexander, who
committed the said rock and the adjacent country to his government,
saying: I take this for a wise man, who chose rather to commit himself
to a good man than to a strong place. When the rock was taken, his
friends said that it exceeded the deeds of Hercules. But I, said he, do
not think my actions and all my empire to be compared with one word of
Hercules. He fined some of his friends whom he caught playing at dice
in earnest. Of his chief and most powerful friends, he seemed most to
respect Craterus, and to love Hephaestion. Craterus, said he, is the
friend of the king; but Hephaestion is the friend of Alexander. He sent
fifty talents to Xenocrates the philosopher, who would not receive
them, saying he was not in want. And he asked whether Xenocrates had
no friend either; For as to myself, said he, the treasure of Darius
is hardly sufficient for me to bestow among my friends. He demanded
of Porus, after the fight, how he should treat him. Royally, said he,
like a king. And being again asked, what farther he had to request;
All things, said he, are in that word _royally_. Admiring his wisdom
and valor, he gave him a greater government than he had before. Being
told a certain person reviled him, To do good, said he, and to be evil
spoken of is kingly. As he was dying, looking upon his friends, I
see, said he, my funeral tournament will be great. When he was dead,
Demades the rhetorician likened the Macedonian army without a general
to Polyphemus the Cyclops when his eye was put out.

PTOLEMY. Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, frequently supped with his friends
and lay at their houses; and if at any time he invited them to supper,
he made use of their furniture, sending for vessels, carpets, and
tables; for he himself had only things that were of constant use about
him, saying it was more becoming a king to make others rich than to be
rich himself.

ANTIGONUS. Antigonus exacted money severely. When one told him that
Alexander did not do so, It may be so, said he; Alexander reaped Asia,
and I but glean after him. Seeing some soldiers playing at ball in
head-pieces and breast-plates, he was pleased, and sent for their
officers, intending to commend them; but when he heard the officers
were drinking, he bestowed their commands on the soldiers. When all
men wondered that in his old age his government was mild and easy;
Formerly, said he, I sought for power, but now for glory and good-will.
To Philip his son, who asked him in the presence of many when the
army would march, What, said he, are you afraid that you only should
not hear the trumpet? The same young man being desirous to quarter at
a widow’s house that had three handsome daughters, Antigonus called
the quartermaster to him: Prithee, said he, help my son out of these
straits. Recovering from a slight disease, he said: No harm; this
distemper puts me in mind not to aim at great things, since we are
mortal. Hermodotus in his poems called him Son of the Sun. He that
attends my close-stool, said he, sings me no such song. When one said,
All things in kings are just and honorable,—Indeed, said he, for
barbarian kings; but for us only honorable things are honorable, and
only just things are just. Marsyas his brother had a cause depending,
and requested him it might be examined at his house. Nay, said he, it
shall be heard in the judgment-hall, that all may hear whether we do
exact justice or not. In the winter being forced to pitch his camp
where necessaries were scarce, some of his soldiers reproached him, not
knowing he was near. He opened the tent with his cane, saying: Woe be
to you, unless you get you farther off when you revile me. Aristodemus,
one of his friends, supposed to be a cook’s son, advised him to
moderate his gifts and expenses. Thy words, said he, Aristodemus, smell
of the apron. The Athenians, out of a respect to him, gave one of his
servants the freedom of their city. And I would not, said he, have any
Athenian whipped by my command. A youth, scholar to Anaximenes the
rhetorician, spoke in his presence a prepared and studied speech; and
he asking something which he desired to learn, the youth was silent.
What do you say, said he, is all that you have said written in your
table-book? When he heard another rhetorician say, The snow-spread
season makes the country fodder spent; Will you not stop, said he,
prating to me as you do to the rabble? Thrasyllus the Cynic begged a
drachm of him. That, said he, is too little for a king to give. Why
then, said the other, give me a talent. And that, said he, is too much
for a Cynic (or for a _dog_) to receive. Sending his son Demetrius with
ships and land-forces to make Greece free; Glory, said he, from Greece,
as from a watch-tower, will shine throughout the world. Antagoras the
poet was boiling a conger, and Antigonus, coming behind him as he was
stirring his skillet, said: Do you think, Antagoras, that Homer boiled
congers, when he wrote the deeds of Agamemnon? Antagoras replied: Do
you think, O King, that Agamemnon, when he did such exploits, was a
peeping in his army to see who boiled congers? After he had seen in a
dream Mithridates mowing a golden harvest, he designed to kill him,
and acquainted Demetrius his son with his design, making him swear to
conceal it. But Demetrius, taking Mithridates aside and walking with
him by the seaside, with the pick of his spear wrote on the shore,
“Fly, Mithridates;” which he understanding, fled into Pontus, and there
reigned until his death.

DEMETRIUS. Demetrius, while he was besieging Rhodes, found in one of
the suburbs the picture of Ialysus made by Protogenes the painter.
The Rhodians sent a herald to him, beseeching him not to deface the
picture. I will sooner, said he, deface my father’s statues, than such
a picture. When he made a league with the Rhodians, he left behind him
an engine, called the City Taker, that it might be a memorial of his
magnificence and of their courage. When the Athenians rebelled, and
he took the city, which had been distressed for want of provision, he
called an assembly and gave them corn. And while he made a speech to
them concerning that affair, he spoke improperly; and when one that
sat by told him how the word ought to be spoken, he said: For this
correction I bestow upon you five thousand bushels more.

ANTIGONUS THE SECOND. Antigonus the Second—when his father was a
prisoner, and sent one of his friends to admonish him to pay no regard
to any thing that he might write at the constraint of Seleucus, and to
enter into no obligation to surrender up the cities—wrote to Seleucus
that he would give up his whole kingdom, and himself for an hostage,
that his father might be set free. Being about to fight by sea with the
lieutenants of Ptolemy, and the pilot telling him the enemy outnumbered
him in ships, he said: But how many ships do you reckon my presence to
be worth? Once when he gave ground, his enemies pressing upon him, he
denied that he fled; but he betook himself (as he said) to an advantage
that lay behind him. To a youth, son of a valiant father, but himself
no very great soldier, petitioning he might receive his father’s
pay; Young man, said he, I pay and reward men for their own, not for
their fathers’ valor. When Zeno of Citium, whom he admired beyond all
philosophers, died, he said, The theatre of my actions is fallen.

LYSIMACHUS. Lysimachus, when he was overcome by Dromichaetas in Thrace
and constrained by thirst, surrendered himself and his army. When
he was a prisoner, and had drunk; O Gods, said he, for how small a
satisfaction have I made myself a slave from a king! To Philippides the
comedian, his friend and companion, he said. What have I that I may
impart to you? He answered, What you please, except your secrets.

ANTIPATER. Antipater, hearing that Parmenio was slain by Alexander,
said: If Parmenio conspired against Alexander, whom may we trust? but
if he did not, what is to be done? Of Demades the rhetorician, now
grown old, he said: As of sacrifices when finished, so there is nothing
left of him but his belly and tongue.

ANTIOCHUS THE THIRD. Antiochus the Third wrote to the cities, that if
he should at any time write for any thing to be done contrary to the
law, they should not obey, but suppose it to be done out of ignorance.
When he saw the Priestess of Diana, that she was exceeding beautiful,
he presently removed from Ephesus, lest he should be swayed, contrary
to his judgment, to commit some unholy act.

ANTIOCHUS HIERAX. Antiochus, surnamed the Hawk, warred with his brother
Seleucus for the kingdom. After Seleucus was overcome by the Galatians,
and was not to be heard of, but supposed to be slain in the fight, he
laid aside his purple and went into mourning. A while after, hearing
his brother was safe, he sacrificed to the Gods for the good news, and
caused the cities under his dominion to put on garlands.

EUMENES. Eumenes was thought to be slain by a conspiracy of Perseus.
That report being brought to Pergamus, Attalus his brother put on
the crown, married his wife, and took upon him the kingdom. Hearing
afterwards his brother was alive and upon the way, he met him, as he
used to do, with his life-guard, and a spear in his hand. Eumenes
embraced him kindly, and whispered in his ear:—

    If a widow you will wed,
    Wait till you’re sure her husband’s dead.[111]

But he never afterwards did or spake any thing that showed any
suspicion all his lifetime; but when he died, he bequeathed to him his
queen and kingdom. In requital of which, his brother bred up none of
his own children, although he had many; but when the son of Eumenes was
grown up, he bestowed the kingdom on him in his own lifetime.

PYRRHUS THE EPIROT. Pyrrhus was asked by his sons, when they were boys,
to whom he would leave the kingdom. To him of you, saith he, that hath
the sharpest sword. Being asked whether Pytho or Caphisius was the
better piper, Polysperchon, said he, is the best general. He joined in
battle with the Romans, and twice overcame them, but with the loss of
many friends and captains. If I should overcome the Romans, said he,
in another fight, I were undone. Not being able to keep Sicily (as he
said) from them, turning to his friends he said: What a fine wrestling
ring do we leave to the Romans and Carthaginians! His soldiers called
him Eagle; And I may deserve the title, said he, while I am borne
upon the wings of your arms. Hearing some young men had spoken many
reproachful words of him in their drink, he summoned them all to appear
before him next day; when they appeared, he asked the foremost whether
they spake such things of him or not. The young man answered: Such
words were spoken, O King, and more we had spoken, if we had had more
wine.

ANTIOCHUS. Antiochus, who twice made an inroad into Parthia, as he
was once a hunting, lost his friends and servants in the pursuit, and
went into a cottage of poor people who did not know him. As they were
at supper, he threw out discourse concerning the king; they said for
the most part he was a good prince, but overlooked many things he left
to the management of debauched courtiers, and out of love of hunting
often neglected his necessary affairs; and there they stopped. At break
of day the guard arrived at the cottage, and the king was recognized
when the crown and purple robes were brought. From the day, said he,
on which I first received these, I never heard truth concerning myself
till yesterday. When he besieged Jerusalem, the Jews, in respect of
their great festival, begged of him seven days’ truce; which he not
only granted, but preparing oxen with gilded horns, with a great
quantity of incense and perfumes, he went before them to the very
gates, and having delivered them as a sacrifice to their priests, he
returned back to his army. The Jews wondered at him, and as soon as
their festival was finished, surrendered themselves to him.

THEMISTOCLES. Themistocles in his youth was much given to wine and
women. But after Miltiades the general overcame the Persian at
Marathon, Themistocles utterly forsook his former disorders; and to
such as wondered at the change, he said, The trophy of Miltiades will
neither suffer me to sleep nor to be idle. Being asked whether he would
rather be Achilles or Homer,—And pray, said he, which would you rather
be, a conqueror in the Olympic games, or the crier that proclaims who
are conquerors? When Xerxes with that great navy made a descent upon
Greece, he fearing, if Epicydes (a popular, but a covetous, corrupt,
and cowardly person) were made general, the city might be lost, bribed
him with a sum of money to desist from that pretence. Adimantus was
afraid to hazard a sea-fight, whereunto Themistocles persuaded and
encouraged the Grecians. O Themistocles, said he, those that start
before their time in the Olympic games are always scourged. Aye; but,
Adimantus, said the other, they that are left behind are not crowned.
Eurybiades lifted up his cane at him, as if he would strike him.
Strike, said he, but hear me. When he could not persuade Eurybiades to
fight in the straits of the sea, he sent privately to Xerxes, advising
him that he need not fear the Grecians, for they were running away.
Xerxes upon this persuasion, fighting in a place advantageous for the
Grecians, was worsted; and then he sent him another message, and bade
him fly with all speed over the Hellespont, for the Grecians designed
to break down his bridge; that under pretence of saving him he might
secure the Grecians. A man from the little island Seriphus told him,
he was famous not upon his own account but through the city where he
lived. You say true, said he, for if I had been a Seriphian, I had not
been famous; nor would you, if you had been an Athenian. To Antiphatus,
a beautiful person that avoided and despised Themistocles when he
formerly loved him, but came to him and flattered him when he was in
great power and esteem; Hark you, lad, said he, though late, yet both
of us are wise at last. To Simonides desiring him to give an unjust
sentence, You would not be a good poet, said he, if you should sing
out of tune; nor I a good governor, if I should give judgment contrary
to law. When his son was a little saucy towards his mother, he said
that this boy had more power than all the Grecians, for the Athenians
governed Greece, he the Athenians, his wife him, and his son his wife.
He preferred an honest man that wooed his daughter, before a rich man.
I would rather, said he, have a man that wants money, than money that
wants a man. Having a farm to sell, he bid the crier proclaim also
that it had a good neighbor. When the Athenians reviled him; Why do
you complain, said he, that the same persons so often befriend you?
And he compared himself to a row of plane-trees, under which in a
storm passengers run for shelter, but in fair weather they pluck the
leaves off and abuse them. Scoffing at the Eretrians, he said, Like
the sword-fish, they have a sword indeed, but no heart. Being banished
first out of Athens and afterwards out of Greece, he betook himself
to the king of Persia, who bade him speak his mind. Speech, he said,
was like to tapestry; and like it, when it was spread, it showed
its figures, but when it was folded up, hid and spoiled them. And
therefore he requested time until he might learn the Persian tongue,
and could explain himself without an interpreter. Having there received
great presents, and being enriched of a sudden; O lads, said he to his
sons, we had been undone if we had not been undone.

MYRONIDES. Myronides summoned the Athenians to fight against the
Boeotians. When the time was almost come, and the captains told him
they were not near all come out; They are come, said he, all that
intend to fight. And marching while their spirits were up, he overcame
his enemies.

ARISTIDES. Aristides the Just always managed his offices himself, and
avoided all political clubs, because power gotten by the assistance of
friends was an encouragement to the unjust. When the Athenians were
fully bent to banish him by an ostracism, an illiterate country fellow
came to him with his shell, and asked him to write in it the name of
Aristides. Friend, said he, do you know Aristides? Not I, said the
fellow, but I do not like his surname of Just. He said no more, but
wrote his name in the shell and gave it him. He was at variance with
Themistocles, who was sent on an embassy with him. Are you content,
said he, Themistocles, to leave our enmity at the borders? and if you
please, we will take it up again at our return. When he levied an
assessment upon the Greeks, he returned poorer by so much as he spent
in the journey.

Aeschylus wrote these verses on Amphiaraus:—

    His shield no emblem bears; his generous soul
    Wishes to be, not to appear, the best;
    While the deep furrows of his noble mind
    Harvests of wise and prudent counsel bear.[112]

And when they were pronounced in the theatre, all turned their eyes
upon Aristides.

PERICLES. Whenever he entered on his command as general, while he was
putting on his war-cloak, he used thus to bespeak himself: Remember,
Pericles, you govern freemen, Grecians, Athenians. He advised the
Athenians to demolish Aegina, as a dangerous eyesore to the haven of
Piraeus. To a friend that wanted him to bear false witness and to bind
the same with an oath, he said: I am a friend only as far as the altar.
When he lay on his death-bed, he blessed himself that no Athenian ever
went into mourning upon his account.

ALCIBIADES. Alcibiades while he was a boy, wrestling in a ring, seeing
he could not break his adversary’s hold, bit him by the hand; who cried
out, You bite like a woman. Not so, said he, but like a lion. He had a
very handsome dog, that cost him seven thousand drachmas; and he cut
off his tail, that, said he, the Athenians may have this story to tell
of me, and may concern themselves no farther with me. Coming into a
school, he called for Homer’s Iliads; and when the master told him he
had none of Homer’s works, he gave him a box on the ear, and went his
way. He came to Pericles’s gate, and being told he was busy a preparing
his accounts to be given to the people of Athens, Had he not better,
said he, contrive how he might give no account at all? Being summoned
by the Athenians out of Sicily to plead for his life, he absconded,
saying, that criminal was a fool who studied a defence when he might
fly for it. But, said one, will you not trust your country with your
cause? No, said he, nor my mother either, lest she mistake and cast a
black pebble instead of a white one. When he heard death was decreed
to him and his associates, Let us convince them, said he, that we are
alive. And passing over to Lacedaemon, he stirred up the Decelean war
against the Athenians.

LAMACHUS. Lamachus chid a captain for a fault; and when he had said he
would do so no more, Sir, said he, in war there is no room for a second
miscarriage.

IPHICRATES. Iphicrates was despised because he was thought to be a
shoemaker’s son. The exploit that first brought him into repute was
this: when he was wounded himself, he caught up one of the enemies and
carried him alive and in his armor to his own ship. He once pitched his
camp in a country belonging to his allies and confederates, and yet he
fortified it exactly with a trench and bulwark. Said one to him, What
are ye afraid of? Of all speeches, said he, none is so dishonorable
for a general, as I should not have thought it. As he marshalled his
army to fight with barbarians, I am afraid, said he, they do not
know Iphicrates, for his very name used to strike terror into other
enemies. Being accused of a capital crime, he said to the informer:
O fellow! what art thou doing, who, when war is at hand, dost advise
the city to consult concerning me, and not with me? To Harmodius,
descended from the ancient Harmodius, when he reviled him for his mean
birth, My nobility, said he, begins in me, but yours ends in you. A
rhetorician asked him in an assembly, who he was that he took so much
upon him,—horseman, or footman, or archer, or shield-bearer. Neither
of them, said he, but one that understands how to command all those.

TIMOTHEUS. Timotheus was reputed a successful general, and some that
envied him painted cities falling under his net of their own accord,
while he was asleep. Said Timotheus, If I take such cities when I am
asleep, what do you think I shall do when I am awake? A confident
commander showed the Athenians a wound he had received. But I, said
he, when I was your general in Samos, was ashamed that a dart from an
engine fell near me. The orators set up Chares as one they thought fit
to be general of the Athenians. Not to be general, said Timotheus, but
to carry the general’s baggage.

CHABRIAS. Chabrias said, they were the best commanders who best
understood the affairs of their enemies. He was once indicted for
treason with Iphicrates, who blamed him for exposing himself to danger,
by going to the place of exercise, and dining at his usual hour. If
the Athenians, said he, deal severely with us, you will die all foul
and gut-foundered; I’ll die clean and anointed, with my dinner in my
belly. He was wont to say, that an army of stags, with a lion for their
commander, was more formidable than an army of lions led by a stag.

HEGESIPPUS. When Hegesippus, surnamed Crobylus (i.e. _Top-knot_),
instigated the Athenians against Philip, one of the assembly cried
out, You would not persuade us to a war? Yes, indeed, would I, said
he, and to mourning clothes and to public funerals and to funeral
speeches, if we intend to live free and not submit to the pleasure of
the Macedonians.

PYTHEAS. Pytheas, when he was a young man, stood forth to oppose the
decrees made concerning Alexander. One said: Have you, young man, the
confidence to speak in such weighty affairs? And why not? said he:
Alexander, whom you voted a God, is younger than I am.

PHOCION. Phocion the Athenian was never seen to laugh or cry. In an
assembly one told him, You seem to be thoughtful, Phocion. You guess
right, said he, for I am contriving how to contract what I have to
say to the people of Athens. The Oracle told the Athenians, there was
one man in the city of a contrary judgment to all the rest; and the
Athenians in a hubbub ordered search to be made, who this should be.
I, said Phocion, am the man; I alone am pleased with nothing the common
people say or do. Once when he had delivered an opinion which pleased
the people, and perceived it was entertained by a general consent,
he turned to his friend, and said: Have I not unawares spoken some
mischievous thing or other? The Athenians gathered a benevolence for a
certain sacrifice; and when others contributed to it, he being often
spoken to said: I should be ashamed to give to you, and not to pay this
man,—pointing to one of his creditors. Demosthenes the orator told
him, If the Athenians should be mad, they would kill you. Like enough,
said he, me if they were mad, but you if they were wise. Aristogiton
the informer, being condemned and ready to be executed in prison,
entreated that Phocion would come to him. And when his friends would
not suffer him to go to so vile a person; And where, said he, would you
discourse with Aristogiton more pleasantly? The Athenians were offended
with the Byzantines, for refusing to receive Chares into their city,
who was sent with forces to assist them against Philip. Said Phocion,
You ought not to be displeased with the distrust of your confederates,
but with your commanders that are not to be trusted. Whereupon he was
chosen general, and being trusted by the Byzantines, he forced Philip
to return without his errand. King Alexander sent him a present of a
hundred talents; and he asked those that brought it, what it should
mean that, of all the Athenians, Alexander should be thus kind to him.
They answered, because he esteemed him alone to be a worthy and upright
person. Pray therefore, said he, let him suffer me to seem as well as
to be so. Alexander sent to them for some ships, and the people calling
for Phocion by name, bade him speak his opinion. He stood up and told
them: I advise you either to conquer yourselves, or else to side with
the conqueror. An uncertain rumor happened, that Alexander was dead.
Immediately the orators leaped into the pulpit, and advised them to
make war without delay; but Phocion entreated them to tarry awhile
and know the certainty: For, said he, if he is dead to-day, he will
be dead to-morrow, and so forwards. Leosthenes hurried the city into
a war, with fond hopes conceited at the name of liberty and command.
Phocion compared his speeches to cypress-trees; They are tall, said
he, and comely, but bear no fruit. However, the first attempts were
successful; and when the city was sacrificing for the good news, he was
asked whether he did not wish he had done this himself. I would, said
he, have done what has been done, but have advised what I did. When the
Macedonians invaded Attica and plundered the seacoasts, he drew out
the youth. When many came to him and generally persuaded him by all
means to possess himself of such an ascent, and thereon to marshal his
army, O Hercules! said he, how many commanders do I see, and how few
soldiers? Yet he fought and overcame, and slew Nicion, the commander
of the Macedonians. But in a short time the Athenians were overcome,
and admitted a garrison sent by Antipater. Menyllus, the governor of
that garrison, offered money to Phocion, who was enraged thereby and
said: This man is no better than Alexander; and what I refused then I
can with less honor receive now. Antipater said, of the two friends he
had at Athens, he could never persuade Phocion to accept a present, nor
could he ever satisfy Demades with presents. When Antipater requested
him to do some indirect thing or other, Antipater, said he, you cannot
have Phocion for your friend and flatterer too. After the death of
Antipater, democracy was established in Athens, and the assembly
decreed the death of Phocion and his friends. The rest were led weeping
to execution; but as Phocion passed silently, one of his enemies met
him and spat in his face. But he turned himself to the magistrates,
and said, Will nobody restrain this insolent fellow? One of those that
were to suffer with him lamented and took on: Why, Euippus, said he,
are you not pleased that you die with Phocion? When the cup of hemlock
was brought to him, being asked whether he had any thing to say to
his son; I command you, said he, and entreat you not to think of any
revenge upon the Athenians.

PISISTRATUS. Pisistratus, tyrant of Athens, when some of his party
revolted from him and possessed themselves of Phyle, came to them
bearing his baggage on his back. They asked him what he meant by it.
Either, said he, to persuade you to return with me, or if I cannot
persuade you, to tarry with you; and therefore I come prepared
accordingly. An accusation was brought to him against his mother, that
she was in love and used secret familiarity with a young man, who
out of fear for the most part refused her. This young man he invited
to supper, and as they were at supper asked him how he liked his
entertainment. He answered, Very well. Thus, said he, you shall be
treated daily, if you please my mother. Thrasybulus was in love with
his daughter, and as he met her, kissed her; whereupon his wife would
have incensed him against Thrasybulus. If, said he, we hate those that
love us, what shall we do to them that hate us?—and he gave the maid
in marriage to Thrasybulus. Some lascivious drunken persons by chance
met his wife, and used unseemly speech and behavior to her; but the
next day they begged his pardon with tears. As for you, said he, learn
to be sober for the future; but as for my wife, yesterday she was not
abroad at all. He designed to marry another wife, and his children
asked him whether he could blame them for any thing. By no means, said
he, but I commend you, and desire to have more such children as you
are.

DEMETRIUS PHALEREUS. Demetrius Phalereus persuaded King Ptolemy to get
and study such books as treated of government and conduct; for those
things are written in books which the friends of kings dare not advise.

LYCURGUS. Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian brought long hair into fashion
among his countrymen, saying that it rendered those that were handsome
more beautiful, and those that were deformed more terrible. To one
that advised him to set up a democracy in Sparta, Pray, said he, do
you first set up a democracy in your own house. He ordained that
houses should be built with saws and axes only, thinking they would be
ashamed to bring plate, tapestry, and costly tables into such pitiful
houses. He forbade them to contend at boxing or in the double contest
of boxing and wrestling, that they might not accustom themselves to
be conquered, no, not so much as in jest. He forbade them also to war
often against the same people, lest they should make them the more
warlike. Accordingly, many years after, when Agesilaus was wounded,
Antalcidas told him the Thebans had rewarded him worthily for teaching
and accustoming them to war, whether they would or no.

CHARILLUS. King Charillus, being asked why Lycurgus made so few laws,
answered, They who use few words do not need many laws. When one of the
Helots behaved rather too insolently towards him, By Castor and Pollux,
said he, I would kill you, were I not angry. To one that asked him why
the Spartans wore long hair, Because, said he, of all ornaments that is
the cheapest.

TELECLUS. King Teleclus, when his brother inveighed against the
citizens for not giving him that respect which they did to the king,
said to him, No wonder, you do not know how to bear injury.

THEOPOMPUS. Theopompus, to one that showed him the walls of a city and
asked him if they were not high and beautiful, answered, No, not even
if they are built for women.

ARCHIDAMUS. Archidamus, in the Peloponnesian war, when his allies
requested him to appoint them their quota of tributes, replied, War has
a very irregular appetite.

BRASIDAS. Brasidas caught a mouse among his dried figs, which bit him,
and he let it go. Whereupon, turning to the company, Nothing, said
he, is so small which may not save itself, if it have the valor to
defend itself against its aggressors. In a fight he was shot through
his shield, and plucking the spear out of his wound, with the same he
slew his adversary. When he was asked how he came to be wounded, My
shield, said he, betrayed me. It was his fortune to be slain in battle,
as he endeavored to liberate the Grecians that were in Thrace. These
sent an embassy to Lacedaemon, which made a visit to his mother, who
first asked them whether Brasidas died honorably. When the Thracians
praised him, and affirmed that there would never be such another man,
My friends, said she, you are mistaken; Brasidas indeed was a valiant
man, but Lacedaemon hath many more valiant men than he.

AGIS. King Agis said, The Lacedaemonians are not wont to ask how many,
but where the enemy are. At Mantinea he was advised not to fight the
enemy that exceeded him in number. It is necessary, said he, for him to
fight with many, who would rule over many. The Eleans were commended
for managing the Olympic games honorably. What wonder, said he, do they
do, if one day in four years they do justice? When the same persons
enlarged in their commendation, What wonder is it, said he, if they use
justice honorably, which is an honorable thing? To a lewd person, that
often asked who was the best man among the Spartans, he answered, He
that is most unlike you. When another asked what was the number of the
Lacedaemonians,—Sufficient, said he, to defend themselves from wicked
men. To another that asked him the same question, If you should see
them fight, said he, you would think them to be many.

LYSANDER. Dionysius the Tyrant presented Lysander’s daughters with rich
garments, which he refused to accept, saying he feared they would seem
more deformed in them. To such as blamed him for managing much of his
affairs by stratagems, which was unworthy of Hercules from whom he was
descended, he answered, Where the lion’s skin will not reach, it must
be pieced with the fox’s. When the citizens of Argos seemed to make out
a better title than the Lacedaemonians to a country that was in dispute
between them, drawing his sword, He that is master of this, said he,
can best dispute about bounds of countries. When the Lacedaemonians
delayed to assault the walls of Corinth, and he saw a hare leap out of
the trench; Do you fear, said he, such enemies as these, whose laziness
suffers hares to sleep on their walls? To an inhabitant of Megara, that
in a parley spoke confidently unto him, Your words, said he, want the
breeding of the city.

AGESILAUS. Agesilaus said that the inhabitants of Asia were bad freemen
and good servants. When they were wont to call the king of Persia
the Great King, Wherein, said he, is he greater than I, if he is not
more just and wise than I am? Being asked which was better, valor or
justice, he answered, We should have no need of valor, if we were
all just. When he broke up his camp suddenly by night in the enemy’s
country, and saw a lad he loved left behind by reason of sickness,
and weeping, It is a hard thing, said he, to be pitiful and wise at
the same time. Menecrates the physician, surnamed Jupiter, inscribed
a letter to him thus: Menecrates Jupiter to King Agesilaus wisheth
joy. And he returned in answer: King Agesilaus to Menecrates wisheth
his wits. When the Lacedaemonians overcame the Athenians and their
confederates at Corinth, and he heard the number of the enemies that
were slain; Alas, said he, for Greece, who hath destroyed so many of
her men as were enough to have conquered all the barbarians together.
He had received an answer from the Oracle of Jupiter in Olympia, which
was to his satisfaction. Afterwards the Ephori bade him consult Apollo
in the same case; and to Delphi he went, and asked that God whether
he was of the same mind with his father. He interceded for one of his
friends with Idrieus of Caria, and wrote to him thus: If Nicias has not
offended, set him free; but if he is guilty, set him free for my sake;
by all means set him free. Being exhorted to hear one that imitated
the voice of a nightingale, I have often, said he, heard nightingales
themselves. The law ordained that such as ran away should be disgraced.
After the fight at Leuctra, the Ephori, seeing the city void of men,
were willing to dispense with that disgrace, and empowered Agesilaus to
make a law to that purpose. But he standing in the midst commanded that
after the next day the laws should remain in force as before. He was
sent to assist the king of Egypt, with whom he was besieged by enemies
that outnumbered his own forces; and when they had entrenched their
camp, the king commanded him to go out and fight them. Since, said he,
they intend to make themselves equal to us, I will not hinder them.
When the trench was almost finished, he drew up his men in the void
space, and so fighting with equal advantage he overcame them. When he
was dying, he charged his friends that no fiction or counterfeit (so he
called statues) should be made for him; For if, said he, I have done
any honorable exploit, that is my monument; but if I have done none,
all your statues will signify nothing.

ARCHIDAMUS. When Archidamus, the son of Agesilaus, beheld a dart to
be shot from an engine newly brought out of Sicily, he cried out, O
Hercules! the valor of man is at an end.

AGIS THE YOUNGER. Demades said, the Laconians’ swords were so small,
that jugglers might swallow them. That may be, said Agis, but the
Lacedaemonians can reach their enemies very well with them. The Ephori
ordered him to deliver his soldiers to a traitor. I will not, said he,
entrust him with strangers, who betrayed his own men.

CLEOMENES. To one that promised to give him hardy cocks, that would die
fighting, Prithee, said he, give me cocks that will kill fighting.

PAEDARETUS. Paedaretus, when he was not chosen among the Three Hundred
(which was the highest office and honor in the city), went away
cheerfully and smiling, saying, he was glad if the city had three
hundred better citizens than himself.

DAMONIDAS. Damonidas, being placed by him that ordered the chorus in
the last rank of it, said: Well done, you have found a way to make this
place also honorable.

NICOSTRATUS. Archidamus, general of the Argives, enticed Nicostratus
to betray a fort, by promises of a great sum, and the marriage of what
Lacedaemonian lady he pleased except the king’s daughters. He answered,
that Archidamus was none of the offspring of Hercules, for he went
about to punish wicked men, but Archidamus to corrupt honest men.

EUDAEMONIDAS. Eudaemonidas beholding Xenocrates, when he was old, in
the Academy reading philosophy to his scholars, and being told he was
in quest of virtue, asked: And when does he intend to practise it?
Another time, when he heard a philosopher arguing that only the wise
man can be a good general, This is a wonderful speech, said he, but he
that saith it never heard the sound of trumpets.

ANTIOCHUS. Antiochus being Ephor, when he heard Philip had given the
Messenians a country, asked whether he had granted them that they
should be victorious when they fought for that country.

ANTALCIDAS. To an Athenian that called the Lacedaemonians unlearned,
Therefore we alone, said Antalcidas, have learned no mischief of
you. To another Athenian that told him, Indeed, we have often driven
you from the Cephissus, he replied, But we never drove you from the
Eurotas. When a Sophist was beginning to recite the praise of Hercules;
And who, said he, ever spoke against him?

EPAMINONDAS. No panic fear ever surprised the army of the Thebans while
Epaminondas was their general. He said, to die in war was the most
honorable death, and the bodies of armed men ought to be exercised,
not as wrestlers, but in a warlike manner. Wherefore he hated fat
men, and dismissed one of them, saying, that three or four shields
would scarce serve to secure his belly, which would not suffer him
to see his members. He was so frugal in his diet that, being invited
by a neighbor to supper, and finding there dishes, ointments, and
junkets in abundance, he departed immediately, saying: I thought you
were sacrificing, and not displaying your luxury. When his cook gave
an account to his colleagues of the charges for several days, he was
offended only at the quantity of oil; and when his colleagues wondered
at him, I am not, said he, troubled at the charge, but that so much
oil should be received into my body. When the city kept a festival,
and all gave themselves to banquets and drinking, he was met by one of
his acquaintance unadorned and in a thoughtful posture. He wondering
asked him why he of all men should walk about in that manner. That all
of you, said he, may be drunk and revel securely. An ill man, that
had committed no great fault, he refused to discharge at the request
of Pelopidas; when his miss entreated for him, he dismissed him,
saying: Whores are fitting to receive such presents, and not generals.
The Lacedaemonians invaded the Thebans, and oracles were brought to
Thebes, some that promised victory, others that foretold an overthrow.
He ordered those to be placed on the right hand of the judgment seat,
and these on the left. When they were placed accordingly, he rose up
and said: If you will obey your commanders and unanimously resist your
enemies, these are your oracles,—pointing to the better; but if you
play the cowards, those,—pointing to the worser. Another time, as he
drew nigh to the enemy, it thundered, and some that were about him
asked him what he thought the Gods would signify by it. They signify,
said he, that the enemy is thunderstruck and demented, since he pitches
his camp in a bad place, when he was nigh to a better. Of all the
happy and prosperous events that befell him, he said that in this he
took most satisfaction, that he overcame the Lacedaemonians at Leuctra
while his father and mother, that begot him, were living. Whereas he
was wont to appear with his body anointed and a cheerful countenance,
the day after that fight he came abroad meanly habited and dejected;
and when his friends asked him whether any misfortune had befallen
him, No, said he, but yesterday I was pleased more than became a wise
man, and therefore to-day I chastise that immoderate joy. Perceiving
the Spartans concealed their disasters, and desiring to discover the
greatness of their loss, he did not give them leave to take away
their dead altogether, but allowed each city to bury its own; whereby
it appeared that above a thousand Lacedaemonians were slain. Jason,
monarch of Thessaly, was at Thebes as their confederate, and sent two
thousand pieces of gold to Epaminondas, then in great want; but he
refused the gold, and when he saw Jason, he said: You are the first to
commit violence. And borrowing fifty drachms of a citizen, with that
money to supply his army he invaded Peloponnesus. Another time, when
the Persian king sent him thirty thousand darics, he chid Diomedon
severely, asking him whether he sailed so far to bribe Epaminondas;
and bade him tell the king, as long as he wished the prosperity of
the Thebans, Epaminondas would be his friend gratis, but when he was
otherwise minded, his enemy. When the Argives were confederates with
the Thebans, the Athenian ambassadors then in Arcadia complained of
both, and Callistratus the orator reproached the cities with Orestes
and Oedipus. But Epaminondas stood up and said: We confess there hath
been one amongst us that killed his father, and among the Argives one
that killed his mother; but we banished those that did such things,
and the Athenians entertained them. To some Spartans that accused the
Thebans of many and great crimes, These indeed, said he, are they that
have put an end to your short dialect. The Athenians made friendship
and alliance with Alexander the tyrant of Pherae, who was an enemy to
the Thebans, and who had promised to furnish them with flesh at half
an obol a pound. And we, said Epaminondas, will supply them with wood
to that flesh gratis; for if they grow meddlesome, we will make bold
to cut all the wood in their country for them. Being desirous to keep
the Boeotians, that were grown rusty by idleness, always in arms, when
he was chosen their chief magistrate, he used to exhort them, saying:
Yet consider what you do, my friends; for if I am your general, you
must be my soldiers. He called their country, which was plain and open,
the stage of war, which they could keep no longer than their hands
were upon their shields. Chabrias, having slain a few Thebans near
Corinth, that engaged too hotly near the walls, erected a trophy, which
Epaminondas laughed at, saying, it was not a trophy, but a statue of
Trivia, which they usually placed in the highway before the gates. One
told him that the Athenians had sent an army into Peloponnesus adorned
with new armor. What then? said he, doth Antigenidas sigh because
Telles hath got new pipes? (Now Antigenidas was an excellent piper, but
Telles a vile one.) Understanding his shield-bearer had taken a great
deal of money from a prisoner, Come, said he, give me the shield, and
buy you a victualling-house to live in; for now you are grown rich
and wealthy, you will not hazard your life as you did formerly. Being
asked whether he thought himself or Chabrias or Iphicrates the better
general, It is hard, said he, to judge while we live. After he returned
out of Laconia, he was tried for his life, with his fellow-commanders,
for continuing Boeotarch four months longer than the law allowed. He
bade the other commanders lay the blame upon him, as if he had forced
them, and for himself, he said, his actions were his best speech; but
if any thing at all were to be answered to the judges, he entreated
them, if they put him to death, to write his fault upon his monument,
that the Grecians might know that Epaminondas compelled the Thebans
against their will to plunder and fire Laconia,—which in five hundred
years before had never suffered the like,—to build Messene two
hundred and thirty years after it was sacked, to unite the Arcadians,
and to restore liberty to Greece; for those things were done in that
expedition. Whereupon the judges arose with great laughter, and refused
even to receive the votes against him. In his last fight, being wounded
and carried into his tent, he called for Diaphantes and after him for
Iollidas; and when he heard they were slain, he advised the Thebans
to make their peace with the enemy, since they had never a general
left them; as by the event proved true. So well did he understand his
countrymen.

PELOPIDAS. Pelopidas, Epaminondas’s colleague, when his friends told
him that he neglected a necessary business, that was the gathering of
money, replied: In good deed money is necessary for this Nicomedas,
pointing to a lame man that could not go. As he was going out to fight,
his wife beseeched him to have a care of himself. To others you may
give this advice, said he; but a commander and general you must advise
that he should save his countrymen. A soldier told him, We are fallen
among the enemies. Said he, How are we fallen among them, more than
they among us? When Alexander, the tyrant of Pherae, broke his faith
and cast him into prison, he reviled him; and when the other told him
he did but hasten his death, That is my design, said he, that the
Thebans may be exasperated against you, and be revenged on you the
sooner. Thebe, the wife of the tyrant, came to him, and told him she
wondered to see him so merry in chains. He answered, he wondered more
at her, that she could endure Alexander without being chained. When
Epaminondas caused him to be released, he said: I thank Alexander, for
I have now found by trial that I have not only courage to fight, but to
die.




