CHAPTER I

THE EVOLUTION OF ENGLISH CRITICISM FROM ASCHAM TO MILTON


LITERARY criticism in England during the Elizabethan age was neither so
influential nor so rich and varied as the contemporary criticism of
Italy and France. This fact might perhaps be thought insufficient to
affect the interest or patriotism of English-speaking people, yet the
most charming critical monument of this period, Sidney's _Defence of
Poesy_, has been slightingly referred to by the latest historian of
English poetry. Such interest and importance as Elizabethan criticism
possesses must therefore be of an historical nature, and lies in two
distinct directions. In the first place, the study of the literature of
this period will show, not only that there was a more or less complete
body of critical doctrine during the Renaissance, but also that
Englishmen shared in this creation, or inheritance, of the Renaissance
as truly as did their continental neighbors; and on the other hand this
study may be said to possess an interest in itself, in so far as it will
make the growth of classicism in England intelligible, and will indicate
that the formation of the classic ideal had begun before the
introduction of the French influence. In neither case, however, can
early English criticism be considered wholly apart from the general body
of Renaissance doctrine; and its study loses in importance and
perspicuity according as it is kept distinct from the consideration of
the critical literature of France, and especially of Italy.

English criticism, during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
passed through five more or less distinct stages of development. The
first stage, characterized by the purely rhetorical study of literature,
may be said to begin with Leonard Coxe's _Arte or Crafte of Rhetoryke_,
a hand-book for young students, compiled about 1524, chiefly from one of
the rhetorical treatises of Melanchthon.[437] This was followed by
Wilson's _Arte of Rhetorike_ (1553), which is more extensive and
certainly more original than Coxe's manual, and which has been called by
Warton "the first book or system of criticism in our language." But the
most important figure of this period is Roger Ascham. The educational
system expounded in his _Scholemaster_, written between 1563 and 1568,
he owed largely to his friend, John Sturm, the Strasburg humanist, and
to his teacher, Sir John Cheke, who had been Greek lecturer at the
University of Padua; but for the critical portions of this work he seems
directly indebted to the rhetorical treatises of the Italians.[438] Yet
his obligations to the Italian humanists did not prevent the expression
of his stern and unyielding antagonism to the romantic Italian spirit
as it influenced the imaginative literature of his time. In studying
early English literature it must always be kept in mind that the Italian
Renaissance influenced the Elizabethan age in two different directions.
The Italianization of English poetry had been effected, or at least
begun, by the publication of Tottel's _Miscellany_ in 1557; on this, the
creative side of English literature, the Italian influence was
distinctly romantic. The influence of the Italian humanists, on the
other hand, was directly opposed to this romantic spirit; even in their
own country they had antagonized all that was not classical in tendency.
Ascham, therefore, as a result of his humanistic training, became not
only the first English man of letters, but also the first English
classicist.

The first stage of English criticism, then, was entirely given up to
rhetorical study. It was at this time that English writers first
attained the appreciation of form and style as distinguishing features
of literature; and it was to this appreciation that the formation of an
English prose style was due. This period may therefore be compared with
the later stages of Italian humanism in the fifteenth century; and the
later humanists were the masters and models of these early English
rhetoricians. Gabriel Harvey, as a Ciceronian of the school of Bembo,
was perhaps their last representative.

The second stage of English criticism--a period of classification and
especially of metrical studies--commences with Gascoigne's _Notes of
Instruction concerning the making of Verse_,[439] published in 1575, and
modelled apparently on Ronsard's _Abrege de l'Art Poetique francois_
(1565). Besides this brief pamphlet, the first work on English
versification, this stage also includes Puttenham's _Arte of English
Poesie_, the first systematic classification of poetic forms and
subjects, and of rhetorical figures; Bullokar's _Bref Grammar_, the
first systematic treatise on English grammar; and Harvey's _Letters_ and
Webbe's _Discourse of English Poetrie_, the first systematic attempts to
introduce classical metres into English poetry. This period was
characterized by the study and classification of the practical questions
of language and versification; and in this labor it was cooperating with
the very tendencies which Ascham had been attempting to counteract. The
study of the verse-forms introduced into England from Italy helped
materially to perfect the external side of English poetry; and a similar
result was obtained by the crude attempts at quantitative verse
suggested by the school of Tolomei. The Italian prosodists were thus,
directly or indirectly, the masters of the English students of this era.

The representative work of the third stage--the period of philosophical
and apologetic criticism--is Sir Philip Sidney's _Defence of Poesy_,
published posthumously in 1595, though probably written about 1583.
Harington's _Apologie of Poetrie_, Daniel's _Defence of Ryme_, and a few
others, are also contemporary treatises. These works, as their titles
indicate, are all defences or apologies, and were called forth by the
attacks of the Puritans on poetry, especially dramatic poetry, and the
attacks of the classicists on English versification and rhyme. Required
by the exigencies of the moment to defend poetry in general, these
authors did not attempt to do so on local or temporary grounds, but set
out to examine the fundamental grounds of criticism, and to formulate
the basic principles of poetry. In this attempt they consciously or
unconsciously sought aid from the critics of Italy, and thus commenced
in England the influence of the Italian theory of poetry. How great was
their indebtedness to the Italians the course of the present study will
make somewhat clear; but it is certainly remarkable that this
indebtedness has never been pointed out before. Speaking of Sidney's
_Defence of Poesy_, one of the most distinguished English authorities on
the Renaissance says: "Much as the Italians had recently written upon
the theory of poetry, I do not remember any treatise which can be said
to have supplied the material or suggested the method of this
apology."[440] On the contrary, the doctrines discussed by Sidney had
been receiving very similar treatment from the Italians for over half a
century; and it can be said without exaggeration that there is not an
essential principle in the _Defence of Poesy_ which cannot be traced
back to some Italian treatise on the poetic art. The age of which Sidney
is the chief representative is therefore the first period of the
influence of Italian critics.

The fourth stage of English criticism, of which Ben Jonson is, as it
were, the presiding genius, occupies the first half of the seventeenth
century. The period that preceded it was in general romantic in its
tendencies; that of Jonson leaned toward a strict though never servile
classicism. Sidney's contemporaries had studied the general theory of
poetry, not for the purpose of enunciating rules or dogmas of criticism,
but chiefly in order to defend the poetic art, and to understand its
fundamental principles. The spirit of the age was the spirit, let us
say, of Fracastoro; that of Jonson was, in a moderate form, the spirit
of Scaliger or Castelvetro. With Jonson the study of the art of poetry
became an inseparable guide to creation; and it is this element of
self-conscious art, guided by the rules of criticism, which
distinguishes him from his predecessors. The age which he represents is
therefore the second period of the influence of Italian criticism; and
the same influence also is to be seen in such critical poems as
Suckling's _Session of the Poets_, and the _Great Assises holden in
Parnassus_, ascribed to Wither, both of which may be traced back to the
class of critical poetry of which Boccalini's _Ragguagli di Parnaso_ is
the type.[441]

The fifth period, which covers the second half of the seventeenth
century, is characterized by the introduction of French influence, and
begins with Davenant's letter to Hobbes, and Hobbes's answer, both
prefixed to the epic of _Gondibert_ (1651). These letters, written while
Davenant and Hobbes were at Paris, display many of the characteristic
features of the new influence,--the rationalistic spirit, the stringent
classicism, the restriction of art to the imitation of nature, with the
further limitation of nature to the life of the city and the court, and
the confinement of the imagination to what is called "wit." This
specialized sense of the word "wit" is characteristic of the new age, of
which Dryden, in part the disciple of Davenant, is the leading figure.
The Elizabethans used the term in the general sense of the
understanding,--wit, the mental faculty, as opposed to will, the faculty
of volition. With the neo-classicists it was used sometimes to
represent, in a limited sense, the imagination,[442] more often,
however, to designate what we should call fancy,[443] or even mere
propriety of poetic expression;[444] but whatever its particular use, it
was always regarded as of the essence of poetic art.

With the fifth stage of English criticism this essay is not concerned.
The history of literary criticism in England will be traced no farther
than 1650, when the influence of France was substituted for that of
Italy. This section deals especially with the two great periods of
Italian influence,--that of Sidney and that of Ben Jonson. These two men
are the central figures, and their names, like those of Dryden, Pope,
and Samuel Johnson, represent distinct and important epochs in the
history of literary criticism.

FOOT-NOTES:

[437] _Cf._ _Mod. Lang. Notes_, 1898, xiii. 293.

[438] _Cf._ Ascham, _Works_, ii. 174-191.

[439] The _Reulis and Cautelis of Scottis Poesie_ by James VI. of
Scotland is wholly based on Gascoigne's treatise.

[440] J. A. Symonds, _Sir Philip Sidney_, p. 157. _Cf._ also, Sidney,
_Defence_, Cook's introduction, p. xxvii.

[441] _Cf._ Foffano, p. 173 _sq._ In Spain, Lope de Vega's _Laurel de
Apolo_ and Cervantes' _Viage del Parnaso_ belong to the same class of
poems.

[442] _Cf._ Dryden, ded. epist. to the _Annus Mirabilis_.

[443] Addison, _Spectator_, no. 62.

[444] Dryden, preface to the _State of Innocence_.




