CHAPTER VI

THE BANNER OF THE RED CROSS


Returning in desperation to his estate, Don Marcelo Desnoyers saw
huge automobiles and men on horseback, forming a very long convoy and
completely filling the road. They were all going in his direction. At
the entrance to the park a band of Germans was putting up the wires for
a telephone line. They had just been reconnoitering the rooms befouled
with the night’s saturnalia, and were ha-haing boisterously over Captain
von Hartrott’s inscription, “Bitte, nicht plundern.” To them it seemed
the acme of wit--truly Teutonic.

The convoy now invaded the park with its automobiles and trucks bearing
a red cross. A war hospital was going to be established in the castle.
The doctors were dressed in grayish green and armed the same as the
officers; they also imitated their freezing hauteur and repellent
unapproachableness. There came out of the drays hundreds of folding
cots, which were placed in rows in the different rooms. The furniture
that still remained was thrown out in a heap under the trees. Squads
of soldiers were obeying with mechanical promptitude the brief and
imperious orders. An odor of an apothecary shop, of concentrated
drugs, now pervaded the quarters, mixed with the strong smell of the
antiseptics with which they were sprinkling the walls in order to
disinfect the filthy remains of the nocturnal orgy.

Then he saw women clad in white, buxom girls with blue eyes and flaxen
hair. They were grave, bland, austere and implacable in appearance.
Several times they pushed Desnoyers out of their way as if they did not
see him. They looked like nuns, but with revolvers under their habits.

At midday other automobiles began to arrive, attracted by the enormous
white flag with the red cross, which was now waving from the castle
tower. They came from the division battling beyond the Marne. Their
metal fittings were dented by projectiles, their wind-shields broken by
star-shaped holes. From their interiors appeared men and more men; some
on foot, others on canvas stretchers--faces pale and rubicund, profiles
aquiline and snubby, red heads and skulls wrapped in white turbans stiff
with blood; mouths that laughed with bravado and mouths that groaned
with bluish lips; jaws supported with mummy-like bandages; giants in
agony whose wounds were not apparent; shapeless forms ending in a head
that talked and smoked; legs with hanging flesh that was dyeing the
First Aid wrappings with their red moisture; arms that hung as inert
as dead boughs; torn uniforms in which were conspicuous the tragic
vacancies of absent members.

This avalanche of suffering was quickly distributed throughout the
castle. In a few hours it was so completely filled that there was not a
vacant bed--the last arrivals being laid in the shadow of the trees. The
telephones were ringing incessantly; the surgeons in coarse aprons
were going from one side to the other, working rapidly; human life was
submitted to savage proceedings with roughness and celerity. Those who
died under it simply left one more cot free for the others that kept
on coming. Desnoyers saw bloody baskets filled with shapeless masses of
flesh, strips of skin, broken bones, entire limbs. The orderlies were
carrying these terrible remnants to the foot of the park in order to
bury them in a little plot which had been Chichi’s favorite reading
nook.

Pairs of soldiers were carrying out objects wrapped in sheets which
the owner recognized as his. These were the dead, and the park was soon
converted into a cemetery. No longer was the little retreat large enough
to hold the corpses and the severed remains from the operations. New
grave trenches were being opened near by. The Germans armed with shovels
were pressing into service a dozen of the farmer-prisoners to aid in
unloading the dead. Now they were bringing them down by the cartload,
dumping them in like the rubbish from some demolished building. Don
Marcelo felt an abnormal delight in contemplating this increasing
number of vanquished enemies, yet he grieved at the same time that this
precipitation of intruders should be deposited forever on his property.

At nightfall, overwhelmed by so many emotions, he again suffered the
torments of hunger. All day long he had eaten nothing but the crust of
bread found in the kitchen by the Warden’s wife. The rest he had left
for her and her daughter. A distress as harrowing to him as his hunger
was the sight of poor Georgette’s shocked despondency. She was always
trying to escape from his presence in an agony of shame.

“Don’t let the Master see me!” she would cry, hiding her face. Since
his presence seemed to recall more vividly the memory of her assaults,
Desnoyers tried, while in the lodge, to avoid going near her.

Desperate with the gnawings of his empty stomach, he accosted several
doctors who were speaking French, but all in vain. They would not listen
to him, and when he repeated his petitions they pushed him roughly out
of their way. . . . He was not going to perish with hunger in the midst
of his riches! Those people were eating; the indifferent nurses had
established themselves in his kitchen. . . . But the time passed
on without encountering anybody who would take pity on this old man
dragging himself weakly from one place to another, in the misery of an
old age intensified by despair, and suffering in every part of the body,
the results of the blows of the night before. He now knew the gnawings
of a hunger far worse than that which he had suffered when journeying
over the desert plains--a hunger among men, in a civilized country,
wearing a belt filled with gold, surrounded with towers and castle halls
which were his, but in the control of others who would not condescend
to listen to him. And for this piteous ending of his life he had amassed
millions and returned to Europe! . . . Ah, the irony of fate! . . .

He saw a doctor’s assistant leaning up against a tree, about to devour
a slab of bread and sausage. His envious eyes scrutinized this fellow,
tall, thick-set, his jaws bristling with a great red beard. The
trembling old man staggered up to him, begging for the food by signs and
holding out a piece of money. The German’s eyes glistened at the sight
of the gold, and a beatific smile stretched his mouth from ear to ear.

“Ya,” he responded, and grabbing the money, he handed over the food.

Don Marcelo commenced to swallow it with avidity. Never had he so
appreciated the sheer ecstasy of eating as at that instant--in the midst
of his gardens converted into a cemetery, before his despoiled castle
where hundreds of human beings were groaning in agony. A grayish arm
passed before his eyes; it belonged to the German, who had returned
with two slices of bread and a bit of meat snatched from the kitchen. He
repeated his smirking “Ya?” . . . and after his victim had secured it
by means of another gold coin, he was able to take it to the two women
hidden in the cottage.

During the night--a night of painful watching, cut with visions of
horror, it seemed to him that the roar of the artillery was coming
nearer. It was a scarcely perceptible difference, perhaps the effect of
the silence of the night which always intensifies sound. The ambulances
continued coming from the front, discharging their cargoes of riddled
humanity and going back for more. Desnoyers surmised that his castle was
but one of the many hospitals established in a line of more than eighty
miles, and that on the other side, behind the French, were many similar
ones in which the same activity was going on--the consignments of
dying men succeeding each other with terrifying frequency. Many of the
combatants were not even having the satisfaction of being taken from
the battle field, but were lying groaning on the ground, burying their
bleeding members in the dust or mud, and weltering in the ooze from
their wounds. . . . And Don Marcelo, who a few hours before had been
considering himself the unhappiest of mortals, now experienced a cruel
joy in reflecting that so many thousands of vigorous men at the point of
death could well envy him for his hale old age, and for the tranquillity
with which he was reposing on that humble bed.

The next morning the orderly was waiting for him in the same place,
holding out a napkin filled with eatables. Good red-bearded man, helpful
and kind! . . . and he offered him the piece of gold.

“Nein,” replied the fellow, with a broad, malicious grin. Two gleaming
gold pieces appeared between Don Marcelo’s fingers. Another leering
“Nein” and a shake of the head. Ah, the robber! How he was taking
advantage of his necessity! . . . And not until he had produced five
gold coins was he able to secure the package.

He soon began to notice all around him a silent and sly conspiracy
to get possession of his money. A giant in a sergeant’s uniform put a
shovel in his hand pushing him roughly forward. He soon found himself
in a corner of the park that had been transformed into a graveyard, near
the cart of cadavers; there he had to shovel dirt on his own ground in
company with the indignant prisoners.

He averted his eyes so as not to look at the rigid and grotesque bodies
piled above him at the edge of the pit, ready to be tumbled in. The
ground was sending forth an insufferable odor, for decomposition had
already set in in the nearby trenches. The persistence with which his
overseers accosted him, and the crafty smile of the sergeant made him
see through the deep-laid scheme. The red-beard must be at the bottom
of all this. Putting his hand in his pocket he dropped the shovel with
a look of interrogation. “Ya,” replied the sergeant. After handing
over the required sum, the tormented old man was permitted to stop
grave-digging and wander around at his pleasure; he knew, however, what
was probably in store for him--those men were going to submit him to a
merciless exploitation.

Another day passed by, like its predecessor. In the morning of the
following day his perceptions, sharpened by apprehension, made him
conjecture that something extraordinary had occurred. The automobiles
were arriving and departing with greater rapidity, and there was greater
disorder and confusion among the executive force. The telephone was
ringing with mad precipitation; and the wounded arrivals seemed more
depressed. The day before they had been singing when taken from the
vehicles, hiding their woe with laughter and bravado, all talking of the
near victory and regretting that they would not be able to witness the
triumphal entry into Paris. Now they were all very silent, with furrowed
brows, thinking no longer about what was going on behind them, wondering
only about their own fate.

Outside the park was the buzz of the approaching throng which was
blackening the roads. The invasion was beginning again, but with a
refluent movement. For hours at a time great strings of gray trucks went
puffing by; then regiments of infantry, squadrons, rolling stock. They
were marching very slowly with a deliberation that puzzled Desnoyers,
who could not make out whether this recessional meant flight or change
of position. The only thing that gave him any satisfaction was the
stupefied and downcast appearance of the soldiers, the gloomy sulks of
the officers. Nobody was shouting; they all appeared to have forgotten
their “Nach Paris!” The greenish gray monster still had its armed head
stretched across the other side of the Marne, but its tail was beginning
to uncoil with uneasy wrigglings.

After night had settled down the troops were still continuing to
fall back. The cannonading was certainly coming nearer. Some of the
thunderous claps sounded so close that they made the glass tremble in
the windows. A fugitive farmer, trying to find refuge in the park,
gave Don Marcelo some news. The Germans were in full retreat. They had
installed some of their batteries on the banks of the Marne in order
to attempt a new resistance. . . . And the new arrival remained without
attracting the attention of the invaders who, a few days before, would
have shot him on the slightest suspicion.

The mechanical workings of discipline were evidently out of gear.
Doctors and nurses were running from place to place, shouting orders and
breaking out into a volley of curses every time a fresh ambulance load
arrived. The drivers were commanded to take their patients on ahead
to another hospital near the rear-guard. Orders had been received to
evacuate the castle that very night.

In spite of this prohibition, one of the ambulances unloaded its relay
of wounded men. So deplorable was their state that the doctors accepted
them, judging it useless for them to continue their journey. They
remained in the garden, lying on the same stretchers that they had
occupied within the vehicle. By the light of the lanterns Desnoyers
recognized one of the dying. It was the secretary to His Excellency, the
Socialist professor who had shut him in the cellar vaults.

At the sight of the owner of the castle he smiled as though he had met a
comrade. His was the only familiar face among all those people who were
speaking his language. He was ghastly in hue, with sunken features and
an impalpable glaze spreading over his eyes. He had no visible wounds,
but from under the cloak spread over his abdomen his torn intestines
exhaled a fatal warning. The presence of Don Marcelo made him guess
where they had brought him, and little by little he co-ordinated his
recollections. As though the old gentleman might be interested in the
whereabouts of his comrades, he told him all he knew in a weak and
strained voice. . . . Bad luck for their brigade! They had reached the
front at a critical moment for the reserve troops. Commandant Blumhardt
had died at the very first, a shell of ‘75 taking off his head. Dead,
too, were all the officers who had lodged in the castle. His Excellency
had had his jaw bone torn off by a fragment of shell. He had seen him
on the ground, howling with pain, drawing a portrait from his breast and
trying to kiss it with his broken mouth. He had himself been hit in
the stomach by the same shell. He had lain forty-two hours on the field
before he was picked up by the ambulance corps. . . .

And with the mania of the University man, whose hobby is to see
everything reasoned out and logically explained, he added in that
supreme moment, with the tenacity of those who die talking:

“Sad war, sir. . . . Many premises are lacking in order to decide who is
the culpable party. . . . When the war is ended they will have to . . .
will have to . . .” And he closed his eyes overcome by the effort.
Desnoyers left the dead man, thinking to himself. Poor fellow! He was
placing the hour of justice at the termination of the war, and meanwhile
hundreds like him were dying, disappearing with all their scruples of
ponderous and disciplined reasoning.

That night there was no sleep on the place. The walls of the lodge
were creaking, the glass crashing and breaking, the two women in the
adjoining room crying out nervously. The noise of the German fire was
beginning to mingle with that of other explosives close at hand. He
surmised that this was the smashing of the French projectiles which were
coming in search of the enemy’s artillery above the Marne.

For a few minutes his hopes revived as the possibility of victory
flashed into his mind, but he was so depressed by his forlorn situation
that such a hope evaporated as quickly as it had come. His own troops
were advancing, but this advance did not, perhaps, represent more than
a local gain. The line of battle was so extensive! . . . It was going to
be as in 1870; the French would achieve partial victories, modified at
the last moment by the strategy of the enemies until they were turned
into complete defeat.

After midnight the cannonading ceased, but silence was by no means
re-established. Automobiles were rolling around the lodge midst hoarse
shouts of command. It must be the hospital convoy that was evacuating
the castle. Then near daybreak the thudding of horses’ hoofs and the
wheels of chugging machines thundered through the gates, making the
ground tremble. Half an hour afterwards sounded the tramp of multitudes
moving at a quick pace, dying away in the depths of the park.

At dawn the old gentleman leaped from his bed, and the first thing
he spied from the cottage window was the flag of the Red Cross still
floating from the top of the castle. There were no more cots under the
trees. On the bridge he met one of the doctors and several assistants.
The hospital force had gone with all its transportable patients. There
only remained in the castle, under the care of a company, those most
gravely wounded. The Valkyries of the health department had also
disappeared.

The red-bearded Shylock was among those left behind, and on seeing Don
Marcelo afar off, he smiled and immediately vanished. A few minutes
after he returned with full hands. Never before had he been so generous.
Foreseeing pressing necessity, the hungry man put his hands in his
pockets as usual, but was astonished to learn from the orderly’s
emphatic gestures that he did not wish any money.

“Nein. . . . Nein!”

What generosity was this! . . . The German persisted in his negatives.
His enormous mouth expanded in an ingratiating grin as he laid his heavy
paws on Marcelo’s shoulders. He appeared like a good dog, a meek dog,
fawning and licking the hands of the passer-by, coaxing to be taken
along with him. “Franzosen. . . . Franzosen.” He did not know how to
say any more, but the Frenchman read in his words the desire to make him
understand that he had always been in great sympathy with the French.
Something very important was evidently transpiring--the ill-humored air
of those left behind in the castle, and the sudden servility of this
plowman in uniform, made it very apparent. . . .

Some distance beyond the castle he saw soldiers, many soldiers. A
battalion of infantry had spread itself along the walls with trucks,
draught horses and swift mounts. With their pikes the soldiers were
making small openings in the mud walls, shaping them into a border of
little pinnacles. Others were kneeling or sitting near the apertures,
taking off their knapsacks in order that they might be less hampered.
Afar off the cannon were booming, and in the intervals between their
detonations could be heard the bursting of shrapnel, the bubbling of
frying oil, the grinding of a coffee-mill, and the incessant crackling
of rifle-fire. Fleecy clouds were floating over the fields, giving to
near objects the indefinite lines of unreality. The sun was a faint spot
seen between curtains of mist. The trees were weeping fog moisture from
all the cracks in their bark.

A thunderclap rent the air so forcibly that it seemed very near the
castle. Desnoyers trembled, believing that he had received a blow in
the chest. The other men remained impassive with their customary
indifference. A cannon had just been discharged but a few feet away
from him, and not till then did he realize that two batteries had been
installed in the park. The pieces of artillery were hidden under mounds
of branches, the gunners having felled trees in order to mask their
monsters more perfectly. He saw them arranging the last; with shovels,
they were forming a border of earth, a foot in width, around each
piece. This border guarded the feet of the operators whose bodies were
protected by steel shields on both sides of them. Then they raised
a breastwork of trunks and boughs, leaving only the mouth of the
cylindrical mortar visible.

By degrees Don Marcelo became accustomed to the firing which seemed
to be creating a vacuum within his cranium. He ground his teeth and
clenched his fists at every detonation, but stood stock-still with no
desire to leave, dominated by the violence of the explosions, admiring
the serenity of these men who were giving orders, erect and coolly, or
moving like humble menials around their roaring metal beasts.

All his ideas seemed to have been snatched away by that first discharge
of cannon. His brain was living in the present moment only. He turned
his eyes insistently toward the white and red banner which was waving
from the mansion.

“That is treachery,” he thought, “a breach of faith.”

Far away, on the other side of the Marne, the French artillery were
belching forth their deadly fire. He could imagine their handiwork
from the little yellowish clouds that were floating in the air, and
the columns of smoke which were spouting forth at various points of
the landscape where the German troops were hidden, forming a line which
appeared to lose itself in infinity. An atmosphere of protection and
respect seemed to be enveloping the castle.

The morning mists had dissolved; the sun was finally showing its bright
and limpid light, lengthening the shadows of men and trees to fantastic
dimensions. Hills and woods came forth from the haze, fresh and dripping
after their morning bath. The entire valley was now completely exposed,
and Desnoyers was surprised to see the river from the spot to which he
had been rooted--the cannon having opened great windows in the woods
that had hid it from view. What most astonished him in looking over this
landscape, smiling and lovely in the morning light, was that nobody was
to be seen--absolutely nobody. Mountain tops and forests were bellowing
without anyone’s being in evidence. There must be more than a hundred
thousand men in the space swept by his piercing gaze, and yet not a
human being was visible. The deadly boom of arms was causing the air to
vibrate without leaving any optical trace. There was no other smoke but
that of the explosions, the black spirals that were flinging their
great shells to burst on the ground. These were rising on all sides,
encircling the castle like a ring of giant tops, but not one of that
orderly circle ventured to touch the edifice. Don Marcelo again stared
at the Red Cross flag. “It is treachery!” he kept repeating; yet at the
same time he was selfishly rejoicing in the base expedient, since it
served to defend his property.

The battalion was at last completely installed the entire length of the
wall, opposite the river. The soldiers, kneeling, were supporting their
guns on the newly made turrets and grooves, and seemed satisfied with
this rest after a night of battling retreat. They all appeared sleeping
with their eyes open. Little by little they were letting themselves drop
back on their heels, or seeking the support of their knapsacks. Snores
were heard in the brief spaces between the artillery fire. The officials
standing behind them were examining the country with their field
glasses, or talking in knots. Some appeared disheartened, others furious
at the backward flight that had been going on since the day before.
The majority appeared calm, with the passivity of obedience. The battle
front was immense; who could foresee the outcome? . . . There they were
in full retreat, but in other places, perhaps, their comrades might be
advancing with decided gains. Until the very last moment, no soldier
knows certainly the fate of the struggle. What was most grieving this
detachment was the fact that it was all the time getting further away
from Paris.

Don Marcelo’s eye was caught by a sparkling circle of glass, a monocle
fixed upon him with aggressive insistence. A lank lieutenant with the
corseted waist of the officers that he had seen in Berlin, a genuine
Junker, was a few feet away, sword in hand behind his men, like a
wrathful and glowering shepherd.

“What are you doing here?” he said gruffly.

Desnoyers explained that he was the owner of the castle. “French?”
 continued the lieutenant. “Yes, French.” . . . The official scowled in
hostile meditation, feeling the necessity of saying something against
the enemy. The shouts and antics of his companions-at-arms put a summary
end to his reflections. They were all staring upward, and the old man
followed their gaze.

For an hour past, there had been streaking through the air frightful
roarings enveloped in yellowish vapors, strips of cloud which seemed
to contain wheels revolving with frenzied rotation. They were the
projectiles of the heavy German artillery which, fired from various
distances, threw their great shells over the castle. Certainly that
could not be what was interesting the officials!

He half shut his eyes in order to see better, and finally near the
edge of a cloud, he distinguished a species of mosquito flashing in
the sunlight. Between brief intervals of silence, could be heard the
distant, faint buzz announcing its presence. The officers nodded their
heads. “Franzosen!” Desnoyers thought so, too. He could not believe that
the enemy’s two black crosses were between those wings. Instead he saw
with his mind’s eye, two tricolored rings like the circular spots which
color the fluttering wings of butterflies.

This explained the agitation of the Germans. The French air-bird
remained motionless for a few seconds over the castle, regardless of
the white bubbles exploding underneath and around it. In vain the cannon
nearest hurled their deadly fire. It wheeled rapidly, and returned to
the place from which it came.

“It must have taken in the whole situation,” thought the old Frenchman.
“It has found them out; it knows what is going on here.”

He guessed rightly that this information would swiftly change the course
of events. Everything which had been happening in the early morning
hours was going to sink into insignificance compared with what was
coming now. He shuddered with fear, the irresistible fear of the
unknown, and yet at the same time, he was filled with curiosity,
impatience and nervous dread before a danger that threatened and would
not stay its relentless course.

Outside the park, but a short distance from the mud wall, sounded a
strident explosion like a stupendous blow from a gigantic axe--an axe as
big as his castle. There began flying through the air entire treetops,
trunks split in two, great chunks of earth with the vegetation still
clinging, a rain of dirt that obscured the heavens. Some stones fell
down from the wall. The Germans crouched but with no visible emotion.
They knew what it meant; they had been expecting it as something
inevitable after seeing the French aeroplane. The Red Cross flag could
no longer deceive the enemy’s artillery.

Don Marcelo had not time to recover from his surprise before there came
a second explosion nearer the mud wall . . . a third inside the park.
It seemed to him that he had been suddenly flung into another world from
which he was seeing men and things across a fantastic atmosphere which
roared and rocked and destroyed with the violence of its reverberations.
He was stunned with the awfulness of it all, and yet he was not afraid.
Until then, he had imagined fear in a very different form. He felt an
agonizing vacuum in his stomach. He staggered violently all the time, as
though some force were pushing him about, giving him first a blow on the
chest, and then another on the back to straighten him up.

A strong smell of acids penetrated the atmosphere, making respiration
very difficult, and filling his eyes with smarting tears. On the other
hand, the uproar no longer disturbed him, it did not exist for him. He
supposed it was still going on from the trembling air, the shaking of
things around him, in the whirlwind which was bending men double but was
not reacting within his body. He had lost the faculty of hearing; all
the strength of his senses had concentrated themselves in looking. His
eyes appeared to have acquired multiple facets like those of certain
insects. He saw what was happening before, beside, behind him,
simultaneously witnessing extraordinary things as though all the laws of
life had been capriciously overthrown.

An official a few feet away suddenly took an inexplicable flight. He
began to rise without losing his military rigidity, still helmeted, with
furrowed brow, moustache blond and short, mustard-colored chest,
and gloved hands still holding field-glasses and map--but there his
individuality stopped. The lower extremities, in their grayish leggings
remained on the ground, inanimate as reddening, empty moulds. The
trunk, in its violent ascent, spread its contents abroad like a bursting
rocket. Further on, some gunners, standing upright, were suddenly
stretched full length, converted into a motionless row, bathed in blood.

The line of infantry was lying close to the ground. The men had huddled
themselves together near the loopholes through which they aimed their
guns, trying to make themselves less visible. Many had placed their
knapsacks over their heads or at their backs to defend themselves from
the flying bits of shell. If they moved at all, it was only to worm
their way further into the earth, trying to hollow it out with their
stomachs. Many of them had changed position with mysterious rapidity,
now lying stretched on their backs as though asleep. One had his uniform
torn open across the abdomen, showing between the rents of the cloth,
slabs of flesh, blue and red that protruded and swelled up with a
bubbling expansion. Another had his legs shot away, and was looking
around with surprised eyes and a black mouth rounded into an effort to
howl, but from which no sound ever came.

Desnoyers had lost all notion of time. He could not tell whether he had
been rooted to that spot for many hours or for a single moment. The only
thing that caused him anxiety was the persistent trembling of his legs
which were refusing to sustain him. . . .

Something fell behind him. It was raining ruin. Turning his head, he
saw his castle completely transformed. Half of the tower had just been
carried off. The pieces of slate were scattered everywhere in tiny
chips; the walls were crumbling; loose window frames were balancing on
edge like fragments of stage scenery, and the old wood of the tower hood
was beginning to burn like a torch.

The spectacle of this instantaneous change in his property impressed him
more than the ravages of death, making him realize the Cyclopean power
of the blind, avenging forces raging around him. The vital force that
had been concentrated in his eyes, now spread to his feet . . . and he
started to run without knowing whither, feeling the same necessity to
hide himself as had those men enchained by discipline who were trying to
flatten themselves into the earth in imitation of the reptile’s pliant
invisibility.

His instinct was pushing him toward the lodge, but half way up the
avenue, he was stopped by another lot of astounding transformations. An
unseen hand had just snatched away half of the cottage roof. The entire
side wall doubled over, forming a cascade of bricks and dust. The
interior rooms were now exposed to view like a theatrical setting--the
kitchen where he had eaten, the upper floor with the room in which he
descried his still unmade bed. The poor women! . . .

He turned around, running now toward the castle, trying to make the
sub-cellar in which he had been fastened for the night; and when he
finally found himself under those dusty cobwebs, he felt as though
he were in the most luxurious salon, and he devoutly blessed the good
workmanship of the castle builders.

The subterranean silence began gradually to bring back his sense of
hearing. The cannonading of the Germans and the bursting of the French
shells sounded from his retreat like a distant tempest. There came into
his mind the eulogies which he had been accustomed to lavish upon the
cannon of ‘75 without knowing anything about it except by hearsay. Now
he had witnessed its effects. “It shoots TOO well!” he muttered. In a
short time it would finish destroying his castle--he was finding such
perfection excessive.

But he soon repented of these selfish lamentations. An idea, tenacious
as remorse, had fastened itself in his brain. It now seemed to him that
all he was passing through was an expiation for the great mistake of
his youth. He had evaded the service of his country, and now he was
enveloped in all the horrors of war, with the humiliation of a passive
and defenseless being, without any of the soldier’s satisfaction of
being able to return the blows. He was going to die--he was sure of
that--but a shameful death, unknown and inglorious. The ruins of his
mansion were going to become his sepulchre. . . . And the certainty of
dying there in the darkness, like a rat that sees the openings of his
hole being closed up, made this refuge intolerable.

Above him the tornado was still raging. A peal like thunder boomed above
his head, and then came the crash of a landslide. Another projectile
must have fallen upon the building. He heard shrieks of agony, yells
and precipitous steps on the floor above him. Perhaps the shell, in its
blind fury, had blown to pieces many of the dying in the salons.

Fearing to remain buried in his retreat, he bounded up the cellar stairs
two steps at a time. As he scudded across the first floor, he saw the
sky through the shattered roofs. Along the edges were hanging sections
of wood, fragments of swinging tile and furniture stopped halfway in
its flight. Crossing the hall, he had to clamber over much rubbish. He
stumbled over broken and twisted iron, parts of beds rained from the
upper rooms into the mountain of debris in which he saw convulsed limbs
and heard anguished voices that he could not understand.

He leaped as he ran, feeling the same longing for light and free air as
those who rush from the hold to the deck of a shipwreck. While sheltered
in the darkness more time had elapsed than he had supposed. The sun was
now very high. He saw in the garden more corpses in tragic and grotesque
postures. The wounded were doubled over with pain or lying on the ground
or propping themselves against the trees in painful silence. Some had
opened their knapsacks and drawn out their sanitary kits and were trying
to care for their cuts. The infantry was now firing incessantly. The
number of riflemen had increased. New bands of soldiers were entering
the park--some with a sergeant at their head, others followed by an
officer carrying a revolver at his breast as though guiding his men
with it. This must be the infantry expelled from their position near
the river which had come to reinforce the second line of defense. The
mitrailleuses were adding their tac-tac to the cracks of the fusileers.

The hum of the invisible swarms was buzzing incessantly. Thousands of
sticky horse-flies were droning around Desnoyers without his even seeing
them. The bark of the trees was being stripped by unseen hands; the
leaves were falling in torrents; the boughs were shaken by opposing
forces, the stones on the ground were being crushed by a mysterious
foot. All inanimate objects seemed to have acquired a fantastic life.
The zinc spoons of the soldiers, the metallic parts of their outfit, the
pails of the artillery were all clanking as though in an imperceptible
hailstorm. He saw a cannon lying on its side with the wheels broken
and turned over among many men who appeared asleep; he saw soldiers
who stretched themselves out without a contraction, without a sound, as
though overcome by sudden drowsiness. Others were howling and dragging
themselves forward in a sitting position.

The old man felt an extreme sensation of heat. The pungent perfume of
explosive drugs brought the tears to his eyes and clawed at his throat.
At the same time he was chilly and felt his forehead freezing in a
glacial sweat.

He had to leave the bridge. Several soldiers were passing bearing the
wounded to the edifice in spite of the fact that it was falling in
ruins. Suddenly he was sprinkled from head to foot, as if the earth had
opened to make way for a waterspout. A shell had fallen into the moat,
throwing up an enormous column of water, making the carp sleeping in
the mud fly into fragments, breaking a part of the edges and grinding to
powder the white balustrades with their great urns of flowers.

He started to run on with the blindness of terror, when he suddenly saw
before him the same little round crystal, examining him coolly. It
was the Junker, the officer of the monocle. . . . With the end of
his revolver, the German pointed to two pails a short distance away,
ordering Desnoyers to fill them from the lagoon and give the water to
the men overcome by the sun. Although the imperious tone admitted of no
reply, Don Marcelo tried, nevertheless, to resist. He received a blow
from the revolver on his chest at the same time that the lieutenant
slapped him in the face. The old man doubled over, longing to weep,
longing to perish; but no tears came, nor did life escape from his body
under this affront, as he wished. . . . With the two buckets in his
hands, he found himself dipping up water from the canal, carrying it the
length of the file, giving it to men who, each in his turn, dropped his
gun to gulp the liquid with the avidity of panting beasts.

He was no longer afraid of the shrill shrieks of invisible bodies. His
one great longing was to die. He was strongly convinced that he was
going to die; his sufferings were too great; there was no longer any
place in the world for him.

He had to pass by breaches opened in the wall by the bursting shells.
There was no natural object to arrest the eye looking through these
gaps. Hedges and groves had been swept away or blotted out by the
fire of the artillery. He descried at the foot of the highway near his
castle, several of the attacking columns which had crossed the Marne.
The advancing forces were coming doggedly on, apparently unmoved by the
steady, deadly fire of the Germans. Soon they were rushing forward with
leaps and bounds, by companies, shielding themselves behind bits of
upland in bends of the road, in order to send forth their blasts of
death.

The old man was now fired with a desperate resolution;--since he had to
die, let a French ball kill him! And he advanced very erect with his two
pails among those men shooting, lying down. Then, with a sudden fear,
he stood still hanging his head; a second thought had told him that the
bullet which he might receive would be one danger less for the enemy.
It would be better for them to kill the Germans . . . and he began to
cherish the hope that he might get possession of some weapon from those
dying around him, and fall upon that Junker who had struck him.

He was filling his pails for the third time, and murderously
contemplating the lieutenant’s back when something occurred so absurd
and unnatural that it reminded him of the fantastic flash of the
cinematograph;--the officer’s head suddenly disappeared; two jets of
blood spurted from his severed neck and his body collapsed like an empty
sack.

At the same time, a cyclone was sweeping the length of the wall, tearing
up groves, overturning cannon and carrying away people in a whirlwind as
though they were dry leaves. He inferred that Death was now blowing from
another direction. Until then, it had come from the front on the river
side, battling with the enemy’s line ensconced behind the walls. Now,
with the swiftness of an atmospheric change, it was blustering from the
depths of the park. A skillful manoeuver of the aggressors, the use of a
distant road, a chance bend in the German line had enabled the French to
collect their cannon in a new position, attacking the occupants of the
castle with a flank movement.

It was a lucky thing for Don Marcelo that he had lingered a few moments
on the bank of the fosse, sheltered by the bulk of the edifice. The fire
of the hidden battery passed the length of the avenue, carrying off the
living, destroying for a second time the dead, killing horses, breaking
the wheels of vehicles and making the gun carriages fly through the air
with the flames of a volcano in whose red and bluish depths black bodies
were leaping. He saw hundreds of fallen men; he saw disembowelled horses
trampling on their entrails. The death harvest was not being reaped in
sheaves; the entire field was being mowed down with a single flash
of the sickle. And as though the batteries opposite divined the
catastrophe, they redoubled their fire, sending down a torrent of
shells. They fell on all sides. Beyond the castle, at the end of the
park, craters were opening in the woods, vomiting forth the entire
trunks of trees. The projectiles were hurling from their pits the bodies
interred the night before.

Those still alive were firing through the gaps in the walls. Then they
sprang up with the greatest haste. Some grasped their bayonets, pale,
with clamped lips and a mad glare in their eyes; others turned their
backs, running toward the exit from the park, regardless of the shouts
of their officers and the revolver shots sent after the fugitives.

All this occurred with dizzying rapidity, like a nightmare. On the other
side of the wall came a murmur, swelling in volume, like that of the
sea. Desnoyers heard shouts, and it seemed to him that some hoarse,
discordant voices were singing the Marseillaise. The machine-guns were
working with the swift steadiness of sewing machines. The attack was
going to be opposed with furious resistance. The Germans, crazed
with fury, shot and shot. In one of the breaches appeared a red kepis
followed by legs of the same color trying to clamber over the ruins. But
this vision was instantly blotted out by the sprinkling from the machine
guns, making the invaders fall in great heaps on the other side of the
wall. Don Marcelo never knew exactly how the change took place. Suddenly
he saw the red trousers within the park. With irresistible bounds they
were springing over the wall, slipping through the yawning gaps, and
darting out from the depths of the woods by invisible paths. They were
little soldiers, husky, panting, perspiring, with torn cloaks; and
mingled with them, in the disorder of the charge, African marksmen with
devilish eyes and foaming mouths, Zouaves in wide breeches and chasseurs
in blue uniforms.

The German officers wanted to die. With upraised swords, after having
exhausted the shots in their revolvers, they advanced upon their
assailants followed by the soldiers who still obeyed them. There was a
scuffle, a wild melee. To the trembling spectator, it seemed as though
the world had fallen into profound silence. The yells of the combatants,
the thud of colliding bodies, the clang of arms seemed as nothing after
the cannon had quieted down. He saw men pierced through the middle by
gun points whose reddened ends came out through their kidneys; muskets
raining hammer-like blows, adversaries that grappled in hand-to-hand
tussles, rolling over and over on the ground, trying to gain the
advantage by kicks and bites.

The mustard-colored fronts had entirely disappeared, and he now saw only
backs of that color fleeing toward the exit, filtering among the trees,
falling midway in their flight when hit by the pursuing balls. Many
of the invaders were unable to chase the fugitives because they were
occupied in repelling with rude thrusts of their bayonets the bodies
falling upon them in agonizing convulsions.

Don Marcelo suddenly found himself in the very thick of these mortal
combats, jumping up and down like a child, waving his hands and shouting
with all his might. When he came to himself again, he was hugging
the grimy head of a young French officer who was looking at him in
astonishment. He probably thought him crazy on receiving his kisses, on
hearing his incoherent torrent of words. Emotionally exhausted, the worn
old man continued to weep after the officer had freed himself with a
jerk. . . . He needed to give vent to his feelings after so many days of
anguished self-control. Vive la France! . . .

His beloved French were already within the park gates. They were
running, bayonets in hand, in pursuit of the last remnants of the German
battalion trying to escape toward the village. A group of horsemen
passed along the road. They were dragoons coming to complete the rout.
But their horses were fagged out; nothing but the fever of victory
transmitted from man to beast had sustained their painful pace. One
of the equestrians came to a stop near the entrance of the park, the
famished horse eagerly devouring the herbage while his rider settled
down in the saddle as though asleep. Desnoyers touched him on the hip in
order to waken him, but he immediately rolled off on the opposite side.
He was dead, with his entrails protruding from his body, but swept on
with the others, he had been brought thus far on his steady steed.

Enormous tops of iron and smoke now began falling in the neighborhood.
The German artillery was opening a retaliatory fire against its
lost positions. The advance continued. There passed toward the North
battalions, squadrons and batteries, worn, weary and grimy, covered with
dust and mud, but kindled with an ardor that galvanized their flagging
energy.

The French cannon began thundering on the village side. Bands of
soldiers were exploring the castle and the nearest woods. From the
ruined rooms, from the depths of the cellars, from the clumps of
shrubbery in the park, from the stables and burned garage, came surging
forth men dressed in greenish gray and pointed helmets. They all threw
up their arms, extending their open hands:--“Kamarades . . . kamarades,
non kaput.” With the restlessness of remorse, they were in dread of
immediate execution. They had suddenly lost all their haughtiness on
finding that they no longer had any official powers and were free from
discipline. Some of those who knew a little French, spoke of their wives
and children, in order to soften the enemies that were threatening them
with their bayonets. A brawny Teuton came up to Desnoyers and clapped
him on the back. It was Redbeard. He pressed his heart and then pointed
to the owner of the castle. “Franzosen . . . great friend of the
Franzosen” . . . and he grinned ingratiatingly at his protector.

Don Marcelo remained at the castle until the following morning, and was
astounded to see Georgette and her mother emerge unexpectedly from the
depths of the ruined lodge. They were weeping at the sight of the French
uniforms.

“It could not go on,” sobbed the widow. “God does not die.”

After a bad night among the ruins, the owner decided to leave
Villeblanche. What was there for him to do now in the destroyed castle?
. . . The presence of so many dead was racking his nerves. There were
hundreds, there were thousands. The soldiers and the farmers were
interring great heaps of them wherever he went, digging burial trenches
close to the castle, in all the avenues of the park, in the garden
paths, around the outbuildings. Even the depths of the circular lagoon
were filled with corpses. How could he ever live again in that tragic
community composed mostly of his enemies? . . . Farewell forever, castle
of Villeblanche!

He turned his steps toward Paris, planning to get there the best way
he could. He came upon corpses everywhere, but they were not all the
gray-green uniform. Many of his countrymen had fallen in the gallant
offensive. Many would still fall in the last throes of the battle that
was going on behind them, agitating the horizon with its incessant
uproar. Everywhere red pantaloons were sticking up out of the stubble,
hobnailed boots glistening in upright position near the roadside,
livid heads, amputated bodies, stray limbs--and, scattered through this
funereal medley, red kepis and Oriental caps, helmets with tufts of
horse hair, twisted swords, broken bayonets, guns and great mounds
of cannon cartridges. Dead horses were strewing the plain with their
swollen carcasses. Artillery wagons with their charred wood and bent
iron frames revealed the tragic moment of the explosion. Rectangles of
overturned earth marked the situation of the enemy’s batteries before
their retreat. Amidst the broken cannons and trucks were cones of
carbonized material, the remains of men and horses burned by the Germans
on the night before their withdrawal.

In spite of these barbarian holocausts corpses were every where in
infinite numbers. There seemed to be no end to their number; it seemed
as though the earth had expelled all the bodies that it had received
since the beginning of the world. The sun was impassively flooding the
fields of death with its waves of light. In its yellowish glow, the
pieces of the bayonets, the metal plates, the fittings of the guns were
sparkling like bits of crystal. The damp night, the rain, the rust of
time had not yet modified with their corrosive action these relics of
combat.

But decomposition had begun to set in. Graveyard odors were all along
the road, increasing in intensity as Desnoyers plodded on toward Paris.
Every half hour, the evidence of corruption became more pronounced--many
of the dead on this side of the river having lain there for three or
four days. Bands of crows, at the sound of his footsteps, rose up,
lazily flapping their wings, but returning soon to blacken the earth,
surfeited but not satisfied, having lost all fear of mankind.

From time to time, the sad pedestrian met living bands of men--platoons
of cavalry, gendarmes, Zouaves and chasseurs encamped around the ruined
farmsteads, exploring the country in pursuit of German fugitives. Don
Marcelo had to explain his business there, showing the passport that
Lacour had given him in order to make his trip on the military train.
Only in this way, could he continue his journey. These soldiers--many
of them slightly wounded--were still stimulated by victory. They were
laughing, telling stories, and narrating the great dangers which they
had escaped a few days before, always ending with, “We are going to kick
them across the frontier!” . . .

Their indignation broke forth afresh as they looked around at the
blasted towns--farms and single houses, all burned. Like skeletons
of prehistoric beasts, many steel frames twisted by the flames were
scattered over the plains. The brick chimneys of the factories were
either levelled to the ground or, pierced with the round holes made
by shells, were standing up like giant pastoral flutes forced into the
earth.

Near the ruined villages, the women were removing the earth and trying
to dig burial trenches, but their labor was almost useless because it
required an immense force to inter so many dead. “We are all going to
die after gaining the victory,” mused the old man. “The plague is going
to break out among us.”

The water of the river must also be contaminated by this contagion;
so when his thirst became intolerable he drank, in preference, from a
nearby pond. . . . But, alas, on raising his head, he saw some greenish
legs on the surface of the shallow water, the boots sunk in the muddy
banks. The head of the German was in the depths of the pool.

He had been trudging on for several hours when he stopped before a
ruined house which he believed that he recognized. Yes, it was the
tavern where he had lunched a few days ago on his way to the castle. He
forced his way in among the blackened walls where a persistent swarm of
flies came buzzing around him. The smell of decomposing flesh attracted
his attention; a leg which looked like a piece of charred cardboard was
wedged in the ruins. Looking at it bitterly he seemed to hear again the
old woman with her grandchildren clinging to her skirts--“Monsieur, why
are the people fleeing? War only concerns the soldiers. We countryfolk
have done no wrong to anybody, and we ought not to be afraid.”

Half an hour later, on descending a hilly path, the traveller had the
most unexpected of encounters. He saw there a taxicab, an automobile
from Paris. The chauffeur was walking tranquilly around the vehicle as
if it were at the cab stand, and he promptly entered into conversation
with this gentleman who appeared to him as downcast and dirty as a
tramp, with half of his livid face discolored from a blow. He had
brought out here in his machine some Parisians who had wanted to see the
battlefield; they were reporters; and he was waiting there to take them
back at nightfall.

Don Marcelo buried his right hand in his pocket. Two hundred francs
if the man would drive him to Paris. The chauffeur declined with the
gravity of a man faithful to his obligations. . . . “Five hundred?”
 . . . and he showed his fist bulging with gold coins. The man’s only
response was a twirl of the handle which started the machine to
snorting, and away they sped. There was not a battle in the neighborhood
of Paris every day in the year! His other clients could just wait.

And settling back into the motor-car, Desnoyers saw the horrors of the
battle field flying past at a dizzying speed and disappearing behind
him. He was rolling toward human life . . . he was returning to
civilization!

As they came into Paris, the nearly empty streets seemed to him to be
crowded with people. Never had he seen the city so beautiful. He whirled
through the avenue de l’Opera, whizzed past the place de la Concorde,
and thought he must be dreaming as he realized the gigantic leap that he
had taken within the hour. He compared all that was now around him with
the sights on that plain of death but a few miles away. No; no, it was
not possible. One of the extremes of this contrast must certainly be
false!

The automobile was beginning to slow down; he must be now in the avenue
Victor Hugo. . . . He couldn’t wake up. Was that really his home? . . .

The majestic concierge, unable to understand his forlorn appearance,
greeted him with amazed consternation. “Ah. Monsieur! . . . Where has
Monsieur been?” . . .

“In hell!” muttered Don Marcelo.

His wonderment continued when he found himself actually in his own
apartment, going through its various rooms. He was somebody once more.
The sight of the fruits of his riches and the enjoyment of home comforts
restored his self-respect at the same time that the contrast recalled to
his mind the recollection of all the humiliations and outrages that he
had suffered. . . . Ah, the scoundrels! . . .

Two mornings later, the door bell rang. A visitor!

There came toward him a soldier--a little soldier of the infantry,
timid, with his kepis in his hand, stuttering excuses in Spanish:--“I
knew that you were here . . . I come to . . .”

That voice? . . . Dragging him from the dark hallway, Don Marcelo
conducted him to the balcony. . . . How handsome he looked! . . . The
kepis was red, but darkened with wear; the cloak, too large, was torn
and darned; the great shoes had a strong smell of leather. Yet never
had his son appeared to him so elegant, so distinguished-looking as now,
fitted out in these rough ready-made clothes.

“You! . . . You! . . .”

The father embraced him convulsively, crying like a child, and trembling
so that he could no longer stand.

He had always hoped that they would finally understand each other. His
blood was coursing through the boy’s veins; he was good, with no other
defect than a certain obstinacy. He was excusing him now for all the
past, blaming himself for a great part of it. He had been too hard.

“You a soldier!” he kept exclaiming over and over. “You defending my
country, when it is not yours!” . . .

And he kissed him again, receding a few steps so as to get a better look
at him. Decidedly he was more fascinating now in his grotesque uniform,
than when he was so celebrated for his skill as a dancer and idolized by
the women.

When the delighted father was finally able to control his emotion, his
eyes, still filled with tears, glowed with a malignant light. A spasm of
hatred furrowed his face.

“Go,” he said simply. “You do not know what war is; I have just come
from it; I have seen it close by. This is not a war like other wars,
with rational enemies; it is a hunt of wild beasts. . . . Shoot without
a scruple against them all. . . . Every one that you overcome, rids
humanity of a dangerous menace.”

He hesitated a few seconds, and then added with tragic calm:

“Perhaps you may encounter familiar faces. Family ties are not always
formed to our tastes. Men of your blood are on the other side. If you
see any one of them . . . do not hesitate. Shoot! He is your enemy. Kill
him! . . . Kill him!”




