PART II



CHAPTER I

WHAT DON MARCELO ENVIED


Upon being convinced that war really was inevitable, the elder Desnoyers
was filled with amazement. Humanity had gone crazy. Was it possible that
war could happen in these days of so many railroads, so many merchant
marines, so many inventions, so much activity developed above and below
the earth? . . . The nations would ruin themselves forever. They were
now accustomed to luxuries and necessities unknown a century ago.
Capital was master of the world, and war was going to wipe it out. In
its turn, war would be wiped out in a few months’ time through lack
of funds to sustain it. His soul of a business man revolted before the
hundreds of thousands of millions that this foolhardy event was going to
convert into smoke and slaughter.

As his indignation had to fix upon something close at hand, he made his
own countrymen responsible for this insanity. Too much talk about la
revanche! The very idea of worrying for forty-four years over the two
lost provinces when the nation was mistress of enormous and undeveloped
lands in other countries! . . . Now they were going to pay the penalty
for such exasperating and clamorous foolishness.

For him war meant disaster writ large. He had no faith in his country.
France’s day had passed. Now the victors were of the Northern peoples,
and especially that Germany which he had seen so close, admiring with a
certain terror its discipline and its rigorous organization. The former
working-man felt the conservative and selfish instinct of all those who
have amassed millions. He scorned political ideals, but through class
interest he had of late years accepted the declarations against the
scandals of the government. What could a corrupt and disorganized
Republic do against the solidest and strongest empire in the
world? . . .

“We are going to our deaths,” he said to himself. “Worse than ‘70! . . .
We are going to see horrible things!”

The good order and enthusiasm with which the French responded to their
country’s call and transformed themselves into soldiers were most
astonishing to him. This moral shock made his national faith begin to
revive. The great majority of Frenchmen were good after all; the nation
was as valiant as in former times. Forty-four years of suffering and
alarm had developed their old bravery. But the leaders? Where were they
going to get leaders to march to victory? . . .

Many others were asking themselves the same question. The silence of the
democratic government was keeping the country in complete ignorance of
their future commanders. Everybody saw the army increasing from hour to
hour: very few knew the generals. One name was beginning to be repeated
from mouth to mouth, “Joffre . . . Joffre.” His first pictures made the
curious crowds struggle to get a glimpse of them. Desnoyers studied them
very carefully. “He looks like a very capable person.” His methodical
instincts were gratified by the grave and confident look of the
general of the Republic. Suddenly he felt the great confidence that
efficient-looking bank directors always inspired in him. He could
entrust his interests to this gentleman, sure that he would not act
impulsively.

Finally, against his will, Desnoyers was drawn into the whirlpool of
enthusiasm and emotion. Like everyone around him, he lived minutes that
were hours, and hours that were years. Events kept on overlapping each
other; within a week the world seemed to have made up for its long
period of peace.

The old man fairly lived in the street, attracted by the spectacle
of the multitude of civilians saluting the multitude of uniformed men
departing for the seat of war.

At night he saw the processions passing through the boulevards. The
tricolored flag was fluttering its colors under the electric lights. The
cafes were overflowing with people, sending forth from doors and windows
the excited, musical notes of patriotic songs. Suddenly, amidst applause
and cheers, the crowd would make an opening in the street. All Europe
was passing here; all Europe--less the arrogant enemy--and was saluting
France in her hour of danger with hearty spontaneity. Flags of different
nations were filing by, of all tints of the rainbow, and behind them
were the Russians with bright and mystical eyes; the English, with
heads uncovered, intoning songs of religious gravity; the Greeks and
Roumanians of aquiline profile; the Scandinavians, white and red; the
North Americans, with the noisiness of a somewhat puerile enthusiasm;
the Hebrews without a country, friends of the nation of socialistic
revolutions; the Italians, as spirited as a choir of heroic tenors;
the Spanish and South Americans, tireless in their huzzas. They were
students and apprentices who were completing their courses in the
schools and workshops, and refugees who, like shipwrecked mariners, had
sought shelter on the hospitable strand of Paris. Their cheers had no
special significance, but they were all moved by their desire to show
their love for the Republic. And Desnoyers, touched by the sight,
felt that France was still of some account in the world, that she yet
exercised a moral force among the nations, and that her joys and sorrows
were still of interest to humanity.

“In Berlin and Vienna, too,” he said to himself, “they must also be
cheering enthusiastically at this moment . . . but Germans only, no
others. Assuredly no foreigner is joining in their demonstrations.”

The nation of the Revolution, legislator of the rights of mankind, was
harvesting the gratitude of the throngs, but was beginning to feel
a certain remorse before the enthusiasm of the foreigners who were
offering their blood for France. Many were lamenting that the government
should delay twenty days, until after they had finished the operations
of mobilization, in admitting the volunteers. And he, a Frenchman born,
a few hours before, had been mistrusting his country! . . .

In the daytime the popular current was running toward the Gare de l’Est.
Crowded against the gratings was a surging mass of humanity stretching
its tentacles through the nearby streets. The station that was acquiring
the importance of a historic spot appeared like a narrow tunnel
through which a great human river was trying to flow with many rippling
encounters and much heavy pressure against its banks. A large part of
France in arms was coursing through this exit from Paris toward the
battlefields at the frontier.

Desnoyers had been in the station only twice, when going and coming from
Germany. Others were now taking the same road. The crowds were swarming
in from the environs of the city in order to see the masses of human
beings in geometric bodies, uniformly clad, disappearing within the
entrance with flash of steel and the rhythm of clanking metal. The
crystal archways that were glistening in the sun like fiery mouths were
swallowing and swallowing people. When night fell the processions were
still coming on, by light of the electric lamps. Through the iron grills
were passing thousands and thousands of draught horses; men with their
breasts crossed with metal and bunches of horsehair hanging from their
helmets, like paladins of bygone centuries; enormous cases that were
serving as cages for the aeronautic condors; strings of cannon, long
and narrow, painted grey and protected, by metal screens, more like
astronomical instruments than mouths of death; masses and masses of
red kepis (military caps) moving in marching rhythm, rows and rows of
muskets, some black and stark like reed plantations, others ending in
bayonets like shining spikes. And over all these restless fields of
seething throngs, the flags of the regiments were fluttering in the air
like colored birds; a white body, a blue wing, or a red one, a cravat of
gold on the neck, and above, the metal tip pointing toward the clouds.

Don Marcelo would return home from these send-offs vibrating with
nervous fatigue, as one who had just participated in a scene of racking
emotion. In spite of his tenacious character which always stood out
against admitting a mistake, the old man began to feel ashamed of his
former doubts. The nation was quivering with life; France was a grand
nation; appearances had deceived him as well as many others. Perhaps the
most of his countrymen were of a light and flippant character, given to
excessive interest in the sensuous side of life; but when danger came
they were fulfilling their duty simply, without the necessity of the
harsh force to which the iron-clad organizations were submitting their
people.

On leaving home on the morning of the fourth day of the mobilization
Desnoyers, instead of betaking himself to the centre of the city, went
in the opposite direction toward the rue de la Pompe. Some imprudent
words dropped by Chichi, and the uneasy looks of his wife and
sister-in-law made him suspect that Julio had returned from his trip. He
felt the necessity of seeing at least the outside of the studio windows,
as if they might give him news. And in order to justify a trip so at
variance with his policy of ignoring his son, he remembered that the
carpenter lived in the same street.

“I must hunt up Robert. He promised a week ago that he would come here.”

This Robert was a husky young fellow who, to use his own words, was
“emancipated from boss tyranny,” and was working independently in his
own home. A tiny, almost subterranean room was serving him for dwelling
and workshop. A woman he called “my affinity” was looking carefully
after his hearth and home, with a baby boy clinging to her skirts.
Desnoyers was accustomed to humor Robert’s tirades against his fellow
citizens because the man had always humored his whimseys about the
incessant rearrangement of his furniture. In the luxurious apartment in
the avenue Victor Hugo the carpenter would sing La Internacional while
using hammer and saw, and his employer would overlook his audacity of
speech because of the cheapness of his work.

Upon arriving at the shop he found the man with cap over one ear, broad
trousers like a mameluke’s, hobnailed boots and various pennants and
rosettes fastened to the lapels of his jacket.

“You’ve come too late, Boss,” he said cheerily. “I am just going to
close the factory. The Proprietor has been mobilized, and in a few hours
will join his regiment.”

And he pointed to a written paper posted on the door of his dwelling
like the printed cards on all establishments, signifying that employer
and employees had obeyed the order of mobilization.

It had never occurred to Desnoyers that his carpenter might become a
soldier, since he was so opposed to all kinds of authority. He hated
the flics, the Paris police, with whom he had, more than once, exchanged
fisticuffs and clubbings. Militarism was his special aversion. In the
meetings against the despotism of the barracks he had always been one
of the noisiest participants. And was this revolutionary fellow going to
war naturally and voluntarily? . . .

Robert spoke enthusiastically of his regiment, of life among comrades
with Death but four steps away.

“I believe in my ideas, Boss, the same as before,” he explained as
though guessing the other’s thought. “But war is war and teaches many
things--among others that Liberty must be accompanied with order
and authority. It is necessary that someone direct that the rest may
follow--willingly, by common consent . . . but they must follow. When
war actually comes one sees things very differently from when living at
home doing as one pleases.”

The night that they assassinated Jaures he howled with rage, announcing
that the following morning the murder would be avenged. He had hunted up
his associates in the district in order to inform them what retaliation
was being planned against the malefactors. But war was about to break
out. There was something in the air that was opposing civil strife, that
was placing private grievances in momentary abeyance, concentrating all
minds on the common weal.

“A week ago,” he exclaimed, “I was an anti-militarist! How far away that
seems now--as if a year had gone by! I keep thinking as before! I
love peace and hate war like all my comrades. But the French have not
offended anybody, and yet they threaten us, wishing to enslave us. . . .
But we French can be fierce, since they oblige us to be, and in order
to defend ourselves it is just that nobody should shirk, that all should
obey. Discipline does not quarrel with Revolution. Remember the armies
of the first Republic--all citizens, Generals as well as soldiers, but
Hoche, Kleber and the others were rough-hewn, unpolished benefactors who
knew how to command and exact obedience.”

The carpenter was well read. Besides the papers and pamphlets of “the
Idea,” he had also read on stray sheets the views of Michelet and other
liberal actors on the stage of history.

“We are going to make war on War,” he added. “We are going to fight so
that this war will be the last.”

This statement did not seem to be expressed with sufficient clearness,
so he recast his thought.

“We are going to fight for the future; we are going to die in order
that our grandchildren may not have to endure a similar calamity. If
the enemy triumphs, the war-habit will triumph, and conquest will be the
only means of growth. First they will overcome Europe, then the rest of
the world. Later on, those who have been pillaged will rise up in their
wrath. More wars! . . . We do not want conquests. We desire to regain
Alsace and Lorraine, for their inhabitants wish to return to us . . .
and nothing more. We shall not imitate the enemy, appropriating
territory and jeopardizing the peace of the world. We had enough of that
with Napoleon; we must not repeat that experience. We are going to fight
for our immediate security, and at the same time for the security of
the world--for the life of the weaker nations. If this were a war
of aggression, of mere vanity, of conquest, then we Socialists would
bethink ourselves of our anti-militarism. But this is self-defense, and
the government has not been at fault. Since we are attacked, we must be
united in our defensive.”

The carpenter, who was also anti-clerical, was now showing a more
generous tolerance, an amplitude of ideas that embraced all mankind. The
day before he had met at the administration office a Reservist who was
just leaving to join his regiment. At a glance he saw that this man was
a priest.

“I am a carpenter,” he had said to him, by way of introduction, “and
you, comrade, are working in the churches?”

He employed this figure of speech in order that the priest might not
suspect him of anything offensive. The two had clasped hands.

“I do not take much stock in the clerical cowl,” Robert explained
to Desnoyers. “For some time I have not been on friendly terms with
religion. But in every walk of life there must be good people, and the
good people ought to understand each other in a crisis like this. Don’t
you think so, Boss?”

The war coincided with his socialistic tendencies. Before this,
when speaking of future revolution, he had felt a malign pleasure in
imagining all the rich deprived of their fortunes and having to work in
order to exist. Now he was equally enthusiastic at the thought that all
Frenchmen would share the same fate without class distinction.

“All with knapsacks on their backs and eating at mess.”

And he was even extending this military sobriety to those who remained
behind the army. War was going to cause great scarcity of provisions,
and all would have to come down to very plain fare.

“You, too, Boss, who are too old to go to war--you, with all your
millions, will have to eat the same as I. . . . Admit that it is a
beautiful thing.”

Desnoyers was not offended by the malicious satisfaction that his future
privations seemed to inspire in the carpenter. He was very thoughtful.
A man of his stamp, an enemy of existing conditions, who had no property
to defend, was going to war--to death, perhaps--because of a generous
and distant ideal, in order that future generations might never know
the actual horrors of war! To do this, he was not hesitating at the
sacrifice of his former cherished beliefs, all that he had held sacred
till now. . . . And he who belonged to the privileged class, who
possessed so many tempting things, requiring defense, had given himself
up to doubt and criticism! . . .

Hours after, he again saw the carpenter, near the Arc de Triomphe. He
was one of a group of workmen looking much as he did, and this group
was joining others and still others that represented every social
class--well-dressed citizens, stylish and anaemic young men, graduate
students with worn jackets, pale faces and thick glasses, and youthful
priests who were smiling rather shamefacedly as though they had been
caught at some ridiculous escapade. At the head of this human herd was
a sergeant, and as a rear guard, various soldiers with guns on their
shoulders. Forward march, Reservists! . . .

And a musical cry, a solemn harmony like a Greek chant, menacing and
monotonous, surged up from this mass with open mouths, swinging arms,
and legs that were opening and shutting like compasses.

Robert was singing the martial chorus with such great

energy that his eyes and Gallic moustachios were fairly trembling. In
spite of his corduroy suit and his bulging linen hand bag, he had
the same grand and heroic aspect as the figures by Rude in the Arc de
Triomphe. The “affinity” and the boy were trudging along the sidewalk so
as to accompany him to the station. For a moment he took his eyes from
them to speak with a companion in the line, shaven and serious-looking,
undoubtedly the priest whom he had met the day before. Now they were
talking confidentially, intimately, with that brotherliness which
contact with death inspires in mankind.

The millionaire followed the carpenter with a look of respect,
immeasurably increased since he had taken his part in this human
avalanche. And this respect had in it something of envy, the envy that
springs from an uneasy conscience.

Whenever Don Marcelo passed a bad night, suffering from nightmare, a
certain terrible thing--always the same--would torment his imagination.
Rarely did he dream of mortal peril to his family or self. The frightful
vision was always that certain notes bearing his signature were
presented for collection which he, Marcelo Desnoyers, the man always
faithful to his bond, with a past of immaculate probity, was not able
to pay. Such a possibility made him tremble, and long after waking his
heart would be oppressed with terror. To his imagination this was the
greatest disgrace that a man could suffer.

Now that war was overturning his existence with its agitations, the
same agonies were reappearing. Completely awake, with full powers of
reasoning, he was suffering exactly the same distress as when in his
horrible dreams he saw his dishonored signature on a protested document.

All his past was looming up before his eyes with such extraordinary
clearness that it seemed as though until then his mind must have been
in hopeless confusion. The threatened land of France was his native
country. Fifteen centuries of history had been working for him, in
order that his opening eyes might survey progress and comforts that his
ancestors did not even know. Many generations of Desnoyers had prepared
for his advent into life by struggling with the land and defending it
that he might be born into a free family and fireside. . . . And when
his turn had come for continuing this effort, when his time had arrived
in the rosary of generations--he had fled like a debtor evading payment!
. . . On coming into his fatherland he had contracted obligations with
the human group to whom he owed his existence. This obligation should be
paid with his arms, with any sacrifice that would repel danger . . . and
he had eluded the acknowledgment of his signature, fleeing his country
and betraying his trust to his forefathers! Ah, miserable coward! The
material success of his life, the riches acquired in a remote country,
were comparatively of no importance. There are failures that millions
cannot blot out. The uneasiness of his conscience was proving it now.
Proof, too, was in the envy and respect inspired by this poor mechanic
marching to meet his death with others equally humble, all kindled with
the satisfaction of duty fulfilled, of sacrifice accepted.

The memory of Madariaga came to his memory.

“Where we make our riches, and found a family--there is our country.”

No, the statement of the centaur was not correct. In normal times,
perhaps. Far from one’s native land when it is not exposed to danger,
one may forget it for a few years. But he was living now in France, and
France was being obliged to defend herself against enemies wishing to
overpower her. The sight of all her people rising en masse was becoming
an increasingly shameful torture for Desnoyers, making him think all the
time of what he should have done in his youth, of what he had dodged.

The veterans of ‘70 were passing through the streets, with the green and
black ribbon in their lapel, souvenirs of the privations of the Siege of
Paris, and of heroic and disastrous campaigns. The sight of these men,
satisfied with their past, made him turn pale. Nobody was recalling his,
but he knew it, and that was enough. In vain his reason would try to
lull this interior tempest. . . . Those times were different; then
there was none of the present unanimity; the Empire was unpopular . . .
everything was lost. . . . But the recollection of a celebrated sentence
was fixing itself in his mind as an obsession--“France still remained!”
 Many had thought as he did in his youth, but they had not, therefore,
evaded military service. They had stood by their country in a last and
desperate resistance.

Useless was his excuse-making reasoning. Nobler thoughts showed him the
fallacy of this beating around the bush. Explanations and demonstrations
are unnecessary to the understanding of patriotic and religious ideals;
true patriotism does not need them. One’s country . . . is one’s
country. And the laboring man, skeptical and jesting, the self-centred
farmer, the solitary pastor, all had sprung to action at the sound
of this conjuring word, comprehending it instantly, without previous
instruction.

“It is necessary to pay,” Don Marcelo kept repeating mentally. “I ought
to pay my debt.”

As in his dreams, he was constantly feeling the anguish of an upright
and desperate man who wishes to meet his obligations.

Pay! . . . and how? It was now very late. For a moment the heroic
resolution came into his head of offering himself as a volunteer, of
marching with his bag at his side in some one of the groups of future
combatants, the same as the carpenter. But the uselessness of the
sacrifice came immediately into his mind. Of what use would it be?
. . . He looked robust and was well-preserved for his age, but he was
over seventy, and only the young make good soldiers. Combat is but
one incident in the struggle. Equally necessary are the hardship
and self-denial in the form of interminable marches, extremes of
temperature, nights in the open air, shoveling earth, digging trenches,
loading carts, suffering hunger. . . . No; it was too late. He could not
even leave an illustrious name that might serve as an example.

Instinctively he glanced behind. He was not alone in the world; he had a
son who could assume his father’s debt . . . but that hope only lasted
a minute. His son was not French; he belonged to another people; half
of his blood was from another source. Besides, how could the boy be
expected to feel as he did? Would he even understand if his father
should explain it to him? . . . It was useless to expect anything from
this lady-killing, dancing clown, from this fellow of senseless bravado,
who was constantly exposing his life in duels in order to satisfy a
silly sense of honor.

Oh, the meekness of the bluff Senor Desnoyers after these reflections!
. . . His family felt alarmed at seeing the humility and gentleness with
which he moved around the house. The two men-servants had gone to
join their regiments, and to them the most surprising result of
the declaration of war was the sudden kindness of their master, the
lavishness of his farewell gifts, the paternal care with which he
supervised their preparations for departure. The terrible Don Marcelo
embraced them with moist eyes, and the two had to exert themselves to
prevent his accompanying them to the station.

Outside of his home he was slipping about humbly as though mutely asking
pardon of the many people around him. To him they all appeared his
superiors. It was a period of economic crisis; for the time being, the
rich also were experiencing what it was to be poor and worried; the
banks had suspended operations and were paying only a small part of
their deposits. For some weeks the millionaire was deprived of his
wealth, and felt restless before the uncertain future. How long would it
be before they could send him money from South America? Was war going to
take away fortunes as well as lives? . . . And yet Desnoyers had never
appreciated money less, nor disposed of it with greater generosity.

Numberless mobilized men of the lower classes who were going alone
toward the station met a gentleman who would timidly stop them, put
his hand in his pocket and leave in their right hand a bill of
twenty francs, fleeing immediately before their astonished eyes. The
working-women who were returning weeping from saying good-bye to their
husbands saw this same gentleman smiling at the children who were with
them, patting their cheeks and hastening away, leaving a five-franc
piece in their hands.

Don Marcelo, who had never smoked, was now frequenting the tobacco
shops, coming out with hands and pockets filled in order that he might,
with lavish generosity, press the packages upon the first soldier he
met. At times the recipient, smiling courteously, would thank him with a
few words, revealing his superior breeding--afterwards passing the gift
on to others clad in cloaks as coarse and badly cut as his own. The
mobilization, universally obligatory, often caused him to make these
mistakes.

The rough hands pressing his with a grateful clasp, left him satisfied
for a few moments. Ah, if he could only do more! . . . The Government
in mobilizing its vehicles had appropriated three of his monumental
automobiles, and Desnoyers felt very sorry that they were not also
taking the fourth mastodon. Of what use were they to him? The shepherds
of this monstrous herd, the chauffeur and his assistants, were now in
the army. Everybody was marching away. Finally he and his son would be
the only ones left--two useless creatures.

He roared with wrath on learning of the enemy’s entrance into Belgium,
considering this the most unheard-of treason in history. He suffered
agonies of shame at remembering that at first he had held the exalted
patriots of his country responsible for the war. . . . What perfidy,
methodically carried out after long years of preparation! The accounts
of the sackings, fires and butcheries made him turn pale and gnash his
teeth. To him, to Marcelo Desnoyers, might happen the very same thing
that Belgium was enduring, if the barbarians should invade France. He
had a home in the city, a castle in the country, and a family. Through
association of ideas, the women assaulted by the soldiery, made him
think of Chichi and the dear Dona Luisa. The mansions in flames called
to his mind the rare and costly furnishings accumulated in his expensive
dwellings--the armorial bearings of his social elevation. The old folk
that were shot, the women foully mutilated, the children with their
hands cut off, all the horrors of a war of terror, aroused the violence
of his character.

And such things could happen with impunity in this day and
generation! . . .

In order to convince himself that punishment was near, that vengeance
was overtaking the guilty ones, he felt the necessity of mingling daily
with the people crowding around the Gare de l’Est.

Although the greater part of the troops were operating on the frontiers,
that was not diminishing the activity in Paris. Entire battalions were
no longer going off, but day and night soldiers were coming to the
station singly or in groups. These were Reserves without uniform on
their way to enroll themselves with their companies, officials who until
then had been busy with the work of the mobilization, platoons in arms
destined to fill the great gaps opened by death.

The multitude, pressed against the railing, was greeting those who were
going off, following them with their eyes while they were crossing the
large square. The latest editions of the daily papers were announced
with hoarse yells, and instantly the dark throng would be spotted with
white, all reading with avidity the printed sheets. Good news: “Vive
la France!” A doubtful despatch, foreshadowing calamity: “No matter! We
must press on at all costs! The Russians will close in behind them!” And
while these dialogues, inspired by the latest news were taking place,
many young girls were going among the groups offering little flags and
tricolored cockades--and passing through the patio, men and still more
men were disappearing behind the glass doors, on their way to the war.

A sub-lieutenant of the Reserves, with his bag on his shoulder, was
accompanied by his father toward the file of policemen keeping the
crowds back. Desnoyers saw in the young officer a certain resemblance to
his son. The father was wearing in his lapel the black and green ribbon
of 1870--a decoration which always filled Desnoyers with remorse. He was
tall and gaunt, but was still trying to hold himself erect, with a heavy
frown. He wanted to show himself fierce, inhuman, in order to hide his
emotion.

“Good-bye, my boy! Do your best.”

“Good-bye, father.”

They did not clasp hands, and each was avoiding looking at the other.
The official was smiling like an automaton. The father turned his back
brusquely, and threading his way through the throng, entered a cafe,
where for some time he needed the most retired seat in the darkest
earner to hide his emotion.

AND DON MARCELO ENVIED HIS GRIEF.

Some of the Reservists came along singing, preceded by a flag. They were
joking and jostling each other, betraying in excited actions, long halts
at all the taverns along the way. One of them, without interrupting
his song, was pressing the hand of an old woman marching beside him,
cheerful and dry-eyed. The mother was concentrating all her strength in
order, with feigned happiness, to accompany this strapping lad to the
last minute.

Others were coming along singly, separated from their companies, but not
on that account alone. The gun was hanging from the shoulder, the back
overlaid by the hump of the knapsack, the red legs shooting in and out
of the turned-back folds of the blue cloak, and the smoke of a pipe
under the visor of the kepis. In front of one of these men, four
children were walking along, lined up according to size. They kept
turning their heads to admire their father, suddenly glorified by his
military trappings. At his side was marching his wife, affable and
resigned, feeling in her simple soul a revival of love, an ephemeral
Spring, born of the contact with danger. The man, a laborer of Paris,
who a few months before was singing La Internacional, demanding the
abolishment of armies and the brotherhood of all mankind, was now going
in quest of death. His wife, choking back her sobs, was admiring him
greatly. Affection and commiseration made her insist upon giving him a
few last counsels. In his knapsack she had put his best handkerchiefs,
the few provisions in the house and all the money. Her man was not to be
uneasy about her and the children; they would get along all right. The
government and kind neighbors would look after them.

The soldier in reply was jesting over the somewhat misshapen figure of
his wife, saluting the coming citizen, and prophesying that he would
be born in a time of great victory. A kiss to the wife, an affectionate
hair-pull for his offspring, and then he had joined his comrades. . . .
No tears. Courage! . . . Vive la France!

The final injunctions of the departing were now heard. Nobody was
crying. But as the last red pantaloons disappeared, many hands grasped
the iron railing convulsively, many handkerchiefs were bitten with
gnashing teeth, many faces were hidden in the arms with sobs of anguish.

AND DON MARCELO ENVIED THESE TEARS.

The old woman, on losing the warm contact of her son’s hand from her
withered one, turned in the direction which she believed to be that of
the hostile country, waving her arms with threatening fury.

“Ah, the assassin! . . . the bandit!”

In her wrathful imagination she was again seeing the countenance so
often displayed in the illustrated pages of the periodicals--moustaches
insolently aggressive, a mouth with the jaw and teeth of a wolf, that
laughed . . . and laughed as men must have laughed in the time of the
cave-men.

AND DON MARCELO ENVIED THIS WRATH!



