CHAPTER IV

“NO ONE WILL KILL HIM”


Four months later, Don Marcelo’s confidence received a rude shock. Julio
was wounded. But at the same time that Lacour bought him this news,
lamentably delayed, he tranquilized him with the result of his
investigations in the war ministry. Sergeant Desnoyers was now
a sub-lieutenant, his wound was almost healed and, thanks to the
wire-pulling of the senator, he was coming to pass a fortnight with his
family while convalescing.

“An exceptionally brave fellow,” concluded the influential man. “I
have read what his chiefs say about him. At the head of his platoon, he
attacked a German company; he killed the captain with his own hand; he
did I don’t know how many more brave things besides. . . . They have
presented him with the military medal and have made him an officer.
. . . A regular hero!”

And the rapidly aging father, weeping with emotion, but with increasing
enthusiasm, shook his head and trembled. He repented now of his
momentary lack of faith when the first news of his wounded boy reached
him. How absurd! . . . No one would kill Julio; his heart told him so.

Soon after, he saw him coming home amid the cries and delighted
exclamations of the women. Poor Dona Luisa wept as she embraced him,
hanging on his neck with sobs of emotion. Chichi contemplated him with
grave reflection, putting half of her mind on the recent arrival while
the rest flew far away in search of the other warrior. The dusky,
South American maids fought each other for the opening in the curtains,
peering through the crack with the gaze of an antelope.

The father admired the little scrap of gold on the sleeve of the gray
cloak, with the skirts buttoning behind, examining afterwards the dark
blue cap with its low brim, adopted by the French for the war in the
trenches. The traditional kepi had disappeared. A suitable visor, like
that of the men in the Spanish infantry, now shadowed Julio’s face. Don
Marcelo noted, too, the short and well-cared-for beard, very different
from the one he had seen in the trenches. The boy was coming home,
groomed and polished from his recent stay in the hospital.

“Isn’t it true that he looks like me?” queried the old man proudly.

Dona Luisa responded with the inconsequence that mothers always show in
matters of resemblance.

“He has always been the living image of you!”

Having made sure that he was well and happy, the entire family suddenly
felt a certain disquietude. They wished to examine his wound so as to
convince themselves that he was completely out of danger.

“Oh, it’s nothing at all,” protested the sub-lieutenant. “A bullet wound
in the shoulder. The doctor feared at first that I might lose my left
arm, but it has healed well and it isn’t worth while to think any more
about it.”

Chichi’s appraising glance swept Julio from head to foot; taking in all
the details of his military elegance. His cloak was worn thin and dirty;
the leggings were spatter-dashed with mud; he smelled of leather, sweaty
cloth and strong tobacco; but on one wrist he was wearing a watch, and
on the other, his identity medal fastened with a gold chain. She had
always admired her brother for his natural good taste, so she stowed
away all these little details in her memory in order to pass them on to
Rene. Then she surprised her mother with a demand for a loan that she
might send a little gift to her artilleryman.

Don Marcelo gloated over the fifteen days of satisfaction ahead of him.
Sub-lieutenant Desnoyers found it impossible to go out alone, for his
father was always pacing up and down the reception hall before the
military cap which was shedding modest splendor and glory upon the hat
rack. Scarcely had Julio put it on his head before his sire appeared,
also with hat and cane, ready to sally forth.

“Will you permit me to accompany you? . . . I will not bother you.”

This would be said so humbly, with such an evident desire to have his
request granted, that his son had not the heart to refuse him. In order
to take a walk with Argensola, he had to scurry down the back stairs, or
resort to other schoolboy tricks.

Never had the elder Desnoyers promenaded the streets of Paris with
such solid satisfaction as by the side of this muscular youth in
his gloriously worn cloak, on whose breast were glistening his two
decorations--the cross of war and the military medal. He was a hero,
and this hero was his son. He accepted as homage to them both the
sympathetic glances of the public in the street cars and subways. The
interest with which the women regarded the fine-looking youth tickled
him immensely. All the other military men that they met, no matter how
many bands and crosses they displayed, appeared to the doting father
mere embusques, unworthy of comparison with his Julio. . . . The
wounded men who got out of the coaches by the aid of staffs and crutches
inspired him with the greatest pity. Poor fellows! . . . They did not
bear the charmed life of his son. Nobody could kill him; and when, by
chance, he had received a wound, the scars had immediately disappeared
without detriment to his handsome person.

Sometimes, especially at night, Desnoyers senior would show an
unexpected magnanimity, letting Julio fare forth alone. Since before the
war, his son had led a life filled with triumphant love-affairs, what
might he not achieve now with the added prestige of a distinguished
officer! . . .

Passing through his room on his way to bed, the father imagined the hero
in the charming company of some aristocratic lady. None but a feminine
celebrity was worthy of him; his paternal pride could accept nothing
less. . . . And it never occurred to him that Julio might be with
Argensola in a music-hall or in a moving-picture show, enjoying the
simple and monotonous diversions of a Paris sobered by war, with the
homely tastes of a sub-lieutenant whose amorous conquests were no more
than the renewal of some old friendships.

One evening as Don Marcelo was accompanying his son down the Champs
Elysees, he started at recognizing a lady approaching from the opposite
direction. It was Madame Laurier. . . . Would she recognize Julio? He
noted that the youth turned pale and began looking at the other people
with feigned interest. She continued straight ahead, erect, unseeing.
The old gentleman was almost irritated at such coldness. To pass by his
son without feeling his presence instinctively! Ah, these women! . . .
He turned his head involuntarily to look after her, but had to avert his
inquisitive glance immediately. He had surprised Marguerite motionless
behind them, pallid with surprise, and fixing her gaze earnestly on the
soldier who was separating himself from her. Don Marcelo read in her
eyes admiration, love, all of the past that was suddenly surging up in
her memory. Poor woman! . . . He felt for her a paternal affection as
though she were the wife of Julio. His friend Lacour had again spoken
to him about the Lauriers. He knew that Marguerite was going to become a
mother, and the old man, without taking into account the reconciliation
nor the passage of time, felt as much moved at the thought of this
approaching maternity as though the child were going to be Julio’s.

Meanwhile Julio was marching right on, without turning his head, without
being conscious of the burning gaze fixed upon him, colorless, but
humming a tune to hide his emotion. He always believed that Marguerite
had passed near him without recognizing him, since his father did not
betray her.

One of Don Marcelo’s pet occupations was to make his son tell about the
encounter in which he had been hurt. No visitor ever came to see the
sub-lieutenant but the father always made the same petition.

“Tell us how you were wounded. . . . Explain how you killed that German
captain.”

Julio tried to excuse himself with visible annoyance. He was already
surfeited with his own history. To please his father, he had related the
facts to the senator, to Argensola and to Tchernoff in his studio, and
to other family friends. . . . He simply could not do it again.

So the father began the narration on his own account, giving the relief
and details of the deed as though seen with his own eyes. . . .

He had to take possession of the ruins of a sugar refinery in front
of the trench. The Germans had been expelled by the French cannon.
A reconnoitring survey under the charge of a trusty man was then
necessary. And the heads, as usual, had selected Sergeant Desnoyers.

At daybreak, the platoon had advanced stealthily without encountering
any difficulty. The soldiers scattered among the ruins. Julio then went
on alone, examining the positions of the enemy; on turning around a
corner of the wall, he had the most unexpected of encounters. A German
captain was standing in front of him. They had almost bumped into each
other. They looked into each other’s eyes with more suspense than hate,
yet at the same time, they were trying instinctively to kill each other,
each one trying to get the advantage by his swiftness. The captain
had dropped the map that he was carrying. His right hand sought his
revolver, trying to draw it from its case without once taking his eyes
off his enemy. Then he had to give this up as useless--it was too late.
With his eyes distended by the proximity of death, he kept his gaze
fixed upon the Frenchman who had raised his gun to his face. A shot,
from a barrel almost touching him . . . and the German fell dead.

Not till then did the victor notice the captain’s orderly who was but a
few steps behind. He shot Desnoyers, wounding him in the shoulder. The
French hurried to the spot, killing the corporal. Then there was a sharp
cross-fire with the enemy’s company which had halted a little ways off
while their commander was exploring the ground. Julio, in spite of
his wound, continued at the head of his section, defending the factory
against superior forces until supports arrived, and the land remained
definitely in the power of the French.

“Wasn’t that about the way of it?” Don Marcelo would always wind up.

The son assented, desirous that his annoyance with the persistent story
should come to an end as soon as possible. Yes, that was the way of it.
But what the father didn’t know, what Julio would never tell, was the
discovery that he had made after killing the captain.

The two men, during the interminable second in which they had confronted
each other, had showed in their eyes something more than the surprise
of an encounter, and the wish to overcome the other. Desnoyers knew that
man. The captain knew him, too. He guessed it from his expression. . . .
But self-preservation was more insistent than recollection and prevented
them both from co-ordinating their thoughts.

Desnoyers had fired with the certainty that he was killing someone that
he knew. Afterwards, while directing the defense of the position and
guarding against the approach of reinforcements, he had a suspicion that
the enemy whose corpse was lying a few feet away might possibly be a
member of the von Hartrott family. No, he looked much older than his
cousins, yet younger than his Uncle Karl who at his age, would be no
mere captain of infantry.

When, weakened by the loss of blood, they were about to carry him to
the trenches, the sergeant expressed a wish to see again the body of
his victim. His doubt continued before the face blanched by death. The
wide-open eyes still seemed to retain their startled expression. The man
had undoubtedly recognized him. His face was familiar. Who was he? . . .
Suddenly in his mind’s eye, Julio saw the heaving ocean, a great
steamer, a tall, blonde woman looking at him with half-closed eyes of
invitation, a corpulent, moustached man making speeches in the style of
the Kaiser. “Rest in peace, Captain Erckmann!” . . . Thus culminated in
a corner of France the discussions started at table in mid-ocean.

He excused himself mentally as though he were in the presence of the
sweet Bertha. He had had to kill, in order not to be killed. Such is
war. He tried to console himself by thinking that Erckmann, perhaps,
had failed to identify him, without realizing that his slayer was the
shipmate of the summer. . . . And he kept carefully hidden in the depths
of his memory this encounter arranged by Fate. He did not even tell
Argensola who knew of the incidents of the trans-atlantic passage.

When he least expected it, Don Marcelo found himself at the end of that
delightful and proud existence which his son’s presence had brought him.
The fortnight had flown by so swiftly! The sub-lieutenant had returned
to his post, and all the family, after this period of reality, had
had to fall back on the fond illusions of hope, watching again for the
arrival of his letters, making conjectures about the silence of the
absent one, sending him packet after packet of everything that the
market was offering for the soldiery--for the most part, useless and
absurd things.

The mother became very despondent. Julio’s visit home but made her feel
his absence with greater intensity. Seeing him, hearing those tales of
death that her husband was so fond of repeating, made her realize all
the more clearly the dangers constantly surrounding her son. Fatality
appeared to be warning her with funereal presentiments.

“They are going to kill him,” she kept saying to Desnoyers. “That wound
was a forewarning from heaven.”

When passing through the streets, she trembled with emotion at sight of
the invalid soldiers. The convalescents of energetic appearance, filled
her with the greatest pity. They made her think of a certain trip with
her husband to San Sebastian where a bull fight had made her cry out
with indignation and compassion, pitying the fate of the poor, gored
horses. With entrails hanging, they were taken to the corrals, and
submitted to a hurried adjustment in order that they might return to the
arena stimulated by a false energy. Again and again they were reduced to
this makeshift cobbling until finally a fatal goring finished them.
. . . These recently cured men continually brought to her mind those poor
beasts. Some had been wounded three times since the beginning of the
war, and were returning surgically patched together and re-galvanized to
take another chance in the lottery of Fate, always in the expectation of
the supreme blow. . . . Ay, her son!

Desnoyers waxed very indignant over his wife’s low spirits, retorting:

“But I tell you that Nobody will kill Julio! . . . He is my son. In my
youth I, too, passed through great dangers. They wounded me, too, in the
wars in the other world, and nevertheless, here I am at a ripe old age.”

Events seemed to reinforce his blind faith. Calamities were raining
around the family and saddening his relatives, yet not one grazed the
intrepid sub-lieutenant who was persisting in his daring deeds with the
heroic nerve of a musketeer.

Dona Luisa received a letter from Germany. Her sister wrote from Berlin,
transmitting her letters through the kindness of a South American in
Switzerland. This time, the good lady wept for some one besides her son;
she wept for Elena and the enemies. In Germany there were mothers, too,
and she put the sentiment of maternity above all patriotic differences.

Poor Frau von Hartrott! Her letter written a month before, had contained
nothing but death notices and words of despair. Captain Otto was dead.
Dead, too, was one of his younger brothers. The fact that the latter
had fallen in a territory dominated by their nation, at least gave the
mother the sad comfort of being able to weep near his grave. But the
Captain was buried on French soil, nobody knew where, and she would
never be able to find his remains, mingled with hundreds of others.
A third son was wounded in Poland. Her two daughters had lost their
promised lovers, and the sight of their silent grief, was intensifying
the mother’s suffering. Von Hartrott continued presiding over patriotic
societies and making plans of expansion after the near victory, but he
had aged greatly in the last few months. The “sage” was the only one
still holding his own. The family afflictions were aggravating the
ferocity of Professor Julius von Hartrott. He was calculating, in a book
he was writing, the hundreds of thousands of millions that Germany must
exact after her triumph, and the various nations that she would have to
annex to the Fatherland.

Dona Luisa imagined that in the avenue Victor Hugo, she could hear the
mother’s tears falling in her home in Berlin. “You will understand,
Luisa, my despair. . . . We were all so happy! May God punish those
who have brought such sorrow on the world! The Emperor is innocent. His
adversaries are to blame for it all . . .”

Don Marcelo was silent about the letter in his wife’s presence. He
pitied Elena for her losses, so he overlooked her political connections.
He was touched, too, at Dona Luisa’s distress about Otto. She had been
his godmother and Desnoyers his godfather. That was so--Don Marcelo had
forgotten all about it; and the fact recalled to his mental vision the
placid life of the ranch, and the play of the blonde children that he
had petted behind their grandfather’s back, before Julio was born. For
many years, he had lavished great affection on these youngsters, when
dismayed at Julio’s delayed arrival. He was really affected at thinking
of what must be Karl’s despair.

But then, as soon as he was alone, a selfish coldness would blot out
this compassion. War was war, and the Germans had sought it. France had
to defend herself, and the more enemies fell the better. . . . The only
soldier who interested him now was Julio. And his faith in the destiny
of his son made him feel a brutal joy, a paternal satisfaction almost
amounting to ferocity.

“No one will kill HIM! . . . My heart tells me so.”

A nearer trouble shook his peace of mind. When he returned to his home
one evening, he found Dona Luisa with a terrified aspect holding her
hands to her head.

“The daughter, Marcelo . . . our daughter!”

Chichi was stretched out on a sofa in the salon, pale, with an olive
tinge, looking fixedly ahead of her as if she could see somebody in the
empty air. She was not crying, but a slight palpitation was making her
swollen eyes tremble spasmodically.

“I want to see him,” she was saying hoarsely. “I must see him!”

The father conjectured that something terrible must have happened to
Lacour’s son. That was the only thing that could make Chichi show such
desperation. His wife was telling him the sad news. Rene was wounded,
very seriously wounded. A shell had exploded over his battery, killing
many of his comrades. The young officer had been dragged out from a
mountain of dead, one hand was gone, he had injuries in the legs, chest
and head.

“I’ve got to see him!” reiterated Chichi.

And Don Marcelo had to concentrate all his efforts in making his
daughter give up this dolorous insistence which made her exact an
immediate journey to the front, trampling down all obstacles, in order
to reach her wounded lover. The senator finally convinced her of the
uselessness of it all. She would simply have to wait; he, the father,
had to be patient. He was negotiating for Rene to be transferred to a
hospital in Paris.

The great man moved Desnoyers to pity. He was making such heroic efforts
to preserve the stoic serenity of ancient days by recalling his glorious
ancestors and all the illustrious figures of the Roman Republic. But
these oratorical illusions had suddenly fallen flat, and his old friend
surprised him weeping more than once. An only child, and he might
have to lose him! . . . Chichi’s dumb woe made him feel even greater
commiseration. Her grief was without tears or faintings. Her sallow
face, the feverish brilliancy of her eyes, and the rigidity that made
her move like an automaton were the only signs of her emotion. She was
living with her thoughts far away, with no knowledge of what was going
on around her.

When the patient arrived in Paris, his father and fiancee were
transfigured. They were going to see him, and that was enough to make
them imagine that he was already recuperated.

Chichi hastened to the hospital with her mother and the senator. Then
she went alone and insisted on remaining there, on living at the wounded
man’s side, waging war on all regulations and clashing with Sisters
of Charity, trained nurses, and all who roused in her the hatred of
rivalry. Soon realizing that all her violence accomplished nothing, she
humiliated herself and became suddenly very submissive, trying with her
wiles, to win the women over one by one. Finally, she was permitted to
spend the greater part of the day with Rene.

When Desnoyers first saw the wounded artilleryman in bed, he had to make
a great effort to keep the tears back. . . . Ay, his son, too, might be
brought to this sad pass! . . . The man looked to him like an Egyptian
mummy, because of his complete envelopment in tight bandage wrappings.
The sharp hulls of the shell had fairly riddled him. There could only
be seen a pair of sweet eyes and a blond bit of moustache sticking up
between white bands. The poor fellow was trying to smile at Chichi, who
was hovering around him with a certain authority as though she were in
her own home.

Two months rolled by. Rene was better, almost well. His betrothed had
never doubted his recovery from the moment that they permitted her to
remain with him.

“No one that I love, ever dies,” she asserted with a ring of her
father’s self-confidence. “As if I would ever permit the Boches to leave
me without a husband!”

She had her little sugar soldier back again, but, oh, in what
a lamentable state! . . . Never had Don Marcelo realized the
de-personalizing horrors of war as when he saw entering his home this
convalescent whom he had known months before--elegant and slender, with
a delicate and somewhat feminine beauty. His face was now furrowed by
a network of scars that had transformed it into a purplish arabesque.
Within his body were hidden many such. His left hand had disappeared
with a part of the forearm, the empty sleeve hanging over the remainder.
The other hand was supported on a cane, a necessary aid in order to be
able to move a leg that would never recover its elasticity.

But Chichi was content. She surveyed her dear little soldier with more
enthusiasm than ever--a little deformed, perhaps, but very interesting.
With her mother, she accompanied the convalescent in his constitutionals
through the Bois de Boulogne. When, in crossing a street, automobilists
or coachmen failed to stop their vehicles in order to give the invalid
the right of way, her eyes shot lightning shafts, as she thundered,
“Shameless embusques!” . . . She was now feeling the same fiery
resentment as those women of former days who used to insult her Rene
when he was well and happy. She trembled with satisfaction and pride
when returning the greetings of her friends. Her eloquent eyes seemed
to be saying, “Yes, he is my betrothed . . . a hero!” She was constantly
arranging the war cross on his blouse of “horizon blue,” taking pains
to place it as conspicuously as possible. She also spent much time in
prolonging the life of his shabby uniform--always the same one, the
old one which he was wearing when wounded. A new one would give him the
officery look of the soldiers who never left Paris.

As he grew stronger, Rene vainly tried to emancipate himself from her
dominant supervision. It was simply useless to try to walk with more
celerity or freedom.

“Lean on me!”

And he had to take his fiancee’s arm. All her plans for the future were
based on the devotion with which she was going to protect her husband,
on the solicitude that she was going to dedicate to his crippled
condition.

“My poor, dear invalid,” she would murmur lovingly. “So ugly and so
helpless those blackguards have left you! . . . But luckily you have
me, and I adore you! . . . It makes no difference to me that one of your
hands is gone. I will care for you; you shall be my little son. You will
just see, after we are married, how elegant and stylish I am going to
keep you. But don’t you dare to look at any of the other women! The very
first moment that you do, my precious little invalid, I’ll leave you
alone in your helplessness!”

Desnoyers and the senator were also concerned about their future, but in
a very definite way. They must be married as soon as possible. What was
the use of waiting? . . . The war was no longer an obstacle. They would
be married as quietly as possible. This was no time for wedding pomp.

So Rene Lacour remained permanently in the house on the avenida Victor
Hugo, after the nuptial ceremony witnessed by a dozen people.

Don Marcelo had had dreams of other things for his daughter--a grand
wedding to which the daily papers would devote much space, a son-in-law
with a brilliant future . . . but ay, this war! Everybody was having his
fondest hopes dashed to pieces every few hours.

He took what comfort he could out of the situation. What more did they
want? Chichi was happy--with a rollicking and selfish happiness which
took no interest in anything but her own love-affairs. The Desnoyers
business returns could not be improved upon;--after the first crisis
had passed, the necessities of the belligerents had begun utilizing
the output of his ranches, and never before had meat brought such high
prices. Money was flowing in with greater volume than formerly, while
the expenses were diminishing. . . . Julio was in daily danger of death,
but the old ranchman was buoyed up by his conviction that his son led
a charmed life--no harm could touch him. His chief preoccupation,
therefore, was to keep himself tranquil, avoiding all emotional storms.
He had been reading with considerable alarm of the frequency with which
well-known persons, politicians, artists and writers, were dying in
Paris. War was not doing all its killing at the front; its shocks were
falling like arrows over the land, causing the fall of the weak, the
crushed and the exhausted who, in normal times, would probably have
lived to a far greater age.

“Attention, Marcelo!” he said to himself with grim humor. “Keep cool
now! . . . You must avoid Friend Tchernoff’s four horsemen, you know!”

He spent an afternoon in the studio going over the war news in the
papers. The French had begun an offensive in Champagne with great
advances and many prisoners.

Desnoyers could not but think of the loss of life that this must
represent. Julio’s fate, however, gave him no uneasiness, for his son
was not in that part of the front. But yesterday he had received a
letter from him, dated the week before; they all took about that
length of time to reach him. Sub-lieutenant Desnoyers was as blithe and
reckless as ever. They were going to promote him again--he was among
those proposed for the Legion d’Honneur. These facts intensified Don
Marcelo’s vision of himself as the father of a general as young as those
of the revolution; and as he contemplated the daubs and sketches around
him, he marvelled at the extraordinary way in which the war had twisted
his son’s career.

On his way home, he passed Marguerite Laurier dressed in mourning.
The senator had told him a few days before that her brother, the
artilleryman, had just been killed at Verdun.

“How many are falling!” he said mournfully to himself. “How hard it will
be for his poor mother!”

But he smiled immediately after at the thought of those to be born.
Never before had the people been so occupied in accelerating their
reproduction. Even Madame Laurier now showed with pride the very visible
curves of her approaching maternity, and Desnoyers noted sympathetically
the vital volume apparent beneath her long mourning veil. Again he
thought of Julio, without taking into account the flight of time. He
felt as interested in the little newcomer as though he were in some way
related to it, and he promised himself to aid generously the Laurier
baby if he ever had the opportunity.

On entering his house, he was met in the hall by Dona Luisa, who told
him that Lacour was waiting for him.

“Very good!” he responded gaily. “Let us see what our illustrious
father-in-law has to say.”

His good wife was uneasy. She had felt alarmed without knowing exactly
why at the senator’s solemn appearance; with that feminine instinct
which perforates all masculine precautions, she surmised some hidden
mission. She had noticed, too, that Rene and his father were talking
together in a low tone, with repressed emotion.

Moved by an irresistible impulse, she hovered near the closed door,
hoping to hear something definite. Her wait was not long.

Suddenly a cry . . . a groan . . . the groan that can come only from a
body from which all vitality is escaping.

And Dona Luisa rushed in just in time to support her husband as he was
falling to the floor.

The senator was excusing himself confusedly to the walls, the furniture,
and turning his back in his agitation on the dismayed Rene, the only one
who could have listened to him.

“He did not let me finish. . . . He guessed from the very first
word. . . .”

Hearing the outcry, Chichi hastened in in time to see her father
slipping from his wife’s arms to the sofa, and from there to the floor,
with glassy, staring eyes, and foaming at the mouth.

From the luxurious rooms came forth the world-old cry, always the same
from the humblest home to the highest and loneliest:--

“Oh, Julio! . . . Oh, my son, my son! . . .”



