PART III



CHAPTER I

AFTER THE MARNE


At the end of October, the Desnoyers family returned to Paris. Dona
Luisa could no longer live in Biarritz, so far from her husband. In vain
la Romantica discoursed on the dangers of a return. The Government was
still in Bordeaux, the President of the Republic and the Ministry making
only the most hurried apparitions in the Capital. The course of the war
might change at any minute; that little affair of the Marne was but
a momentary relief. . . . But the good senora, after having read
Don Marcelo’s letters, opposed an adamantine will to all contrary
suggestions. Besides, she was thinking of her son, her Julio, now a
soldier. . . . She believed that, by returning to Paris, she might in
some ways be more in touch with him than at this seaside resort near the
Spanish frontier.

Chichi also wished to return because Rene was now filling the greater
part of her thoughts. Absence had shown her that she was really in love
with him. Such a long time without seeing her little sugar soldier!
. . . So the family abandoned their hotel life and returned to the
avenue Victor Hugo.

Since the shock of the first September days, Paris had been gradually
changing its aspect. The nearly two million inhabitants who had been
living quietly in their homes without letting themselves be drawn into
the panic, had accepted the victory with grave serenity. None of them
could explain the exact course of the battle; they would learn all about
it when it was entirely finished.

One September Sunday, at the hour when the Parisians are accustomed
to take advantage of the lovely twilight, they had learned from the
newspapers of the great triumph of the Allies and of the great danger
which they had so narrowly escaped. The people were delighted, but
did not, however, abandon their calm demeanor. Six weeks of war had
radically changed the temperament of turbulent and impressionable Paris.

The victory was slowly restoring the Capital to its former aspect. A
street that was practically deserted a few weeks before was now filled
with transients. The shops were reopening. The neighbors accustomed to
the conventional silence of their deserted apartment houses, again heard
sounds of returning life in the homes above and below them.

Don Marcelo’s satisfaction in welcoming his family home was considerably
clouded by the presence of Dona Elena. She was Germany returning to the
encounter, the enemy again established within his tents. Would he never
be able to free himself from this bondage? . . . She was silent in her
brother-in-law’s presence because recent events had rather bewildered
her. Her countenance was stamped with a wondering expression as though
she were gazing at the upsetting of the most elemental physical laws.
In reflective silence she was puzzling over the Marne enigma, unable to
understand how it was that the Germans had not conquered the ground
on which she was treading; and in order to explain this failure, she
resorted to the most absurd suppositions.

One especially engrossing matter was increasing her sadness. Her sons.
. . . What would become of her sons! Don Marcelo had never told her of
his meeting with Captain von Hartrott. He was maintaining absolute
silence about his sojourn at Villeblanche. He had no desire to recount
his adventures at the battle of the Marne. What was the use of saddening
his loved ones with such miseries? . . . He simply told Dona Luisa, who
was alarmed about the possible fate of the castle, that they would not
be able to go there for many years to come, because the hostilities had
rendered it uninhabitable. A covering of zinc sheeting had been
substituted for the ancient roof in order to prevent further injury from
wind and rain to the wrecked interior. Later on, after peace had been
declared, they would think about its renovation. Just now it had too
many inhabitants. And all the ladies, including Dona Elena, shuddered in
imagining the thousands of buried bodies forming their ghastly circle
around the building. This vision made Frau von Hartrott again groan,
“Ay, my sons!”

Finally, for humanity’s sake, her brother-in-law set her mind at rest
regarding the fate of one of them, the Captain von Hartrott. He was in
perfect health at the beginning of the battle. He knew that this was so
from a friend who had conversed with him . . . and he did not wish to
talk further about him.

Dona Luisa was spending a part of each day in the churches, trying to
quiet her uneasiness with prayer. These petitions were no longer vague
and generous for the fate of millions of unknown men, for the victory of
an entire people. With maternal self-centredness they were focussed
on one single person--her son, who was a soldier like the others, and
perhaps at this very moment was exposed to the greatest danger. The
tears that he had cost her! . . . She had implored that he and his
father might come to understand each other, and finally just as God was
miraculously granting her supplication, Julio had taken himself off to
the field of death.

Her entreaties never went alone to the throne of grace. Someone was
praying near her, formulating identical requests. The tearful eyes of
her sister were raised at the same time as hers to the figure of the
crucified Savior. “Lord, save my son!” . . . When uttering these words,
Dona Luisa always saw Julio as he looked in a pale photograph which he
had sent his father from the trenches--with kepis and military cloak, a
gun in his right hand, and his face shadowed by a growing beard. “O
Lord have mercy upon us!” . . . and Dona Elena was at the same time
contemplating a group of officers with helmets and reseda uniforms
reinforced with leather pouches for the revolver, field glasses and
maps, with sword-belt of the same material.

Oftentimes when Don Marcelo saw them setting forth together toward Saint
Honore d’Eylau, he would wax very indignant.

“They are juggling with God. . . . This is most unreasonable! How could
He grant such contrary petitions? . . . Ah, these women!”

And then, with that superstition which danger awakens, he began to
fear that his sister-in-law might cause some grave disaster to his son.
Divinity, fatigued with so many contradictory prayers was going to turn
His back and not listen to any of them. Why did not this fatal woman
take herself off? . . .

He felt as exasperated at her presence in his home as he had at the
beginning of hostilities. Dona Luisa was still innocently repeating her
sister’s statements, submitting them to the superior criticism of her
husband. In this way, Don Marcelo had learned that the victory of the
Marne had never really happened; it was an invention of the allies.
The German generals had deemed it prudent to retire through profound
strategic foresight, deferring till a little later the conquest of
Paris, and the French had done nothing but follow them over the ground
which they had left free. That was all. She knew the opinions of
military men of neutral countries; she had been talking in Biarritz with
some people of unusual intelligence; she knew what the German papers
were saying about it. Nobody over there believed that yarn about the
Marne. The people did not even know that there had been such a battle.

“Your sister said that?” interrupted Desnoyers, pale with wrath and
amazement.

But he could do nothing but keep on longing for the bodily
transformation of this enemy planted under his roof. Ay, if she could
only be changed into a man! If only the evil genius of her husband could
but take her place for a brief half hour! . . .

“But the war still goes on,” said Dona Luisa in artless perplexity. “The
enemy is still in France. . . . What good did the battle of the Marne
do?”

She accepted his explanations with intelligent noddings of the head,
seeming to take them all in, and an hour afterwards would be repeating
the same doubts.

She, nevertheless, began to evince a mute hostility toward her sister.
Until now, she had been tolerating her enthusiasms in favor of her
husband’s country because she always considered family ties of more
importance than the rivalries of nations. Just because Desnoyers
happened to be a Frenchman and Karl a German, she was not going to
quarrel with Elena. But suddenly this forbearance had vanished. Her son
was now in danger. . . . Better that all the von Hartrotts should die
than that Julio should receive the most insignificant wound! . . . She
began to share the bellicose sentiments of her daughter, recognizing in
her an exceptional talent for appraising events, and now desiring all of
Chichi’s dagger thrusts to be converted into reality.

Fortunately La Romantica took herself off before this antipathy
crystallized. She was accustomed to pass the afternoons somewhere
outside, and on her return would repeat the news gleaned from friends
unknown to the rest of the family.

This made Don Marcelo wax very indignant because of the spies
still hidden in Paris. What mysterious world was his sister-in-law
frequenting? . . .

Suddenly she announced that she was leaving the following morning; she
had obtained a passport to Switzerland, and from there she would go to
Germany. It was high time for her to be returning to her own; she was
most appreciative of the hospitality shown her by the family. . . . And
Desnoyers bade her good-bye with aggressive irony. His regards to
von Hartrott; he was hoping to pay him a visit in Berlin as soon as
possible.

One morning Dona Luisa, instead of entering the neighboring church as
usual, continued on to the rue de la Pompe, pleased at the thought of
seeing the studio once more. It seemed to her that in this way she might
put herself more closely in touch with her son. This would be a new
pleasure, even greater than poring over his photograph or re-reading his
last letter.

She was hoping to meet Argensola, the friend of good counsels, for she
knew that he was still living in the studio. Twice he had come to see
her by the service stairway as in the old days, but she had been out.

As she went up in the elevator, her heart was palpitating with pleasure
and distress. It occurred to the good lady that the “foolish virgins”
 must have had feelings like this when for the first time they fell from
the heights of virtue.

The tears came to her eyes when she beheld the room whose furnishings
and pictures so vividly recalled the absent. Argensola hastened from the
door at the end of the room, agitated, confused, and greeting her with
expressions of welcome at the same time that he was putting sundry
objects out of sight. A woman’s sweater lying on the divan, he covered
with a piece of Oriental drapery--a hat trimmed with flowers, he sent
flying into a far-away corner. Dona Luisa fancied that she saw a bit of
gauzy feminine negligee embroidered in pink, flitting past the window
frame. Upon the divan were two big coffee cups and bits of toast
evidently left from a double breakfast. These artists! . . . The same
as her son! And she was moved to compassion over the bad life of Julio’s
counsellor.

“My honored Dona Luisa. . . . My DEAR Madame Desnoyers. . . .”

He was speaking in French and at the top of his voice, looking
frantically at the door through which the white and rosy garments had
flitted. He was trembling at the thought that his hidden companion, not
understanding the situation, might in a jealous fit, compromise him by a
sudden apparition.

Then he spoke to his unexpected guest about the soldier, exchanging news
with her. Dona Luisa repeated almost word for word the paragraphs of his
letters so frequently read. Argensola modestly refrained from displaying
his; the two friends were accustomed to an epistolary style which would
have made the good lady blush.

“A valiant man!” affirmed the Spaniard proudly, looking upon the deeds
of his comrade as though they were his own. “A true hero! and I, Madame
Desnoyers, know something about what that means. . . . His chiefs know
how to appreciate him.” . . .

Julio was a sergeant after having been only two months in the campaign.
The captain of his company and the other officials of the regiment
belonged to the fencing club in which he had had so many triumphs.

“What a career!” he enthused. “He is one of those who in youth reach
the highest ranks, like the Generals of the Revolution. . . . And what
wonders he has accomplished!”

The budding officer had merely referred in the most casual way to some
of exploits, with the indifference of one accustomed to danger and
expecting the same attitude from his comrades; but his chum exaggerated
them, enlarging upon them as though they were the culminating events of
the war. He had carried an order across an infernal fire, after three
messengers, trying to accomplish the same feat, had fallen dead. He
had been the first to attack many trenches and had saved many of
his comrades by means of the blows from his bayonet and hand to hand
encounters. Whenever his superior officers needed a reliable man, they
invariably said, “Let Sergeant Desnoyers be called!”

He rattled off all this as though he had witnessed it, as if he had
just come from the seat of war, making Dona Luisa tremble and pour forth
tears of joy mingled with fear over the glories and dangers of her son.
That Argensola certainly possessed the gift of affecting his hearers by
the realism with which he told his stories!

In gratitude for these eulogies, she felt that she ought to show some
interest in his affairs. . . . What had he been doing of late?

“I, Madame, have been where I ought to be. I have not budged from this
spot. I have witnessed the siege of Paris.”

In vain, his reason protested against the inexactitude of that word,
“siege.” Under the influence of his readings about the war of 1870, he
had classed as a siege all those events which had developed near Paris
during the course of the battle of the Marne.

He pointed modestly to a diploma in a gold frame hanging above the piano
against a tricolored flag. It was one of the papers sold in the streets,
a certificate of residence in the Capital during the week of danger. He
had filled in the blanks with his name and description of his person;
and at the foot were very conspicuous the signatures of two residents of
the rue de la Pompe--a tavern-keeper, and a friend of the concierge. The
district Commissary of Police, with stamp and seal, had guaranteed the
respectability of these honorable witnesses. Nobody could remain in
doubt, after such precautions, as to whether he had or had not witnessed
the siege of Paris. He had such incredulous friends! . . .

In order to bring the scene more dramatically before his amiable
listener, he recalled the most striking of his impressions for her
special benefit. Once, in broad daylight, he had seen a flock of sheep
in the boulevard near the Madeleine. Their tread had resounded through
the deserted streets like echoes from the city of the dead. He was the
only pedestrian on the sidewalks thronged with cats and dogs.

His military recollections excited him like tales of glory.

“I have seen the march of the soldiers from Morocco. . . . I have seen
the Zouaves in automobiles!”

The very night that Julio had gone to Bordeaux, he had wandered around
till sunrise, traversing half of Paris, from the Lion of Belfort, to
the Gare de l’Est. Twenty thousand men, with all their campaign outfit,
coming from Morocco, had disembarked at Marseilles and arrived at the
Capital, making part of the trip by rail and the rest afoot. They had
come to take part in the great battle then beginning. They were troops
composed of Europeans and Africans. The vanguard, on entering through
the Orleans gate, had swung into rhythmic pace, thus crossing half Paris
toward the Gare de l’Est where the trains were waiting for them.

The people of Paris had seen squadrons from Tunis with theatrical
uniforms, mounted on horses, nervous and fleet, Moors with yellow
turbans, Senegalese with black faces and scarlet caps, colonial
artillerymen, and light infantry from Africa. These were professional
warriors, soldiers who in times of peace, led a life of continual
fighting in the colonies--men with energetic profiles, bronzed faces and
the eyes of beasts of prey. They had remained motionlesss in the streets
for hours at a time, until room could be found for them in the military
trains. . . . And Argensola had followed this armed, impassive mass of
humanity from the boulevards, talking with the officials, and listening
to the primitive cries of the African warriors who had never seen Paris,
and who passed through it without curiosity, asking where the enemy was.

They had arrived in time to attack von Kluck on the banks of the Ourq,
obliging him to fall back or be completely overwhelmed.

A fact which Argensola did not relate to his sympathetic guest was that
his nocturnal excursion the entire length of this division of the
army had been accompanied by the amiable damsel within, and two other
friends--an enthusiastic and generous coterie, distributing flowers and
kisses to the swarthy soldiers, and laughing at their consternation and
gleaming white teeth.

Another day he had seen the most extraordinary of all the spectacles
of the war. All the taxicabs, some two thousand vehicles, conveying
battalions of Zouaves, eight men to a motor car, had gone rolling past
him at full speed, bristling with guns and red caps. They had presented
a most picturesque train in the boulevards, like a kind of interminable
wedding procession. And these soldiers got out of the automobiles on the
very edge of the battle field, opening fire the instant that they leaped
from the steps. Gallieni had launched all the men who knew how to handle
a gun against the extreme right of the adversary at the supreme moment
when the most insignificant weight might tip the scales in favor of the
victory which was hanging in the balance. The clerks and secretaries
of the military offices, the orderlies of the government and the civil
police, all had marched to give that final push, forming a mass of
heterogenous colors.

And one Sunday afternoon when, with his three companions of the “siege”
 he was strolling with thousands of other Parisians through the Bois
de Boulogne, he had learned from the extras that the combat which
had developed so near to the city was turning into a great battle, a
victory.

“I have seen much, Madame Desnoyers. . . . I can relate great events.”

And she agreed with him. Of course Argensola had seen much! . . . And on
taking her departure, she offered him all the assistance in her power.
He was the friend of her son, and she was used to his petitions. Times
had changed; Don Marcelo’s generosity now knew no bounds . . . but the
Bohemian interrupted her with a lordly gesture; he was living in luxury.
Julio had made him his trustee. The draft from America had been
honored by the bank as a deposit, and he had the use of the interest
in accordance with the regulations of the moratorium. His friend was
sending him regularly whatever money was needed for household expenses.
Never had he been in such prosperous condition. War had its good side,
too . . . but not wishing to break away from old customs, he announced
that once more he would mount the service stairs in order to bear away a
basket of bottles.

After her sister’s departure, Dona Luisa went alone to the churches
until Chichi in an outburst of devotional ardor, suddenly surprised her
with the announcement:

“Mama, I am going with you!”

The new devotee was no longer agitating the household by her rollicking,
boyish joy; she was no longer threatening the enemy with imaginary
dagger thrusts. She was pale, and with dark circles under her eyes. Her
head was drooping as though weighed down with a set of serious, entirely
new thoughts on the other side of her forehead.

Dona Luisa observed her in the church with an almost indignant jealousy.
Her headstrong child’s eyes were moist, and she was praying as fervently
as the mother . . . but it was surely not for her brother. Julio
had passed to second place in her remembrance. Another man was now
completely filling her thoughts.

The last of the Lacours was no longer a simple soldier, nor was he now
in Paris. Upon her return from Biarritz, Chichi had listened anxiously
to the reports from her little sugar soldier. Throbbing with eagerness,
she wanted to know all about the dangers which he had been experiencing;
and the young warrior “in the auxiliary service” told her of his
restlessness in the office during the interminable days in which the
troops were battling around Paris, hearing afar off the boom of the
artillery. His father had wished to take him with him to Bordeaux,
but the administrative confusion of the last hour had kept him in the
capital.

He had done something more. On the day of the great crisis, when the
acting governor had sent out all the available men in automobiles, he
had, unasked, seized a gun and occupied a motor with others from his
office. He had not seen anything more than smoke, burning houses, and
wounded men. Not a single German had passed before his eyes, excepting a
band of Uhlan prisoners, but for some hours he had been shooting on the
edge of the road . . . and nothing more.

For a while, that was enough for Chichi. She felt very proud to be
the betrothed of a hero of the Marne, even though his intervention had
lasted but a few hours. In a few days, however, her enthusiasm became
rather clouded.

It was becoming annoying to stroll through the streets with Rene, a
simple soldier and in the auxiliary service, besides. . . . The women
of the town, excited by the recollection of their men fighting at the
front, or clad in mourning because of the death of some loved one, would
look at them with aggressive insolence. The refinement and elegance
of the Republican Prince seemed to irritate them. Several times, she
overheard uncomplimentary words hurled against the “embusques.”

The fact that her brother who was not French was in the thick of the
fighting, made the Lacour situation still more intolerable. She had an
“embusque” for a lover. How her friends would laugh at her! . . .

The senator’s son soon read her thoughts and began to lose some of
his smiling serenity. For three days he did not present himself at the
Desnoyers’ home, and they all supposed that he was detained by work at
the office.

One morning as Chichi was going toward the Bois de Boulogne, escorted by
one of the nut-brown maids, she noticed a soldier coming toward her. He
was wearing a bright uniform of the new gray-blue, the “horizon blue”
 just adopted by the French army. The chin strap of his kepi was gilt,
and on his sleeve there was a little strip of gold. His smile, his
outstretched hands, the confidence with which he advanced toward her
made her recognize him. Rene an officer! Her betrothed a sub-lieutenant!

“Yes, of course! I could do nothing else. . . . I had heard enough!”

Without his father’s knowledge, and assisted by his friends, he had in
a few days, wrought this wonderful transformation. As a graduate of
the Ecole Centrale, he held the rank of a sub-lieutenant of the Reserve
Artillery, and he had requested to be sent to the front. Good-bye to the
auxiliary service! . . . Within two days, he was going to start for the
war.

“You have done this!” exclaimed Chichi. “You have done this!”

Although very pale, she gazed fondly at him with her great eyes--eyes
that seemed to devour him with admiration.

“Come here, my poor boy. . . . Come here, my sweet little soldier! . . .
I owe you something.”

And turning her back on the maid, she asked him to come with her round
the corner. It was just the same there. The cross street was just as
thronged as the avenue. But what did she care for the stare of the
curious! Rapturously she flung her arms around his neck, blind and
insensible to everything and everybody but him.

“There. . . . There!” And she planted on his face two vehement,
sonorous, aggressive kisses.

Then, trembling and shuddering, she suddenly weakened, and fumbling for
her handkerchief, broke down in desperate weeping.



