CHAPTER V

IN WHICH APPEAR THE FOUR HORSEMEN


The two friends now lived a feverish life, considerably accelerated by
the rapidity with which events succeeded each other. Every hour brought
forth an astonishing bit of news--generally false--which changed
opinions very suddenly. As soon as the danger of war seemed arrested,
the report would spread that mobilization was going to be ordered within
a few minutes.

Within each twenty-four hours were compressed the disquietude, anxiety
and nervous waste of a normal year. And that which was aggravating the
situation still more was the uncertainty, the expectation of the
event, feared but still invisible, the distress on account of a danger
continually threatening but never arriving.

History in the making was like a stream overflowing its banks, events
overlapping each other like the waves of an inundation. Austria was
declaring war with Servia while the diplomats of the great powers were
continuing their efforts to stem the tide. The electric web girdling the
planet was vibrating incessantly in the depths of the ocean and on the
peaks of the continents, transmitting alternate hopes and fears.

Russia was mobilizing a part of its army. Germany, with its troops in
readiness under the pretext of manoeuvres, was decreeing the state of
“threatened war.” The Austrians, regardless of the efforts of diplomacy,
were beginning the bombardment of Belgrade. William II, fearing that the
intervention of the Powers might settle the differences between the
Czar and the Emperor of Austria, was forcing the course of events by
declaring war upon Russia. Then Germany began isolating herself, cutting
off railroad and telegraphic communications in order to shroud in
mystery her invading forces.

France was watching this avalanche of events, temperate in its words and
enthusiasm. A cool and grave resolution was noticeable everywhere. Two
generations had come into the world, informed as soon as they reached
a reasonable age, that some day there would undoubtedly be war. Nobody
wanted it; the adversary imposed it. . . . But all were accepting it
with the firm intention of fulfilling their duty.

During the daytime Paris was very quiet, concentrating the mind on
the work in hand. Only a few groups of exalted patriots, following the
tricolored flag, were passing through the place de la Concorde, in order
to salute the statue of Strasbourg. The people were accosting each other
in a friendly way in the streets. Everybody seemed to know everybody
else, although they might not have met before. Eye attracted eye,
and smiles appeared to broaden mutually with the sympathy of a common
interest. The women were sad but speaking cheerily in order to hide
their emotions. In the long summer twilight, the boulevards were filling
with crowds. Those from the outlying districts were converging toward
the centre of the city, as in the remote revolutionary days, banding
together in groups, forming an endless multitude from which came shouts
and songs. These manifestations were passing through the centre under
the electric lights that were just being turned on, the processions
generally lasting until midnight, with the national banner floating
above the walking crowds, escorted by the flags of other nations.

It was on one of these nights of sincere enthusiasm that the two friends
heard an unexpected, astonishing piece of news. “They have killed
Jaures!” The groups were repeating it from one to another with an
amazement which seemed to overpower their grief. “Jaures assassinated!
And what for?” The best popular element, which instinctively seeks an
explanation of every proceeding, remained in suspense, not knowing
which way to turn. The tribune dead, at the very moment that his word as
welder of the people was most needed! . . .

Argensola thought immediately of Tchernoff. “What will our neighbors
say?” . . . The quiet, orderly people of Paris were fearing a
revolution, and for a few moments Desnoyers believed that his cousin’s
auguries were about to be fulfilled. This assassination, with its
retaliations, might be the signal for civil war. But the masses of the
people, worn out with grief at the death of their hero, were waiting in
tragic silence. All were seeing, beyond his dead body, the image of the
country.

By the following morning, the danger had vanished. The laboring classes
were talking of generals and war, showing each other their little
military memorandums, announcing the date of their departure as soon as
the order of mobilization should be published. “I go the second day.” “I
the first.” Those of the standing army who were on leave were recalled
individually to the barracks. All these events were tending in the same
direction--war.

The Germans were invading Luxembourg; the Germans were ordering their
armies to invade the French frontier when their ambassador was still in
Paris making promises of peace. On the day after the death of Jaures,
the first of August, the people were crowding around some pieces of
paper, written by hand and in evident haste. These papers were copies of
other larger printed sheets, headed by two crossed flags. “It has come;
it is now a fact!”. . . It was the order for general mobilization. All
France was about to take up arms, and chests seemed to expand with a
sigh of relief. Eyes were sparkling with excitement. The nightmare was
at last over! . . . Cruel reality was preferable to the uncertainty of
days and days, each as long as a week.

In vain President Poincare, animated by a last hope, was explaining to
the French that “mobilization is not necessarily war, that a call to
arms may be simply a preventive measure.” “It is war, inevitable war,”
 said the populace with a fatalistic expression. And those who were going
to start that very night or the following day were the most eager and
enthusiastic.--“Now those who seek us are going to find us! Vive la
France!” The Chant du Depart, the martial hymn of the volunteers of the
first Republic, had been exhumed by the instinct of a people which
seek the voice of Art in its most critical moments. The stanzas of the
conservative Chenier, adapted to a music of warlike solemnity, were
resounding through the streets, at the same time as the Marseillaise:

     La Republique nous appelle.
     Sachons vaincre ou sachons perir;
     Un francais doit vivre pour elle.
     Pour elle un francais doit mourir.

The mobilization began at midnight to the minute. At dusk, groups of men
began moving through the streets towards the stations. Their families
were walking beside them, carrying the valise or bundle of clothes.
They were escorted by the friends of their district, the tricolored flag
borne aloft at the head of these platoons. The Reserves were donning
their old uniforms which presented all the difficulties of suits long
ago forgotten. With new leather belts and their revolvers at their
sides, they were betaking themselves to the railway which was to carry
them to the point of concentration. One of their children was carrying
the old sword in its cloth sheath. The wife was hanging on his arm,
sad and proud at the same time, giving her last counsels in a loving
whisper.

Street cars, automobiles and cabs rolled by with crazy velocity. Nobody
had ever seen so many vehicles in the Paris streets, yet if anybody
needed one, he called in vain to the conductors, for none wished to
serve mere civilians. All means of transportation were for military
men, all roads ended at the railroad stations. The heavy trucks of the
administration, filled with sacks, were saluted with general enthusiasm.
“Hurrah for the army!” The soldiers in mechanic’s garb, on top of the
swaying pyramid, replied to the cheers, waving their arms and uttering
shouts that nobody pretended to understand.

Fraternity had created a tolerance hitherto unknown. The crowds were
pressing forward, but in their encounters, invariably preserved good
order. Vehicles were running into each other, and when the conductors
resorted to the customary threats, the crowds would intervene and make
them shake hands. “Three cheers for France!” The pedestrians, escaping
between the wheels of the automobiles were laughing and good-naturedly
reproaching the chauffeur with, “Would you kill a Frenchman on his way
to his regiment?” and the conductor would reply, “I, too, am going in
a few hours. This is my last trip.” As night approached, cars and cabs
were running with increasing irregularity, many of the employees having
abandoned their posts to take leave of their families and make the
train. All the life of Paris was concentrating itself in a half-dozen
human rivers emptying in the stations.

Desnoyers and Argensola met in a boulevard cafe toward midnight. Both
were exhausted by the day’s emotions and under that nervous depression
which follows noisy and violent spectacles. They needed to rest. War
was a fact, and now that it was a certainty, they felt no anxiety to get
further news. Remaining in the cafe proved impossible. In the hot and
smoky atmosphere, the occupants were singing and shouting and waving
tiny flags. All the battle hymns of the past and present were here
intoned in chorus, to an accompaniment of glasses and plates. The
rather cosmopolitan clientele was reviewing the European nations. All,
absolutely all, were going to enroll themselves on the side of France.
“Hurrah! . . . Hurrah!” . . . An old man and his wife were seated at a
table near the two friends. They were tenants, of an orderly, humdrum
walk in life, who perhaps in all their existence had never been awake at
such an hour. In the general enthusiasm they had come to the boulevards
“in order to see war a little closer.” The foreign tongue used by his
neighbors gave the husband a lofty idea of their importance.

“Do you believe that England is going to join us?” . . .

Argensola knew as much about it as he, but he replied authoritatively,
“Of course she will. That’s a sure thing!” The old man rose to his feet:
“Hurrah for England!” and he began chanting a forgotten patriotic song,
marking time with his arms in a spirited way, to the great admiration
of his old wife, and urging all to join in the chorus that very few were
able to follow.

The two friends had to take themselves home on foot. They could not find
a vehicle that would stop for them; all were hurrying in the opposite
direction toward the stations. They were both in a bad humor, but
Argensola couldn’t keep his to himself.

“Ah, these women!” Desnoyers knew all about his relations (so far
honorable) with a midinette from the rue Taitbout. Sunday strolls in the
suburbs of Paris, various trips to the moving picture shows, comments
upon the fine points of the latest novel published in the sheets of a
popular paper, kisses of farewell when she took the night train from
Bois Colombes in order to sleep at home--that was all. But Argensola was
wickedly counting on Father Time to mellow the sharpest virtues. That
evening they had taken some refreshment with a French friend who was
going the next morning to join his regiment. The girl had sometimes
seen him with Argensola without noticing him particularly, but now she
suddenly began admiring him as though he were another person. She had
given up the idea of returning home that night; she wanted to see how
a war begins. The three had dined together, and all her interest had
centred upon the one who was going away. She even took offense, with
sudden modesty, when Argensola tried as he had often done before, to
squeeze her hand under the table. Meanwhile she was almost leaning her
head on the shoulder of the future hero, enveloping him with admiring
gaze.

“And they have gone. . . . They have gone away together!” said the
Spaniard bitterly. “I had to leave them in order not to make my hard
luck any worse. To have worked so long . . . for another!”

He was silent for a few minutes, then changing the trend of his ideas,
he added: “I recognize, nevertheless, that her behavior is beautiful.
The generosity of these women when they believe that the moment for
sacrifice has come! She is terribly afraid of her father, and yet she
stays away from home all night with a person whom she hardly knows, and
whom she was not even thinking of in the middle of the afternoon! . . .
The entire nation feels gratitude toward those who are going to imperil
their lives, and she, poor child, wishing to do something, too, for
those destined for death, to give them a little pleasure in their last
hour . . . is giving the best she has, that which she can never recover.
I have sketched her role poorly, perhaps. . . . Laugh at me if you want
to, but admit that it is beautiful.”

Desnoyers laughed heartily at his friend’s discomfiture, in spite of the
fact that he, too, was suffering a good deal of secret annoyance. He had
seen Marguerite but once since the day of his return. The only news of
her that he had received was by letter. . . . This cursed war! What an
upset for happy people! Marguerite’s mother was ill. She was brooding
over the departure of her son, an officer, on the first day of the
mobilization. Marguerite, too, was uneasy about her brother and did not
think it expedient to come to the studio while her mother was grieving
at home. When was this situation ever to end? . . .

That check for four hundred thousand francs which he had brought from
America was also worrying him. The day before, the bank had declined to
pay it for lack of the customary official advice. Afterward they said
that they had received the advice, but did not give him the money. That
very afternoon, when the trust companies had closed their doors, the
government had already declared a moratorium, in order to prevent a
general bankruptcy due to the general panic. When would they pay him?
. . . Perhaps when the war which had not yet begun was ended--perhaps
never. He had no other money available except the two thousand francs
left over from his travelling expenses. All of his friends were in the
same distressing situation, unable to draw on the sums which they had in
the banks. Those who had any money were obliged to go from shop to shop,
or form in line at the bank doors, in order to get a bill changed. Oh,
this war! This stupid war!

In the Champs Elysees, they saw a man with a broad-brimmed hat who
was walking slowly ahead of them and talking to himself. Argensola
recognized him as he passed near the street lamp, “Friend Tchernoff.”
 Upon returning their greeting, the Russian betrayed a slight odor of
wine. Uninvited, he had adjusted his steps to theirs, accompanying them
toward the Arc de Triomphe.

Julio had merely exchanged silent nods with Argensola’s new acquaintance
when encountering him in the vestibule; but sadness softens the heart
and makes us seek the friendship of the humble as a refreshing shelter.
Tchernoff, on the contrary, looked at Desnoyers as though he had known
him all his life.

The man had interrupted his monologue, heard only by the black masses
of vegetation, the blue shadows perforated by the reddish tremors of
the street lights, the summer night with its cupola of warm breezes and
twinkling stars. He took a few steps without saying anything, as a mark
of consideration to his companions, and then renewed his arguments,
taking them up where he had broken off, without offering any
explanation, as though he were still talking to himself. . . .

“And at this very minute, they are shouting with enthusiasm the same as
they are doing here, honestly believing that they are going to defend
their outraged country, wishing to die for their families and firesides
that nobody has threatened.”

“Who are ‘they,’ Tchernoff?” asked Argensola.

The Russian stared at him as though surprised at such a question.

“They,” he said laconically.

The two understood. . . . THEY! It could not be anyone else.

“I have lived ten years in Germany,” he continued, connecting up his
words, now that he found himself listened to. “I was daily correspondent
for a paper in Berlin and I know these people. Passing along these
thronged boulevards, I have been seeing in my imagination what must be
happening there at this hour. They, too, are singing and shouting with
enthusiasm as they wave their flags. On the outside, they seem just
alike--but oh, what a difference within! . . . Last night the people
beset a few babblers in the boulevard who were yelling, ‘To Berlin!’--a
slogan of bad memories and worse taste. France does not wish
conquests; her only desire is to be respected, to live in peace without
humiliations or disturbances. To-night two of the mobilized men said on
leaving, ‘When we enter Germany we are going to make it a republic!’
. . . A republic is not a perfect thing, but it is better than living
under an irresponsible monarchy by the grace of God. It at least
presupposes tranquillity and absence of the personal ambitions that
disturb life. I was impressed by the generous thought of these laboring
men who, instead of wishing to exterminate their enemies, were planning
to give them something better.”

Tchernoff remained silent a few minutes, smiling ironically at the
picture which his imagination was calling forth.

“In Berlin, the masses are expressing their enthusiasm in the lofty
phraseology befitting a superior people. Those in the lowest classes,
accustomed to console themselves for humiliations with a gross
materialism, are now crying ‘Nach Paris! We are going to drink champagne
gratis!’ The pietistic burgher, ready to do anything to attain a new
honor, and the aristocracy which has given the world the greatest
scandals of recent years, are also shouting, ‘Nach Paris!’ To them Paris
is the Babylon of the deadly sin, the city of the Moulin Rouge and the
restaurants of Montmartre, the only places that they know. . . . And my
comrades of the Social-Democracy, they are also cheering, but to another
tune.--‘To-morrow! To St. Petersburg! Russian ascendency, the menace
of civilization, must be obliterated!’ The Kaiser waving the tyranny of
another country as a scarecrow to his people! . . . What a joke!”

And the loud laugh of the Russian sounded through the night like the
noise of wooden clappers.

“We are more civilized than the Germans,” he said, regaining his
self-control.

Desnoyers, who had been listening with great interest, now gave a start
of surprise, saying to himself, “This Tchernoff has been drinking.”

“Civilization,” continued the Socialist, “does not consist merely in
great industry, in many ships, armies and numerous universities that
only teach science. That is material civilization. There is another, a
superior one, that elevates the soul and does not permit human dignity
to suffer without protesting against continual humiliations. A Swiss
living in his wooden chalet and considering himself the equal of the
other men of his country, is more civilized than the Herr Professor who
gives precedence to a lieutenant, or to a Hamburg millionaire who, in
turn, bends his neck like a lackey before those whose names are prefixed
by a von.”

Here the Spaniard assented as though he could guess what Tchernoff was
going to say.

“We Russians endure great tyranny. I know something about that. I know
the hunger and cold of Siberia. . . . But opposed to our tyranny
has always existed a revolutionary protest. Part of the nation is
half-barbarian, but the rest has a superior mentality, a lofty moral
spirit which faces danger and sacrifice because of liberty and truth.
. . . And Germany? Who there has ever raised a protest in order to defend
human rights? What revolutions have ever broken out in Prussia, the land
of the great despots?

“Frederick William, the founder of militarism, when he was tired of
beating his wife and spitting in his children’s plates, used to sally
forth, thong in hand, in order to cowhide those subjects who did not get
out of his way in time. His son, Frederick the Great, declared that he
died, bored to death with governing a nation of slaves. In two centuries
of Prussian history, one single revolution--the barricades of 1848--a
bad Berlinish copy of the Paris revolution, and without any result.
Bismarck corrected with a heavy hand so as to crush completely the last
attempts at protest--if such ever really existed. And when his friends
were threatening him with revolution, the ferocious Junker, merely put
his hands on his hips and roared with the most insolent of horse laughs.
A revolution in Prussia! . . . Nothing at all, as he knew his people!”

Tchernoff was not a patriot. Many a time Argensola had heard him railing
against his country, but now he was indignant in view of the contempt
with which Teutonic haughtiness was treating the Russian nation.
Where, in the last forty years of imperial grandeur, was that universal
supremacy of which the Germans were everlastingly boasting? . . .

Excellent workers in science; tenacious and short-sighted academicians,
each wrapped in his specialty!--Benedictines of the laboratory who
experimented painstakingly and occasionally hit upon something, in spite
of enormous blunders given out as truths, because they were their own
. . . that was all! And side by side with such patient laboriosity, really
worthy of respect--what charlatanism! What great names exploited as a
shop sample! How many sages turned into proprietors of sanatoriums!
. . . A Herr Professor discovers the cure of tuberculosis, and the
tubercular keep on dying as before. Another labels with a number the
invincible remedy for the most unconfessable of diseases, and the
genital scourge continues afflicting the world. And all these errors
were representing great fortunes, each saving panacea bringing into
existence an industrial corporation selling its products at high
prices--as though suffering were a privilege of the rich. How different
from the bluff Pasteur and other clever men of the inferior races who
have given their discoveries to the world without stooping to form
monopolies!

“German science,” continued Tchernoff, “has given much to humanity, I
admit that; but the science of other nations has done as much. Only a
nation puffed up with conceit could imagine that it has done everything
for civilization, and the others nothing. . . . Apart from their learned
specialists, what genius has been produced in our day by this Germany
which believes itself so transcendent? Wagner, the last of the
romanticists, closes an epoch and belongs to the past. Nietzsche took
pains to proclaim his Polish origin and abominated Germany, a country,
according to him, of middle-class pedants. His Slavism was so pronounced
that he even prophesied the overthrow of the Prussians by the Slavs.
. . . And there are others. We, although a savage people, have given
the world of modern times an admirable moral grandeur. Tolstoi and
Dostoievsky are world-geniuses. What names can the Germany of William II
put ahead of these? . . . His country was the country of music, but the
Russian musicians of to-day are more original than the mere followers
of Wagner, the copyists who take refuge in orchestral exasperations in
order to hide their mediocrity. . . . In its time of stress the German
nation had men of genius, before Pan-Germanism had been born, when
the Empire did not exist. Goethe, Schiller, Beethoven were subjects of
little principalities. They received influence from other countries and
contributed their share to the universal civilization like citizens of
the world, without insisting that the world should, therefore, become
Germanized.”

Czarism had committed atrocities. Tchernoff knew that by experience, and
did not need the Germans to assure him of it. But all the illustrious
classes of Russia were enemies of that tyranny and were protesting
against it. Where in Germany were the intellectual enemies of Prussian
Czarism? They were either holding their peace, or breaking forth into
adulation of the anointed of the Lord--a musician and comedian like
Nero, of a sharp and superficial intelligence, who believed that by
merely skimming through anything he knew it all. Eager to strike a
spectacular pose in history, he had finally afflicted the world with the
greatest of calamities.

“Why must the tyranny that weighs upon my country necessarily be
Russian? The worst Czars were imitators of Prussia. Every time that the
Russian people of our day have attempted to revindicate their rights,
the reactionaries have used the Kaiser as a threat, proclaiming that he
would come to their aid. One-half of the Russian aristocracy is German;
the functionaries who advise and support despotism are Germans; German,
too, are the generals who have distinguished themselves by massacring
the people; German are the officials who undertake to punish the
laborers’ strikes and the rebellion of their allies. The reactionary
Slav is brutal, but he has the fine sensibility of a race in which many
princes have become Nihilists. He raises the lash with facility, but
then he repents and oftentimes weeps. I have seen Russian officials kill
themselves rather than march against the people, or through remorse
for slaughter committed. The German in the service of the Czar feels no
scruples, nor laments his conduct. He kills coldly, with the minuteness
and exactitude with which he does everything. The Russian is a barbarian
who strikes and regrets; German civilization shoots without hesitation.
Our Slav Czar, in a humanitarian dream, favored the Utopian idea of
universal peace, organizing the Conference of The Hague. The Kaiser of
culture, meanwhile, has been working years and years in the erection and
establishment of a destructive organ of an immensity heretofore unknown,
in order to crush all Europe. The Russian is a humble Christian,
socialistic, democratic, thirsting for justice; the German prides
himself upon his Christianity, but is an idolator like the German of
other centuries. His religion loves blood and maintains castes; his true
worship is that of Odin;--only that nowadays, the god of slaughter has
changed his name and calls himself, ‘The State’!”

Tchernoff paused an instant--perhaps in order to increase the wonder of
his companions--and then said with simplicity:

“I am a Christian.”

Argensola, who already knew the ideas and history of the Russian,
started with astonishment, and Julio persisted in his suspicion, “Surely
Tchernoff is drunk.”

“It is true,” declared the Russian earnestly, “that I do not worry about
God, nor do I believe in dogmas, but my soul is Christian as is that
of all revolutionists. The philosophy of modern democracy is lay
Christianity. We Socialists love the humble, the needy, the weak. We
defend their right to life and well-being, as did the greatest lights
of the religious world who saw a brother in every unfortunate. We exact
respect for the poor in the name of justice; the others ask for it in
the name of charity. That only separates us. But we strive that
mankind may, by common consent, lead a better life, that the strong may
sacrifice for the weak, the lofty for the lowly, and the world be ruled
by brotherliness, seeking the greatest equality possible.”

The Slav reviewed the history of human aspirations. Greek thought had
brought comfort, a sense of well-being on the earth--but only for the
few, for the citizens of the little democracies, for the free men,
leaving the slaves and barbarians who constituted the majority, in their
misery. Christianity, the religion of the lowly, had recognized the
right of happiness for all mankind, but this happiness was placed in
heaven, far from this world, this “vale of tears.” The Revolution
and its heirs, the Socialists, were trying to place happiness in the
immediate realities of earth, like the ancients, but making all humanity
participants in it like the Christians.

“Where is the ‘Christianity of modern Germany? . . . There is far more
genuine Christian spirit in the fraternal laity of the French Republic,
defender of the weak, than in the religiosity of the conservative
Junkers. Germany has made a god in her own image, believing that she
adores it, but in reality adoring her own image. The German God is a
reflex of the German State which considers war as the first activity of
a nation and the noblest of occupations. Other Christian peoples, when
they have to go to war, feel the contradiction that exists between
their conduct and the teachings of the Gospel, and excuse themselves by
showing the cruel necessity which impels them. Germany declares that war
is acceptable to God. I have heard German sermons proving that Jesus was
in favor of Militarism.

“Teutonic pride, the conviction that its race is providentially destined
to dominate the world, brings into working unity their Protestants,
Catholics and Jews.

“Far above their differences of dogma is that God of the State which
is German--the Warrior God to whom William is probably referring as ‘my
worthy Ally.’ Religions always tend toward universality. Their aim is to
place humanity in relationship with God, and to sustain these relations
among mankind. Prussia has retrograded to barbarism, creating for its
personal use a second Jehovah, a divinity hostile to the greater part of
the human race who makes his own the grudges and ambitions of the German
people.”

Tchernoff then explained in his own way the creation of this Teutonic
God, ambitious, cruel and vengeful. The Germans were comparatively
recent Christians. Their Christianity was not more than six centuries
old. When the Crusades were drawing to a close, the Prussians were still
living in paganism. Pride of race, impelling them to war, had revived
these dead divinities. The God of the Gospel was now adorned by the
Germans with lance and shield like the old Teutonic god who was a
military chief.

“Christianity in Berlin wears helmet and riding boots. God at this
moment is seeing Himself mobilized the same as Otto, Fritz and Franz,
in order to punish the enemies of His chosen people. That the Lord has
commanded, ‘Thou shalt not kill,’ and His Son has said to the world,
‘Blessed are the peacemakers,’ no longer matters. Christianity,
according to its German priests of all creeds, can only influence the
individual betterment of mankind, and should not mix itself in affairs
of state. The Prussian God of the State is ‘the old German God,’ the
lineal descendant of the ferocious Germanic mythology, a mixture of
divinities hungry for war.”

In the silence of the avenue, the Russian evoked the ruddy figures of
the implacable gods, that were going to awake that night upon hearing
the hum of arms and smelling the acrid odor of blood. Thor, the brutal
god with the little head, was stretching his biceps and clutching the
hammer that crushed cities. Wotan was sharpening his lance which had the
lightning for its handle, the thunder for its blade. Odin, the one-eyed,
was gaping with gluttony on the mountain-tops, awaiting the dead
warriors that would crowd around his throne. The dishevelled Valkyries,
fat and perspiring, were beginning to gallop from cloud to cloud,
hallooing to humanity that they might carry off the corpses doubled like
saddle bags, over the haunches of their flying nags.

“German religiosity,” continued the Russian, “is the disavowal of
Christianity. In its eyes, men are no longer equal before God. Their God
is interested only in the strong, and favors them with his support
so that they may dare anything. Those born weak must either submit or
disappear. Neither are nations equal, but are divided into leaders and
inferior races whose destiny is to be sifted out and absorbed by their
superiors. Since God has thus ordained, it is unnecessary to state that
the grand world-leader is Germany.”

Argensola here interrupted to observe that German pride believed itself
championed not only by God but by science, too.

“I know that,” interposed the Russian without letting him
finish--“generalization, inequality, selection, the struggle for life,
and all that. . . . The Germans, so conceited about their special worth,
erect upon distant ground their intellectual monuments, borrowing of the
foreigner their foundation material whenever they undertake a new line
of work. A Frenchman and an Englishman, Gobineau and Chamberlain, have
given them the arguments with which to defend the superiority of their
race. With the rubbish left over from Darwin and Spencer, their
old Haeckel has built up his doctrine of ‘Monism’ which, applied to
politics, scientifically consecrates Prussian pride and recognizes its
right to rule the world by force.”

“No, a thousand times no!” he exclaimed after a brief silence. “The
struggle for existence with its procession of cruelties may be
true among the lower species, but it should not be true among human
creatures. We are rational beings and ought to free ourselves from the
fatality of environment, moulding it to our convenience. The animal does
not know law, justice or compassion; he lives enslaved in the obscurity
of his instincts. We think, and thought signifies liberty. Force does
not necessarily have to be cruel; it is strongest when it does not take
advantage of its power, and is kindly. All have a right to the life into
which they are born, and since among individuals there exist the haughty
and the humble, the mighty and the weak, so should exist nations, large
and small, old and young. The end of our existence is not combat nor
killing in order that others may afterwards kill us, and, perhaps, be
killed themselves. Civilized peoples ought unanimously to adopt the idea
of southern Europe, striving for the most peaceful and sweetest form of
life possible.”

A cruel smile played over the Russian’s beard.

“But there exists that Kultur, diametrically opposed to civilization,
which the Germans wish to palm off upon us. Civilization is refinement
of spirit, respect of one’s neighbor, tolerance of foreign opinion,
courtesy of manner. Kultur is the action of a State that organizes and
assimilates individuals and communities in order to utilize them for
its own ends; and these ends consist mainly in placing ‘The State’ above
other states, overwhelming them with their grandeur--or what is the same
thing--with their haughty and violent pride.”

By this time, the three had reached the place de l’Etoile. The dark
outline of the Arc de Triomphe stood forth clearly in the starry
expanse. The avenues extended in all directions, a double file of
lights. Those around the monument illuminated its gigantic bases and the
feet of the sculptured groups. Further up, the vaulted spaces were so
locked in shadow that they had the black density of ebony.

Upon passing under the Arch, which greatly intensified the echo of their
footsteps, they came to a standstill. The night breeze had a wintry
chill as it whistled past, and the curved masses seemed melting into the
diffused blue of space. Instinctively the three turned to glance back
at the Champs Elysees. They saw only a river of shadow on which were
floating rosaries of red stars among the two long, black scarfs formed
by the buildings. But they were so well acquainted with this panorama
that in imagination they mentally saw the majestic sweep of the avenue,
the double row of palaces, the place de la Concorde in the background
with the Egyptian obelisk, and the trees of the Tuileries.

“How beautiful it is!” exclaimed Tchernoff who was seeing something
beyond the shadows. “An entire civilization, loving peace and pleasure,
has passed through here.”

A memory greatly affected the Russian. Many an afternoon, after lunch,
he had met in this very spot a robust man, stocky, with reddish beard
and kindly eyes--a man who looked like a giant who had just stopped
growing. He was always accompanied by a dog. It was Jaures, his friend
Jaures, who before going to the senate was accustomed to taking a walk
toward the Arch from his home in Passy.

“He liked to come just where we are now! He loved to look at the
avenues, the distant gardens, all of Paris which can be seen from this
height; and filled with admiration, he would often say to me, ‘This is
magnificent--one of the most beautiful perspectives that can be found in
the entire world.’ . . . Poor Jaures!”

Through association of ideas, the Russian evoked the image of his
compatriot, Michael Bakounine, another revolutionist, the father of
anarchy, weeping with emotion at a concert after hearing the symphony
with Beethoven chorals directed by a young friend of his, named Richard
Wagner. “When our revolution comes,” he cried, clasping the hand of the
master, “whatever else may perish, this must be saved at any cost!”

Tchernoff roused himself from his reveries to look around him and say
with sadness:

“THEY have passed through here!”

Every time that he walked through the Arch, the same vision would spring
up in his mind. THEY were thousands of helmets glistening in the sun,
thousands of heavy boots lifted with mechanical rigidity at the same
time; horns, fifes, drums large and small, clashing against the majestic
silence of these stones--the warlike march from Lohengrin sounding in
the deserted avenues before the closed houses.

He, who was a foreigner, always felt attracted by the spell exerted by
venerable buildings guarding the glory of a bygone day. He did not wish
to know who had erected it. As soon as its pride is flattered, mankind
tries immediately to solidify it. Then Humanity intervenes with a
broader vision that changes the original significance of the work,
enlarges it and strips it of its first egotistical import. The Greek
statues, models of the highest beauty, had been originally mere images
of the temple, donated by the piety of the devotees of those times.
Upon evoking Roman grandeur, everybody sees in imagination the enormous
Coliseum, circle of butcheries, or the arches erected to the glory
of the inept Caesars. The representative works of nations have two
significations--the interior or immediate one which their creators gave
them, and the exterior or universal interest, the symbolic value which
the centuries have given them.

“This Arch,” continued Tchernoff, “is French within, with its names
of battles and generals open to criticism. On the outside, it is the
monument of the people who carried through the greatest revolution
for liberty ever known. The glorification of man is there below in
the column of the place Vendome. Here there is nothing individual. Its
builders erected it to the memory of la Grande Armee and that Grand
Army was the people in arms who spread revolution throughout Europe. The
artists, great inventors, foresaw the true significance of this work.
The warriors of Rude who are chanting the Marseillaise in the group
at the left are not professional soldiers, they are armed citizens,
marching to work out their sublime and violent mission. Their nudity
makes them appear to me like sans-culottes in Grecian helmets. . . .
Here there is more than the glory and egoism of a great nation. All
Europe is awake to new life, thanks to these Crusaders of Liberty. . . .
The nations call to mind certain images. If I think of Greece, I see the
columns of the Parthenon; Rome, Mistress of the World, is the Coliseum
and the Arch of Trajan; and revolutionary France is the Arc de
Triomphe.”

The Arch was even more, according to the Russian. It represented a
great historical retaliation; the nations of the South, called the
Latin races, replying, after many centuries, to the invasion which had
destroyed the Roman jurisdiction--the Mediterranean peoples spreading
themselves as conquerors through the lands of the ancient barbarians.
Retreating immediately, they had swept away the past like a tidal
wave--the great surf depositing all that it contained. Like the waters
of certain rivers which fructify by overflowing, this recession of the
human tide had left the soil enriched with new and generous ideas.

“If THEY should return!” added Tchernoff with a look of uneasiness.
“If they again should tread these stones! . . . Before, they were
simple-minded folk, stunned by their rapid good-fortune, who passed
through here like a farmer through a salon. They were content with money
for the pocket and two provinces which should perpetuate the memory
of their victory. . . . But now they will not be the soldiers only
who march against Paris. At the tail of the armies come the maddened
canteen-keepers, the Herr Professors, carrying at the side the little
keg of wine with the powder which crazes the barbarian, the wine
of Kultur. And in the vans come also an enormous load of scientific
savagery, a new philosophy which glorifies Force as a principle and
sanctifier of everything, denies liberty, suppresses the weak and places
the entire world under the charge of a minority chosen by God, just
because it possesses the surest and most rapid methods of slaughter.
Humanity may well tremble for the future if again resounds under this
archway the tramp of boots following a march of Wagner or any other
Kapellmeister.”

They left the Arch, following the avenue Victor Hugo. Tchernoff
walking along in dogged silence as though the vision of this imaginary
procession had overwhelmed him. Suddenly he continued aloud the course
of his reflections.

“And if they should enter, what does it matter? . . . On that account,
the cause of Right will not die. It suffers eclipses, but is born again;
it may be ignored and trampled under foot, but it does not, therefore,
cease to exist, and all good souls recognize it as the only rule of
life. A nation of madmen wishes to place might upon the pedestal that
others have raised to Right. Useless endeavor! The eternal hope
of mankind will ever be the increasing power of more liberty, more
brotherliness, more justice.”

The Russian appeared to calm himself with this statement. He and
his friends spoke of the spectacle which Paris was presenting in its
preparation for war. Tchernoff bemoaned the great suffering produced by
the catastrophe, the thousands and thousands of domestic tragedies that
were unrolling at that moment. Apparently nothing had changed. In the
centre of the city and around the stations, there was unusual agitation,
but the rest of the immense city did not appear affected by the great
overthrow of its existence. The solitary street was presenting its usual
aspect, the breeze was gently moving the leaves. A solemn peace seemed
to be spreading itself through space. The houses appeared wrapped in
slumber, but behind the closed windows might be surmised the insomnia
of the reddened eyes, the sighs from hearts anguished by the threatened
danger, the tremulous agility of the hands preparing the war outfit,
perhaps the last loving greetings exchanged without pleasure, with
kisses ending in sobs.

Tchernoff thought of his neighbors, the husband and wife who occupied
the other interior apartment behind the studio. She was no longer
playing the piano. The Russian had overheard disputes, the banging of
doors locked with violence, and the footsteps of a man in the middle of
the night, fleeing from a woman’s cries. There had begun to develop on
the other side of the wall a regulation drama--a repetition of hundreds
of others, all taking place at the same time.

“She is a German,” volunteered the Russian. “Our concierge has ferreted
out her nationality. He must have gone by this time to join his
regiment. Last night I could hardly sleep. I heard the lamentations
through the thin wall partition, the steady, desperate weeping of an
abandoned child, and the voice of a man who was vainly trying to quiet
her! . . . Ah, what a rain of sorrows is now falling upon the world!”

That same evening, on leaving the house, he had met her by her door.
She appeared like another woman, with an old look as though in these
agonizing hours she had been suffering for fifteen years. In vain the
kindly Tchernoff had tried to cheer her up, urging her to accept quietly
her husband’s absence so as not to harm the little one who was coming.

“For the unhappy creature is going to be a mother,” he said sadly. “She
hides her condition with a certain modesty, but from my window, I have
often seen her making the dainty layette.”

The woman had listened to him as though she did not understand. Words
were useless before her desperation. She could only sob as though
talking to herself, “I am a German. . . . He has gone; he has to go
away. . . . Alone! . . . Alone forever!” . . .

“She is thinking all the time of her nationality which is separating
her from her husband; she is thinking of the concentration camp to
which they will take her with her compatriots. She is fearful of being
abandoned in the enemy’s country obliged to defend itself against the
attack of her own country. . . . And all this when she is about to
become a mother. What miseries! What agonies!”

The three reached the rue de la Pompe and on entering the house,
Tchernoff began to take leave of his companions in order to climb the
service stairs; but Desnoyers wished to prolong the conversation. He
dreaded being alone with his friend, still chagrined over the evening’s
events. The conversation with the Russian interested him, so they all
went up in the elevator together. Argensola suggested that this would
be a good opportunity to uncork one of the many bottles which he was
keeping in the kitchen. Tchernoff could go home through the studio door
that opened on the stairway.

The great window had its glass doors wide open; the transoms on the
patio side were also open; a breeze kept the curtains swaying, moving,
too, the old lanterns, moth-eaten flags and other adornments of the
romantic studio. They seated themselves around the table, near a window
some distance from the light which was illuminating the other end of
the big room. They were in the shadow, with their backs to the interior
court. Opposite them were tiled roofs and an enormous rectangle of blue
shadow, perforated by the sharp-pointed stars. The city lights were
coloring the shadowy space with a bloody reflection.

Tchernoff drank two glasses, testifying to the excellence of the liquid
by smacking his lips. The three were silent with the wondering and
thoughtful silence which the grandeur of the night imposes. Their
eyes were glancing from star to star, grouping them in fanciful lines,
forming them into triangles or squares of varying irregularity. At
times, the twinkling radiance of a heavenly body appeared to broaden the
rays of light, almost hypnotizing them.

The Russian, without coming out of his revery, availed himself of
another glass. Then he smiled with cruel irony, his bearded face taking
on the semblance of a tragic mask peeping between the curtains of the
night.

“I wonder what those men up there are thinking!” he muttered. “I wonder
if any star knows that Bismarck ever existed! . . . I wonder if the
planets are aware of the divine mission of the German nation!”

And he continued laughing.

Some far-away and uncertain noise disturbed the stillness of the night,
slipping through some of the chinks that cut the immense plain of roofs.
The three turned their heads so as to hear better. . . . The sound
of voices cut through the thick silence of night--a masculine chorus
chanting a hymn, simple, monotonous and solemn. They guessed at what it
must be, although they could not hear very well. Various single notes
floating with greater intensity on the night wind, enabled Argensola to
piece together the short song, ending in a melodious, triumphant yell--a
true war song:

     C’est l’Alsace et la Lorraine,
     C’est l’Alsace qu’il nous faut,
     Oh, oh, oh, oh.

A new band of men was going away through the streets below, toward the
railway station, the gateway of the war. They must be from the outlying
districts, perhaps from the country, and passing through silence-wrapped
Paris, they felt like singing of the great national hope, that those who
were watching behind the dark facades might feel comforted, knowing that
they were not alone.

“Just as it is in the opera,” said Julio listening to the last notes of
the invisible chorus dying away into the night.

Tchernoff continued drinking, but with a distracted air, his eyes fixed
on the red cloud that floated over the roofs.

The two friends conjectured his mental labor from his concentrated look,
and the low exclamations which were escaping him like the echoes of an
interior monologue. Suddenly he leaped from thought to word without any
forewarning, continuing aloud the course of his reasoning.

“And when the sun arises in a few hours, the world will see coursing
through its fields the four horsemen, enemies of mankind. . . . Already
their wild steeds are pawing the ground with impatience; already the
ill-omened riders have come together and are exchanging the last words
before leaping into the saddle.”

“What horsemen are these?” asked Argensola.

“Those which go before the Beast.”

The two friends thought this reply as unintelligible as the preceding
words. Desnoyers again said mentally, “He is drunk,” but his curiosity
forced him to ask, “What beast is that?”

“That of the Apocalypse.”

There was a brief silence, but the Russian’s terseness of speech did not
last long. He felt the necessity of expressing his enthusiasm for the
dreamer on the island rock of Patmos. The poet of great and mystic
vision was exerting, across two thousand years, his influence over this
mysterious revolutionary, tucked away on the top floor of a house in
Paris. John had foreseen it all. His visions, unintelligible to the
masses, nevertheless held within them the mystery of great human events.

Tchernoff described the Apocalyptic beast rising from the depths of the
sea. He was like a leopard, his feet like those of a bear, his mouth
like the snout of a lion. He had seven heads and ten horns. And upon
the horns were ten crowns, and upon each of his heads the name of a
blasphemy. The evangelist did not say just what these blasphemies were,
perhaps they differed according to the epochs, modified every thousand
years when the beast made a new apparition. The Russian seemed to be
reading those that were flaming on the heads of the monster--blasphemies
against humanity, against justice, against all that makes life sweet
and bearable. “Might is superior to Right!” . . . “The weak should not
exist.” . . . “Be harsh in order to be great.” . . . And the Beast in
all its hideousness was attempting to govern the world and make mankind
render him homage!

“But the four horsemen?” persisted Desnoyers.

The four horsemen were preceding the appearance of the monster in John’s
vision.

The seven seals of the book of mystery were broken by the Lamb in the
presence of the great throne where was seated one who shone like jasper.
The rainbow round about the throne was in sight like unto an emerald.
Twenty-four thrones were in a semicircle around the great throne, and
upon them twenty-four elders with white robes and crowns of gold. Four
enormous animals, covered with eyes and each having six wings, seemed
to be guarding the throne. The sounding of trumpets was greeting the
breaking of the first seal.

“Come and see,” cried one of the beasts in a stentorian tone to the
vision-seeing poet. . . . And the first horseman appeared on a white
horse. In his hand he carried a bow, and a crown was given unto him.
He was Conquest, according to some, the Plague according to others. He
might be both things at the same time. He wore a crown, and that was
enough for Tchernoff.

“Come forth,” shouted the second animal, removing his thousand eyes. And
from the broken seal leaped a flame-colored steed. His rider brandished
over his head an enormous sword. He was War. Peace fled from the world
before his furious gallop; humanity was going to be exterminated.

And when the third seal was broken, another of the winged animals
bellowed like a thunder clap, “Come and see!” And John saw a black
horse. He who mounted it held in his hand a scale in order to weigh the
maintenance of mankind. He was Famine.

The fourth animal saluted the breaking of the fourth seal with a great
roaring--“Come and see!” And there appeared a pale-colored horse. His
rider was called Death, and power was given him to destroy with the
sword and with hunger and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.

The four horsemen were beginning their mad, desolating course over the
heads of terrified humanity.

Tchernoff was describing the four scourges of the earth exactly as
though he were seeing them. The horseman on the white horse was clad in
a showy and barbarous attire. His Oriental countenance was contracted
with hatred as if smelling out his victims. While his horse continued
galloping, he was bending his bow in order to spread pestilence
abroad. At his back swung the brass quiver filled with poisoned arrows,
containing the germs of all diseases--those of private life as well as
those which envenom the wounded soldier on the battlefield.

The second horseman on the red steed was waving the enormous, two-edged
sword over his hair bristling with the swiftness of his course. He was
young, but the fierce scowl and the scornful mouth gave him a look of
implacable ferocity. His garments, blown open by the motion of his wild
race, disclosed the form of a muscular athlete.

Bald, old and horribly skinny was the third horseman bouncing up and
down on the rawboned back of his black steed. His shrunken legs clanked
against the thin flanks of the lean beast. In one withered hand he was
holding the scales, symbol of the scarcity of food that was going to
become as valuable as gold.

The knees of the fourth horseman, sharp as spurs, were pricking the
ribs of the pale horse. His parchment-like skin betrayed the lines and
hollows of his skeleton. The front of his skull-like face was twisted
with the sardonic laugh of destruction. His cane-like arms were whirling
aloft a gigantic sickle. From his angular shoulders was hanging a
ragged, filthy shroud.

And the furious cavalcade was passing like a hurricane over the immense
assemblage of human beings. The heavens showed above their heads, a
livid, dark-edged cloud from the west. Horrible monsters and deformities
were swarming in spirals above the furious horde, like a repulsive
escort. Poor Humanity, crazed with fear, was fleeing in all directions
on hearing the thundering pace of the Plague, War, Hunger and Death. Men
and women, young and old, were knocking each other down and falling to
the ground overwhelmed by terror, astonishment and desperation. And the
white horse, the red, the black and the pale, were crushing all with
their relentless, iron tread--the athletic man was hearing the crashing
of his broken ribs, the nursing babe was writhing at its mother’s
breast, and the aged and feeble were closing their eyes forever with a
childlike sob.

“God is asleep, forgetting the world,” continued the Russian. “It will
be a long time before he awakes, and while he sleeps the four feudal
horsemen of the Beast will course through the land as its only lords.”

Tchernoff was overpowered by the intensity of his dramatic vision.
Springing from his seat, he paced up and down with great strides; but
his picture of the fourfold catastrophe revealed by the gloomy poet’s
trance, seemed to him very weak indeed. A great painter had given
corporeal form to these terrible dreams.

“I have a book,” he murmured, “a rare book.” . . .

And suddenly he left the studio and went to his own quarters. He wanted
to bring the book to show to his friends. Argensola accompanied him, and
they returned in a few minutes with the volume, leaving the doors open
behind them, so as to make a stronger current of air among the hollows
of the facades and the interior patio.

Tchernoff placed his precious book under the light. It was a volume
printed in 1511, with Latin text and engravings. Desnoyers read the
title, “The Apocalypse Illustrated.” The engravings were by Albert
Durer, a youthful effort, when the master was only twenty-seven years
old. The three were fascinated by the picture portraying the wild career
of the Apocalyptic horsemen. The quadruple scourge, on fantastic mounts,
seemed to be precipitating itself with a realistic sweep, crushing
panic-stricken humanity.

Suddenly something happened which startled the three men from their
contemplative admiration--something unusual, indefinable, a dreadful
sound which seemed to enter directly into their brains without passing
through their ears--a clutch at the heart. Instinctively they knew that
something very grave had just happened.

They stared at each other silently for a few interminable seconds.

Through the open door, a cry of alarm came up from the patio.

With a common impulse, the three ran to the interior window, but before
reaching them, the Russian had a presentiment.

“My neighbor! . . . It must be my neighbor. Perhaps she has killed
herself!”

Looking down, they could see lights below, people moving around a form
stretched out on the tiled floor. The alarm had instantly filled all
the court windows, for it was a sleepless night--a night of nervous
apprehension when everyone was keeping a sad vigil.

“She has killed herself,” said a voice which seemed to come up from a
well. “The German woman has committed suicide.”

The explanation of the concierge leaped from window to window up to the
top floor.

The Russian was shaking his head with a fatalistic expression. The
unhappy woman had not taken the death-leap of her own accord. Someone
had intensified her desperation, someone had pushed her. . . . The
horsemen! The four horsemen of the Apocalypse! . . . Already they were
in the saddle! Already they were beginning their merciless gallop of
destruction!

The blind forces of evil were about to be let loose throughout the
world.

The agony of humanity, under the brutal sweep of the four horsemen, was
already begun!




