CHAPTER V

THE INVASION


Don Marcelo was fleeing to take refuge in his castle when he met the
mayor of Villeblanche. The noise of the firing had made him hurry to the
barricade. When he learned of the apparition of the group of stragglers
he threw up his hands in despair. They were crazy. Their resistance was
going to be fatal for the village, and he ran on to beg them to cease.

For some time nothing happened to disturb the morning calm. Desnoyers
had climbed to the top of his towers and was surveying the country with
his field glasses. He couldn’t make out the highway through the nearest
group of trees, but he suspected that underneath their branches great
activity was going on--masses of men on guard, troops preparing for the
attack. The unexpected defense of the fugitives had upset the advance
of the invasion. Desnoyers thought despairingly of that handful of mad
fellows and their stubborn chief. What was their fate going to be? . . .

Focussing his glasses on the village, he saw the red spots of kepis
waving like poppies over the green of the meadows. They were the
retreating men, now convinced of the uselessness of their resistance.
Perhaps they had found a ford or forgotten boat by which they might
cross the Maine, and so were continuing their retreat toward the river.
At any minute now the Germans were going to enter Villeblanche.

Half an hour of profound silence passed by. The village lay silhouetted
against a background of hills--a mass of roofs beneath the church tower
finished with its cross and iron weather cock. Everything seemed as
tranquil as in the best days of peace. Suddenly he noticed that the
grove was vomiting forth something noisy and penetrating--a bubble of
vapor accompanied by a deafening report. Something was hurtling through
the air with a strident curve. Then a roof in the village opened like
a crater, vomiting forth flying wood, fragments of plaster and broken
furniture. All the interior of the house seemed to be escaping in a
stream of smoke, dirt and splinters.

The invaders were bombarding Villeblanche before attempting attack, as
though fearing to encounter persistent resistance in its streets. More
projectiles fell. Some passed over the houses, exploding between
the hamlet and the castle. The towers of the Desnoyers property
were beginning to attract the aim of the artillerymen. The owner
was therefore about to abandon his dangerous observatory when he saw
something white like a tablecloth or sheet floating from the church
tower. His neighbors had hoisted this signal of peace in order to avoid
bombardment. A few more missiles fell and then there was silence.

When Don Marcelo reached his park he found the Warden burying at the
foot of a tree the sporting rifles still remaining in his castle. Then
he went toward the great iron gates. The enemies were going to come,
and he had to receive them. While uneasily awaiting their arrival his
compunctions again tormented him. What was he doing there? Why had he
remained? . . . But his obstinate temperament immediately put aside
the promptings of fear. He was there because he had to guard his own.
Besides, it was too late now to think about such things.

Suddenly the morning stillness was broken by a sound like the deafening
tearing of strong cloth. “Shots, Master,” said the Warden. “Firing! It
must be in the square.”

A few minutes after they saw running toward them a woman from the
village, an old soul, dried up and darkened by age, who was panting
from her great exertion, and looking wildly around her. She was fleeing
blindly, trying to escape from danger and shut out horrible visions.
Desnoyers and the Keeper’s family listened to her explanations
interrupted with hiccoughs of terror.

The Germans were in Villeblanche. They had entered first in an
automobile driven at full speed from one end of the village to the
other. Its mitrailleuse was firing at random against closed houses and
open doors, knocking down all the people in sight. The old woman flung
up her arms with a gesture of terror. . . . Dead . . . many dead . . .
wounded . . . blood! Then other iron-plated vehicles had stopped in
the square, and behind them cavalrymen, battalions of infantry, many
battalions coming from everywhere. The helmeted men seemed furious; they
accused the villagers of having fired at them. In the square they had
struck the mayor and villagers who had come forward to meet them. The
priest, bending over some of the dying, had also been trodden under
foot. . . . All prisoners! The Germans were talking of shooting them.

The old dame’s words were cut short by the rumble of approaching
automobiles.

“Open the gates,” commanded the owner to the Warden. The massive iron
grill work swung open, and was never again closed. All property rights
were at an end.

An enormous automobile, covered with dust and filled with men, stopped
at the entrance. Behind them sounded the horns of other vehicles that
were putting on the brakes. Desnoyers saw soldiers leaping out, all
wearing the greenish-gray uniform with a sheath of the same tone
covering the pointed casque. The one who marched at their head put his
revolver to the millionaire’s forehead.

“Where are the sharpshooters?” he asked.

He was pale with the pallor of wrath, vengeance and fear. His face
was trembling under the influence of his triple emotion. Don Marcelo
explained slowly, contemplating at a short distance from his eyes the
black circle of the threatening tube. He had not seen any sharpshooters.
The only inhabitants of the castle were the Warden with his family and
himself, the owner of the castle.

The officer surveyed the edifice and then examined Desnoyers
with evident astonishment as though he thought his appearance too
unpretentious for a proprietor. He had taken him for a simple employee,
and his respect for social rank made him lower his revolver.

He did not, however, alter his haughty attitude. He pressed Don Marcelo
into the service as a guide, making him search ahead of him while forty
soldiers grouped themselves at his back. They advanced in two files to
the shelter of the trees which bordered the central avenue, with their
guns ready to shoot, and looking uneasily at the castle windows as
though expecting to receive from them hidden shots. Desnoyers marched
tranquilly through the centre, and the official, who had been imitating
the precautions of his men, finally joined him when he was crossing the
drawbridge.

The armed men scattered through the rooms in search of the enemy.
They ran their bayonets through beds and divans. Some, with automatic
destructiveness, slit the draperies and the rich bed coverings. The
owner protested; what was the sense in such useless destruction?
. . . He was suffering unbearable torture at seeing the enormous boots
spotting the rugs with mud, on hearing the clash of guns and knapsacks
against the most fragile, choicest pieces of furniture. Poor historic
mansion! . . .

The officer looked amazed that he should protest for such trifling
cause, but he gave orders in German and his men ceased their rude
explorations. Then, in justification of this extraordinary respect, he
added in French:

“I believe that you are going to have the honor of entertaining here the
general of our division.”

The certainty that the castle did not hold any hidden enemies made
him more amiable. He, nevertheless, persisted in his wrath against the
sharpshooters. A group of the villagers had opened fire upon the Uhlans
when they were entering unsuspiciously after the retreat of the French.

Desnoyers felt it necessary to protest. They were neither inhabitants
nor sharpshooters; they were French soldiers. He took good care to be
silent about their presence at the barricade, but he insisted that he
had distinguished their uniforms from a tower of the castle.

The official made a threatening face.

“You, too? . . . You, who appear a reasonable man, can repeat such yarns
as these?” And in order to close the conversation, he said, arrogantly:
“They were wearing uniforms, then, if you persist in saying so, but they
were sharpshooters just the same. The French Government has distributed
arms and uniforms among the farmers that they may assassinate us. . . .
Belgium did the same thing. . . . But we know their tricks, and we know
how to punish them, too!”

The village was going to be burned. It was necessary to avenge the four
German dead lying on the outskirts of Villeblanche, near the barricade.
The mayor, the priest, the principal inhabitants would all be shot.

By the time they reached the top floor Desnoyers could see floating
above the boughs of his park dark clouds whose outlines were reddened
by the sun. The top of the bell tower was the only thing that he could
distinguish at that distance. Around the iron weathercock were flying
long thin fringes like black cobwebs lifted by the breeze. An odor of
burning wood came toward the castle.

The German greeted this spectacle with a cruel smile. Then on descending
to the park, he ordered Desnoyers to follow him. His liberty and his
dignity had come to an end. Henceforth he was going to be an underling
at the beck and call of these men who would dispose of him as their
whims directed. Ay, why had he remained? . . . He obeyed, climbing into
an automobile beside the officer, who was still carrying his revolver
in his right hand. His men distributed themselves through the castle and
outbuildings, in order to prevent the flight of an imaginary enemy. The
Warden and his family seemed to be saying good-bye to him with their
eyes. Perhaps they were taking him to his death. . . .

Beyond the castle woods a new world was coming into existence. The short
cut to Villeblanche seemed to Desnoyers a leap of millions of leagues,
a fall into a red planet where men and things were covered with the film
of smoke and the glare of fire. He saw the village under a dark canopy
spotted with sparks and glowing embers. The bell tower was burning like
an enormous torch; the roof of the church was breaking into flames with
a crashing fury. The glare of the holocaust seemed to shrivel and grow
pale in the impassive light of the sun.

Running across the fields with the haste of desperation were shrieking
women and children. The animals had escaped from the stables, and driven
forth by the flames were racing wildly across the country. The cow and
the work horse were dragging their halters broken by their flight. Their
flanks were smoking and smelt of burnt hair. The pigs, the sheep and the
chickens were all tearing along mingled with the cats and the dogs. All
the domestic animals were returning to a brute existence, fleeing
from civilized man. Shots were heard and hellish ha-ha’s. The soldiers
outside of the village were making themselves merry in this hunt for
fugitives. Their guns were aimed at beasts and were hitting people.

Desnoyers saw men, many men, men everywhere. They were like gray ants,
marching in endless files towards the South, coming out from the woods,
filling the roads, crossing the fields. The green of vegetation was
disappearing under their tread; the dust was rising in spirals behind
the dull roll of the cannons and the measured trot of thousands of
horses. On the roadside several battalions had halted, with their
accompaniment of vehicles and draw horses. They were resting before
renewing their march. He knew this army. He had seen it in Berlin on
parade, and yet it seemed to have changed its former appearance. There
now remained very little of the heavy and imposing glitter, of the mute
and vainglorious haughtiness which had made his relatives-in-law weep
with admiration. War, with its realism, had wiped out all that was
theatrical about this formidable organization of death. The soldiers
appeared dirty and tired, out. The respiration of fat and sweaty bodies,
mixed with the strong smell of leather, floated over the regiments. All
the men had hungry faces.

For days and nights they had been following the heels of an enemy
which was always just eluding their grasp. In this forced advance the
provisions of the administration would often arrive so late at the
cantonments that they could depend only on what they happened to have
in their knapsacks. Desnoyers saw them lined up near the road devouring
hunks of black bread and mouldy sausages. Some had scattered through
the fields to dig up beet roots and other tubers, chewing with loud
crunchings the hard pulp to which the grit still adhered. An ensign was
shaking the fruit trees using as a catch-all the flag of his regiment.
That glorious standard, adorned with souvenirs of 1870, was serving as
a receptacle for green plums. Those who were seated on the ground were
improving this rest by drawing their perspiring, swollen feet from high
boots which were sending out an insufferable smell.

The regiments of infantry which Desnoyers had seen in Berlin reflecting
the light on metal and leather straps, the magnificent and terrifying
Hussars, the Cuirassiers in pure white uniform like the paladins of the
Holy Grail, the artillerymen with breasts crossed with white bands, all
the military variations that on parade had drawn forth the Hartrotts’
sighs of admiration--these were now all unified and mixed together,
of uniform color, all in greenish mustard like the dusty lizards that,
slipping along, try to be confounded with the earth.

The persistency of the iron discipline was easily discernible. A word
from the chiefs, the sound of a whistle, and they all grouped themselves
together, the human being disappearing in the throngs of automatons; but
danger, weariness, and the uncertainty of triumph had for the time
being brought officers and men nearer together, obliterating caste
distinction. The officers were coming part way out of their overbearing,
haughty seclusion, and were condescending to talk with the lower orders
so as to revive their courage. One effort more and they would overwhelm
both French and English, repeating the triumph of Sedan, whose
anniversary they were going to celebrate in a few days! They were going
to enter Paris; it was only a matter of a week. Paris! Great shops
filled with luxurious things, famous restaurants, women, champagne,
money. . . . And the men, flattered that their commanders were stooping
to chat with them, forgot fatigue and hunger, reviving like the throngs
of the Crusade before the image of Jerusalem. “Nach Paris!” The joyous
shout circulated from the head to the tail of the marching columns. “To
Paris! To Paris!”

The scarcity of their food supply was here supplemented by the products
of a country rich in wines. When sacking houses they rarely found
eatables, but invariably a wine cellar. The humble German, the perpetual
beer drinker, who had always looked upon wine as a privilege of the
rich, could now open up casks with blows from his weapons, even bathing
his feet in the stream of precious liquid. Every battalion left as a
souvenir of its passing a wake of empty bottles; a halt in camp sowed
the land with glass cylinders. The regimental trucks, unable to renew
their stores of provisions, were accustomed to seize the wine in all the
towns. The soldier, lacking bread, would receive alcohol. . . .

This donation was always accompanied by the good counsels of the
officers--War is war; no pity toward our adversaries who do not deserve
it. The French were shooting their prisoners, and their women were
putting out the eyes of the wounded. Every dwelling was a den of traps.
The simple-hearted and innocent German entering therein was going to
certain death. The beds were made over subterranean caves, the wardrobes
were make-believe doors, in every corner was lurking an assassin. This
traitorous nation, which was arranging its ground like the scenario of
a melodrama, would have to be chastised. The municipal officers,
the priests, the schoolmasters were directing and protecting the
sharpshooters.

Desnoyers was shocked at the indifference with which these men were
stalking around the burning village. They did not appear to see the fire
and destruction; it was just an ordinary spectacle, not worth looking
at. Ever since they had crossed the frontier, smoldering and blasted
villages, fired by the advance guard, had marked their halting places on
Belgian and French soil.

When entering Villeblanche the automobile had to lower its speed. Burned
walls were bulging out over the street and half-charred beams were
obstructing the way, obliging the vehicle to zigzag through the smoking
rubbish. The vacant lots were burning like fire pans between the houses
still standing, with doors broken, but not yet in flames. Desnoyers saw
within these rectangular spaces partly burned wood, chairs, beds,
sewing machines, iron stoves, all the household goods of the well-to-do
countryman, being consumed or twisted into shapeless masses. Sometimes
he would spy an arm sticking out of the ruins, beginning to burn like a
long wax candle. No, it could not be possible . . . and then the
smell of cooking flesh began to mingle with that of the soot, wood and
plaster.

He closed his eyes, not able to look any longer. He thought for a moment
he must be dreaming. It was unbelievable that such horrors could
take place in less than an hour. Human wickedness at its worst he had
supposed incapable of changing the aspect of a village in such a short
time.

An abrupt stoppage of the motor made him look around involuntarily. This
time the obstruction was the dead bodies in the street--two men and
a woman. They had probably fallen under the rain of bullets from the
machine gun which had passed through the town preceding the invasion.
Some soldiers were seated a little beyond them, with their backs to the
victims, as though ignoring their presence. The chauffeur yelled to
them to clear the track; with their guns and feet they pushed aside the
bodies still warm, at every turn leaving a trail of blood. The space was
hardly opened before the vehicle shot through . . . a thud, a leap--the
back wheels had evidently crushed some very fragile obstacle.

Desnoyers was still huddled in his seat, benumbed and with closed eyes.
The horror around him made him think of his own fate. Whither was this
lieutenant taking him? . . .

He soon saw the town hall flaming in the square; the church was now
nothing but a stone shell, bristling with flames. The houses of the
prosperous villagers had had their doors and windows chopped out by
axe-blows. Within them soldiers were moving about methodically. They
entered empty-handed and came out loaded with furniture and clothing.
Others, in the upper stories, were flinging out various objects;
accompanying their trophies with jests and guffaws. Suddenly they had
to come out flying, for fire was breaking out with the violence and
rapidity of an explosion. Following their footsteps was a group of men
with big boxes and metal cylinders. Someone at their head was pointing
out the buildings into whose broken windows were to be thrown the
lozenges and liquid streams which would produce catastrophe with
lightning rapidity.

Out of one of these flaming buildings two men, who seemed but bundles
of rags, were being dragged by some Germans. Above the blue sleeves of
their military cloaks Don Marcelo could distinguish blanched faces and
eyes immeasurably distended with suffering. Their legs were dragging on
the ground, sticking out between the tatters of their red pantaloons.
One of them still had on his kepis. Blood was gushing from different
parts of their bodies and behind them, like white serpents, were
trailing their loosened bandages. They were wounded Frenchmen,
stragglers who had remained in the village because too weak to keep up
with the retreat. Perhaps they had joined the group which, finding its
escape cut off, had attempted that insane resistance.

Wishing to make that matter more clearly understood, Desnoyers looked at
the official beside him, attempting to speak; but the officer silenced
him instantly: “French sharpshooters in disguise who are going to get
the punishment they deserve.” The German bayonets were sunk deep into
their bodies. Then blows with the guns fell on the head of one of them
. . . and these blows were repeated with dull thumps upon their skulls,
crackling as they burst open.

Again the old man wondered what his fate would be. Where was this
lieutenant taking him across such visions of horror? . . .

They had reached the outskirts of the village, where the dragoons had
built their barricade. The carts were still there, but at one side of
the road. They climbed out of the automobile, and he saw a group of
officers in gray, with sheathed helmets like the others. The one who had
brought him to this place was standing rigidly erect with one hand to
his visor, speaking to a military man standing a few paces in front of
the others. He looked at this man, who was scrutinizing him with his
little hard blue eyes that had carved his spare, furrowed countenance
with lines. He must be the general. His arrogant and piercing gaze was
sweeping him from head to foot. Don Marcelo felt a presentiment that his
life was hanging on this examination; should an evil suggestion, a
cruel caprice flash across this brain, he was surely lost. The general
shrugged his shoulders and said a few words in a contemptuous tone, then
entered his automobile with two of his aids, and the group disbanded.

The cruel uncertainty, the interminable moments before the official
returned to his side, filled Desnoyers with dread.

“His Excellency is very gracious,” announced the lieutenant. “He might
have shot you, but he pardons you and yet you people say that we are
savages!” . . .

With involuntary contempt, he further explained that he had conducted
him thither fully expecting that he would be shot. The General was
planning to punish all the prominent residents of Villeblanche, and he
had inferred, on his own initiative, that the owner of the castle must
be one of them.

“Military duty, sir. . . . War exacts it.”

After this excuse the petty official renewed his eulogies of His
Excellency. He was going to make his headquarters in Don Marcelo’s
property, and on that account granted him his life. He ought to thank
him. . . . Then again his face trembled with wrath. He pointed to some
bodies lying near the road. They were the corpses of Uhlans, covered
with some cloaks from which were protruding the enormous soles of their
boots.

“Plain murder!” he exclaimed. “A crime for which the guilty are going to
pay dearly!”

His indignation made him consider the death of four soldiers as an
unheard-of and monstrous outrage--as though in was only the enemy ought
to fall, keeping safe and sound the lives of his compatriots.

A band of infantry commanded by an officer approached. As their ranks
opened, Desnoyers saw the gray uniforms roughly pushing forward some of
the inhabitants. Their clothes were torn and some had blood on face and
hands. He recognized them one by one as they were lined up against the
mud wall, at twenty paces from the firing squad of soldiers--the mayor,
the priest, the forest guard, and some rich villagers whose houses he
had seen falling in flames.

“They are going to shoot them . . . in order to prevent any doubt about
it,” the lieutenant explained. “I wanted you to see this. It will serve
as an object lesson. In this way, you will feel more appreciative of the
leniency of His Excellency.”

The prisoners were mute. Their voices had been exhausted in vain
protest. All their life was concentrated in their eyes, looking around
them in stupefaction. . . . And was it possible that they would kill
them in cold blood without hearing their testimony, without admitting
the proofs of their innocence!

The certainty of approaching death soon gave almost all of them a noble
serenity. It was useless to complain. Only one rich countryman, famous
for his avarice, was whimpering desperately, saying over and over, “I do
not wish to die. . . . I do not want to die!”

Trembling and with eyes overflowing with tears, Desnoyers hid himself
behind his implacable guide. He knew them all, he had battled with them
all, and repented now of his former wrangling. The mayor had a red stain
on his forehead from a long skin wound. Upon his breast fluttered a
tattered tricolor; the municipality had placed it there that he might
receive the invaders who had torn most of it away. The priest was
holding his little round body as erect as possible, wishing to embrace
in a look of resignation the victims, the executioners, earth and
heaven. He appeared larger than usual and more imposing. His black
girdle, broken by the roughness of the soldiers, left his cassock loose
and floating. His waving, silvery hair was dripping blood, spotting with
its red drops the white clerical collar.

Upon seeing him cross the fatal field with unsteady step, because of his
obesity, a savage roar cut the tragic silence. The unarmed soldiers,
who had hastened to witness the execution, greeted the venerable old man
with shouts of laughter. “Death to the priest!” . . . The fanaticism of
the religious wars vibrated through their mockery. Almost all of them
were devout Catholics or fervent Protestants, but they believed only
in the priests of their own country. Outside of Germany, everything was
despicable--even their own religion.

The mayor and the priest changed their places in the file, seeking one
another. Each, with solemn courtesy, was offering the other the central
place in the group.

“Here, your Honor, is your place as mayor--at the head of all.”

“No, after you, Monsieur le cure.”

They were disputing for the last time, but in this supreme moment each
one was wishing to yield precedence to the other.

Instinctively they had clasped hands, looking straight ahead at the
firing squad, that had lowered its guns in a rigid, horizontal line.
Behind them sounded laments--“Good-bye, my children. . . . Adieu, life!
. . . I do not wish to die! . . . I do not want to die! . . .”

The two principal men felt the necessity of saying something, of closing
the page of their existence with an affirmation.

“Vive la Republique!” cried the mayor.

“Vive la France!” said the priest.

Desnoyers thought that both had said the same thing. Two uprights
flashed up above their heads--the arm of the priest making the sign of
the cross, and the sabre of the commander of the shooters, glistening
at the same instant. . . . A dry, dull thunderclap, followed by some
scattering, tardy shots.

Don Marcelo’s compassion for that forlorn cluster of massacred humanity
was intensified on beholding the grotesque forms which many assumed
in the moment of death. Some collapsed like half-emptied sacks; others
rebounded from the ground like balls; some leaped like gymnasts, with
upraised arms, falling on their backs, or face downward, like a swimmer.
In that human heap, he saw limbs writhing in the agony of death. Some
soldiers advanced like hunters bagging their prey. From the palpitating
mass fluttered locks of white hair, and a feeble hand, trying to repeat
the sacred sign. A few more shots and blows on the livid, mangled mass
. . . and the last tremors of life were extinguished forever.

The officer had lit a cigar.

“Whenever you wish,” he said to Desnoyers with ironical courtesy.

They re-entered the automobile in order to return to the castle by the
way of Villeblanche. The increasing number of fires and the dead bodies
in the streets no longer impressed the old man. He had seen so much!
What could now affect his sensibilities? . . . He was longing to get
out of the village as soon as possible to try to find the peace of the
country. But the country had disappeared under the invasion--soldier’s,
horses, cannons everywhere. Wherever they stopped to rest, they were
destroying all that they came in contact with. The marching battalions,
noisy and automatic as a machine were preceded by the fifes and drums,
and every now and then, in order to cheer their drooping spirits, were
breaking into their joyous cry, “Nach Paris!”

The castle, too, had been disfigured by the invasion. The number of
guards had greatly increased during the owner’s absence. He saw an
entire regiment of infantry encamped in the park. Thousands of men
were moving about under the trees, preparing the dinner in the movable
kitchens. The flower borders of the gardens, the exotic plants, the
carefully swept and gravelled avenues were all broken and spoiled by
this avalanche of men, beasts and vehicles.

A chief wearing on his sleeve the band of the military administration
was giving orders as though he were the proprietor. He did not even
condescend to look at this civilian walking beside the lieutenant with
the downcast look of a prisoner. The stables were vacant. Desnoyers saw
his last animals being driven off with sticks by the helmeted shepherds.
The costly progenitors of his herds were all beheaded in the park like
mere slaughter-house animals. In the chicken houses and dovecotes, there
was not a single bird left. The stables were filled with thin horses who
were gorging themselves before overflowing mangers. The feed from the
barns was being lavishly distributed through the avenue, much of it lost
before it could be used. The cavalry horses of various divisions were
turned loose in the meadows, destroying with their hoofs the canals,
the edges of the slopes, the level of the ground, all the work of
many months. The dry wood was uselessly burning in the park. Through
carelessness or mischief, someone had set the wood piles on fire. The
trees, with the bark dried by the summer heat, were crackling on being
licked by the flame.

The building was likewise occupied by a multitude of men under this same
superintendent. The open windows showed a continual shifting through the
rooms. Desnoyers heard great blows that re-echoed within his breast. Ay,
his historic mansion! . . . The General was going to establish himself
in it, after having examined on the banks of the Marne, the works of the
pontoon builders, who had been constructing several military bridges
for the troops. Don Marcelo’s outraged sense of ownership forced him to
speak. He feared that they would break the doors of the locked rooms--he
would like to go for the keys in order to give them up to those in
charge. The commissary would not listen to him but continued ignoring
his existence. The lieutenant replied with cutting amiability:

“It is not necessary; do not trouble yourself!”

After this considerate remark, he started to rejoin his regiment but
deemed it prudent before losing sight of Desnoyers to give him a little
advice. He must remain quietly at the castle; outside, he might be taken
for a spy, and he already knew how promptly the soldiers of the Emperor
settled all such little matters.

He could not remain in the garden looking at his dwelling from any
distance, because the Germans who were going and coming were diverting
themselves by playing practical jokes upon him. They would march toward
him in a straight line, as though they did not see him, and he would
have to hurry out of their way to avoid being thrown down by their
mechanical and rigid advance.

Finally he sought refuge in the lodge of the Keeper, whose good wife
stared with astonishment at seeing him drop into a kitchen chair
breathless and downcast, suddenly aged by losing the remarkable energy
that had been the wonder of his advanced years.

“Ah, Master. . . . Poor Master!”

Of all the events attending the invasion, the most unbelievable for this
poor woman was seeing her employer take refuge in her cottage.

“What is ever going to become of us!” she groaned.

Her husband was in constant demand by the invaders. His Excellency’s
assistants, installed in the basement apartments of the castle were
incessantly calling him to tell them the whereabouts of things which
they could not find. From every trip, he would return humiliated, his
eyes filled with tears. On his forehead was the black and blue mark of
a blow, and his jacket was badly torn. These were souvenirs of a futile
attempt at opposition, during his master’s absence, to the German
plundering of stables and castle rooms.

The millionaire felt himself linked by misfortune to these people,
considered until then with indifference. He was very grateful for the
loyalty of this sick and humble man, and the poor woman’s interest in
the castle as though it were her own, touched him greatly. The presence
of their daughter brought Chichi to his mind. He had passed near her
without noting the transformation in her, seeing her just the same
as when, with her little dog trot, she had accompanied the Master’s
daughter on her rounds through the parks and grounds. Now she was a
woman, slender and full grown, with the first feminine graces showing
subtly in her fourteen-year-old figure. Her mother would not let her
leave the lodge, fearing the soldiery which was invading every other
spot with its overflowing current, filtering into all open places,
breaking every obstacle which impeded their course.

Desnoyers broke his despairing silence to admit that he was feeling
hungry. He was ashamed of this bodily want, but the emotions of the day,
the executions seen so near, the danger still threatening, had awakened
in him a nervous appetite. The fact that he was so impotent in the midst
of his riches and unable to avail himself of anything on his estate but
aggravated his necessity.

“Poor Master!” again exclaimed the faithful soul.

And the woman looked with astonishment at the millionaire devouring a
bit of bread and a triangle of cheese, the only food that she could find
in her humble dwelling. The certainty that he would not be able to find
any other nourishment, no matter how much he might seek it, greatly
sharpened his cravings. To have acquired an enormous fortune only to
perish with hunger at the end of his existence! . . . The good wife, as
though guessing his thoughts, sighed, raising her eyes beseechingly to
heaven. Since the early morning hours, the world had completely changed
its course. Ay, this war! . . .

The rest of the afternoon and a part of the night, the proprietor kept
receiving news from the Keeper after his visits to the castle. The
General and numerous officers were now occupying the rooms. Not a single
door was locked, all having been opened with blows of the axe or gun.
Many things had completely disappeared; the man did not know exactly
how, but they had vanished--perhaps destroyed, or perhaps carried off
by those who were coming and going. The chief with the banded sleeve was
going from room to room examining everything, dictating in German to a
soldier who was writing down his orders. Meanwhile the General and his
staff were in the dining room drinking heavily, consulting the maps
spread out on the floor, and ordering the Warden to go down into the
vaults for the very best wines.

By nightfall, an onward movement was noticeable in the human tide that
had been overflowing the fields as far as the eye could reach. Some
bridges had been constructed across the Marne and the invasion had
renewed its march, shouting enthusiastically. “Nach Paris!” Those left
behind till the following day were to live in the ruined houses or
the open air. Desnoyers heard songs. Under the splendor of the evening
stars, the soldiers had grouped themselves in musical knots, chanting
a sweet and solemn chorus of religious gravity. Above the trees was
floating a red cloud, intensified by the dusk--a reflection of the
still burning village. Afar off were bonfires of farms and homesteads,
twinkling in the night with their blood-colored lights.

The bewildered proprietor of the castle finally fell asleep in a bed
in the lodge, made mercifully unconscious by the heavy and stupefying
slumber of exhaustion, without fright nor nightmare. He seemed to be
falling, falling into a bottomless pit, and on awaking fancied that he
had slept but a few minutes. The sun was turning the window shades to an
orange hue, spattered with shadows of waving boughs and birds fluttering
and twittering among the leaves. He shared their joy in the cool
refreshing dawn of the summer day. It certainly was a fine morning--but
whose dwelling was this? . . . He gazed dumbfounded at his bed and
surroundings. Suddenly the reality assaulted his brain that had been so
sweetly dulled by the first splendors of the day. Step by step, the host
of emotions compressed into the preceding day, came climbing up the long
stairway of his memory to the last black and red landing of the night
before. And he had slept tranquilly surrounded by enemies, under the
surveillance of an arbitrary power which might destroy him in one of its
caprices!

When he went into the kitchen, the Warden gave him some news. The
Germans were departing. The regiment encamped in the park had left at
daybreak, and after them others, and still others. In the village there
was still one regiment occupying the few houses yet standing and the
ruins of the charred ones. The General had gone also with his numerous
staff. There was nobody in the castle now but the head of a Reserve
brigade whom his aide called “The Count,” and a few officials.

Upon receiving this information, the proprietor ventured to leave the
lodge. He saw his gardens destroyed, but still beautiful. The trees were
still stately in spite of the damage done to their trunks. The birds
were flying about excitedly, rejoicing to find themselves again in
possession of the spaces so recently flooded by the human inundation.

Suddenly Desnoyers regretted having sallied forth. Five huge trucks were
lined up near the moat before the castle bridge. Gangs of soldiers were
coming out carrying on their shoulders enormous pieces of furniture,
like peons conducting a moving. A bulky object wrapped in damask
curtains--an excellent substitute for sacking--was being pushed by four
men toward one of the drays. The owner suspected immediately what it
must be. His bath! The famous tub of gold! . . . Then with an abrupt
revulsion of feeling, he felt no grief at his loss. He now detested the
ostentatious thing, attributing to it a fatal influence. On account of
it he was here. But, ay! . . . the other furnishings piled up in the
drays! . . . In that moment he suffered the extreme agony of misery and
impotence. It was impossible for him to defend his property, to dispute
with the head thief who was sacking his castle, tranquilly ignoring the
very existence of the owner. “Robbers! thieves!” and he fled back to the
lodge.

He passed the remainder of the morning with his elbow on the table, his
head in his hands, the same as the day before, letting the hours grind
slowly by, trying not to hear the rolling of the vehicles that were
bearing away these credentials of his wealth.

Toward midday, the Keeper announced that an officer who had arrived a
few hours before in an automobile was inquiring for him.

Responding to this summons, Desnoyers encountered outside the lodge,
a captain arrayed like the others in sheathed and pointed helmet,
in mustard-colored uniform, red leather boots, sword, revolver,
field-glasses and geographic map hanging in a case from his belt. He
appeared young; on his sleeve was the staff emblem.

“Do you know me? . . . I did not wish to pass through here without
seeing you.”

He spoke in Castilian, and Don Marcelo felt greater surprise at this
than at the many things which he had been experiencing so painfully
during the last twenty-four hours.

“You really do not know me?” queried the German, always in Spanish. “I
am Otto. . . . Captain Otto von Hartrott.”

The old man’s mind went painfully down the staircase of memory, stopping
this time at a far-distant landing. There he saw the old ranch, and his
brother-in-law announcing the birth of his second son. “I shall give
him Bismarck’s name,” Karl had said. Then, climbing back past many other
platforms, Desnoyers saw himself in Berlin during his visit to the
von Hartrott home where they were speaking proudly of Otto, almost
as learned as the older brother, but devoting his talents entirely to
martial matters. He was then a lieutenant and studying for admission to
the General Staff. “Who knows but he may turn out to be another Moltke?”
 said the proud father . . . and the charming Chichi had thereupon
promptly bestowed upon the warlike wonder a nickname, accepted through
the family. From that time, Otto was Moltkecito (the baby Moltke) to his
Parisian relatives.

Desnoyers was astounded by the transformation which had meanwhile taken
place in the youth. This vigorous captain with the insolent air who
might shoot him at any minute was the same urchin whom he had seen
running around the ranch, the beardless Moltkecito who had been the butt
of his daughter’s ridicule. . . .

The soldier, meanwhile, was explaining his presence there. He belonged
to another division. There were many . . . many! They were advancing
rapidly, forming an extensive and solid wall from Verdun to Paris. His
general had sent him to maintain the contact with the next division, but
finding himself near the castle, he had wished to visit it. A family tie
was not a mere word. He still remembered the days that he had spent at
Villeblanche when the Hartrott family had paid a long visit to their
relatives in France. The officials now occupying the edifice had
detained him that he might lunch with them. One of them had casually
mentioned that the owner of the castle was somewhere about although
nobody knew exactly where. This had been a great surprise to Captain von
Hartrott who had tried to find him, regretting to see him taking refuge
in the Warden’s quarters.

“You must leave this hut; you are my uncle,” he said haughtily. “Return
to your castle where you belong. My comrades will be much pleased to
make your acquaintance; they are very distinguished men.”

He very much regretted whatever the old gentleman might have suffered.
. . . He did not know exactly in what that suffering had consisted, but
surmised that the first moments of the invasion had been cruel ones for
him.

“But what else can you expect?” he repeated several times. “That is
war.”

At the same time he approved of his having remained on his property.
They had special orders to seize the goods of the fugitives. Germany
wished the inhabitants to remain in their dwellings as though nothing
extraordinary had occurred. . . . Desnoyers protested. . . . “But if the
invaders were shooting the innocent ones and burning their homes!” . . .
His nephew prevented his saying more. He turned pale, an ashy hue
spreading over his face; his eyes snapped and his face trembled like
that of the lieutenant who had taken possession of the castle.

“You refer to the execution of the mayor and the others. My comrades
have just been telling me about it; yet that castigation was very mild;
they should have completely destroyed the entire village. They should
have killed even the women and children. We’ve got to put an end to
these sharpshooters.”

His uncle looked at him in amazement. His Moltkecito was as formidable
and ferocious as the others. . . . But the captain brought the
conversation to an abrupt close by repeating the monstrous and
everlasting excuse.

“Very horrible, but what else can you expect! . . . That is war.”

He then inquired after his mother, rejoicing to learn that she was in
the South. He had been uneasy at the idea of her remaining in Paris
. . . especially with all those revolutions which had been breaking out
there lately! . . . Desnoyers looked doubtful as if he could not have
heard correctly. What revolutions were those? . . . But the officer,
without further explanation, resumed his conversation about his family,
taking it for granted that his relative would be impatient to learn the
fate of his German kin.

They were all in magnificent state. Their illustrious father was
president of various patriotic societies (since his years no longer
permitted him to go to war) and was besides organizing future industrial
enterprises to improve the conquered countries. His brother, “the Sage,”
 was giving lectures about the nations that the imperial victory
was bound to annex, censuring severely those whose ambitions were
unpretending or weak. The remaining brothers were distinguishing
themselves in the army, one of them having been presented with a medal
at Lorraine. The two sisters, although somewhat depressed by the absence
of their fiances, lieutenants of the Hussars, were employing their
time in visiting the hospitals and begging God to chastise traitorous
England.

Captain von Hartrott was slowly conducting his uncle toward the castle.
The gray and unbending soldiers who, until then, had been ignoring the
existence of Don Marcelo, looked at him with interest, now that he
was in intimate conversation with a member of the General Staff. He
perceived that these men were about to humanize themselves by casting
aside temporarily their inexorable and aggressive automatonism.

Upon entering his mansion something in his heart contracted with an
agonizing shudder. Everywhere he could see dreadful vacancies, which
made him recall the objects which had formerly been there. Rectangular
spots of stronger color announced the theft of furniture and paintings.
With what despatch and system the gentleman of the armlet had been doing
his work! . . . To the sadness that the cold and orderly spoliation
caused was added his indignation as an economical man, gazing upon the
slashed curtains, spotted rugs, broken crystal and porcelain--all the
debris from a ruthless and unscrupulous occupation.

His nephew, divining his thoughts, could only offer the same old
excuse--“What a mess! . . . But that is war!”

With Moltkecito, he did not have to subside into the respectful
civilities of fear.

“That is NOT war!” he thundered bitterly. “It is an expedition of
bandits. . . . Your comrades are nothing less than highwaymen.”

Captain von Hartrott swelled up with a jerk. Separating himself from the
complainant and looking fixedly at him, he spoke in a low voice, hissing
with wrath. “Look here, uncle! It is a lucky thing for you that you have
expressed yourself in Spanish, and those around you could not understand
you. If you persist in such comments you will probably receive a bullet
by way of an answer. The Emperor’s officials permit no insults.” And
his threatening attitude demonstrated the facility with which he could
forget his relationship if he should receive orders to proceed against
Don Marcelo.

Thus silenced, the vanquished proprietor hung his head. What was he
going to do? . . . The Captain now renewed his affability as though he
had forgotten what he had just said. He wished to present him to his
companions-at-arms. His Excellency, Count Meinbourg, the Major General,
upon learning that he was a relative of the von Hartrotts, had done him
the honor of inviting him to his table.

Invited into his own demesne, he finally reached the dining room, filled
with men in mustard color and high boots. Instinctively, he made
an inventory of the room. All in good order, nothing broken--walls,
draperies and furniture still intact; but an appraising glance within
the sideboard again caused a clutch at his heart. Two entire table
services of silver, and another of old porcelain had disappeared without
leaving the most insignificant of their pieces. He was obliged to
respond gravely to the presentations which his nephew was making, and
take the hand which the Count was extending with aristocratic languor.
The adversary began considering him with benevolence, on learning that
he was a millionaire from a distant land where riches were acquired very
rapidly.

Soon he was seated as a stranger at his own table, eating from the same
dishes that his family were accustomed to use, served by men with shaved
heads, wearing coarse, striped aprons over their uniforms. That which he
was eating was his, the wine was from his vaults; all that adorned
the room he had bought: the trees whose boughs were waving outside the
window also belonged to him. . . . And yet he felt as though he were in
this place for the first time, with all the discomfort and diffidence of
a total stranger. He ate because he was hungry, but the food and wines
seemed to have come from another planet.

He continued looking with consternation at those occupying the places of
his wife, children and the Lacours. . . .

They were speaking in German among themselves, but those having a
limited knowledge of French frequently availed themselves of that
language in order that their guest might understand them. Those who
could only mumble a few words, repeated them to an accompaniment of
amiable smiles. All were displaying an amicable desire to propitiate the
owner of the castle.

“You are going to lunch with the barbarians,” said the Count, offering
him a seat at his side. “Aren’t you afraid that we may eat you alive?”

The Germans burst into roars of laughter at the wit of His Excellency.
They all took great pains to demonstrate by word and manner that
barbarity was wrongly attributed to them by their enemies.

Don Marcelo looked from one to another. The fatigues of war, especially
the forced march of the last days, were very apparent in their persons.
Some were tall and slender with an angular slimness; others were stocky
and corpulent with short neck and head sunk between the shoulders.
These had lost much of their fat in a month’s campaign, the wrinkled and
flabby skin hanging in folds in various parts of their bodies. All had
shaved heads, the same as the soldiers. Around the table shone two rows
of cranial spheres, reddish or dark. Their ears stood out grotesquely,
and their jaw bones were in strong relief owing to their thinness. Some
had preserved the upright moustache in the style of the Emperor; the
most of them were shaved or had a stubby tuft like a brush.

A golden bracelet glistened on the wrist of the Count, stretched on
the table. He was the oldest of them all and the only one that kept
his hair, of a frosty red, carefully combed and glistening with pomade.
Although about fifty years old, he still maintained a youthful
vigor cultivated by exercise. Wrinkled, bony and strong, he tried
to dissimulate his uncouthness as a man of battle under a suave and
indolent laziness. The officers treated him with the greatest respect.
Hartrott told his uncle that the Count was a great artist, musician
and poet. The Emperor was his friend; they had known each other from
boyhood. Before the war, certain scandals concerning his private
life had exiled him from Court--mere lampoons of the socialists and
scandal-mongers. The Kaiser had always kept a secret affection for
his former chum. Everybody remembered his dance, “The Caprices of
Scheherazade,” represented with the greatest luxury in Berlin through
the endorsement of his powerful friend, William II. The Count had lived
many years in the Orient. In fact, he was a great gentleman and an
artist of exquisite sensibility as well as a soldier.

Since Desnoyers was now his guest, the Count could not permit him
to remain silent, so he made an opportunity of bringing him into the
conversation.

“Did you see any of the insurrections? . . . Did the troops have to kill
many people? How about the assassination of Poincare? . . .”

He asked these questions in quick succession and Don Marcelo, bewildered
by their absurdity, did not know how to reply. He believed that he must
have fallen in with a feast of fools. Then he suspected that they were
making fun of him. Uprisings? Assassinations of the President? . . .

Some gazed at him with pity because of his ignorance, others with
suspicion, believing that he was merely pretending not to know of these
events which had happened so near him.

His nephew insisted. “The daily papers in Germany have been full
of accounts of these matters. Fifteen days ago, the people of Paris
revolted against the Government, bombarding the Palais de l’Elysee, and
assassinating the President. The army had to resort to the machine guns
before order could be restored. . . . Everybody knows that.”

But Desnoyers insisted that he did not know it, that nobody had
seen such things. And as his words were received in an atmosphere of
malicious doubt, he preferred to be silent. His Excellency, superior
spirit, incapable of being associated with the popular credulity, here
intervened to set matters straight. The report of the assassination was,
perhaps, not certain; the German periodicals might have unconsciously
exaggerated it. Just a few hours ago, the General of the Staff had
told him of the flight of the French Government to Bordeaux, and the
statement about the revolution in Paris and the firing of the French
troops was indisputable. “The gentleman has seen it all without doubt,
but does not wish to admit it.” Desnoyers felt obliged to contradict
this lordling, but his negative was not even listened to.

Paris! This name made all eyes glisten and everybody talkative. As soon
as possible they wished to reach the Eiffel Tower, to enter victorious
into the city, to receive their recompense for the privations and
fatigues of a month’s campaign. They were devotees of military glory,
they considered war necessary to existence, and yet they were bewailing
the hardship that it was imposing upon them. The Count exhaled the
plaint of the craftsmaster.

“Oh, the havoc that this war has brought in my plans!” he sighed. “This
winter they were going to bring out my dance in Paris!”

They all protested at his sadness; his work would surely be presented
after the triumph, and the French would have to recognize it.

“It will not be the same thing,” complained the Count. “I confess that I
adore Paris. . . . What a pity that these people have never wished to
be on familiar terms with us!” . . . And he relapsed into the silence of
the unappreciated man.

Desnoyers suddenly recognized in one of the officers who was talking,
with eyes bulging with covetousness, of the riches of Paris, the Chief
Thief with the band on his arm. He it was who so methodically had
sacked the castle. As though divining the old Frenchman’s thought, the
commissary began excusing himself.

“It is war, monsieur. . . .”

The same as the others! . . . War had to be paid with the treasures of
the conquered. That was the new German system; the healthy return to
the wars of ancient days; tributes imposed on the cities, and each house
sacked separately. In this way, the enemy’s resistance would be more
effectually overcome and the war soon brought to a close. He ought
not to be downcast over the appropriations, for his furnishings and
ornaments would all be sold in Germany. After the French defeat, he
could place a remonstrance claim with his government, petitioning it to
indemnify his loss; his relatives in Berlin would support his demand.

Desnoyers listened in consternation to his counsels. What kind of
mentality had these men, anyway? Were they insane, or were they trying
to have some fun at his expense? . . .

When the lunch was at last ended, the officers arose and adjusted their
swords for service. Captain von Hartrott rose, too; it was necessary for
him to return to his general; he had already dedicated too much time
to family expansion. His uncle accompanied him to the automobile where
Moltkecito once more justified the ruin and plunder of the castle.

“It is war. . . . We have to be very ruthless that it may not last long.
True kindness consists in being cruel, because then the terror-stricken
enemy gives in sooner, and so the world suffers less.”

Don Marcelo shrugged his shoulders before this sophistry. In the
doorway, the captain gave some orders to a soldier who soon returned
with a bit of chalk which had been used to number the lodging places.
Von Hartrott wished to protect his uncle and began tracing on the wall
near the door:--“Bitte, nicht plundern. Es sind freundliche Leute.”

In response to the old man’s repeated questions, he then translated the
inscription. “It means, ‘Please do not sack this house. Its occupants
are kind people . . . friendly people.’”

Ah, no! . . . Desnoyers repelled this protection vehemently. He did not
wish to be kind. He was silent because he could not be anything else.
. . . But a friend of the invaders of his country! . . . No, NO, NO!

His nephew rubbed out part of the lettering, leaving the first words,
“Bitte, nicht plundern.” Then he repeated the scrawled request at the
entrance of the park. He thought this notice advisable because His
Excellency might go away and other officials might be installed in the
castle. Von Hartrott had seen much and his smile seemed to imply that
nothing could surprise him, no matter how outrageous it might be. But
his relative continued scorning his protection, and laughing bitterly at
the impromptu signboard. What more could they carry off? . . . Had they
not already stolen the best?

“Good-bye, uncle! Soon we shall meet in Paris.”

And the captain climbed into his automobile, extending a soft, cold hand
that seemed to repel the old man with its flabbiness.

Upon returning to his castle, he saw a table and some chairs in the
shadow of a group of trees. His Excellency was taking his coffee in the
open air, and obliged him to take a seat beside him. Only three officers
were keeping him company. . . . There was here a grand consumption of
liquors from his wine cellars. They were talking together in German, and
for an hour Don Marcelo remained there, anxious to go but never finding
the opportune moment to leave his seat and disappear.

He employed his time in imagining the great stir among the troops hidden
by the trees. Another division of the army was passing by with the
incessant, deafening roar of the sea. An inexplicable phenomenon kept
the luminous calm of the afternoon in a continuous state of vibration.
A constant thundering sounded afar off as though an invisible storm were
always approaching from beyond the blue horizon line.

The Count, noticing his evident interest in the noise, interrupted his
German chat to explain.

“It is the cannon. A battle is going on. Soon we shall join in the
dance.”

The possibility of having to give up his quarters here, the most
comfortable that he had found in all the campaign, put His Excellency in
a bad humor.

“War,” he sighed, “a glorious life, but dirty and deadening! In an
entire month--to-day is the first that I have lived as a gentleman.”

And as though attracted by the luxuries that he might shortly have to
abandon, he rose and went toward the castle. Two of the Germans betook
themselves toward the village, and Desnoyers remained with the other
officer who was delightfully sampling his liquors. He was the chief of
the battalion encamped in the village.

“This is a sad war, Monsieur!” he said in French.

Of all the inimical group, this man was the only one for whom Don
Marcelo felt a vague attraction. “Although a German, he appears a good
sort,” meditated the old man, eyeing him carefully. In times of peace,
he must have been stout, but now he showed the loose and flaccid
exterior of one who has just lost much in weight. Desnoyers surmised
that the man had formerly lived in tranquil and vulgar sensuousness, in
a middle-class happiness suddenly cut short by war.

“What a life, Monsieur!” the officer rambled on. “May God punish well
those who have provoked this catastrophe!”

The Frenchman was almost affected. This man represented the Germany that
he had many times imagined, a sweet and tranquil Germany composed of
burghers, a little heavy and slow perhaps, but atoning for their natural
uncouthness by an innocent and poetic sentimentalism. This Blumhardt
whom his companions called Bataillon-Kommandeur, was undoubtedly the
good father of a large family. He fancied him walking with his wife and
children under the lindens of a provincial square, all listening with
religious unction to the melodies played by a military band. Then he
saw him in the beer gardens with his friends, discussing metaphysical
problems between business conversations. He was a man from old Germany,
a character from a romance by Goethe. Perhaps the glory of the Empire
had modified his existence, and instead of going to the beer gardens,
he was now accustomed to frequent the officers’ casino, while his family
maintained a separate existence--separated from the civilians by the
superciliousness of military caste; but at heart, he was always the good
German, ready to weep copiously before an affecting family scene or a
fragment of good music.

Commandant Blumhardt, meanwhile, was thinking of his family living in
Cassel.

“There are eight children, Monsieur,” he said with a visible effort to
control emotion. “The two eldest are preparing to become officers. The
youngest is starting school this year. . . . He is just so high.”

And with his right hand he measured off the child’s diminutive stature.
He trembled with laughter and grief at recalling the little chap. Then
he broke forth into eulogies about his wife--excellent manager of the
home, a mother who was always modestly sacrificing herself for her
children and husband. Ay, the sweet Augusta! . . . After twenty years of
married life, he adored her as on the day he first saw her. In a pocket
of his uniform, he was keeping all the letters that she had written him
since the beginning of the campaign.

“Look at her, Monsieur. . . . There are my children.”

From his breast pocket, he had drawn forth a silver medallion, adorned
with the art of Munich, and touching a spring, he displayed the pictures
of all the family--the Frau Kommandeur, of an austere and frigid beauty,
imitating the air and coiffure of the Empress; the Frauleine Kommandeur,
clad in white, with uplifted eyes as though they were singing a musical
romance; and at the end, the children in the uniforms of the army
schools or private institutions. And to think that he might lose these
beloved beings if a bit of iron should hit him! . . . And he had to live
far from them now that it was such fine weather for long walks in the
country! . . .

“Sad war!” he again said. “May God punish the English!”

With a solicitude that Don Marcelo greatly appreciated, he in turn
inquired about the Frenchman’s family. He pitied him for having so few
children, and smiled a little over the enthusiasm with which the old
gentleman spoke of his daughter, saluting Fraulein Chichi as a witty
sprite, and expressing great sympathy on learning that the only son was
causing his parents great sorrow by his conduct.

Tender-hearted Commandant! . . . He was the first rational and human
being that he had met in this hell of an invasion. “There are good
people everywhere,” he told himself. He hoped that this new acquaintance
would not be moved from the castle; for if the Germans had to stay
there, it would better be this man than the others.

An orderly came to summon Don Marcelo to the presence of His Excellency.
After passing through the salons with closed eyes so as to avoid useless
distress and wrath, he found the Count in his own bedroom. The doors had
been forced open, the floors stripped of carpet and the window frames of
curtains. Only the pieces of furniture broken in the first moments now
occupied their former places. The sleeping rooms had been stripped more
methodically, everything having been taken that was not required for
immediate use. Because the General with his suite had been lodging there
the night before, this apartment had escaped the arbitrary destruction.

The Count received him with the civility of a grandee who wishes to be
attentive to his guests. He could not consent that HERR Desnoyers--a
relative of a von Hartrott--whom he vaguely remembered having seen at
Court, should be staying in the Keeper’s lodge. He must return to his
own room, occupying that bed, solemn as a catafalque with columns and
plumes, which had had the honor, a few hours before, of serving as the
resting-place of an illustrious General of the Empire.

“I myself prefer to sleep here,” he added condescendingly. “This other
habitation accords better with my tastes.”

While saying this, he was entering Dona Luisa’s rooms, admiring its
Louis Quinze furniture of genuine value, with its dull golds and
tapestries mellowed by time. It was one of the most successful purchases
that Don Marcelo had made. The Count smiled with an artist’s scorn as he
recalled the man who had superintended the official sacking.

“What an ass! . . . To think that he left this behind, supposing that it
was old and ugly!”

Then he looked the owner of the castle squarely in the face.

“Monsieur Desnoyers, I do not believe that I am committing any
indiscretion, and even imagine that I am interpreting your desires when
I inform you that I intend taking this set of furniture with me. It will
serve as a souvenir of our acquaintance, a testimony to the friendship
springing up between us. . . . If it remains here, it will run the risk
of being destroyed. Warriors, of course, are not obliged to be artists.
I will guard these excellent treasures in Germany where you may see them
whenever you wish. We are all going to be one nation, you know. . . . My
friend, the Emperor, is soon to be proclaimed sovereign of the French.”

Desnoyers remained silent. How could he reply to that look of cruel
irony, to the grimace with which the noble lord was underscoring his
words? . . .

“When the war is ended, I will send you a gift from Berlin,” he added in
a patronizing tone.

The old collector could say nothing to that, either. He was looking
at the vacant spots which many small pictures had left on the walls,
paintings by famous masters of the XVIII century. The banded brigand
must also have passed these by as too insignificant to carry off,
but the smirk illuminating the Count’s face revealed their ultimate
destination.

He had carefully scrutinized the entire apartment--the adjoining
bedroom, Chichi’s, the bathroom, even the feminine robe-room of the
family, which still contained some of the daughter’s gowns. The warrior
fondled with delight the fine silky folds of the materials, gloating
over their cool softness.

This contact made him think of Paris, of the fashions, of the
establishments of the great modistes. The rue de la Paix was the spot
which he most admired in his visits to the enemy’s city.

Don Marcelo noticed the strong mixture of perfumes which came from
his hair, his moustache, his entire body. Various little jars from the
dressing table were on the mantel.

“What a filthy thing war is!” exclaimed the German. “This morning I was
at last able to take a bath after a week’s abstinence; at noon I shall
take another. By the way, my dear sir, these perfumes are good, but
they are not elegant. When I have the pleasure of being presented to the
ladies, I shall give them the addresses of my source of supply. . . . I
use in my home essences from Turkey. I have many friends there. . . . At
the close of the war, I will send a consignment to the family.”

While speaking the Count’s eyes had been fixed upon some photographs
upon the table. Examining the portrait of Madame Desnoyers, he
guessed that she must be Dona Luisa. He smiled before the bewitchingly
mischievous face of Mademoiselle Chichi. Very enchanting; he specially
admired her militant, boyish expression; but he scrutinized the
photograph of Julio with special interest.

“Splendid type of youth,” he murmured. “An interesting head, and
artistic, too. He would create a great sensation in a fancy-dress ball.
What a Persian prince he would make! . . . A white aigrette on his head,
fastened with a great jewel, the breast bared, a black tunic with golden
birds. . . .”

And he continued seeing in his mind’s eye the heir of the Desnoyers
arrayed in all the gorgeous raiment of an Oriental monarch. The proud
father, because of the interest which his son was inspiring, began to
feel a glimmer of sympathy with the man. A pity that he should select so
unerringly and appropriate the choicest things in the castle!

Near the head of the bed, Don Marcelo saw lying upon a book of devotions
forgotten by his wife, a medallion containing another photograph. It did
not belong to his family, and the Count, following the direction of his
eyes, wished to show it to him. The hands of this son of Mars trembled.
. . . His disdainful haughtiness had suddenly disappeared. An official
of the Hussars of Death was smiling from the case; his sharp profile
with a beak curved like a bird of prey, was surmounted by a cap adorned
with skull and cross-bones.

“My best friend,” said the Count in tremulous tones. “The being that I
love most in all the world. . . . And to think that at this moment he
may be fighting, and they may kill him! . . . To think that I, too, may
die!”

Desnoyers believed that he must be getting a glimpse into a romance of
the nobleman’s past. That Hussar was undoubtedly his natural son. His
simplicity of mind could not conceive of anything else. Only a father’s
tenderness could so express itself . . . and he was almost touched by
this tenderness.

Here the interview came to an end, the warrior turning his back as he
left the room in order to hide his emotion. A few minutes after was
heard on the floor below the sound of a grand piano which the Commissary
had not been able to carry off, owing to the general’s interposition.
His voice was soon heard above the chords that he was playing. It was
rather a lifeless baritone, but he managed to impart an impassioned
tremolo to his romance. The listening old man was now really affected;
he did not understand the words, but the tears came into his eyes. He
thought of his family, of the sorrows and dangers about them and of the
difficulties surrounding his return to them. . . . As though under the
spell of the melody, little by little, he descended the stairs. What
an artist’s soul that haughty scoffer had! . . . At first sight, the
Germans with their rough exterior and their discipline which made them
commit the greatest atrocities, gave one a wrong impression. One had to
live intimately with them to appreciate their true worth.

By the time the music had ceased, he had reached the castle bridge. A
sub-officer was watching the graceful movements of the swans gliding
double over the waters of the moat. He was a young Doctor of Laws who
just now was serving as secretary to His Excellency--a university man
mobilized by the war.

On speaking with Don Marcelo, he immediately revealed his academic
training. The order for departure had surprised the professor in a
private institute; he was just about to be married and all his plans had
been upset.

“What a calamity, sir! . . . What an overturning for the world! . . .
Yet many of us have foreseen that this catastrophe simply had to come.
We have felt strongly that it might break out any day. Capital, accursed
Capital is to blame.”

The speaker was a Socialist. He did not hesitate to admit his
co-operation in certain acts of his party that had brought persecutions
and set-backs to his career. But the Social-Democracy was now being
accepted by the Emperor and flattered by the most reactionary Junkers.
All were now one. The deputies of his party were forming in the
Reichstag the group most obedient to the government. . . . The only
belief that it retained from its former creed, was its anathematization
of Capital--responsible for the war.

Desnoyers ventured to disagree with this enemy who appeared of an
amiable and tolerant character. “Did he not think that the real
responsibility rested with German militarism? Had it not sought and
prepared this conflict, by its arrogance preventing any settlement?”

The Socialist denied this roundly. His deputies were supporting the war
and, therefore, must have good reason. Everything that he said showed an
absolute submission to discipline--the eternal German discipline, blind
and obedient, which was dominating even the most advanced parties. In
vain the Frenchman repeated arguments and facts which everybody had read
from the beginning of the war. His words simply slid over the calloused
brains of this revolutionist, accustomed to delegating all his reasoning
functions to others.

“Who can tell?” he finally said. “Perhaps we have made a mistake. But
just at this moment all is confused; the premises which would enable us
to draw exact conclusions are lacking. When the conflict ends, we shall
know the truly guilty parties, and if they are ours we shall throw the
responsibility upon them.”

Desnoyers could hardly keep from laughing at his simplicity. To wait
till the end of the war to know who was to blame! . . . And if the
Empire should come out conqueror, what responsibility could the
Socialists exact in the full pride of victory, they who always confined
themselves to electoral battles, without the slightest attempt at
rebellion?

“Whatever the cause may be,” concluded the Socialist, “this war is very
sad. How many dead! . . . I was at Charleroi. One has to see modern
warfare close by. . . . We shall conquer; we are going to enter Paris,
so they say, but many of our men must fall before obtaining the final
victory.”

And as though wishing to put these visions of death out of his mind, he
resumed his diversion of watching the swans, offering them bits of bread
so as to make them swing around in their slow and majestic course.

The Keeper and his family were continually crossing and recrossing the
bridge. Seeing their master on such friendly terms with the invaders,
they had lost some of the fear which had kept them shut up in their
cottage. To the woman it seemed but natural that Don Marcelo’s authority
should be recognized by these people; the master is always the master.
And as though she had received a part of this authority, she was
entering the castle fearlessly, followed by her daughter, in order to
put in order her master’s sleeping room. They had decided to pass the
night in rooms near his, that he might not feel so lonely among the
Germans.

The two women were carrying bedding and mattresses from the lodge to
the top floor. The Keeper was occupied in heating a second bath for His
Excellency while his wife was bemoaning with gestures of despair the
sacking of the castle. How many exquisite things had disappeared! . . .
Desirous of saving the remainder, she besought her master to make
complaints, as though he could prevent the individual and stealthy
robberies. The orderlies and followers of the Count were pocketing
everything they could lay their hands on, saying smilingly that
they were souvenirs. Later on the woman approached Desnoyers with a
mysterious air to impart a new revelation. She had seen a head officer
force open the chiffoniers where her mistress was accustomed to keep her
lingerie, and he was making up a package of the finest pieces, including
a great quantity of blonde lace.

“That’s the one, Master,” she said soon after, pointing to a German
who was writing in the garden, where an oblique ray of sunlight was
filtering through the branches upon his table.

Don Marcelo recognized him with surprise. Commandant Blumhardt, too!
. . . But immediately he excused the act. He supposed it was only
natural that this official should want to take something away from the
castle, since the Count had set the example. Besides, he took into
account the quality of the objects which he was appropriating. They were
not for himself; they were for the wife, for the daughters. . . . A good
father of his family! For more than an hour now, he had been sitting
before that table writing incessantly, conversing, pen in hand, with his
Augusta and all the family in Cassel. Better that this good man should
carry off his stuff than those other domineering officers with cutting
voices and insolent stiffness.

Desnoyers noticed, too, that the writer raised his head every time that
Georgette, the Warden’s daughter, passed by, following her with his
eyes. The poor father! . . . Undoubtedly he was comparing her with his
two girls home in Germany, with all their thoughts on the war. He, too,
was thinking of Chichi, fearing sometimes, that he might never see her
again. In one of her trips from the castle to her home, Blumhardt called
the child to him. She stopped before the table, timid and shrinking as
though she felt a presentiment of danger, but making an effort to smile.
The Prussian father meanwhile chatted with her, and patted her cheeks
with his great paws--a sight which touched Desnoyers deeply. The
memories of a pacific and virtuous life were rising above the horrors of
war. Decidedly this one enemy was a good man, anyway.

Because of his conclusion, the millionaire smiled indulgently when the
Commandant, leaving the table, came toward him--after delivering
his letter and a bulky package to a soldier to take to the battalion
post-office in the village.

“It is for my family,” he explained. “I do not let a day pass without
sending them a letter. Theirs are so precious to me! . . . I am also
sending them a few remembrances.”

Desnoyers was on the point of protesting. . . . But with a shrug of
indifference, he concluded to keep silence as if he did not object. The
Commandant continued talking of the sweet Augusta and their children
while the invisible tempest kept on thundering beyond the serene
twilight horizon. Each time the cannonading was more intense.

“The battle,” continued Blumhardt. “Always a battle! . . . Surely it is
the last and we are going to win. Within the week, we shall be entering
Paris. . . . But how many will never see it! So many dead! . . . I
understand that to-morrow we shall not be here. All the Reserves are to
combine with the attack so as to overcome the last resistance. . . . If
only I do not fall!” . . .

Thoughts of the possibility of death the following day contracted his
forehead in a scowl of hatred. A deep, vertical line was parting his
eyebrows. He frowned ferociously at Desnoyers as though making him
responsible for his death and the trouble of his family. For a few
moments Don Marcelo could hardly recognize this man, transformed by
warlike passions, as the sweet-natured and friendly Blumhardt of a
little while before.

The sun was beginning to set when a sub-officer, the one of the
Social-Democracy, came running in search of the Commandant. Desnoyers
could not understand what was the matter because they were speaking
in German, but following the direction of the messenger’s continual
pointing, he saw beyond the iron gates a group of country people and
some soldiers with guns. Blumhardt, after a brief reflection, started
toward the group and Don Marcelo behind him.

Soon he saw a village lad in the charge of some Germans who were holding
their bayonets to his breast. His face was colorless, with the whiteness
of a wax candle. His shirt, blackened with soot, was so badly torn that
it told of a hand-to-hand struggle. On one temple was a gash, bleeding
badly. A short distance away was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding
a baby, and surrounded by four children all covered with black grime as
though coming from a coal mine.

The woman was pleading desperately, raising her hands appealingly, her
sobs interrupting her story which she was uselessly trying to tell the
soldiers, incapable of understanding her. The petty officer convoying
the band spoke in German with the Commandant while the woman besought
the intervention of Desnoyers. When she recognized the owner of the
castle, she suddenly regained her serenity, believing that he could
intercede for her.

That husky young boy was her son. They had all been hiding since the
day before in the cellar of their burned house. Hunger and the danger
of death from asphyxiation had forced them finally to venture forth. As
soon as the Germans had seen her son, they had beaten him and were going
to shoot him as they were shooting all the young men. They believed that
the lad was twenty years old, the age of a soldier, and in order that he
might not join the French army, they were going to kill him.

“It’s a lie!” shrieked the mother. “He is not more than eighteen . . .
not eighteen . . . a little less--he’s only seventeen.”

She turned to those who were following behind, in order to implore their
testimony--sad women, equally dirty, their ragged garments smelling of
fire, poverty and death. All assented, adding their outcries to those of
the mother. Some even went so far as to say that the overgrown boy was
only sixteen . . . fifteen! And to this feminine chorus was added the
wailing of the little ones looking at their brother with eyes distended
with terror.

The Commandant examined the prisoner while he listened to the official.
An employee of the township had said carelessly that the child was about
twenty, never dreaming that with this inaccuracy he was causing his
death.

“It was a lie!” repeated the mother guessing instinctively what they
were saying. “That man made a mistake. My boy is robust and, therefore,
looks older than he is, but he is not twenty. . . . The gentleman
from the castle who knows him can tell you so. Is it not so, Monsieur
Desnoyers?”

Since, in her maternal desperation, she had appealed to his protection,
Don Marcelo believed that he ought to intervene, and so he spoke to
the Commandant. He knew this youth very well (he did not ever remember
having seen him before) and believed that he really was under twenty.

“And even if he were of age,” he added, “is that a crime to shoot a man
for?”

Blumhardt did not reply. Since he had recovered his functions of
command, he ignored absolutely Don Marcelo’s existence. He was about to
say something, to give an order, but hesitated. It might be better to
consult His Excellency . . . and seeing that he was going toward the
castle, Desnoyers marched by his side.

“Commandant, this cannot be,” he commenced saying. “This lacks common
sense. To shoot a man on the suspicion that he may be twenty years old!”

But the Commandant remained silent and continued on his way. As they
crossed the bridge, they heard the sound of the piano--a good omen,
Desnoyers thought. The aesthete who had so touched him with his
impassioned voice, was going to say the saving word.

On entering the salon, he did not at first recognize His Excellency.
He saw a man sitting at the piano wearing no clothing but a Japanese
dressing gown--a woman’s rose-colored kimono, embroidered with golden
birds, belonging to Chichi. At any other time, he would have burst into
roars of laughter at beholding this scrawny, bony warrior with the
cruel eyes, with his brawny braceleted arms appearing through the loose
sleeves. After taking his bath, the Count had delayed putting on his
uniform, luxuriating in the silky contact of the feminine tunic so like
his Oriental garments in Berlin. Blumhardt did not betray the slightest
astonishment at the aspect of his general. In the customary attitude
of military erectness, he spoke in his own language while the Count
listened with a bored air, meanwhile passing his fingers idly over the
keys.

A shaft of sunlight from a nearby window was enveloping the piano and
musician in a halo of gold. Through the window, too, was wafting the
poetry of the sunset--the rustling of the leaves, the hushed song of the
birds and the hum of the insects whose transparent wings were glowing
like sparks in the last rays of the sun. The General, annoyed that his
dreaming melancholy should be interrupted by this inopportune visit, cut
short the Commandant’s story with a gesture of command and a word . . .
one word only. He said no more. He took two puffs from a Turkish
cigarette that was slowly scorching the wood of the piano, and again
ran his hands over the ivory keys, catching up the broken threads of the
vague and tender improvisation inspired by the gloaming.

“Thanks, Your Excellency,” said the gratified Desnoyers, surmising his
magnanimous response.

The Commandant had disappeared, nor could the Frenchman find him outside
the castle. A soldier was pacing up and down near the iron gates in
order to transmit commands, and the guards were pushing back with blows
from their guns, a screaming group of women and tiny children. The
entrance was entirely cleared! undoubtedly the crowds were returning
to the village after the General’s pardon. . . . Desnoyers was half way
down the avenue when he heard a howling sound composed of many voices, a
hair-raising shriek such as only womanly desperation can send forth. At
the same time, the air was vibrating with snaps, the loud cracking sound
that he knew from the day before. Shots! . . . He imagined that on
the other side of the iron railing there were some writhing bodies
struggling to escape from powerful arms, and others fleeing with bounds
of fear. He saw running toward him a horror-stricken, sobbing woman with
her hands to her head. It was the wife of the Keeper who a little while
before had joined the desperate group of women.

“Oh, don’t go on, Master,” she called stopping his hurried step. “They
have killed him. . . . They have just shot him.”

Don Marcelo stood rooted to the ground. Shot! . . . and after the
General’s pardon! . . . Suddenly he ran back to the castle, hardly
knowing what he was doing, and soon reached the salon. His Excellency
was still at the piano humming in low tones, his eyes moistened by the
poesy of his dreams. But the breathless old gentleman did not stop to
listen.

“They have shot him, Your Excellency. . . . They have just killed him in
spite of your order.”

The smile which crossed the Count’s face immediately informed him of his
mistake.

“That is war, my dear sir,” said the player, pausing for a moment. “War
with its cruel necessities. . . . It is always expedient to destroy the
enemy of to-morrow.”

And with a pedantic air as though he were giving a lesson, he discoursed
about the Orientals, great masters of the art of living. One of the
personages most admired by him was a certain Sultan of the Turkish
conquest who, with his own hands, had strangled the sons of the
adversary. “Our foes do not come into the world on horseback and
brandishing the lance,” said that hero. “All are born as children, and
it is advisable to wipe them from the face of the earth before they grow
up.”

Desnoyers listened without taking it in. One thought only was occupying
his mind. . . . That man that he had supposed just, that sentimentalist
so affected by his own singing, had, between two arpeggios, coldly given
the order for death! . . .

The Count made a gesture of impatience. He might retire now, and he
counselled him to be more discreet in the future, avoiding mixing
himself up in the affairs of the service. Then he turned his back,
running his hands over the piano, and giving himself up to harmonious
melancholy.

For Don Marcelo there now began an absurd life of the most extraordinary
events, an experience which was going to last four days. In his life
history, this period represented a long parenthesis of stupefaction,
slashed by the most horrible visions.

Not wishing to meet these men again, he abandoned his own bedroom,
taking refuge on the top floor in the servants’ quarters, near the
room selected by the Warden and his family. In vain the good woman kept
offering him things to eat as the night came on--he had no appetite. He
lay stretched out on the bed, preferring to be alone with his thoughts
in the dark. When would this martyrdom ever come to an end? . . .

There came into his mind the recollection of a trip which he had made
to London some years ago. In his imagination he again saw the British
Museum and certain Assyrian bas-reliefs--relics of bestial humanity,
which had filled him with terror. The warriors were represented as
burning the towns; the prisoners were beheaded in heaps; the pacific
countrymen were marching in lines with chains on their necks, forming
strings of slaves. Until that moment he had never realized the advance
which civilization had made through the centuries. Wars were still
breaking out now and then, but they had been regulated by the march of
progress. The life of the prisoner was now held sacred; the captured
towns must be respected; there existed a complete code of international
law to regulate how men should be killed and nations should combat,
causing the least possible harm. . . . But now he had just seen the
primitive realities of war. The same as that of thousands of years ago!
The men with the helmets were proceeding in exactly the same way as
those ferocious and perfumed satraps with blue mitre and curled beard.
The adversary was shot although not carrying arms; the prisoner died of
shot or blow from the gun; the civilian captives were sent in crowds
to Germany like those of other centuries. Of what avail was all our
so-called Progress? Where was our boasted civilization? . . .

He was awakened by the light of a candle in his eyes. The Warden’s wife
had come up again to see if he needed anything.

“Oh, what a night, Master! Just hear them yelling and singing! The
bottles that they have emptied! . . . They are in the dining room. You
better not see them. Now they are amusing themselves by breaking the
furniture. Even the Count is drunk; drunk, too, is that Commandant that
you were talking with, and all the rest. . . . Some of them are dancing
half-naked.”

She evidently wished to keep quiet about certain details, but her love
of talking got the better of her discretion. Some of the officers had
dressed themselves up in the hats and gowns of her mistress and were
dancing and shouting, imitating feminine seductiveness and affectations.
. . . One of them had been greeted with roars of enthusiasm upon
presenting himself with no other clothing than a “combination” of
Mademoiselle Chichi’s. Many were taking obscene delight in soiling the
rugs and filling the sideboard drawers with indescribable filth, using
the finest linens that they could lay their hands on.

Her master silenced her peremptorily. Why tell him such vile, disgusting
things? . . .

“And we are obliged to wait on them!” wailed the woman. “They are beside
themselves; they appear like different beings. The soldiers are saying
that they are going to resume their march at daybreak. There is a
great battle on, and they are going to win it; but it is necessary that
everyone of them should fight in it. . . . My poor, sick husband just
can’t stand it any longer. So many humiliations . . . and my little girl
. . . . My little girl!”

The child was her greatest anxiety. She had her well hidden away, but
she was watching uneasily the goings and comings of some of these
men maddened with alcohol. The most terrible of them all was that fat
officer who had patted Georgette so paternally.

Apprehension for her daughter’s safety made her hurry restlessly away,
saying over and over:

“God has forgotten the world. . . . Ay, what is ever going to become of
us!”

Don Marcelo was now tinglingly awake. Through the open window was
blowing the clear night air. The cannonading was still going on,
prolonging the conflict way into the night. Below the castle the
soldiers were intoning a slow and melodious chant that sounded like a
psalm. From the interior of the edifice rose the whoopings of brutal
laughter, the crash of breaking furniture, and the mad chase of
dissolute pursuit. When would this diabolical orgy ever wear itself
down? . . . For a long time he was not at all sleepy, but was gradually
losing consciousness of what was going on around him when he was roused
with a start. Near him, on the same floor, a door had fallen with a
crash, unable to resist a succession of formidable batterings. This
was followed immediately by the screams of a woman, weeping, desperate
supplications, the noise of a struggle, reeling steps, and the thud of
bodies against the wall. He had a presentiment that it was Georgette
shrieking and trying to defend herself. Before he could put his feet to
the floor he heard a man’s voice, which he was sure was the Keeper’s;
she was safe.

“Ah, you villain!” . . .

Then the outbreak of a second struggle . . . a shot . . . silence!

Rushing down the hallway that ended at the stairway Desnoyers saw
lights, and many men who came trooping up the stairs, bounding over
several steps at a time. He almost fell over a body from which escaped a
groan of agony. At his feet lay the Warden, his chest moving like a pair
of bellows, his eyes glassy and unnaturally distended, his mouth covered
with blood. . . . Near him glistened a kitchen knife. Then he saw a man
with a revolver in one hand, and holding shut with the other a broken
door that someone was trying to open from within. Don Marcelo
recognized him, in spite of his greenish pallor and wild look. It was
Blumhardt--another Blumhardt with a bestial expression of terrifying
ferocity and lust.

Don Marcelo could see clearly how it had all happened--the debauchee
rushing through the castle in search of his prey, the anxious father in
close pursuit, the cries of the girl, the unequal struggle between the
consumptive with his emergency weapon and the warrior triumphant. The
fury of his youth awoke in the old Frenchman, sweeping everything before
it. What did it matter if he did die? . . .

“Ah, you villain!” he yelled, as the poor father had done.

And with clenched fists he marched up to the German, who smiled coldly
and held his revolver to his eyes. He was just going to shoot him . . .
but at that instant Desnoyers fell to the floor, knocked down by those
who were leaping up the stairs. He received many blows, the heavy boots
of the invaders hammering him with their heels. He felt a hot stream
pouring over his face. Blood! . . . He did not know whether it was his
own or that of the palpitating mortal slowly dying beside him. Then
he found himself lifted from the floor by many hands which pushed him
toward a man. It was His Excellency, with his uniform burst open and
smelling of wine. Eyes and voice were both trembling.

“My dear sir,” he stuttered, trying to recover this suave irony, “I
warned you not to interfere in our affairs and you have not obeyed me.
You may now take the consequences of your lack of discretion.”

He gave an order, and the old man felt himself pushed downstairs to the
cellars underneath the castle. Those conducting him were soldiers under
the command of a petty officer whom he recognized as the Socialist. This
young professor was the only one sober, but he maintained himself erect
and unapproachable with the ferocity of discipline.

He put his prisoner into an arched vault without any breathing-place
except a tiny window on a level with the floor. Many broken bottles and
chests with some straw were all that was in the cave.

“You have insulted a head officer!” said the official roughly, “and
they will probably shoot you to-morrow. Your only salvation lies in the
continuance of the revels, in which case they may forget you.”

As the door of this sub-cellar was broken, like all the others in the
building, a pile of boxes and furniture was heaped in the entrance way.

Don Marcelo passed the rest of the night tormented with the cold--the
only thing which worried him just then. He had abandoned all hope of
life; even the images of his family seemed blotted from his memory.
He worked in the dark in order to make himself more comfortable on the
chests, burrowing down into the straw for the sake of its heat. When the
morning breeze began to sift in through the little window he fell slowly
into a heavy, overpowering sleep, like that of criminals condemned to
death, or duellists before the fatal morning. He thought he heard
shouts in German, the galloping of horses, a distant sound of tattoo and
whistle such as the battalions of the invaders made with their fifes and
drums. . . . Then he lost all consciousness of his surroundings.

On opening his eyes again a ray of sunlight, slipping through the
window, was tracing a little golden square on the wall, giving a regal
splendor to the hanging cobwebs. Somebody was removing the barricade
before the door. A woman’s voice, timid and distressed, was calling
repeatedly:

“Master, are you here?”

He sprang up quickly, wishing to aid the worker outside, and pushing
vigorously. He thought that the invaders must have left. In no other way
could he imagine the Warden’s wife daring to try to get him out of his
cell.

“Yes, they have gone,” she said. “Nobody is left in the castle.”

As soon as he was able to get out Don Marcelo looked inquiringly at the
woman with her bloodshot eyes, dishevelled hair and sorrow-drawn face.
The night had weighed her down pitilessly with the pressure of many
years. All the energy with which she had been working to free Desnoyers
disappeared on seeing him again. “Oh, Master . . . Master,” she moaned
convulsively; and she flung herself into his arms, bursting into tears.

Don Marcelo did not need to ask anything further; he dreaded to know the
truth. Nevertheless, he asked after her husband. Now that he was awake
and free, he cherished the fleeting hope that what he had gone through
the night before was but another of his nightmares. Perhaps the poor man
was still living. . . .

“They killed him, Monsieur. That man who seemed so good murdered him.
. . . And I don’t know where his body is; nobody will tell me.”

She had a suspicion that the corpse was in the fosse. The green and
tranquil waters had closed mysteriously over this victim of the night.
. . . Desnoyers suspected that another sorrow was troubling the mother
still more, but he kept modestly silent. It was she who finally spoke,
between outbursts of grief. . . . Georgette was now in the lodge.
Horror-stricken and shuddering, she had fled there when the invaders had
left the castle. They had kept her in their power until the last minute.

“Oh, Master, don’t look at her. . . . She is trembling and sobbing at
the thought that you may speak with her about what she has gone through.
She is almost out of her mind. She longs to die! Ay, my little girl!
. . . And is there no one who will punish these monsters?”

They had come up from the cellars and crossed the bridge, the woman
looking fixedly into the silent waters. The dead body of a swan was
floating upon them. Before their departure, while their horses were
being saddled, two officers had amused themselves by chasing with
revolver shots the birds swimming in the moat. The aquatic plants were
spotted with blood; among the leaves were floating some tufts of
limp white plumage like a bit of washing escaped from the hands of a
laundress.

Don Marcelo and the woman exchanged a compassionate glance, and then
looked pityingly at each other as the sunlight brought out more strongly
their aging, wan appearance.

The passing of these people had destroyed everything. There was no food
left in the castle except some crusts of dry bread forgotten in the
kitchen. “And we have to live, Monsieur!” exclaimed the woman with
reviving energy as she thought of her daughter’s need. “We have to
live, if only to see how God punishes them!” The old man shrugged his
shoulders in despair; God? . . . But the woman was right; they had to
live.

With the famished audacity of his early youth, when he was travelling
over boundless tracts of land, driving his herds of cattle, he now
rushed outside the park, hunting for some form of sustenance. He saw
the valley, fair and green, basking in the sun; the groups of trees, the
plots of yellowish soil with the hard spikes of stubble; the hedges in
which the birds were singing--all the summer splendor of a countryside
developed and cultivated during fifteen centuries by dozens and dozens
of generations. And yet--here he was alone at the mercy of chance,
likely to perish with hunger--more alone than when he was crossing the
towering heights of the Andes--those irregular slopes of rocks and
snow wrapped in endless silence, only broken from time to time by
the flapping of the condor’s wings. Nobody. . . . His gaze could not
distinguish a single movable point--everything fixed, motionless,
crystallized, as though contracted with fear before the peals of thunder
which were still rumbling around the horizon.

He went on toward the village--a mass of black walls with a few houses
still intact, and a roofless bell tower with its cross twisted by fire.
Nobody in the streets sown with bottles, charred chunks of wood, and
soot-covered rubbish. The dead bodies had disappeared, but a nauseating
smell of decomposing and burned flesh assailed his nostrils. He saw
a mound of earth where the shooting had taken place, and from it were
protruding two feet and a hand. At his approach several black forms flew
up into the air from a trench so shallow that the bodies within were
exposed to view. A whirring of stiff wings beat the air above him,
flying off with the croakings of wrath. He explored every nook and
corner, even approaching the place where the troopers had erected their
barricade. The carts were still by the roadside.

He then retraced his steps, calling out before the least injured
houses, and putting his head through the doors and windows that were
unobstructed or but half consumed. Was nobody left in Villeblanche? He
descried among the ruins something advancing on all fours, a species of
reptile that stopped its crawling with movements of hesitation and fear,
ready to retreat or slip into its hole under the ruins. Suddenly the
creature stopped and stood up. It was a man, an old man. Other human
larvae were coming forth conjured by his shouts--poor beings who hours
ago had given up the standing position which would have attracted
the bullets of the enemy, and had been enviously imitating the lower
organisms, squirming through the dirt as fast as they could scurry into
the bosom of the earth. They were mostly women and children, all filthy
and black, with snarled hair, the fierceness of animal appetite in their
eyes--the faintness of the weak animal in their hanging jaws. They
were all living hidden in the ruins of their homes. Fear had made them
temporarily forget their hunger, but finding that the enemy had gone,
they were suddenly assailed by all necessitous demands, intensified by
hours of anguish.

Desnoyers felt as though he were surrounded by a tribe of brutalized
and famished Indians like those he had often seen in his adventurous
voyages. He had brought with him from Paris a quantity of gold pieces,
and he pulled out a coin which glittered in the sun. Bread was needed,
everything eatable was needed; he would pay without haggling.

The flash of gold aroused looks of enthusiasm and greediness, but this
impression was short-lived, all eyes contemplating the yellow discs
with indifference. Don Marcelo was himself convinced that the miraculous
charm had lost its power. They all chanted a chorus of sorrow and
horrors with slow and plaintive voice, as though they stood weeping
before a bier: “Monsieur, they have killed my husband.” . . . “Monsieur,
my sons! Two of them are missing.” . . . “Monsieur, they have taken all
the men prisoners: they say it is to work the land in Germany.” . . .
“Monsieur, bread! . . . My little ones are dying of hunger!”

One woman was lamenting something worse than death. “My girl! . . . My
poor girl!” Her look of hatred and wild desperation revealed the secret
tragedy; her outcries and tears recalled that other mother who was
sobbing in the same way up at the castle. In the depths of some cave,
was lying the victim, half-dead with fatigue, shaken with a wild
delirium in which she still saw the succession of brutal faces, inflamed
with simian passion.

The miserable group, forming themselves into a circle around him,
stretched out their hands beseechingly toward the man whom they knew to
be so very rich. The women showed him the death-pallor on the faces
of their scarcely breathing babies, their eyes glazed with starvation.
“Bread! . . . bread!” they implored, as though he could work a miracle.
He gave to one mother the gold piece that he had in his hand and
distributed more to the others. They took them without looking at them,
and continued their lament, “Bread! . . . Bread!” And he had gone to the
village to make the same supplication! . . . He fled, recognizing the
uselessness of his efforts.



