CHAPTER VIII.

OBJECTIONS AGAINST ARGUING FROM THE ANALOGY OF NATURE, TO RELIGION.


If every one would consider, with such attention as they are bound,
even in point of morality, to consider, what they judge and give
characters of; the occasion of this chapter would be, in some good
measure at least, superseded. But since this is not to be expected;
for some we find do not concern themselves to understand even what
they write against: since this treatise, in common with most others,
lies open to objections, which may appear very material to thoughtful
men at first sight; and, besides that, seems peculiarly liable to the
objections of such as can judge without thinking, and of such as can
censure without judging; it may not be amiss to set down the chief of
these objections which occur to me, and consider them to their hands.
They are such as these:

“That it is a poor thing to solve difficulties in revelation, by
saying, that there are the same in natural religion; when what is
wanting is to clear both of them of these their common, as well as
other their respective, difficulties; that it is a strange way indeed
of convincing men of the obligations of religion, to show them,
that they have as little reason for their worldly pursuits: and a
strange way of vindicating the justice and goodness of the Author of
nature, and of removing the objections against both, to which the
system of religion lies open, to show, that the like objections lie
against natural providence; a way of answering objections against
religion, without so much as pretending to make out, that the
system of it, or the particular things in it objected against, are
reasonable--especially, perhaps some may be inattentive enough to add,
must this be thought strange, when it is confessed that analogy is no
answer to such objections: that when this sort of reasoning is carried
to the utmost length it can be imagined capable of, it will yet leave
the mind in a very unsatisfied state; and that it must be unaccountable
ignorance of mankind, to imagine they will be prevailed with to forego
their present interests and pleasures, from regard to religion, upon
doubtful evidence.”

Now, as plausible as this way of talking may appear, that appearance
will be found in a great measure owing to half views, which show but
part of an object, yet show that indistinctly, and to undeterminate
language. By these means weak men are often deceived by others, and
ludicrous men, by themselves. And even those, who are serious and
considerate, cannot always readily disentangle, and at once clearly see
through the perplexities, in which subjects themselves are involved;
and which are heightened by the deficiencies and the abuse of words. To
this latter sort of persons, the following reply to each part of this
objection severally, may be of some assistance; as it may also tend a
little to stop and silence others.

_First_, The thing wanted, _i.e._ what men require, is to have _all_
difficulties cleared. And this is, or at least for any thing we know
to the contrary, it may be, the same as requiring to comprehend the
divine nature, and the whole plan of Providence from everlasting to
everlasting! But it hath always been allowed to argue from what is
acknowledged, to what is disputed. And it is in no other sense a poor
thing, to argue from natural religion to revealed, in the manner
found fault with, than it is to argue in numberless other ways of
probable deduction and inference, in matters of conduct, which we are
continually reduced to the necessity of doing. Indeed the epithet
_poor_ may be applied, I fear as properly, to great part or the whole
of human life, as it is to the things mentioned in the objection. Is it
not a poor thing, for a physician to have so little knowledge in the
cure of diseases, as even the most eminent have? To act upon conjecture
and guess, where the life of man is concerned? Undoubtedly it is: but
not in comparison of having no skill at all in that useful art, and
being obliged to act wholly in the dark.

Further: since it is as unreasonable, as it is common, to urge
objections against revelation, which are of equal weight against
natural religion; and those who do this, if they are not confused
themselves, deal unfairly with others, in making it seem that they are
arguing only against revelation, or particular doctrines of it, when
in reality they are arguing against moral providence; it is a thing
of consequence to show, that such objections are as much levelled
against natural religion, as against revealed. Objections, which are
equally applicable to both, are properly speaking answered, by its
being shown that they are so, provided the former be admitted to be
true. And without taking in the consideration how distinctly this is
admitted, it is plainly very material to observe, that as the things
objected against in natural religion are of the same kind with what is
certain matter of experience in the course of providence, and in the
information which God affords us concerning our temporal interest under
his government; so the objections against the system of Christianity,
and the evidence of it, are of the very same kind with those which are
made against the system and evidence of natural religion. However, the
reader upon review may see, that most of the analogies insisted upon,
even in the latter part of this treatise, do not necessarily require to
have more taken for granted than is in the former; [viz.] that there is
an Author of nature, or natural Governor of the world: and Christianity
is vindicated, not from its analogy to natural religion, but chiefly
from its analogy to the experienced constitution of nature.

_Secondly_, Religion is a practical thing, and consists in such a
determinate course of life, as what, there is reason to think, is
commanded by the Author of nature, and will, upon the whole, be our
happiness under his government. If men can be convinced, that they
have the like reason to believe this, as to believe that taking care
of their temporal affairs will be to their advantage; such conviction
cannot but be an argument to them for the practice of religion.
And if there be really any reason for believing one of these, and
endeavoring to preserve life, and secure ourselves the necessaries
and conveniences of it; then there is reason also for believing the
other, and endeavoring to secure the interest it proposes to us. And
if the interest, which religion proposes to us, be infinitely greater
than our whole temporal interest; then there must be proportionably
greater reason for endeavoring to secure one, than the other; since, by
the supposition, the probability of our securing one is equal to the
probability of our securing the other. This seems plainly unanswerable,
and has a tendency to influence fair minds, who consider what our
condition really is, or upon what evidence we are naturally appointed
to act; and who are disposed to acquiesce in the terms upon which we
live, and attend to and follow that practical instruction, whatever it
be, which is afforded us.

But the chief and proper force of the argument referred to in the
objection, lies in another place. The proof of religion, it is said, is
involved in such inextricable difficulties, as to render it doubtful;
and that it cannot be supposed that if it were true, it would be left
upon doubtful evidence. Here then, over and above the force of each
particular difficulty or objection, these difficulties and objections
taken together are turned into a positive argument against the truth
of religion; which argument would stand thus. If religion were true,
it would not be left doubtful, and open to objections to the degree
in which it is: therefore that it is thus left, not only renders the
evidence of it weak, and lessens its force, in proportion to the weight
of such objections, but also shows it to be false, or is a general
presumption of its being so. Now the observation, that from the natural
constitution and course of things, we must in our temporal concerns,
almost continually, and even in matters of great consequence, act upon
evidence of a like kind and degree to the evidence of religion, is an
answer to this argument. Because it shows, that it is according to the
conduct and character of the Author of nature to appoint we should act
upon evidence like to that, which this argument presumes he cannot be
supposed to appoint we should act upon: it is an instance, a general
one, made up of numerous particular ones, of somewhat in his dealing
with us, similar to what is said to be incredible. As the force of this
answer lies merely in the parallel, which there is between the evidence
for religion and for our temporal conduct; the answer is equally just
and conclusive, whether the parallel be made out, by showing the
evidence of the former to be higher, or the evidence of the latter to
be lower.

_Thirdly_, The design of this treatise is not to vindicate the
character of God, but to show the obligations of men: it is not to
justify his providence, but to show what belongs to us to do. These are
two subjects, and ought not to be confounded. Though they may at length
run up into each other, yet observations may immediately tend to make
out the latter, which do not appear, by any immediate connection, to
the purpose of the former; which is less our concern, than many seem to
think. For, first,

It is not necessary we should justify the dispensations of Providence
against objections, any farther than to show, that the things objected
against may, for aught we know, be consistent with justice and
goodness. Suppose then, that there are things in the system of this
world, and plan of Providence relating to it, which taken alone would
be unjust: yet it has been shown unanswerably, that if we could take
in the reference, which these things may have to other things, present
past and to come; to the whole scheme, which the things objected
against are parts of; these very things might, for aught we know, be
found to be, not only consistent with justice, but instances of it.
Indeed it has been shown, by the analogy of what we see, not only
possible that this may be the case, but credible that it is. And thus
objections, drawn from such things, are answered, and Providence is
vindicated, as far as religion makes its vindication necessary.

Hence it appears, Secondly, that objections against the Divine justice
and goodness are not endeavored to be _removed_, by showing that the
like objections, allowed to be really conclusive, lie against natural
providence: but those objections being supposed and shown not to be
_conclusive_, the things objected against, considered as matters of
fact, are farther shown to be credible, from their conformity to the
constitution of nature; for instance, that God will reward and punish
men for their actions hereafter, from the observation, that he does
reward and punish them for their actions here. And this, I apprehend,
is of weight.

Thirdly, it would be of weight, even though those objections were
not answered. For, there being the proof of religion above set down;
and religion implying several facts; for instance again, the fact
last mentioned, that God will reward and punish men for their actions
hereafter; the observation, that his present method of government is by
rewards and punishments, shows that future fact not to be incredible:
whatever objections men may think they have against it, as unjust or
unmerciful, according to their notions of justice and mercy; or as
improbable from their belief of necessity. I say, _as improbable_: for
it is evident no objection against it, _as unjust_, can be urged from
necessity; since this notion as much destroys injustice, as it does
justice.

Fourthly, Though objections against the reasonableness of the system of
religion cannot indeed be answered without entering into consideration
of its reasonableness; yet objections against the credibility or
truth of it may. Because the system of it is reducible into what is
properly matter of fact: and the truth, the probable truth of facts,
may be shown without consideration of their reasonableness. Nor is it
necessary, though, in some cases and respects, it is highly useful and
proper, yet it is not necessary, to give a proof of the reasonableness
of every precept enjoined us, and of every particular dispensation
of Providence, which comes into the system of religion. Indeed the
more thoroughly a person of a right disposition is convinced of the
perfection of the Divine nature and conduct, the farther he will
advance towards that perfection of religion, which John[290] speaks
of.[291] But the general obligations of religion are fully made out, by
proving the reasonableness of the practice of it. And that the practice
of religion _is_ reasonable, may be shown, though no more could be
proved, than that the system of it _may be_ so, for aught we know to
the contrary: and even without entering into the distinct consideration
of this.

Fifthly, It is easy to see, that though the analogy of nature is not
an immediate answer to objections against the wisdom, the justice, or
goodness, of any doctrine or precept of religion; yet it may be, as it
is, an immediate and direct answer to what is really intended by such
objections; which is, to show that the things objected against are
incredible.

_Fourthly_, It is most readily acknowledged, that the foregoing
treatise is by no means satisfactory; very far indeed from it: but so
would any natural institution of life appear, if reduced into a system,
together with its evidence. Leaving religion out of the case, men are
divided in their opinions, whether our pleasures overbalance our pains:
and whether it be, or be not, eligible to live in this world.[292] And
were all such controversies settled, which perhaps, in speculation,
would be found involved in great difficulties; and were it determined
upon the evidence of reason, as nature has determined it to our hands,
that life is to be preserved: still, the rules which God has been
pleased to afford us, for escaping the miseries of it, and obtaining
its satisfactions, the rules, for instance, of preserving health, and
recovering it when lost, are not only fallible and precarious, but
very far from being exact. Nor are we informed by nature, as to future
contingencies and accidents, so as to render it at all certain, what
is the best method of managing our affairs. What will be the success
of our temporal pursuits, in the common sense of the word success, is
highly doubtful. And what will be the success of them in the proper
sense of the word; _i.e._ what happiness or enjoyment we shall obtain
by them, is doubtful in a much higher degree. Indeed the unsatisfactory
nature of the evidence, with which we are obliged to take up, in the
daily course of life, is scarce to be expressed. Yet men do not throw
away life, or disregard the interests of it, upon account of this
doubtfulness. The evidence of religion then being admitted real, those
who object against it, as not satisfactory, _i.e._ as not being what
they wish it, plainly forget the very condition of our being: for
satisfaction, in this sense, does not belong to such a creature as man.

And, what is more material, they forget also the very nature of
religion. For, religion presupposes, in all those who will embrace it,
a certain degree of integrity and honesty; which it was intended to try
whether men have or not, and to exercise in such as have it, in order
to its improvement. Religion presupposes this as much, and in the same
sense, as speaking to a man presupposes he understands the language in
which you speak; or as warning a man of any danger presupposes that he
hath such a regard to himself, as that he will endeavor to avoid it.
Therefore the question is not at all, Whether the evidence of religion
be satisfactory; but Whether it be, in reason, sufficient to prove and
discipline that virtue, which it presupposes. Now the evidence of it is
fully sufficient for all those purposes of _probation_; how far soever
it is from being satisfactory, as to the purposes of _curiosity_, or
any other: and indeed it answers the purposes of the former in several
respects, which it would not do, if it were as overpowering as is
required. Besides, whether the motives or the evidence for any course
of action be satisfactory, meaning here, by that word, what satisfies
a man that such a course of action will in event be for his good; this
need never be, and I think, strictly speaking, never is, the practical
question in common matters. The practical question in all cases is,
Whether the evidence for a course of action be such as, taking in all
circumstances, makes the faculty within us, which is the guide and
judge of conduct,[293] determine that course of action to be prudent.
Indeed, satisfaction that it will be for our interest or happiness,
abundantly determines an action to be prudent: but evidence almost
infinitely lower than this, determines actions to be so too; even in
the conduct of every day.

_Fifthly_, As to the objection concerning the influence which this
argument, or any part of it, may, or may not be expected to have upon
men; I observe, as above, that religion being intended for a trial[294]
and exercise of the morality of every person’s character, who is a
subject of it; and there being, as I have shown, such evidence for
it, as is sufficient, in reason, to influence men to embrace it: to
object, that it is not to be imagined mankind will be influenced by
such evidence, is nothing to the purpose of the foregoing treatise. For
the purpose of it is not to inquire, what sort of creatures mankind
are; but what the light and knowledge, which is afforded them, requires
they should be: to show how, in reason, they ought to behave; not how,
in fact, they will behave. This depends upon themselves, and is their
own concern; the personal concern of each man in particular. How little
regard the generality have to it, experience indeed does too fully
show. But religion, considered as a probation, has had its end upon
all persons, to whom it has been proposed with evidence sufficient in
reason to influence their practice: for by this means they have been
put into a state of probation; let them behave as they will in it.
Thus, not only revelation, but reason also, teaches us, that by the
evidence of religion being laid before men, the designs of Providence
are carrying on, not only with regard to those who will be influenced
by it, but likewise with regard to those who will not. Lastly, the
objection here referred to, allows the thing insisted upon in this
treatise to be of _some_ weight; and if so, it may be hoped it will
have some influence. And if there be a probability that it will have
any at all, there is the same reason in kind, though not in degree,
to lay it before men, as there would be, if it were likely to have a
greater influence.

Further, I desire it may be considered, with respect to the whole of
the foregoing objections, that in this treatise I have argued upon
the principles of others,[295] not my own: and have omitted what I
think true, and of the utmost importance, because by others thought
unintelligible, or not true. Thus I have argued upon the principles of
the fatalists, which I do not believe: and have omitted a thing of the
utmost importance which I do believe,--[viz.] the moral fitness and
unfitness of actions, prior to all will whatever; which as certainly
determine the divine _conduct_, as speculative truth and falsehood
necessarily determine the divine _judgment_. Indeed the principle of
liberty, and that of moral fitness, so force themselves upon the mind,
that moralists, ancient as well as modern, have formed their language
upon it. And probably it may appear in mine, though I have endeavored
to avoid it; and, in order to avoid it, have sometimes been obliged to
express myself in a manner, which will appear strange to such as do not
observe the reason for it. But the general argument here pursued, does
not at all suppose, or proceed upon these principles.

Now, these two abstract principles of liberty and moral fitness being
omitted, religion can be considered in no other view, than merely as
a question of fact: and in this view it is here considered. It is
obvious, that Christianity, and the proof of it, are both historical.
Even natural religion is, properly, a matter of fact. For, that there
is a righteous Governor of the world, is so: and this proposition
contains the general system of natural religion. But then, several
abstract truths, and in particular those two principles, are usually
taken into consideration in the proof of it: whereas it is here treated
of only as a matter of fact. To explain this; That the three angles of
a triangle are equal to two right ones, is an abstract truth; but that
they appear so to our mind, is only a matter of fact. This last must
have been admitted, if any thing was, by those ancient sceptics, who
would not admit the former: but pretended to doubt, whether there were
any such thing as truth, or whether we could certainly depend upon our
faculties of understanding for the knowledge of it in any case.

The assertion that there is, in the nature of things, an original
standard of right and wrong in actions, independent upon all will, but
which unalterably determines the will of God, to exercise that moral
government over the world, which religion teaches, (_i.e._ finally
and upon the whole to reward and punish men respectively as they act
right or wrong;) contains an abstract truth, as well as matter of fact.
But suppose that in the present state, every man without exception,
was rewarded and punished, in exact proportion as he followed or
transgressed that sense of right and wrong, which God has implanted
in his nature: this would not be at all an abstract truth, but only a
matter of fact. And though this fact were acknowledged by every one,
yet the same difficulties might be raised as now are, concerning the
abstract questions of liberty and moral fitness. And we should have a
proof, even the certain one of experience, that the government of the
world was perfectly moral, without taking in the consideration of those
questions: and this proof would remain, in what way soever they were
determined.

Thus, God having given mankind a moral faculty, the object of which
is actions, and which naturally approves some actions as right, and
of good desert, and condemns others as wrong, and of ill desert; that
he will, finally and upon the whole, reward the former and punish the
latter, is not an assertion of an abstract truth, but of what is as
mere a fact, as his doing so at present would be. This future fact I
have not, indeed, proved with the force with which it might be proved,
from the principles of liberty and moral fitness; but without them
have given a really conclusive practical proof of it, which is greatly
strengthened by the general analogy of nature; a proof easily cavilled
at, easily shown not to be demonstrative, (and it is not offered as
such;) but impossible, I think, to be evaded, or answered. Thus the
obligations of religion are made out, exclusive of the questions
concerning liberty and moral fitness; which have been perplexed with
difficulties and abstruse reasonings, as every thing may.

Hence therefore may be observed distinctly, what is the force of this
treatise. It will be, to such as are convinced of religion upon the
proof arising out of the two last mentioned principles, an _additional_
proof and confirmation of it: to such as do not admit those principles,
an _original_ proof of it,[296] and a confirmation of that proof. Those
who believe, will here find the scheme of Christianity cleared of
objections, and the evidence of it in a peculiar manner strengthened.
Those who do not believe will at least be shown the absurdity of all
attempts to prove Christianity false, the plain undoubted credibility
of it; and, I hope, a good deal more.

Thus, though some perhaps may seriously think, that analogy, as here
urged, has too great stress laid upon it; and ridicule, unanswerable
ridicule, may be applied, to show the argument from it in a
disadvantageous light; yet there can be no question, but that it is
a real one. For religion, both natural and revealed, implying in it
numerous facts; analogy, being a _confirmation_ of all facts to which
it can be applied, and the _only proof_ of most, cannot but be admitted
by every one to be a material thing, and truly of weight on the side of
religion, both natural and revealed. And it ought to be particularly
regarded by such as profess to follow nature, and to be less satisfied
with abstract reasonings.




CONCLUSION.


Whatever account may be given of the strange inattention and disregard,
in some ages and countries, to a matter of such importance as religion;
it would, before experience, be incredible, that there should be the
like disregard in those, who have had the moral system of the world
laid before them, as it is by Christianity, and often inculcated upon
them: because this moral system carries in it a good degree of evidence
for its truth, upon its being barely proposed to our thoughts. There
is no need of abstruse reasonings and distinctions, to convince an
unprejudiced understanding, that there is a God who made and governs
the world, and will judge it in righteousness; though they may be
necessary to answer abstruse difficulties, when once such are raised:
when the very meaning of those words, which express most intelligibly
the general doctrine of religion, is pretended to be uncertain; and
the clear truth of the thing itself is obscured by the intricacies of
speculation. To an unprejudiced mind, ten thousand thousand instances
of design cannot but prove a designer. And it is intuitively manifest,
that _creatures_ ought to live under a dutiful sense of their Maker;
and that justice and charity must be his laws, to creatures whom he has
made social, and placed in society.

The truth of revealed religion, peculiarly so called, is not indeed
self-evident, but requires external proof, in order to its being
received. Yet inattention, among us, to revealed religion, will
be found to imply the same dissolute immoral temper of mind, as
inattention to natural religion: because, when both are laid before
us, in the manner they are in Christian countries of liberty, our
obligations to inquire into both, and to embrace both upon supposition
of their truth, are obligations of the same nature. Revelation claims
to be the voice of God: and our obligation to attend to his voice is
surely moral, in all cases. And as it is insisted, that its evidence
is conclusive, upon thorough consideration of it; so it offers itself
with obvious appearances of having something more than human in it,
and therefore in all reason requires to have its claims most seriously
examined into.

It is to be added, that though light and knowledge, in what manner
soever afforded, is equally from God; yet a miraculous revelation
has a peculiar tendency, from the first principles of our nature, to
awaken mankind, and inspire them with reverence and awe. And this
is a peculiar obligation, to attend to what claims to be so, with
such appearances of truth. It is therefore most certain, that our
obligations to inquire seriously into the evidence of Christianity,
and, upon supposition of its truth, to embrace it, are of the utmost
importance, and moral in the highest and most proper sense. Let us then
suppose, that the evidence of religion in general, and of Christianity,
has been seriously inquired into, by all reasonable men among us. Yet
we find many professedly to reject both, upon speculative principles of
infidelity. All of them do not content themselves with a bare neglect
of religion, and enjoying their imaginary freedom from its restraints.
Some go much beyond this. They deride God’s moral government over
the world. They renounce his protection, and defy his justice. They
ridicule and vilify Christianity, and blaspheme the author of it; and
take all occasions to manifest scorn and contempt of revelation. This
amounts to an active setting themselves against religion; to what
may be considered as a positive principle of irreligion, which they
cultivate within themselves; and, whether they intend this effect
or not, render habitual, as a good man does the contrary principle.
Others, who are not chargeable with all this profligateness, yet are in
avowed opposition to religion, as if discovered to be groundless.

Now admitting, which is the supposition we go upon, that these persons
act upon what they think principles of reason, (and otherwise they are
not to be argued with,) it is really inconceivable, that they should
imagine they clearly see the whole evidence of it, considered in
itself, to be nothing at all: nor do they pretend this. They are far
indeed from having a just notion of its evidence: but they would not
say its evidence was nothing, if they thought the system of it, with
all its circumstances, were credible, like other matters of science or
history. Their manner of treating it must proceed, either from such
kind of objections against all religion, as have been answered or
obviated in the former part of this treatise; or else from objections,
and difficulties, supposed more peculiar to Christianity. Thus, they
entertain prejudices against the whole notion of a revelation, and
miraculous interpositions. They find things in Scripture, whether in
incidental passages, or in the general scheme of it, which appear to
them unreasonable. They take for granted, that if Christianity were
true, the light of it must have been more general, and the evidence
of it more satisfactory, or rather overpowering: that it must and
would have been, in some way, otherwise put and left, than it is. Now
this is not imagining they see the evidence itself to be nothing,
or inconsiderable; but quite another thing. It is being fortified
_against_ the evidence, in some degree acknowledged, by thinking they
see the system of Christianity, or something which appears to them
necessarily connected with it, to be incredible or false; fortified
against that evidence, which might otherwise make great impression
upon them. Or, lastly, if any of these persons are, upon the whole, in
doubt concerning the truth of Christianity; their behavior seems owing
to their taking for granted, through strange inattention, that such
doubting is, in a manner, the same thing as being certain against it.

To these persons, and to this state of opinion concerning religion,
the foregoing treatise is adapted. For, all the general objections
against the moral system of nature having been obviated, it is
shown, that there is not any peculiar presumption at all against
Christianity, considered either as not discoverable by reason, or as
unlike to what is so discovered; nor any, worth mentioning, against
it as miraculous, if any at all; none, certainly, which can render
it in the least incredible. It is shown, that, upon supposition of
a divine revelation, the analogy of nature renders it beforehand
highly credible, I think probable, that many things in it must appear
liable to great objections; and that we must be incompetent judges of
it, to a great degree. This observation is, I think, unquestionably
true, and of the very utmost importance. But it is urged, as I hope
it will be understood, with great caution not to vilify the faculty
of reason, which is _the candle of the Lord within us_;[297] though
it can afford no light, where it does not shine; nor judge, where
it has no principles to judge upon. The objections here spoken of,
being first answered in the view of objections against Christianity
as a matter of fact, are in the next place considered as urged more
immediately against the wisdom, justice, and goodness of the Christian
dispensation. And it is fully made out, that they admit of exactly the
like answer, in every respect, to what the like objections against
the constitution of nature admit of: that, as partial views give the
appearance of wrong to things, which, upon further consideration
and knowledge of their relations to other things, are found just
and good; so it is perfectly credible, that the things objected
against the wisdom and goodness of the Christian dispensation, may
be rendered instances of wisdom and goodness, by their reference to
other things beyond our view. Because Christianity is a scheme as much
above our comprehension, as that of nature; and like that, a scheme
in which means are made use of to accomplish ends, and which, as is
most credible, may be carried on by general laws. And it ought to be
attended to, that this is not an answer taken merely or chiefly from
our ignorance: but from something positive, which our observation shows
us. For, to like objections, the like answer is experienced to be just,
in numberless parallel cases.

The objections against the Christian dispensation, and the method
by which it is carried on, having been thus obviated, in general,
and together; the chief of them are considered distinctly, and the
particular things objected to are shown credible, by their perfect
analogy, each apart, to the constitution of nature. Thus, if man be
fallen from his primitive state, and to be restored, and infinite
wisdom and power engages in accomplishing our recovery: it were to have
been expected, it is said, that this should have been effected at once;
and not by such a long series of means, and such a various economy of
persons and things; one dispensation preparatory to another, this to
a further one, and so on through an indefinite number of ages, before
the end of the scheme proposed can be completely accomplished; a scheme
conducted by infinite wisdom, and executed by almighty power. But now,
on the contrary, our finding that every thing in the constitution and
course of nature is thus carried on, shows such expectations concerning
revelation to be highly unreasonable; and is a satisfactory answer to
them, when urged as objections against the credibility, that the great
scheme of Providence in the redemption of the world may be of this
kind, and to be accomplished in this manner.

As to the particular method of our redemption, the appointment of a
Mediator between God and man: this has been shown to be most obviously
analogous to the general conduct of nature, _i.e._ the God of nature,
in appointing others to be the instruments of his mercy, as we
experience in the daily course of Providence. The condition of this
world, which the doctrine of our redemption by Christ presupposes, so
much falls in with natural appearances, that heathen moralists inferred
it from those appearances: inferred that human nature was fallen from
its original rectitude, and in consequence of this, degraded from its
primitive happiness. However this opinion came into the world, these
appearances kept up the tradition, and confirmed the belief of it.
And as it was the general opinion under the light of nature, that
repentance and reformation, alone and by itself, was not sufficient to
do away sin, and procure a full remission of the penalties annexed to
it; and as the reason of the thing does not at all lead to any such
conclusion; so every day’s experience shows us, that reformation is
not, in any sort, sufficient to prevent the present disadvantages and
miseries, which, in the natural course of things, God has annexed to
folly and extravagance.

Yet there may be ground to think, that the punishments, which, by
the general laws of divine government, are annexed to vice, may be
prevented: that provision may have been, even originally, made, that
they should be prevented by some means or other, though they could not
by reformation alone. For we have daily instances of _such mercy_, in
the general conduct of nature: compassion provided for misery,[298]
medicines for diseases, friends against enemies. There is provision
made, in the original constitution of the world, that much of the
natural bad consequences of our follies, which persons themselves
alone cannot prevent, may be prevented by the assistance of others;
assistance which nature enables, and disposes, and appoints them to
afford. By a method of goodness analogous to this, when the world lay
in wickedness, and consequently in ruin, _God so loved the world, that
he gave his only-begotten Son_ to save it: and _he being made perfect
by suffering, became the author of eternal salvation to all them that
obey him_.[299] Indeed neither reason nor analogy would lead us to
think, in particular, that the interposition of Christ, in the manner
in which he did interpose, would be of that efficacy for recovery
of the world, which the Scripture teaches us it was. But neither
would reason nor analogy lead us to think, that other particular
means would be of the efficacy, which experience shows they are, in
numberless instances. Therefore, as the case before us does not admit
of experience; so, that neither reason nor analogy can show how, or
in what particular way, the interposition of Christ, as revealed in
Scripture, is of that efficacy, which it is there represented to be;
this is no kind nor degree of presumption against its being really of
that efficacy.

Further: the objections against Christianity, from the light of it not
being universal, nor its evidence so strong as might possibly be given,
have been answered by the general analogy of nature. That God has made
such variety of creatures, is indeed an answer to the former: but that
he dispenses his gifts in such variety, both of degrees and kinds,
among creatures of the same species, and even to the same individuals
at different times; is a more obvious and full answer to it. And it is
so far from being the method of Providence in other cases, to afford us
such overbearing evidence, as some require in proof of Christianity;
that on the contrary, the evidence upon which we are naturally
appointed to act in common matters, throughout a very great part of
life, is doubtful in a high degree. And admitting the fact, that God
has afforded to some no more than doubtful evidence of religion; the
same account may be given of it, as of difficulties and temptations
with regard to practice. But as it is not impossible,[300] surely,
that this alleged doubtfulness may be men’s own fault; it deserves
their most serious consideration, whether it be not so. However, it is
certain, that doubting implies a _degree_ of evidence for that of which
we doubt: and that this degree of evidence as really lays us under
obligations as demonstrative evidence.

The whole of religion then is throughout credible: nor is there, I
think, any thing, relating to the revealed dispensation of things, more
different from the experienced constitution and course of nature, than
some parts of the constitution of nature are from other parts of it.
If so, the only question which remains is, What positive evidence can
be alleged for the truth of Christianity? This too in general has been
considered, and the objections against it estimated. Deduct, therefore,
what is to be deducted from that evidence, upon account of any weight
which may be thought to remain in these objections, after what the
analogy of nature has suggested in answer to them: and then consider,
what are the practical consequences from all this upon the most
sceptical principles one can argue upon (for I am writing to persons
who entertain these principles): and upon such consideration it will be
obvious, that immorality, as little excuse as it admits of in itself,
is greatly aggravated, in persons who have been made acquainted with
Christianity, whether they believe it or not: because the moral system
of nature, or natural religion, which Christianity lays before us,
approves itself, almost intuitively, to a reasonable mind, upon seeing
it proposed.

In the next place, with regard to Christianity, it will be observed
that there is a middle between a full satisfaction of the truth of it,
and a satisfaction of the contrary. The middle state of mind between
these two consists in a serious apprehension, that it may be true,
joined with doubt whether it is so. And this, upon the best judgment
I am able to make, is as far towards speculative infidelity, as any
sceptic can at all be supposed to go, who has had true Christianity,
with the proper evidences of it, laid before him, and has in any
tolerable measure considered them. For I would not be mistaken to
comprehend all who have ever heard of it; because it seems evident,
that in many countries called Christian, neither Christianity nor
its evidence, is fairly laid before men. And in places where both
are, there appear to be some who have very little attended to either,
and who reject Christianity with a scorn proportionate to their
inattention; and yet are by no means without understanding in other
matters. Now it has been shown, that a serious apprehension that
Christianity may be true, lays persons under the strictest obligations
of a serious regard to it, throughout the whole of their life; a regard
not the same exactly, but in many respects nearly the same with what a
full conviction of its truth would lay them under.

_Lastly_, it will appear, that blasphemy and profaneness, with
regard to Christianity, are absolutely without excuse. There is no
temptation to it, but from the wantonness of vanity or mirth; and
those, considering the infinite importance of the subject, are no such
temptations as to afford any excuse for it. If this be a just account
of things, and yet men can go on to vilify or disregard Christianity,
which is to talk and act as if they had a demonstration of its
falsehood, there is no reason to think they would alter their behavior
to any purpose, though there were a demonstration of its truth.




DISSERTATIONS.

OF PERSONAL IDENTITY.

OF THE NATURE OF VIRTUE.


Advertisement.

In the first copy of these papers, I had inserted the two following
dissertations into the chapters, on _a Future Life_, and on the _Moral
Government of God_; with which they are closely connected. But as these
do not directly fall under the _title_ of the foregoing treatise, and
would have kept the subject of it too long out of sight, it seems more
proper to place them by themselves.




DISSERTATION I.

Personal Identity.


Whether we are to live in a future state, as it is the most important
question which can possibly be asked, so it is the most intelligible
one which can be expressed in language. Yet strange perplexities have
been raised about the meaning of that identity or sameness of person,
which is implied in the notion of our living now and hereafter, or in
any two successive moments. And the solution of these difficulties hath
been stranger than the difficulties themselves. For, personal identity
has been explained so by some, as to render the inquiry concerning a
future life of no consequence at all to us the persons who are making
it. And though few men can be misled by such subtleties; yet it may be
proper to consider them a little.

When it is asked _wherein_ personal identity consists, the answer
should be the same, as if it were asked wherein consists similitude,
or equality; that all attempts to define would but perplex it. Yet
there is no difficulty at all in ascertaining _the idea_. For as,
upon two triangles being compared or viewed together, there arises to
the mind the idea of similitude; or upon twice two and four, the idea
of equality: so likewise, upon comparing the consciousness of one’s
self, or one’s own existence, in any two moments, there as immediately
arises to the mind the idea of personal identity. And as the two former
comparisons not only give us the ideas of similitude and equality;
but also show us that two triangles are alike, and twice two and four
are equal: so the latter comparison not only gives us the idea of
personal identity, but also shows us the identity of ourselves in those
two moments; the present, suppose, and that immediately past; or the
present, and that a month, a year, or twenty years past. In other
words, by reflecting upon that which is myself now, and that which was
myself twenty years ago, I discern they are not two, but one and the
same self.

But though consciousness of what is past does thus ascertain our
personal identity to ourselves, yet to say, that it _makes_ personal
identity, or is necessary to our being the same persons, is to say,
that a person has not existed a single moment, nor done one action, but
what he can remember; indeed none but what he reflects upon. And one
should really think it self-evident, that consciousness of personal
identity presupposes, and therefore cannot constitute, personal
identity; any more than knowledge, in any other case, can constitute
truth, which it presupposes.

This wonderful mistake may possibly have arisen from hence; that to be
endued with consciousness is inseparable from the idea of a person, or
intelligent being. For, this might be expressed inaccurately thus, that
consciousness makes personality: and from hence it might be concluded
to make personal identity. But though present consciousness of what we
at present do and feel is necessary to our being the persons we _now
are_; yet present consciousness of past actions or feelings is not
necessary to our being the same persons who performed those actions, or
_once had_ those feelings.

The inquiry, what makes vegetables the same, in the common acceptation
of the word, does not appear to have any relation to this of personal
identity: because, the word _same_, when applied to them and to a
person, is not only applied to different subjects, but it is also
used in different senses. For when a man swears to the same tree,
as having stood fifty years in the same place, he means only the
same as to all the purposes of property, and uses of common life;
and not that the tree has been all that time the same, in the strict
philosophical sense of the word. For he does not know, whether any one
particle of the present tree be the same with any one particle of the
tree which stood in the same place fifty years ago. And if they have
not one common particle of matter, they cannot be the same tree in
the proper philosophic sense of the word _same_: it being evidently
a contradiction in terms, to say they are, when no part of their
substance, and no one of their properties is the same: no part of their
substance, by the supposition; no one of their properties, because it
is allowed, that the same property cannot be transferred from one
substance to another. Therefore when we say the identity of sameness of
a plant consists in a continuation of the same life, communicated under
the same organization, to a number of particles of matter, whether the
same or not; the word _same_, when applied to life and to organization,
cannot possibly be understood to signify, what it signifies in this
very sentence, when applied to matter. In a loose and popular sense
then, the life and the organization and the plant are justly said to
be the same, notwithstanding the perpetual change of the parts. But in
strict and philosophical language, no man, no being, no mode of being,
no any thing, can be the same with that, with which it has indeed
nothing the same. Now sameness is used in this latter sense, when
applied to persons. The identity of these, therefore, cannot subsist
with diversity of substance.

The thing here considered, and as I think, demonstratively determined,
is proposed by Mr. Locke in these words, _Whether it_; _i.e._ the same
self or person, _be the same identical substance_? And he has suggested
what is a much better answer to the question, than that which he gives
it in form. For he defines person, _a thinking intelligent being_,
&c., and personal identity, _the sameness of a rational being_.[301]
The question then is, whether the same rational being is the same
substance: which needs no answer, because being and substance, in
this place, stand for the same idea. The ground of the doubt, whether
the same person be the same substance, is said to be this; that the
consciousness of our own existence, in youth and in old age, or in any
two joint successive moments, is not the _same individual action_,[302]
_i.e._ not the same consciousness, but different successive
consciousnesses. Now it is strange that this should have occasioned
such perplexities. For it is surely conceivable, that a person may have
a capacity of knowing some object or other to be the same now, which
it was when he contemplated it formerly: yet in this case, where, by
the supposition, the object is perceived to be the same, the perception
of it in any two moments cannot be one and the same perception. And
thus, though the successive consciousnesses, which we have of our own
existence, are not the same, yet are they consciousnesses of one and
the same thing or object; of the same person, self, or living agent.
The person, of whose existence the consciousness is felt now, and was
felt an hour or a year ago, is discerned to be; not two persons, but
one and the same person; and therefore is one and the same.

Mr. Locke’s observations upon this subject appear hasty: and he seems
to profess himself dissatisfied with suppositions, which he has made
relating to it.[303] But some of those hasty observations have been
carried to a strange length by others; whose notion, when traced
and examined to the bottom, amounts, I think, to this:[304] “That
personality is not a permanent, but a transient thing: that it lives
and dies, begins and ends continually: that no one can any more remain
one and the same person two moments together, than two successive
moments can be one and the same moment: that our substance is indeed
continually changing; but whether this be so or not, is, it seems,
nothing to the purpose; since it is not substance, but consciousness
alone, which constitutes personality: which consciousness, being
successive, cannot be the same in any two moments, nor consequently
the personality constituted by it.” Hence it must follow, that it is
a fallacy upon ourselves, to charge our present selves with any thing
we did, or to imagine our present selves interested in any thing which
befell us yesterday; or that our present self will be interested in
what will befall us to-morrow: since our present self is not, in
reality, the same with the self of yesterday, but another like self or
person coming in its room, and mistaken for it; to which another self
will succeed to-morrow. This, I say, must follow. For if the self or
person of to-day, and that of to-morrow, are not the same, but only
like persons; the person of to-day is really no more interested in what
will befall the person of to-morrow, than in what will befall any other
person.

It may be thought, perhaps, that this is not a just representation of
the opinion we are speaking of: because those who maintain it allow,
that a person is the same as far back as his remembrance reaches.
Indeed they use the words, _identity_, and _same person_. Nor will
language permit these words to be laid aside; since if they were, there
must be I know not what ridiculous periphrasis substituted in the
room of them. But they cannot, _consistently with themselves_, mean,
that the person is really the same. For it is self-evident, that the
personality cannot be really the same, if, as they expressly assert,
that in which it consists is not the same. And as, consistently with
themselves, they cannot, so, I think it appears, they do not _mean_,
that the person is _really_ the same, but only that he is so in a
fictitious sense: in such a sense only as they assert, for this they do
assert, that any number of persons whatever may be the same person. The
bare unfolding this notion, and laying it thus naked and open, seems
the best confutation of it. However, since great stress is said to be
put upon it, I add the following things.

_First_, This notion is absolutely contradictory to that certain
conviction, which necessarily and every moment rises within us, when we
turn our thoughts upon ourselves, when we reflect upon what is past,
and look forward upon what is to come. All imagination of a daily
change of that living agent which each man calls himself, for another,
or of any such change throughout our whole present life, is entirely
borne down by our natural sense of things. Nor is it possible for a
person in his wits to alter his conduct, with regard to his health or
affairs, from a suspicion, that, though he should live to-morrow, he
should not, however, be the same person he is to-day. Yet, if it be
reasonable to act, with respect to a future life, upon the notion that
personality is transient, it is reasonable to act upon it, with respect
to the present. Here then is a notion equally applicable to religion
and to temporal concerns. Every one sees and feels the inexpressible
absurdity of it in the latter case; therefore, if any can take up with
it in the former, this cannot proceed from the reason of the thing, but
must be owing to inward unfairness, and secret corruption of heart.

_Secondly_, It is not an idea, or abstract notion, or quality, but a
_being_ only, which is capable of life and action, of happiness and
misery. Now all beings confessedly continue the same, during the whole
time of their existence. Consider then a living being now existing, and
which has existed for any time alive. This living being must have done
and suffered and enjoyed, what it has done and suffered and enjoyed
formerly, (this living being, I say, and not another) as really as it
does and suffers and enjoys, what it does and suffers and enjoys this
instant. All these successive actions, enjoyments, and sufferings, are
actions, enjoyments, and sufferings, of the same living being. And they
are so, prior to all consideration of its remembering or forgetting:
since remembering or forgetting can make no alteration in the truth of
past matter of fact. And suppose this being endued with limited powers
of knowledge and memory, there is no more difficulty in conceiving it
to have a power of knowing itself to be the same living being which it
was some time ago, of remembering some of its actions, sufferings, and
enjoyments, and forgetting others, than in conceiving it to know or
remember or forget any thing else.

_Thirdly_, Every person is _conscious_, that he is now the same person
or self he was as far back as his remembrance reaches: since when any
one reflects upon a past action of his own, he is just as certain
of the person who did that action, namely, himself who now reflects
upon it, as he is certain that the action was done at all. Nay, very
often a person’s assurance of an action having been done, of which he
is absolutely assured, arises wholly from the consciousness that he
himself did it. This he, person, or self, must either be a substance,
or the property of some substance. If he, a person, be a substance;
then consciousness that he is the same person is consciousness that
he is the same substance. If the person, or he, be the property of
a substance, still consciousness that he is the same property is as
certain a proof that his substance remains the same, as consciousness
that he remains the same substance would be; since the same property
cannot be transferred from one substance to another.

But though we are thus certain, that we are the same agents, living
beings, or substances, now, which we were as far back as our
remembrance reaches; yet it is asked, whether we may not possibly
be deceived in it? And this question may be asked at the end of any
demonstration whatever: because it is a question concerning the truth
of perception by memory. He who can doubt, whether perception by memory
can in this case be depended upon, may doubt also, whether perception
by deduction and reasoning, which also include memory, or indeed
whether intuitive perception can. Here then we can go no further. For
it is ridiculous to attempt to prove the truth of those perceptions,
whose truth we can no otherwise prove, than by other perceptions of
exactly the same kind with them, and which there is just the same
ground to suspect; or to attempt to prove the truth of our faculties,
which can no otherwise be proved, than by the use or means of those
very suspected faculties themselves.[305]




DISSERTATION II.

The Nature of Virtue.


That which renders beings capable of moral government, is their having
a moral nature, and moral faculties of perception and of action.
Brute creatures are impressed and actuated by various instincts and
propensions: so also are we. But additional to this, we have a capacity
of reflecting upon actions and characters, and making them an object to
our thought: and on doing this, we naturally and unavoidably approve
some actions, under the peculiar view of their being virtuous and of
good desert; and disapprove others, as vicious and of ill desert.
That we have this moral approving and disapproving[306] faculty, is
certain from our experiencing it in ourselves, and recognising it in
each other. It appears from our exercising it unavoidably, in the
approbation and disapprobation even of feigned characters; from the
words right and wrong, odious and amiable, base and worthy, with many
others of like signification in all languages applied to actions and
characters: from the many written systems of morals which suppose it,
since it cannot be imagined, that all these authors, throughout all
these treatises, had absolutely no meaning at all to their words, or a
meaning merely chimerical: from our natural sense of gratitude, which,
implies a distinction between merely being the instrument of good, and
intending it: from the distinction every one makes between injury and
mere harm, which, Hobbes says, is peculiar to mankind; and between
injury and just punishment, a distinction plainly natural, prior to the
consideration of human laws.

It is manifest that great part of common language, and of common
behavior over the world, is formed upon supposition of such a moral
faculty; whether called conscience, moral reason, moral sense, or
divine reason; whether considered as a sentiment of the understanding,
or as a perception of the heart; or, which seems the truth, as
including both. Nor is it at all doubtful in the general, what course
of action this faculty, or practical discerning power within us,
approves and what it disapproves. For, as much as it has been disputed
wherein virtue consists, or whatever ground for doubt there may be
about particulars; yet, in general, there is in reality a universally
acknowledged standard of it. It is that, which all ages and all
countries have made profession of in public: it is that, which every
man you meet puts on the show of: it is that, which the primary and
fundamental laws of all civil constitutions over the face of the earth
make it their business and endeavor to enforce the practice of upon
mankind: namely, justice, veracity, and regard to common good. It being
manifest then, in general, that we have such a faculty or discernment
as this, it may be of use to remark some things more distinctly
concerning it.

_First_, It ought to be observed, that the object of this faculty
is actions,[307] comprehending under that name active or practical
principles: those principles from which men would act, if occasions
and circumstances gave them power; and which, when fixed and habitual
in any person, we call his character. It does not appear, that brutes
have the least reflex sense of actions, as distinguished from events:
or that will and design, which constitute the very nature of actions
as such, are at all an object to their perception. But to ours they
are: and they are the object, and the only one, of the approving and
disapproving faculty. Acting, conduct, behavior, abstracted from all
regard to what is in fact and event the consequence of it, is itself
the natural object of the moral discernment; as speculative truth
and falsehood is of speculative reason. Intention of such and such
consequences, is indeed, always included; for it is part of the action
itself: but though the intended good or bad consequences do not follow,
we have exactly the same sense of the _action_, as if they did. In
like manner we think well or ill of characters, abstracted from all
consideration of the good or the evil, which persons of such characters
have it actually in their power to do. We never, in the moral way,
applaud or blame either ourselves or others, for what we enjoy or what
we suffer, or for having impressions made upon us, which we consider
as altogether out of our power: but only for what we do or would have
done, had it been in our power: or for what we leave undone, which we
might have done, or would have left undone, though we could have done.

_Secondly_, Our sense or discernment of actions as morally good or
evil, implies in it a sense or discernment of them as of good or ill
desert. It may be difficult to explain this perception, so as to
answer all the questions which may be asked concerning it: but every
one speaks of such and such actions as deserving punishment; and it is
not, I suppose, pretended, that they have absolutely no meaning at all
to the expression. Now the meaning plainly is not, that we conceive
it for the good of society, that the doer of such actions should be
made to suffer. For if, unhappily, it were resolved, that a man, who
by some innocent action, was infected with the plague, should be left
to perish, lest, by other people’s coming near him, the infection
should spread; no one would say he _deserved_ this treatment. Innocence
and ill desert are inconsistent ideas. Ill desert always supposes
guilt: and if one be no part of the other, yet they are evidently and
naturally connected in our mind. The sight of a man in misery raises
our compassion towards him; and if this misery be inflicted on him by
another, our indignation against the author of it. But when we are
informed, that the sufferer is a villain, and is punished only for
his treachery or cruelty; our compassion exceedingly lessens, and in
many instances our indignation wholly subsides. Now what produces
this effect is the conception of that in the sufferer, which we call
ill desert. Upon considering then, or viewing together, our notion of
vice and that of misery, there results a third, that of ill desert.
And thus there is in human creatures an association of the two ideas,
natural and moral evil, wickedness and punishment. If this association
were merely artificial or accidental, it were nothing: but being most
unquestionably natural, it greatly concerns us to attend to it, instead
of endeavoring to explain it away.

It may be observed further, concerning our perception of good and
of ill desert, that the former is very weak with respect to common
instances of virtue. One reason of which may be, that it does not
appear to a spectator, how far such instances of virtue proceed from
a virtuous principle, or in what degree this principle is prevalent:
since a very weak regard to virtue may be sufficient to make men act
well in many common instances. On the other hand, our perception of ill
desert in vicious actions lessens, in proportion to the temptations men
are thought to have had to such vices. For, vice in human creatures
consisting chiefly in the absence or want of the virtuous principle;
though a man be overcome, suppose by tortures, it does not from thence
appear to what degree the virtuous principle was wanting. All that
appears is, that he had it not in such a degree, as to prevail over
the temptation; but possibly he had it in a degree, which would have
rendered him proof against common temptations.

_Thirdly_, Our perception of vice and ill desert arises from, and is
the result of, a comparison of actions with the nature and capacities
of the agent. For the mere neglect of doing what we ought to do, would,
in many cases, be determined by all men to be in the highest degree
vicious. This determination must arise from such comparison, and be the
result of it; because such neglect would not be vicious in creatures
of other natures and capacities, as brutes. It is the same also with
respect to positive vices, or such as consist in doing what we ought
not. For every one has a different sense of harm done by an idiot,
madman, or child, and by one of mature and common understanding; though
the action of both, including the intention, which is part of the
action, be the same: as it may be, since idiots and madmen, as well as
children, are capable not only of doing mischief but also of intending
it. Now this difference must arise from somewhat discerned in the
nature or capacities of one, which renders the action vicious; and the
want of which, in the other, renders the same action innocent or less
vicious: and this plainly supposes a comparison, whether reflected upon
or not, between the action and capacities of the agent, previous to our
determining an action to be vicious. Hence arises a proper application
of the epithets, incongruous, unsuitable, disproportionate, unfit, to
actions which our moral faculty determines to be vicious.

_Fourthly_, It deserves to be considered, whether men are more at
liberty, in point of morals, to make themselves miserable without
reason, than to make other people so: or dissolutely to neglect their
own greater good, for the sake of a present lesser gratification, than
they are to neglect the good of others, whom nature has committed to
their care. It would seem, that a due concern about our own interest
or happiness, and a reasonable endeavor to secure and promote it,
(which is, I think, very much the meaning of the word prudence,
in our language;) it would seem, that this is virtue, and the
contrary behavior faulty and blamable; since, in the calmest way of
reflection, we approve of the first, and condemn the other conduct,
both in ourselves and others. This approbation and disapprobation
are altogether different from mere desire of our own, or of their
happiness, and from sorrow upon missing it. For the object or occasion
of this last kind of perception is satisfaction or uneasiness: whereas
the object of the first is active behavior. In one case, what our
thoughts fix upon is our condition: in the other, our conduct.

It is true indeed, that nature has not given us so sensible a
disapprobation of imprudence and folly, either in _ourselves_ or
_others_, as of falsehood, injustice, and cruelty: I suppose, because
that constant habitual sense of private interest and good, which we
always carry about with us, renders such sensible disapprobation less
necessary, less wanting, to keep us from imprudently neglecting our own
happiness, and foolishly injuring ourselves, than it is necessary and
wanting to keep us from injuring others; to whose good we cannot have
so strong and constant a regard: and also because imprudence and folly,
appearing to bring its own punishment more immediately and constantly
than injurious behavior, it less needs the additional punishment,
which would be inflicted upon it by others, had they the same sensible
indignation against it, as against injustice, and fraud, and cruelty.
Besides, unhappiness being in itself the natural object of compassion,
the unhappiness which people bring upon themselves, though it be
wilfully, excites in us some pity for them; and this of course lessens
our displeasure against them. Still it is matter of experience, that we
are formed so as to reflect very severely upon the greater instances of
imprudent neglect and foolish rashness, both in ourselves and others.
In instances of this kind, men often say of themselves with remorse,
and of others with some indignation, that they deserved to suffer such
calamities, because they brought them upon themselves, and would not
take warning. Particularly when persons come to poverty and distress by
a long course of extravagance, and after frequent admonitions, though
without falsehood or injustice; we plainly, do not regard such people
as alike objects of compassion with those, who are brought into the
same condition by unavoidable accidents. From these things it appears,
that prudence is a species of virtue, and folly of vice: meaning by
_folly_, something quite different from mere incapacity; a thoughtless
want of that regard and attention to our own happiness, which we had
capacity for. And this the word properly includes; and, as it seems, in
its usual acceptation: for we scarcely apply it to brute creatures.

However, if any person be disposed to dispute the matter, I shall very
willingly give him up the words virtue and vice, as not applicable to
prudence and folly: but must insist, that the faculty within us, which
is the judge of actions, approves of prudent actions, and disapproves
imprudent ones: I say prudent and imprudent _actions_ as such, and
considered distinctly from the happiness or misery which they occasion.
And by the way, this observation may help to determine what justness
there is in the objection against religion, that it teaches us to be
interested and selfish.

_Fifthly_, Without inquiring how far, and in what sense, virtue is
resolvable into benevolence, and vice into the want of it; it may
be proper to observe, that benevolence, and the want of it, singly
considered, are in no sort the _whole_, of virtue and vice. For if
this were the case, in the review of one’s own character, or that of
others, our moral understanding and moral sense would be indifferent
to every thing, but the degrees in which benevolence prevailed, and
the degrees in which it was wanting. That is, we should neither approve
of benevolence to some persons rather than to others, nor disapprove
injustice and falsehood upon any other account, than merely as an
overbalance of happiness was foreseen likely to be produced by the
first, and of misery by the second. On the contrary, suppose two men
competitors for any thing whatever, which would be of equal advantage
to each of them; though nothing indeed would be more impertinent,
than for a stranger to busy himself to get one of them preferred
to the other; yet such endeavor would be virtue, in behalf of a
friend or benefactor, abstracted from all consideration of distant
consequences: as that examples of gratitude, and the cultivation of
friendship, would be of general good to the world. Again, suppose one
man should, by fraud or violence, take from another the fruit of his
labor, with intent to give it to a third, who he thought would have as
much pleasure from it as would balance the pleasure which the first
possessor would have had in the enjoyment, and his vexation in the
loss of it; suppose also that no bad consequences would follow: yet
such an action would surely be vicious. Nay further, were treachery,
violence, and injustice, no otherwise vicious, than as foreseen likely
to produce an overbalance of misery to society; then, if in any case a
man could procure to himself as great advantage by an act of injustice,
as the whole foreseen inconvenience, likely to be brought upon others
by it, would amount to; such a piece of injustice would not be faulty
or vicious at all: because it would be no more than, in any other case,
for a man to prefer his own satisfaction to another’s, in equal degrees.

The fact, then, appears to be, that we are _constituted_ so as to
condemn falsehood, unprovoked violence, injustice, and to approve
of benevolence to some preferably to others, abstracted from all
consideration, which conduct is likeliest to produce an overbalance of
happiness or misery. Therefore, were the Author of nature to propose
nothing to himself as an end but the production of happiness, were
his moral character merely that of benevolence; yet ours is not so.
Upon that supposition indeed, the only reason of his giving us the
above mentioned approbation of benevolence to some persons rather
than others, and disapprobation of falsehood, unprovoked violence,
and injustice, must be, that he foresaw this constitution of our
nature would produce more happiness, than forming us with a temper of
mere general benevolence. But still, since this is our constitution,
falsehood, violence, injustice, must be vice in us; and benevolence to
some, preferably to others, virtue; abstracted from all consideration
of the overbalance of evil or good, which they may appear likely to
produce.

Now if human creatures are endued with such a moral nature as we have
been explaining, or with a moral faculty, the natural object of which
is actions: moral government must consist in rendering them happy and
unhappy, in rewarding and punishing them, as they follow, neglect, or
depart from, the moral rule of action interwoven in their nature, or
suggested and enforced by this moral faculty;[308] in rewarding and
punishing them upon account of their so doing.

I am not sensible that I have, in this fifth observation, contradicted
what any author designed to assert. But some of great and distinguished
merit, have, I think, expressed themselves in a manner, which may
occasion some danger, to careless readers, of imagining the whole of
virtue to consist in singly aiming, according to the best of their
judgment, at promoting the happiness of mankind in the present state;
and the whole of vice, in doing what they foresee, or might foresee,
is likely to produce an overbalance of unhappiness in it: than which
mistakes, none can be conceived more terrible. For it is certain, that
some of the most shocking instances of injustice, adultery, murder,
perjury, and even of persecution, may, in many supposable cases, not
have the appearance of being likely to produce an overbalance of
misery in the present state; perhaps sometimes may have the contrary
appearance.

This reflection might easily be carried on, but I forbear. The
happiness of the world is the concern of Him who is the lord and the
proprietor of it: nor do we know what we are about, when we endeavor
to promote the good of mankind in any ways, but those which he has
directed; that is indeed in all ways not contrary to veracity and
justice. I speak thus upon supposition of persons really endeavoring,
in some sort, to do good without regard to these. But the truth seems
to be; that such supposed endeavors proceed, almost always, from
ambition, the spirit of party, or some indirect principle, concealed
perhaps in great measure from persons themselves. And though it is our
business and our duty to endeavor, within the bounds of veracity and
justice, to contribute to the ease, convenience, and even cheerfulness
and diversion of our fellow-creatures: yet, from our short views, it is
greatly uncertain, whether this endeavor will, in particular instances,
produce an overbalance of happiness upon the whole; since so many and
distant things must come into the account. And that which makes it our
duty is, that there is some appearance that it will, and no positive
appearance sufficient to balance this, on the contrary side; and also,
that such benevolent endeavor is a cultivation of that most excellent
of all virtuous principles, the active principle of benevolence.

However, though veracity, as well as justice, is to be our rule of
life; it must be added, otherwise a snare will be laid in the way of
some plain men, that the use of common forms of speech, generally
understood, cannot be falsehood; and in general, that there can be no
designed falsehood, without designing to deceive. It must likewise be
observed, that in numberless cases, a man may be under the strictest
obligations to what he foresees will deceive, without his intending it.
For it is impossible not to foresee, that the words and actions of men,
in different ranks and employments, and of different educations, will
perpetually be mistaken by each other. And it cannot but be so, while
they will judge with the utmost carelessness, as they daily do, of what
they are not, perhaps, enough informed to be competent judges of, even
though they considered it with great attention.




FOOTNOTES


[1] Among these were _Jones_, author of the admirable Treatise on the
Canon of the New Testament: _Lardner_, _Maddox_, _Chandler_, Archbishop
_Secker_, &c.

[2] Sermon at Spittle, on Abraham’s trial.

[3] Among them were CUDWORTH, born 1617; “Intel. Syst. of the
Universe:” BOYLE, 1626; “Things above Reason:” STILLINGFLEET, 1635;
“Letters to a Deist:” Sir I. NEWTON, 1642; “Observations on Prophecy:”
LESLIE, 1650; “Short Method with Deists:” LOWTH, 1661, Vindic. of
the Divine Author of the Bible: KING, 1669; “Origin of Evil:” SAM.
CLARK, 1675; “Evidences of Nat. and Rev. Religion:” WATERLAND, 1683;
“Scripture Vindicated:” LARDNER, 1684; “Credibility of Gospel History:”
LELAND, 1691; “View of Deistical Writers,” and “Advantage and Necessity
of Rev.:” CHANDLER, 1693; “Definition of Christianity,” on “Prophecy,”
&c.: WARBURTON, 1698; “Divine Leg. of Moses;” Bishop NEWTON, 1704; “On
the Prophecies:” WATSON, 1737; “Apology for Christianity,” (against
Gibbon,) and also “Apology for the Bible,” (against Paine.)

[4] MCINTOSH: “Progress of Ethical Philosophy.”

[5] BROUGHAM: “Disc. on Nat. Theology.”

[6] Verisimile.

[7] [These three ways of being “like,” are very distinct from each
other. The first is equivalent to a logical induction. The second
produces belief, because the same evidence made us believe in a similar
case. The third is just an analogy, in the popular sense of the term.]

[8] The story is told by Mr. Locke in the Chapter of Probability.

[9] [This is good common sense, and men always act thus if prudent.
But it is not enough thus to act in the matter of salvation. “He that
_believeth_ not shall be damned:” Mark xvi. 16. “He that _believeth_
hath everlasting life:” John iii. 36. “With the heart man _believeth_
unto righteousness:” Rom. x. 10. Belief is part of the sinner’s _duty_
in submitting himself to God; and not merely a question of prudence.]

[10] See Part II. chap. vi.

[11] Philocal. p. 23, Ed. Cant.

[12] [Some of these speculations, carried to the full measure of
absurdity and impiety, may be found in Bayle’s great “Historical and
Critical Dictionary.” See as instances, the articles ORIGEN, MANICHÆUS,
PAULICIANS.]

[13] Ch. i.

[14] Ch. ii.

[15] Ch. iii.

[16] Ch. iv.

[17] Ch. v.

[18] Ch. vi.

[19] Ch. vii.

[20] Part II. Ch. i.

[21] Ch. ii.

[22] Ch. iii.

[23] Ch. iv.

[24] Ch. v.

[25] Ch. vi. vii.

[26] Ch. viii.

[27] [This chapter Dr. Chalmers regards as the least satisfactory in
the book: not because lacking in just analogies, but because infected
with the obscure metaphysics of that age. His reasoning, however, only
serves to show that B. has perhaps made too much of the argument from
the indivisibility of consciousness; and by no means that he does not
fairly use it.

We certainly cannot object that the subject of identity is not
made plain. Who has explained identity, or motion, or cohesion, or
crystallization, or any thing? Locke goes squarely at the subject of
personal identity, (see Essay, ch. 27,) but has rendered us small aid.
His definition is, “Existence itself, which determines a being of any
sort, to a particular time and place, incommunicable to two beings of
the same kind.” I had rather define it “the uninterrupted continuance
of being.” What ceases to exist, cannot again exist: for then it would
exist after it had ceased to exist, and would have existed before it
existed. Locke makes _consciousness_ to constitute identity, and argues
that a man and a person are not the same; and that hence if I kill a
man, but was not conscious of what I did, or have utterly forgotten,
I am not the same person. Watts shows up this notion of Locke very
ludicrously.

Butler, in his “Dissertation,” urges that consciousness _presupposes_
identity, as knowledge presupposes truth. On Locke’s theory, no person
would have existed any earlier than the period to which his memory
extends. We cannot suppose the soul made up of many consciousnesses,
nor could memory, if material, spread itself over successive years of
life.]

[28] I say _kind_ of presumption or probability; for I do not mean to
affirm that there is the same _degree_ of conviction, that our living
powers will continue after death, as there is, that our substances will.

[29] _Destruction of living powers_, is a manner of expression
unavoidably ambiguous; and may signify either _the destruction of a
living being, so as that the same living being shall be incapable of
ever perceiving or acting again at all_; or _the destruction of those
means and instruments by which it is capable of its present life, of
its present state of perception and of action_. It is here used in the
former sense. When it is used in the latter, the epithet _present_ is
added. The loss of a man’s eye is a destruction of living powers in the
latter sense. But we have no reason to think the destruction of living
powers, in the former sense, to be possible. We have no more reason to
think a being endued with living powers, ever loses them during its
whole existence, than to believe that a stone ever acquires them.

[30] [The next paragraph indicates that Butler does not, as Chalmers
thinks, consider this argument as “handing us over to an absolute
demonstration.” It just places all arguments for and against the soul’s
future life, in that balanced condition, which leaves us to learn the
fact from revelation, free from presumptions _against_ its truth. This
view of the case entirely relieves the objection as to the future life
of brutes; and shows how entirely we must rely on revelation, as to the
future, both of man and beast.]

[31] [Dodwell had published a book, in which he argues that human
souls are not _naturally_ immortal, but become so, by the power of the
Holy Ghost, in regeneration. Dr. Clarke replied. The controversy was
continued by Collins. Dr. C. wrote four tracts on the subject.

These “presumptions” form the base of materialism, and hence the denial
of a future state. Surely, thoughts and feelings, if material, have
extension. But can any one conceive of love a foot long, or anger
an inch thick? How superior to the gloomy mists of modern infidels
have even pagans been! Cicero makes Cato say, “The soul is a simple,
uncompounded substance, without parts or mixture: it cannot be divided,
and so cannot perish.” And in another place, “I never could believe
that the soul lost its senses by escaping from senseless matter; or
that such a release will not enlarge and improve its powers;” and
again, “I am persuaded that I shall only begin truly to live, when I
cease to live in this world,” Xenophon reports Cyrus as saying, in his
last moments, “O my sons! do not imagine that when death has taken me
from you, I shall cease to exist.”]

[32] See Dr. Clarke’s Letter to Mr. Dodwell, and the defences of it.

[33] [As every particle of our bodies is changed within seven years,
an average life would take us through many such changes. If the mind
changes with the body, it would be unjust for an old man to be made to
suffer for the sins of his youth. To escape this, the materialist is
driven to affirm that _the whole_ is not altered, though every particle
be changed.

This argument from the constant flux is irresistible. It proves our
identity, and that matter and mind are not the same. Does it not
also destroy all presumption that the Ego cannot exist without this
particular body?]

[34] See Dissertation I.

[35] [The mind affects the body, as much as the body does the mind.
Love, anger, &c. quicken the circulation; fear checks it; terror may
stop it altogether. Mania is as often produced by moral, as by physical
causes, and hence of late moral means are resorted to for cure. The
brain of a maniac, seldom shows, on dissection, any derangement. But
this does not prove that there was no _functional_ derangement.]

[36] [“S. What shall we say, then, of the shoemaker? That he cuts with
his instrument only, or with his hands also? A. With his hands also.
S. Does he use his eyes also, in making shoes? A. Yes. S. But are we
agreed that he who uses, and what he uses, are different? A. Yes. S.
The shoemaker, then, and harper, are different from the hands and eyes
they use? A. It appears so. S. Does a man then _use_ his whole body? A.
Certainly. S. But he who uses, and that which he uses are different.
A. Yes. S. A man then is something different from his own body.” PLAT.
ALCIBI. PRIM. p. 129, D. Stallb. Ed.

“It may easily be perceived that the _mind_ both sees and hears, and
not those parts which are, so to speak, windows of the mind.” “Neither
are we bodies; nor do I, while speaking this to thee, speak to thy
body.” “Whatever is done by thy mind, is done by thee.” CICERO, Tusc.
Disput. I. 20, 46 and 22, 52.

“The mind of each man is the man; not that figure which may be pointed
out with the finger.” CIC., de Rep. b. 6, s. 24.]

[37] [Butler’s argument, if advanced for _proof_ would prove too much,
not only as to brutes but as to man; for it would prove pre-existence.
And this is really the tenet, (_i.e._ transmigration,) of those who
arrive at the doctrine of immortality only by philosophy. Philosophy
cannot establish the doctrine of a future state, nor can it afford any
presumptions _against_ either a future or a pre-existent state.

Nothing is gained by insisting that reason teaches the true doctrine
of the soul; any more than there would be by insisting that by it
we learned the doctrine of a trinity, or atonement. Philosophy does
teach that He who can _create_, under infinite diversity of forms, can
_sustain_ existence, in any mode he pleases.

The reader who chooses to look further into the discussion as to
the immortality of brutes, will find it spread out in POLIGNAC’S
Anti-Lucretius, and still more in BAYLE’S Dictionary, under the
articles PEREIRA, and RORARIUS. The topic is also discussed in DES
CARTES on the Passions: BAXTER on The Nature of the Soul: HUME’S
Essays, Essay 9: SEARCH’S Light of Nature: CHEYNE’S Philosophical
Principles: WAGSTAFF on the Immortality of Brutes: EDWARDS’ Critical
and Philosophical Exercitations: WATT’S Essays, Essay 9: COLLIBER’S
Enquiry: LOCKE on the Understanding, b. 2, ch. ix.: DITTON on the
Resurrection: WILLIS De Anima Brutæ.]

[38] [It is as absurd to suppose that a brain thinks, as that an eye
sees, or a finger feels. The eye no more sees, than the telescope or
spectacles. If the _nerve_ be paralyzed, there is no vision, though
the eye be perfect. A few words spoken or read, may at once deprive of
sight, or knock a person down.

The mind sometimes survives the body. Swift, utterly helpless from
palsy, retained his faculties. In some, the body survives the mind.
MORGAGNI, HALLER, BONNET, and others, have proved that there is no
part of the brain, not even the pineal gland, which has not been found
destroyed by disease, where there had been no hallucination of mind,
nor any suspicion of such disease, during life.]

[39] Pp. 84, 85.

[40] [We are told by sceptics that “mind is the result of a curious and
complicated organization.” A mere jumble of words! But were the mind
material, there is no evidence that death would destroy it: for we do
not see that death has any power over matter. The body remains the very
same as it does in a swoon, till _chemical_ changes begin.]

[41] There are three distinct questions, relating to a future life,
here considered: Whether death be the destruction of living agents;
if not, Whether it be the destruction of their _present_ powers of
reflection, as it certainly is the destruction of their present
powers of sensation; and if not, Whether it be the suspension, or
discontinuance of the exercise of these present reflecting powers. Now,
if there be no reason to believe the last, there will be, if that were
possible, less for the next, and less still for the first.

[42] This, according to Strabo, was the opinion of the Brachmans,
νομίζειν μὲν γὰρ δὴ τὸν μὲν ἐνθάδε βίον, ὡς ἂν ἀκμὴν κυομένων εἶναι·
τὸν δὲ θάνατον, γένεσιν εἰς τὸν ὄντως βίον, καὶ τὸν εὐδαίμονα τοῖς
φιλοσοφήσασι· Lib. xv. p. 1039, Ed. Amst. 1707. [“For they think that
the present life is like that of those who are just ready to be born;
and that death is a birth into the real life, and a happy one to those
who have practised philosophy.”] To which opinion perhaps Antoninus may
allude in these words, ὡς νῦν περιμένεις, πότε ἔμβρυον ἐκ τῆς γαστρὸς
τῆς γυναικός σου ἐξέλθῃ, οὕτως ἐκδέχεσθαι, τὴν ὥραν ὲν ᾗ τὸ ψυχάριόν
σου τοῦ ἐλύτρου τούτου ἐκπεσεῖται. Lib. ix. c. 3. [As this last passage
may, by some, be thought indelicate, it is left untranslated.]

[43] [The _increase_ of a force in any direction, cannot of itself
_change_ that direction. An arrow shot from a bow, towards an object,
does not aim at some other object, by being shot with more force.]

[44] [Our nature will _always_ be ours, or we should cease to be
ourselves, and become something else. And this nature is _social_.
Every one feels, at least sometimes, that he is not complete in himself
for the production of happiness; and so looks round for that which
may fit his wants, and supply what he cannot produce from within.
Hence amusements, of a thousand kinds, are resorted to, and still
more, society. Society is a want of the mind; as food is of the body.
Society, such as perfectly suits our real nature, and calls out, in a
right manner, its every attribute, would secure our perfect happiness.
But Such society must include God.]

[45] See Part II. chap. ii. and Part II. chap. iv.

[46] [Objections and difficulties belong to all subjects, in _some_
of their bearings. Ingenious and uncandid men may start others, which
care and candor may remove. It is therefore no proof of weakness in a
doctrine, that it is attacked with objections, both real and merely
plausible. Error has been spread by two opposite means:--a dogmatic
insisting on doubtful points, and an unteachable cavilling at certain
truth.]

[47] Part I. chap. vii.

[48] [Our relation to God is “even necessary,” because we are his
creatures: so that the relation must endure so long as we endure. But
our relations to other creatures are contingent, and may be changed or
abrogated.]

[49] Pp. 93, 94.

[50] [“The terms nature, and power of nature, and course of nature,
are but empty words, and merely mean that a thing occurs usually or
frequently. The raising of a human body out of the earth we call a
miracle, the generation of one in the ordinary way we call natural, for
no other reason than because one is usual the other unusual. Did men
usually rise out of the earth like corn we should call that natural.”
Dr. CLARKE, Controv. with Leibnitz.]

[51] [That man consists of parts, is evident; and the use of each part,
and of the whole man, is open to investigation. In examining any part
we learn what it _is_, and what it is _to do_: _e.g._ the eye, the
hand, the heart. So of mental faculties; memory is to preserve ideas,
shame to deter us from things shameful, compassion to induce us to
relieve distress. In observing our whole make, we may see an ultimate
design,--viz.: not particular animal gratifications, but intellectual
and moral improvement, and happiness by that means. If this be our end,
it is our duty. To disregard it, must bring punishment; for shame,
anguish, remorse, are by the laws of mind, the sequences of sin.

See LAW’S Notes on King’s Origin of Evil.]

[52] [It is almost amazing that philosophy, because it discovers the
laws of matter, should be placed in antagonism with the Bible which
reveals a superintending Providence. The Bible itself teaches this very
result of philosophy,--viz.: that the world is governed by _general
laws_. See Prov. viii. 29: Job. xxxviii. 12, 24, 31, 33: Ps. cxix. 90,
91: Jer. xxxi. 35, and xxxiii. 25.]

[53] See Part II. chap. vi.

[54] Part II. chap. vi.

[55] The general consideration of a future state of punishment, most
evidently belongs to the subject of natural religion. But if any of
these reflections should be thought to relate more peculiarly to this
doctrine, as taught in Scripture, the reader is desired to observe,
that Gentile writers, both moralists and poets, speak of the future
punishment of the wicked, both as to the duration and degree of it,
in a like manner of expression and of description, as the Scripture
does. So that all which can positively be asserted to be matter of mere
revelation, with regard to this doctrine, seems to be, that the great
distinction between the righteous and the wicked, shall be made at the
end of this world; that each shall _then_ receive according to his
deserts. Reason did, as it well might, conclude that it should, finally
and upon the whole, be well with the righteous, and ill with the
wicked: but it could not be determined upon any principles of reason,
whether human creatures might not have been appointed to pass through
other states of life and being, before that distributive justice should
finally and effectually take place. Revelation teaches us, that the
next state of things after the present is appointed for the execution
of this justice; that it shall be no longer delayed; but _the mystery
of God_, the great mystery of his suffering vice and confusion to
prevail, _shall then be finished_; and he will _take to him his great
power and will reign_, by rendering to every one according to his works.

[56] [Our language furnishes no finer specimens of the argument
analogical. Butler here seizes the very points, which are most
plausible and most insisted on, as showing the harshness and
unreasonableness of Christianity; and overthrows them at a stroke by
simply directing attention to the same things, in the universally
observed course of nature.]

[57] Chap. i.

[58] See chaps. iv. and vi.

[59] [This chapter, more than any other, carries the force of
positive argument. If in this world, we have _proofs_ that God is
a moral governor, then in order to evince that we shall be under
moral government _hereafter_, we have only to supply an intermediate
consideration,--viz.: that God, as such, must be unchangeable. The
argument, as just remarked, assumes a substantive form, because
admitted facts, as to this world, exhibiting the very _principles_ on
which God’s government goes at present, compel us not only to _suppose_
that the principles of God will remain, but to _believe_ so.]

[60] Chap. ii.

[61] The objections against religion, from the evidence of it not
being universal, nor so strong as might possibly have been, may be
urged against natural religion, as well as against revealed. And
therefore the consideration of them belongs to the first part of this
treatise, as well as the second. But as these objections are chiefly
urged against revealed religion, I choose to consider them in the
second part. And the answer to them there, ch. vi., as urged against
Christianity, being almost equally applicable to them as urged against
the religion of nature; to avoid repetition, the reader is referred to
that chapter.

[62] Dissertation II.

[63] Chap. vi.

[64] See Lord Shaftesbury’s Inquiry concerning Virtue, Part II.

[65] [At the foundation of moral improvement, lies the conviction
that what is right, is our happiness, no less than our duty. This
again is based upon a conviction that God governs justly; and has all
power over us for good or evil. As creation is full of the evidences
of _design_, so is Providence. And as the human mind shows, in its
structure, the most exquisite marks of design, so the government of
mind shows a final object for all our faculties. Among the attributes
of mind we observe, conspicuous, a disposition to seek ends, lay plans,
and sacrifice present indulgence to future and greater good: and a
facility in learning how to subordinate one thing to another, so as
to secure success in our plans. This, with conscience to approve or
disapprove our modes, constitutes an evident _adaptedness_ to a moral
government on the part of God; and would be worse than superfluous, if
there be no such government. Every rule of action, deduced by reason
from the light of nature, may fairly be regarded as God’s law; and the
inconveniences resulting from wrong actions, are God’s retributions.
These retributions, felt or observed, are divine teachings, saying,
emphatically, if you act thus you shall receive thus. We do actually
so judge, in relation to physics. Every rule of motion, distance,
gravitation, heat, electricity, &c. &c., is received as God’s law; and
we would deem it insane to act in opposition.]

[66] [Consult CAPP on the Gov. of God: TWISSE Vindiciæ Prov. Dei:
WITTICHII Excre. Theol.: DWIGHT’S Theol.: MARTINIUS de Gubernatione
Mundi: LIEFCHILD on Providence: MORTON on do.: SHERLOCK on do.:
RUTHERFORD on do.: and the Sermons of Thos. Leland, Porteus, Topping,
Hunt, Davies, Horseley, South, Wisheart, Seed, Collings, and Doddridge.]

[67] Chap. ii.

[68] [In the structure of man, physical and mental, we find no
contrivances for disease or pain, so that in general those who conform
to the laws of their being, enjoy happiness; and suffering is chiefly
the result of our own conduct. But, as without revelation we could only
learn the evil of vice, by its effects, and would often learn it too
late to retrieve our affairs, or our souls’ peace, God has in mercy
given forth his teachings, by which, _beforehand_, we may know the
effects of actions.]

[69] See Dissertation II.

[70] [It was contended by MANDEVILLE in his “_Fable of the Bees_,”
that private vices, as luxury for instance, are often conducive to the
well-being of society. This idea is fully refuted by WARBURTON, Divine
Legation of Moses, b. 1: BERKELEY, Minute Philosopher, Dial. 2: and by
BROWN, Characteristics, Ess. 2.]

[71] [A strong illustration of this distinction is seen in the
“delivering up” of our Savior to be crucified. As to the mere act of
delivering up, we find it referred, =1.= To God the Father, John iii.
16: Acts ii. 23: Rom. viii. 32. =2.= To Christ himself, Eph. v. 2, and
v. 25, &c. In this last passage it is literally _delivered himself_.
=3.= To the Jewish rulers, Luke xx. 20: Mark xii. 12. =4.= To Pontius
Pilate, Matt. xxvii. 26: Mark xv. 15: John xix. 6. =5.= To Judas, Matt.
xxvi. 15: Zec. xi. 12.

As to the _mere act_, Judas and Pilate did just what God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus did. But how infinitely unlike the _qualities_ of
the act!]

[72] [“When one supposes he is about to die, there comes over him a
fear and anxiety about things in regard to which he felt none before.
For the stories which are told about _Hades_, that such, as have
practised wrong, must there suffer punishment, although made light of
for a while, these torment the soul lest they should be true. But he
who is conscious of innocence, has a pleasant and good hope, which will
support old age.” PLATO, Respub. i. s. 5.]

[73] See Dissertation II.

[74] [Aside from revelation, our ideas of the divine attributes must
be derived from a knowledge of our own. Among these is our moral
sense, which constrains us to consider right and wrong as an immutable
distinction, and moral worth as our highest excellence. Hence we
ascribe perfect virtue to God. It does not follow from such reasoning,
that we form a Deity after our own conceptions, for it is but the
argument _a fortiori_, “He that formed the eye, shall he not see? He
that teacheth man knowledge, shall he not know?” Ps. xciv. 9. We do not
conceive of a Deity who sees just as we do; but that _he sees_, for he
makes sight. So we infer that he has moral attributes, because we have
them, from him.

This point is not sufficiently pressed upon infidels. They readily
acknowledge God’s physical attributes, because the argument is
addressed to their _understanding_, but deny his moral ones, because
their _hearts_ are hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.]

[75] [It is easy to see that the occasional disadvantages of virtue,
are no less conducive to moral excellence, than its being generally
advantageous. In view of its general advantages, we are virtuous with a
proper and commanded view to our instinctive desire for happiness. In
face of its disadvantages, we cultivate virtue for its own sake.]

[76] [The common remark, “virtue brings its own reward,” is true
only with qualifications. The apostles, as to _this_ life, were the
most miserable of men: (1 Cor. xv. 9.) Virtue does not _always_
bring earthly rewards. The grand support of the good is drawn from
considerations of that future state which the infidel denies. Observe,
1. We cannot suppose that God would so construct man, as that his
principal comfort and reward for virtue, is a delusion. 2. Very good
persons are often beset with painful doubts and fears, as to their
future safety. Would God allow such doubts, if the expectation of
future happiness were the _only_ reward of virtue? 3. This reward, at
best, is private; but for the encouragement of virtue, it must have
_obvious_ triumphs.

On the other hand, bad men grow callous to the rebukes of conscience,
so that great sinners suffer less from remorse than small ones, and
what is worse, owe their tranquillity to their guilt. Again, he who
kills a good man, wholly _deprives_ him of his only reward, if this
life alone gives it. And the villain who kills himself, escapes his
only punishment.

Virtuous persons, in the strong language of ROBERT HALL,[A] would be
“the _only_ persons who are wholly disappointed of their object; the
only persons who (by a fatal and irreparable mistake), expecting an
imaginary happiness in an imaginary world, lose their only opportunity
of enjoying those present pleasures, of which others avail themselves;
dooming themselves to grasp at shadows, while they neglect the
substance, and harassed with a perpetual struggle against their natural
propensities and passions, and all in vain!”

[A] Sermon on the Vanity of Man.]

[77] [Because, so soon as any community, or collection of persons,
conclude a man to be wholly vicious in his course, and without any
restraint of conscience, he is at once shorn of his influence, and will
soon be stripped of all power of mischief. On the other hand, we see
the might of virtue unarmed with power, in Luther, in Roger Williams,
in Wm. Penn, and innumerable other instances.]

[78] Isa. lx. 21.

[79] P. 109.

[80] P. 110, &c.

[81] P. 111, &c.

[82] P. 118, &c.

[83] See this proof drawn out briefly, ch. vi.

[84] [This chapter is one of many attempts to account for the
mixture of suffering and enjoyment in this world; and demands close
examination both of its theory and its arguments. The student may
consult, as he has opportunity, MUSÆI Disput.: HOLTZSFUSII Disp. de
Lapsu Prim. Hominum: SELDEN de Laps. Angelorum: STAPFERI Inst.: WITSII
Econom. Fœd.: BATE’S Harmony of the Divine Attrib.: CALCOTT on the
Fall: SHUCKFORD on the Creation of Man: MANTON’S Sermons: SOUTH’S
do.: TOPLADY’S do.: PEARSON on the Creed: LE CLERC’S Diss.: HENLY’S
Dissert.: KENNICOTT on the Tree of Life: and FABRICIUS de Primo Peccato
Angelorum Lapsorum.]

[85] [The _evils_ of life, are not to be regarded as entering,
necessarily, into God’s plan of probation; and they are not here so
presented. The Scriptures show that _all_ suffering is either punitive,
or castigatory. Man at first was to be tried by temptations, not by
sufferings.]

[86] Chap. ii.

[87] See Sermons preached at the _Rolle_, 1726, 2d ed. p. 205, &c.
Pref. p. 25, &c. Serm. p. 21, &c.

[88] [“If we persist in our objection, notwithstanding these analogies,
then should we conclude, either that we are under the regimen of an
unrighteous Deity, or that there is no Deity at all.”--Dr. CHALMERS.]

[89] [Shall _we_ be of such? Shall we forget or disregard the great
fact that when death has transferred us to other conditions, we, our
proper selves, will remain? No longer, indeed, united with flesh and
blood, surrounded with houses, lands, business, or enjoyments, such as
the present, _but still ourselves_. Still with wants to be supplied,
desires to be gratified, and capacities to be employed and developed!]

[90] Part II. chap. v.

[91] [This is one of those passages, remarked on in our introduction,
as a statement not properly explained or guarded. We cannot suppose the
author, to have overlooked the great fact of man’s fall and corruption.
That the argument properly considered, stands good, is the verdict of
such a man as CHALMERS. After speaking of human helplessness in matters
of religion, he says, “There is nothing in this [helplessness] to break
the analogies on which to found the negative vindication that forms
the great and undoubted achievement of this volume. The analogy lies
here:--that if a man wills to obtain prosperity in this life, he may,
if observant of the rules which experience and wisdom prescribe, in
general, make it good. And if he wills to attain blessedness in the
next life, he shall, if observant of what religion prescribes, most
certainly make it good; in conformity with the declaration, ‘he that
seeketh findeth.’”]

[92] [It comes to this:--good things, in this life, are not forced
upon us; for we may refuse them, or turn any of them into evils. Nor
are they offered for our mere acceptance: but only as the _results_ of
self-control and pains-taking. So is it, as to heaven.]

[93] [They _are_ an answer, but a cavil remains,--viz.: “the difference
between temporal and eternal things, is so vast that the cases are not
analogous.” Fairly considered, the cases are analogous, differing only
in _degree_, and not at all in principle. What would be wrong on a
great scale, is wrong on a small one.

Perhaps the analogy may be pressed further. As the happiness and life
of some animals, may be sacrificed for the benefit of man, why may
not the happiness and life of some men, be sacrificed for the good of
innumerable beings of a higher order, who witness the affairs of this
earth? It would but be securing “the greatest good of the greatest
number.” No analogies could _teach_ this, for analogies of course teach
nothing. But if the Scriptures contained this doctrine, immensely more
repugnant than that which our author is here defending, would analogy
offer repellant presumptions?]

[94] [That is, the son of Sirac, who says, “All things are double,
one against another; and He hath made nothing imperfect: one thing
established the good of another:” Ecclesiasticus xlii. 24.]

[95] [Consult MILLMAN’S Hist. of Christ, vol. i.: PRIESTLEY’S
Institutes of Nat. and Rev. Rel., vol. i. ch. i.: and WHATELY’S Pol.
Econ., sec. 5.]

[96] [We are too apt to overlook the effect of actions on the actor;
(which is often the chief effect) in improving or impairing his
own powers. A razor used to cut wood or stone, is not only put to
an improper use, but spoiled for the use which is proper. But this
is a faint illustration. The razor may be sharpened again; but how
shall we restore a blunted sensibility, an enfeebled judgment, or a
vitiated appetite? Our wrong-doing inflicts worse results on ourselves
than on our victims; and the evil may spread disaster over our whole
future. Hence the young make a fatal blunder when they suppose that an
occasional indulgence in impropriety may be compatible with general
welfare, and improvement. Instead of balancing the pros and cons of a
particular act, in the scale of utility or pleasure, they should mark
well its effects on themselves. See the description of how an upright
being may fall; in a subsequent part of this chapter.]

[97] [“It might seem, at first sight, that if our state hereafter
presented no temptations to falsehood, injustice, &c., our habit of
indulging these vices here would be no disqualification for such
a state; and our forming the contrary habits no qualification.
But _habits_ of veracity, justice, &c. are not merely securities
against temptations to the contrary, but needful for conserving the
_principles_ of love of truth, justice, &c. As our happiness depends
upon _the ratio_ between our circumstances and our dispositions, our
happiness, in a state where things are ordered so as to give no scope
for the practice of falsehood, injustice, &c., _must depend on our
having formed a love for their opposites_. Besides, the circumstances
of the future life may be such as only to remove temptations from
characters formed by such moral discipline as we undergo in this life,
and not all things that could be temptations to any one.”--PROF.
FITZGERALD.]

[98] It may be thought, that a sense of interest would as effectually
restrain creatures from doing wrong. But if by a _sense of interest_
is meant a speculative conviction or belief, that such and such
indulgence would occasion them greater uneasiness, upon the whole, than
satisfaction; it is contrary to present experience to say, that this
sense of interest is sufficient to restrain them from thus indulging
themselves. And if by a _sense of interest_ is meant a practical regard
to what is upon the whole our happiness; this is not only coincident
with the principle of virtue or moral rectitude, but is a part of the
idea itself. And it is evident this reasonable self-love wants to
be improved, as really as any principle in our nature. For we daily
see it overmatched, not only by the more boisterous passions, but by
curiosity, shame, love of imitation, by any thing, even indolence:
especially if the interest, the temporal interest, suppose, which
is the end of such self-love, be at a distance. So greatly are
profligate men mistaken, when they affirm they are wholly governed
by interestedness and self-love; and so little cause is there for
moralists to disclaim this principle.--See p. 131.

[99] [Discipline is mainly promoted by a careful regard to acts of
small individual moment. The subjecting of trivial acts to moral
considerations, is the sure, and the only mode of self-culture.
These acts are embryo habits, and we may often see clearly the moral
character of a habit, when the single act seems indifferent. Thus
viewed, the importance of single acts will seldom seem small. A single
cigar, one glass of wine for convivial purposes, one story told with
exaggerations, may change the complexion of our character, and of our
whole destiny!

It is doing or refusing to do, from a law-abiding regard to
consequences, that constitutes self-discipline. Papists wholly err
in teaching the repression of bodily desires as in itself virtuous.
Indulgence may be either an obstacle or an aid to moral progress,
according to our reason for indulgence. When we can repress an appetite
or passion whenever indulgence would be wrong, its mastery over us is
broken; and when the passions and appetites act rightly, from force
of virtuous habit, without direct volition, discipline is complete.
Ascetic acts are only useful as _means_, and so long as they are
_ascetic_ (askesis) are proofs of imperfect obedience. Discipline is
good only _as_ discipline; and when complete, changes from a struggle
between principle and inclination, to a spontaneous habit, and
permanent mental peace.]

[100] [Chalmers objects to this hypothetical fall of man, that it wants
harmony with the Scripture account. But I do not see the force of the
objection. Butler _of course_ does not copy the Scripture account, for
he would then depart from the aim and nature of his book. The Bible
says man fell _suddenly_, no less in his state than in his character.
Butler says that we could not reason out _how much_ disorder and
damage would ensue from the first sin: and in saying this, avoids any
incongruity with the Mosaic account, which tells us how much. What B.
says of the formation of habit, by repeated transgressions, certainly
cannot be gainsayed.

Adam “died,” the very day he ate the forbidden fruit. The sinner
“lives” the very day he believes on the only-begotten Son of God.
Increase of guilt, or growth in grace are predicable in both instances.
In both also there is an instant transition into a new relationship
with God.]

[101] [A forced or reluctant obedience is wholly incompatible with
earthly happiness; but may, in the highest degree promote our _future_
happiness. It will not _long_ mar our happiness, even here; because
being based on principle, and established by habit, it will, in process
of time, be superseded by prompt and pleasurable submission. Thus a
person _habitually_ virtuous, is hardly conscious of self-denial; a
fact noticed by Aristotle. “He who abstains from bodily pleasures and
delights, is virtuous in this very abstinence; but he who is troubled
by it is undisciplined.” Ethic. Nic. ii. 3.]

[102] P. 145.

[103] [The student should learn to distinguish between the _kinds_
of necessity. There is--1. “Logical necessity,” which requires the
admission of a consequent to a premise 2. “Moral necessity,” which
requires means in order to ends. “Physical necessity,” which is the
compulsory connection of sequences to antecedents, in the material
world. 4. “Metaphysical necessity,” which belongs to God only, as
existing eternally and immutably. All these exist and operate, and by
them we govern ourselves.

But there are various other kinds of necessity, erroneous and
pernicious, which may be grouped under two heads:--1. “Atheistic,”
sometimes called the Democritic, which ascribes all things to the
mechanical laws of matter. 2. “Theistic,” which admits the existence of
God, but denies to him moral character, and makes him the arbitrary and
only agent in the universe, and creatures not responsible. See COLLINGS
on Providence, PRICE’S Dissertations, RUTHERFORD on Providence,
CHARNOCK’S Sermons, and WHATELY’S Logic.]

[104] P. 157.

[105] P. 158.

[106] [HUME says, “though man, in truth, is a necessary agent, having
all his actions determined by fixed and immutable laws, yet, this being
concealed from him, he acts with the conviction of being a free agent.”

Which is the same as to say that God intended to conceal from men an
important fact, involving the whole subject of right and wrong, but Mr.
Hume found him out!]

[107] By _will_ and _character_ is meant that which, in speaking of
men, we should express, not only by these words, but also by the words
_temper_, _taste_, _dispositions_, _practical principles_: _that whole
frame of mind, from whence we act in one manner rather than another_.

[108] Chap. ii.

[109] P. 157, &c.

[110] Chap. ii.

[111] Dissert. II.

[112] Serm. 2, at the _Rolls_.

[113] Dissert. II.

[114] However, I am far from intending to deny, that the will of God
is determined, by what is fit, by the right and reason of the case;
though one chooses to decline matters of such abstract speculation,
and to speak with caution when one does speak of them. But if it be
intelligible to say, that _it is fit and reasonable for every one to
consult his own happiness_, then _fitness of action, or the right and
reason of the case_, is an intelligible manner of speaking. And it
seems as inconceivable, to suppose God to approve one course of action,
or one end, preferably to another, which yet his acting at all from
design implies that he does, without supposing somewhat prior in that
end, to be the ground of the preference; as to suppose him to discern
an abstract proposition to be true, without supposing somewhat prior in
it, to be the ground of the discernment. It doth not therefore appear,
that moral right is any more relative to perception, than abstract
truth is; or that it is any more improper to speak of the fitness and
lightness of actions and ends, as founded in the nature of things, than
to speak of abstract truth, as thus founded.

[115] P. 118.

[116] P. 110, &c.

[117] Chap. ii.

[118] Dissertation II.

[119] Pp. 68, 71.

[120] Serm. 8th, at the _Rolls_.

[121] [Consult, in favor of the doctrine of necessity, atheistical
writers generally; such as Fichte, Hegel, D’Holback, Comte, Crousse,
Martineau, Leroux, and Holyoake--also, BELSHAM’S Essays, COLLINS on
Liberty, CROMBIE on Phil. Necessity, HOBBES’ Liberty and Necessity, and
Leviathan, PRIESTLEY on Liberty, HARTLEY on Man, and EDWARDS on the
Will.

Against the doctrine, see BEATTIE’S Works, Part 2; Replies to Hobbes
by BRAMHALL and LAWSON; Replies to Priestley by PALMER and BRYANT;
GROVE on Liberty; CLARKE’S Sermons at the Boyle Lectures; GIBB’S
Contemplations; KING’S Origin of Evil; REID on the Mind; WATTS on
Liberty; HARRIS’ Boyle Lectures; JACKSON’S Defence; BUTTERWORTH on
Moral Government.]

[122] [MAIMONIDES makes use of the following similitude. “Suppose one
of good understanding, whose mother had died soon after he was born to
be brought up on an island, where he saw no human being but his father
nor the female of any beast. This person when grown up inquires how men
are produced. He is told that they are bred in the womb of one of the
same species and that while in the womb we are very small and there
move and are nourished. The young man inquires whether when thus in
the womb we did not eat, and drink, and breathe, as we do now, and is
answered, No. Then he denies it, and offers demonstration that it could
not be so. For says he, if either of us cease to breathe our life is
gone; and how could we have lived close shut up in a womb for months?
So if we cease to eat and drink, we die, and how could the child live
so for months? and thus he satisfies himself that it is _impossible_
man should come into existence in such a manner.”]

[123] [Let us imagine a person to be taken to view some great
historical painting, before which hangs a thick curtain. The attendant
raises the curtain a few inches. Can the spectator, from the unmeaning
strip of foreground, derive any conception of the figures yet
concealed? Much less is he able to criticize their proportions, or
beauty, or perspective, or even the design of the artist? The small
fragment of a tree, or flower, or animal, or building, may seem quite
unmeaning and even ugly, though the whole would present beauty,
fitness, or grandeur. Now the portion of God’s dominions within our
survey, is as utterly insignificant, compared to the universe, and its
interminable duration, as, an atom compared to a planet or a man’s age
to eternity.

The concluding observations of this chapter, abundantly remove every
difficulty as to such ignorance being as valid against the _proofs_ of
religion, as it is against _objections_ to it.]

[124] [No truly philosophical mind can be arrogant; because the
wider the range of thought, the greater are the discoveries of our
ignorance. The young student may well hesitate to decide points, on
which the profoundest thinkers take opposite sides, and when conscious
of inability intrust himself to the guidance of those whose lives are
best.]

[125] Pp. 177, 178.

[126] P. 173, &c.

[127] P. 175.

[128] Pp. 72, 73.

[129] P. 68, and Part II. chap. vi.

[130] Serm. at the _Rolls_, p. 312, 2d ed.

[131] P. 172, &c.

[132] See Part II. ch. ii.

[133] P. 173.

[134] [The remainder of this chapter is a recapitulation of the whole
argument from the beginning; and should be carefully conned.]

[135] Part II. ch. vi.

[136] P. 108.

[137] [There is a slight indication in this chapter that Butler falls
into the old plan of settling the necessity of Christianity, before
determining its truth. Paley discards this order of arrangement,
in his very first sentence; and with good reason. The necessity of
revelation is an abstraction; the proofs of it are patent facts. To
hold in abeyance the credentials presented by Christianity, till
we first satisfy ourselves that God could or would make any such
announcements, is unphilosophical and irreverent. This chapter
discusses the _importance_ rather than the necessity of revelation; and
so is a fitting commencement of the discussion. Every truth disclosed
in revelation, over and above the truths which natural religion
furnishes, proves the _necessity_ of revelation, if we would know any
thing of _such_ truths. And it is such truths which constitute the very
peculiarities of revelation, and teach the _way of salvation_, for the
sinful and helpless.]

[138] [No one can read the writings of the great sages of antiquity
without a full and sad conviction that in relation to the character
of God, the sinfulness of man, the future state, and the rules of
living, those prime points on which we need knowledge, they were
almost profoundly ignorant. See on this point, LELAND’S Adv. and
Necess.: CHALMERS’ Nat. Theol.: MCCOSH’S Div. Gov.: PASCAL’S Thoughts:
WARBURTON’S Div. Legation.]

[139] Invenis multos----propterea nolle fieri Christianos, quia quasi
sufficiunt sibi de bona vita sua. Bene vivere opus est, ait. Quid
mihi præcepturus est Christus? Ut bene vivam? Jam bene vivo. Quid
mihi necessarius est Christus; nullum homicidium, nullum furtum,
nullam rapinam facio, res alienas non concupisco, nullo adulterio
contaminor? Nam inveniatur in vita mea aliquid quod reprehendatur, et
qui reprehenderit faciat Christianum. _Aug. in Psal._ xxxi. [You find
many who refuse to become Christians, because they feel sufficient of
themselves to lead a good life. “We ought to live well.” says one.
“What will Christ teach me? To live well? I do live well, what need
then have I of Christ? I commit no murder, no theft, no robbery. I
covet no man’s goods, and am polluted by no adultery. Let some one
find in me any thing to censure, and he who can do so, may make me a
Christian.”]

[140] [The true mode of distinguishing a temporary, local, or
individual command from such as are of universal and perpetual
obligation, is well laid down by WAYLAND, _Mor. Sci._ ch. ix. sec. 2.]

[141] [Natural religion shows us the danger of sin; but not the
infinite danger of eternal retribution, and the hopelessness of
restoration after death. And as to the efficacy of repentance, it
rather opposes that doctrine than teaches it. At least it does not
teach that repentance may be accepted, so as not only to cancel guilt,
but restore to the favor of God.]

[142] [“Christianity was left with Christians, to be transmitted, in
like manner as the religion of nature had been left, with mankind in
general. There was however this difference that by an institution
of external religion with a standing ministry for instruction and
discipline, it pleased God to unite Christiana into _visible churches_,
and all along to preserve them over a great part of the world, and thus
perpetuate a general publication of the Gospel.” BUTLER’S sermon before
the Soc. for Prop. the Gospel. He goes on to show, in that discourse,
that these churches, however corrupt any may become, are repositories
for the written oracles of God, and so carry the antidote to their
heresies.]

[143] Rev. xxii. 11.

[144] [“It is no real objection to this, though it may seem so at first
sight, to say that since Christianity is a _remedial_ system, designed
to obviate those very evils which have been produced by the neglect
and abuse of the light of nature, it ought not to be _liable_ to the
same perversions. Because--1. Christianity is not designed primarily
to remedy the defects of _nature_, but of an unnatural state of ruin
into which men were brought by _the Fall_. And 2. It is remedial of
the defects of nature in a _great degree_, by its giving additional
advantages. 3. It might be impossible that it should be remedial in a
greater degree than it is, without destroying man’s free agency; which
would be to destroy its own end, the practice of virtue.”--FITZGERALD’S
Notes.]

[145] [CHALMERS (Nat. Theol., b. v. ch. iv.) makes this very plain.
He shows the _ethics_ of natural religion to be one thing and
its _objects_ another. Natural religion discloses no Redeemer or
Sanctifier; but it teaches how we should regard such a person, if
there be one. It teaches love and conformity to such a being by the
_relation_ in which we of course stand to him. How we are to _express_
that love and obedience it cannot teach.]

[146] See The Nature, Obligation, and Efficacy, of the Christian
Sacraments, &c., [by WATERLAND,] and COLLIBER of Revealed Religion, as
there quoted.

[147] [If Christianity were but “a republication of natural religion,”
or as Tindall says, “as old as creation,” why do deists oppose it? It
does indeed republish natural religion, but it adds stupendous truths
beside. If it gave us no new light, no new motives, it would be but a
tremendous curse, making us all the more responsible, and none the more
instructed or secure.]

[148] P. 94.

[149] Ch. v.

[150] John iii. 5.

[151] This is the distinction between moral and positive precepts
considered respectively as such. But yet, since the latter have
somewhat of a moral nature, we may see the reason of them, considered
in this view. Moral and positive precepts are in some respects alike,
in other respects different. So far as they are alike, we discern the
reasons of both; so far as they are different, we discern the reasons
of the former, but not of the latter. See p. 189, &c.

[152] [Without offering the least objection to what is here said of
the comparative value of moral and positive institutions, it should
not be overlooked that sometimes, obedience to a positive rite is more
indicative of an obedient spirit, than obedience to a moral rule. The
latter is urged by its intrinsic propriety, over and above the command,
and appeals to several of our finer impulses. The former rests singly
on our reverence for the will of God. There are many who would repel a
temptation to steal, or to lie, who yet are insensible to the duty of
baptism or the Lord’s supper.]

[153] Matt. ix. 13, and xii. 7.

[154] Hosea vi. 6.

[155] See Matt. xii. 7.

[156] See ch. iii.

[157] [Dr. ANGUS judiciously remarks on this sentence, “This sentiment,
as understood by Butler, is just, but very liable to abuse. Clearly,
the Bible must be so interpreted as to agree with _all_ known truth,
whether of natural religion or natural science. At the same time, to
correct the theology of the Bible by the theology of nature, as finite
and guilty men understand it, may involve the rejection of Bible
theology entirely; and of the very light and teaching it was intended
to supply. The converse of Butler’s statement is equally true, and even
more important. If in natural theology there be found any facts, the
seeming lesson of which is contrary to revealed religion, such seeming
lesson is not the real one.” Practically, it will be found that seeming
meanings of Scripture, really erroneous, are corrected by other parts
of Scripture itself. I understand Butler as only affirming that we
must interpret Scripture according to immutable principles, and _known
truth_. The infidel rejects it for not conforming to his _assumed
hypothesis_.]

[158] P. 203.

[159] Chaps. iii., iv., v., vi.

[160] Chap. vii.

[161] P. 172.

[162] [Papists urge that the actual conversion of the bread and wine
in the Eucharist is an invisible miracle. But an invisible miracle is
such because wrought under circumstances which _exclude_ examination:
while transubstantiation _invites_ and _facilitates_ examination. It is
wrought publicly, and constantly, and yet cannot be discovered to be a
miracle. Indeed it supposes the working of a second miracle, to make
the first invisible.]

[163] [Paley shows conclusively that a denial of miracles leads not
only to a denial of revelation, but a denial of the existence of God,
all of whose extraordinary acts are necessarily miraculous.]

[164] [WHATELY, in his _Logic_, b. iii., has shown the folly of the
Deistical attempts to explain our Savior’s miracles as mere natural
events. Having labored to show this of some _one_ of the miracles, they
then do so as to _another_, and thence infer that _all_ were accidental
conjunctures of natural circumstances. He says, they might as well
argue “that because it is not improbable one may throw sixes once in a
hundred throws, therefore it is no more improbable that one may throw
sixes a hundred times running.”

FITZGERALD says, “the improbability of a whole series of strange
natural events, taking place unaccountably, one after another, amounts
to a far greater improbability than is involved in the admission of
miracles.”]

[165] [That man, at first, must have had supernatural _instructions_,
or in other words some revelations, is shown by Archbishop WHATELY in
his “Origin of Civilization.” Rev. SAMUEL STANHOPE SMITH expresses
his conviction, both from reason and history, that man in his savage
state could not even have preserved life without instruction from his
Creator.]

[166] [The maintenance by the Jews, of a system of pure Theism, through
so many and so rude ages, without being superior, or even equal to
their neighbors, in science and civilization, can only be accounted for
on the presumption of a revelation.]

[167] P. 166, &c.

[168] [MILLS (Logic, chap. 24, § 5,) points out what he deems a mistake
of “some of the writers against Hume on Miracles,” in confounding
the improbability of an event, before its occurrence, with the
improbability afterwards; that is, considering them equal in degree.
He fully proves that the great Laplace fell into this error, and the
student should consult the passage.

Prof. FITZGERALD holds Butler to have fallen into the mistake adverted
to by Mills; and quotes the latter author in a way which seems to make
him say that such is his opinion also. I do not so understand Mills,
nor do I see that Butler has confounded these meanings; but the very
contrary. He expressly affirms, and most truly, that the strongest
presumption may lie against “the most ordinary facts _before the proof_
which yet is overcome by almost any proof.” Butler’s position here, may
be thus illustrated. Suppose a hundred numbers to be put in a box, and
it is proposed to draw out the number 42. Now there are 99 chances to 1
against drawing that, or any other _given_ number. But suppose a child
tells you he put the hundred numbers into a box, and drew out one, and
it proved to be 42; you at once believe, for that was as likely to come
as any other.

The proof of Christianity from prophecy becomes amazingly strong, thus
viewed. There are many predictions, for instance that Christ should be
born at a certain time, and place, and under certain very particular
circumstances. The probabilities against such a _conjuncture_ of events
are almost infinite; yet they happened exactly as foretold.]

[169] [For instance, a mass of ice or snow, may imperceptibly
accumulate for an age, and then suddenly fall and overwhelm a village.
Or a planet, or comet, may have been gradually nearing our earth for a
million of years, without producing, _as yet_, any effect on our orbit;
but in process of time, its proximity may work great changes in our
condition.]

[170] P. 208.

[171] 1 Cor. i. 28.

[172] See Chap. vi.

[173] See Chap. vi.

[174] [See note, page 218.]

[175] P. 220.

[176] [It is not to be understood that Butler would not have the
ordinary rules of interpretation applied to the Holy Scriptures.
Because the interpretation, “if not gathered _out_ of the words,
must be brought _into_ them.” We cannot interpret them as if we knew
beforehand, what the Holy Ghost meant to say; as SPINOZA proposes to
do, in his Philosophia Scripturæ Interpretes. The student will do well
to consult BENSON’S Hulsean Lectures on Scripture Difficulties: KING’S
Morsels of Criticism: STORR, Exertationes Exeget.: MICHAELIS, Introd.
ad. Nov. Test.: and FEATLEY’S Key.]

[177] Pp. 207, 208.

[178] [See 1 Cor. xii. 1-10: xiii. 1: and xiv. 1-19.]

[179] [“The power of healing, or working miracles, is, during the
whole course of its operation, one continued arrest or diversion of
the general laws of matter and motion. It was therefore fit that this
power should be given occasionally. But the _speaking with tongues_,
when once the gift was conferred, became thenceforth a natural
power; just as the free use of members of the body, after being
restored, by miracle, to the exercise of their natural functions.
In healing, the apostles are to be considered as the workers of a
miracle; in speaking strange tongues, as persons on whom a miracle is
performed.”--WARBURTON, Doct. of Grace, b. i. ch. iii.]

[180] Heb. vi. 1.

[181] Acts iii. 21.

[182] [The doctrine of “development” has of late been popular in
some quarters. Butler here shows the only _safe_ notion we may
entertain on that subject. “Exact thought, and careful consideration”
may show us how to confute specious heresies, expound embarrassing
passages, dissipate painful doubts, and remove many prejudices or
misapprehensions. But revelation is complete as it stands.

We may hope for progress in theology as in other sciences; not in
the development of new facts or faith, as Papists and Socinians
pretend, but in the increase of sound wisdom, aided by a more perfect
interpretation of God’s word.]

[183] Chap. vi.

[184] Chap. v.

[185] Chap. vii.

[186] Chap. iv. latter part, and v. vi.

[187] [This pregnant paragraph should receive very full attention.
We know much of men, little of God. What men are likely to do, or
say, in certain circumstances, is often very clear; and generally may
be guessed at. But what God would do or say in new contingencies,
who shall attempt to prescribe or predict? We are poorly qualified
to assert that such and such declarations could not have come from
infinite wisdom; but we are quite competent to affirm that such and
such things could not have come from human contrivance or enthusiasm.]

[188] In the foregoing chapter.

[189] Part I, ch. vii., to which this all along refers.

[190] [“It is the last step of reason to know there is an infinity of
things which surpass it.”--PASCAL. “The wall of adamant which bounds
human inquiry, has scarcely ever been discovered by any adventurer,
till he was aroused by the shock that drove him back.”--Sir JAS.
MACKINTOSH. “Of the dark parts of revelation there are two sorts:
one which may be cleared up by the studious; the other which will
always reside within the shadow of God’s throne where it would be
impiety to intrude.”--WARBURTON. “A Christianity without mystery is as
unphilosophical as it is unscriptural.”--ANGUS.]

[191] John xi. 52.

[192] 2 Peter iii. 13.

[193] 1 Peter i. 11, 12.

[194] Phil. ii. [6-11.]

[195] [The influences of the Holy Spirit are not only “given to good
men,” but are sent upon many who live unmindful of eternity, quickening
their consciences, enlightening their understandings and arresting
their passions, and thus it is they are converted unto the truth in
Christ.]

[196] John xiv. 2.

[197] John v. 22, 23.

[198] Matt. xxviii. 18.

[199] 1 Cor. xv. 28.

[200] 1 Tim. iii. 16.

[201] P. 174, &c.

[202] 1 Cor. i. [18-25.]

[203] Pp. 178, 179.

[204] Pp. 180, 181.

[205] P. 172, &c.

[206] [“Providence hurries not himself to display to-day the
consequence of the principle he yesterday announced. He will draw it
out in the lapse of ages Even according to our reasoning logic is none
the less sure, because it is slow.”--GUIZOT on Civilization, Lect. I.

How impressively is this sentiment sustained by modern geology, and
astronomy!]

[207] [“Philosophers make shameful and dangerous mistakes, when they
judge of the Divine economy. He cannot, they tell us, act thus,
it would be contrary to his wisdom, or his justice, &c. But while
they make these peremptory assertions they show themselves to be
unacquainted with the fundamental rules of their own science, and
with the origin of all late improvements. True philosophy would begin
the other way, with observing the constitution of the world, how God
has made us, and in what circumstances he has placed us, and _then_
from what he has done, form a sure judgment what he would do. Thus
might they learn ‘the invisible things of God from those which are
clearly seen’ the things which are not accomplished from those which
are.”--POWELL’S _Use and Abuse of Philosophy_.]

[208] 1 Tim. ii. 5.

[209] [The interposition of a man of known probity and worth often
saves the thoughtless or the guilty from punishment. Mediation is seen
in a thousand forms in the arrangements of social life; and the common
sense of all mankind approves of it. The release of the offending, by
the intercession of the good, and all the benefits of advice, caution,
example, instruction, persuasion, and authority, are instances of
mediation.]

[210] [MR. NEWMAN notices a distinction between the facts of
revelation, and its principles; and considers the argument from analogy
more concerned with its principles than with its facts. “The revealed
facts are special and singular, from the nature of the case, but the
revealed principles are common to all the works of God; and if the
Author of nature be the author of grace, it may be expected that the
principles displayed in them will be the same, and form a connecting
link between them. In this identity of _principle_, lies the analogy
of natural and revealed religion, in Butler’s sense of the word. The
Incarnation is a fact, and cannot be paralleled by any thing in nature:
the doctrine of mediation is a principle, and is abundantly exemplified
in nature.”--_Essay on Developments._]

[211] [The student will find the inadequacy of repentance to cancel
guilt, beautifully exhibited by WAYLAND, Mor. Science: MAGEE,
Atonement: HOWE, Living Temple.]

[212] P. 232, &c.

[213] John iii. 16.

[214] It cannot, I suppose, be imagined, even by the most cursory
reader, that it is, in any sort, affirmed or implied in any thing
said in this chapter, that none can have the benefit of the general
redemption, but such as have the advantage of being made acquainted
with it in the present life. But it may be needful to mention, that
several questions, which have been brought into the subject before
us, and determined, are not in the least entered into here, questions
which have been, I fear, rashly determined, and perhaps with equal
rashness contrary ways. For instance, whether God could have saved
the world by other means than the death of Christ, consistently with
the general laws of his government. And had not Christ come into the
world, what would have been the future condition of the better sort of
men; those just persons over the face of the earth, for whom Manasses
in his prayer[A] asserts, repentance was not appointed. The meaning of
the first of these questions is greatly ambiguous: and neither of them
can properly be answered, without going upon that infinitely absurd
supposition, that we know the whole of the case. And perhaps the very
inquiry, _What would have followed, if God had not done as he has_, may
have in it some very great impropriety: and ought not to be carried
on any further than is necessary to help our partial and inadequate
conceptions of things.

[A] [The “prayer of Manasses” is one of the apocryphal books of the Old
Testament, which next precedes “Maccabees.”]

[215] John i., and viii. 12.

[216] Rom. iii. 25, v. 11: 1 Cor. v. 7: Eph. v. 2: 1 John ii. 2: Matt
xxvi. 28.

[217] John i. 29, 36, and throughout the book of Revelation.

[218] Throughout the epistle to the Hebrews.

[219] Isa. liii.: Dan. ix. 24: Ps. cx. 4.

[220] Heb. x. 1.

[221] Heb. viii. 4, 5.

[222] Heb. x. 4, 5, 7, 9, 10.

[223] Heb. ix. 28.

[224] John xi. 51, 52.

[225] 1 Pet. iii. 18.

[226] Matt. xx. 28: Mark x. 45: 1 Tim. ii. 6.

[227] 2 Pet. ii. 1: Rev. xiv. 4: 1 Cor. vi. 20.

[228] 1 Pet. i. 19: Rev. v. 9: Gal. iii. 13.

[229] Heb. vii. 25: 1 John ii. 1, 2.

[230] Heb. ii. 10.: v. 9.

[231] 2 Cor. v. 19: Rom. v. 10: Eph. ii. 16.

[232] Heb. ii. 14. See also a remarkable passage in the book of Job,
xxxiii. 24.

[233] Phil. ii. 8, 9: John iii. 35, and v. 22, 23.

[234] Rev. v. 12, 13.

[235] John vi. 14.

[236] P. 188, &c.

[237] Eph. iv. 12, 13.

[238] John xiv. 2, 3: Rev. iii. 21, and xi. 15.

[239] 2 Thess. i. 8.

[240] Heb. ix. 26.

[241] [Consult MAGEE, on Atonement: STAPFERI Institutiones: TURRETIN,
De Satisfactione: CHALMERS, Discourses: OWEN, Satis. of Christ.]

[242] P. 194, &c.

[243] [This objection is ably urged by TINDALL. The answer of our
author is complete. We should remember, that twice in the history of
mankind, revelation _has been_ universal. The first pair, and the
occupants of the ark, comprised the whole population. But how soon was
light rejected! Christianity is universal, in nature and intention; is
to become so in fact; and according to a very probable construction of
prophecy, will continue to be universal, for three hundred and sixty
thousand years.]

[244] [May not this be a principal object of the Apocalypse? As the
book of Daniel furnished a constant and powerful support to the faith
of the Jew, by the constant development of prophecy, so the Apocalypse,
rightly studied must powerfully, and through all time, support the
faith of the Christian by the continual unfolding and verification of
its predictions.]

[245] 2 Cor. viii. 12.

[246] Introduction.

[247] Part I. chap. v.

[248] Part I. chap. iv. and pp. 156, 157.

[249] Pp. 156, 157.

[250] Dan. xii. 10. See also Isa. xxix. 13, 14: Matt. vi. 23, and
xi. 25, and xiii. 11, 12: John iii. 19, and v. 44: 1 Cor. ii. 14,
and 2 Cor. iv. 4: 2 Tim. iii. 13; and that affectionate as well as
authoritative admonition, so very many times inculcated, _He that
hath ears to hear, let him hear_. Grotius saw so strongly the thing
intended in these and other passages of Scripture of the like sense,
as to say, that the proof given us of Christianity was less than it
might have been, for this very purpose: _Ut ita sermo Evangelii tanquam
lapis esset Lydius ad quem ingenia sanabilia explorarentur_. De Ver.
R. C. lib. ii. [So that the Gospel should be a touchstone, to test the
honesty of men’s dispositions.]

[251] Pp. 100, 257, &c.

[252] [See WITSII Meletemeta, Diss. IV.: PFAFII Disput.: CAMPBELL on
Miracles: DOUGLASS’ Criterion: FARMER’S Dissertations: PALEY’S Evid.:
TAYLOR’S Apol. of Ben Mordecai: TUCKER’S Light of Nat.: WATSON’S
Tracts, vol. iv.: JORTIN’S Sermons: Bp. FLEETWOOD’S Essays: BOYLE
Lectures: LARDNER’S Credibility.]

[253] [“The miracles of the Jewish historian, are intimately connected
with all the civil affairs, and make a necessary and inseparable
part. The whole history is founded in them; it consists of little
else; and if it were not a history of them, it would be a history of
nothing.”--BOLINGBROKE, Posthumous Works, vol. iii. p. 279.]

[254] [An admirable work on this recondite mode of proving the truth
of the New Testament narrative, is PALEY’S Horæ Paulinæ. The same
department of evidence is ably handled by BIRK, in his Horæ Evangelicæ,
and Horæ Apostolicæ: GRAVES on the Pentateuch: and BLUNT in his
“Undesigned Coincidences both of the Old and New Testament.” GROTIUS,
De Veritate, has some excellent passages on the same subject.]

[255] [Clem. Rom. Ep. 1. c. 47.] CLEMENT, who is here quoted, lived in
the first century, and is mentioned Phil. iv. 3. His epistle to the
Corinthians, written in Greek, contains the passage here referred to,
which may be thus translated: “Take the letter of the blessed Paul
the Apostle. What did he write to you, in the first beginning of the
Gospel? Truly he sent you a divinely inspired letter about himself, and
Cephas, and Apollos.”

[256] Gal. i.: 1 Cor. xi. 23, &c.: 1 Cor. xv. 8.

[257] Rom. xv. 19: 1 Cor. xii. 8, 9, 10-28, &c., and xiii. 1, 2, 8, and
the whole 14th chapter: 2 Cor. xii. 12, 13: Gal. iii. 2, 5.

[258] See the Koran, chap. xiii. and chap. xvii.

[259] [MAHOMET expressly declares that he worked no _public_ miracles
in confirmation of his mission, “because the former nations have
charged them with imposture.” He claims, however, to have had private
miraculous assurances of his mission, and most preposterous they were.

WHATELY, in his Christian Evidences, has handled this aspect of
miracles with great ability. See also PALEY’S Evidences, sec. 3: and
GIBBON’S Decline and Fall, chap. 1.]

[260] [ALEXANDER, in his Evidences, and several other writers have
placed this argument in a very convincing light. ARNOBIUS, one of the
earliest Christian writers, asks, “Shall we say that the men of those
times were inconsiderate, deceitful, stupid, and brutish enough to
feign having seen what they never saw? and that when they might have
lived in peace and comfort, they chose gratuitous hatred and obloquy?”

The _rejection_ of Christianity by so many in the first age was the
result of the continued action of personal and hereditary prejudice
and depravity, capable of resisting any supposable evidence. The
_reception_ of Christianity by multitudes, under the same evidences,
and to their immediate personal damage, shows strongly that there was
enough evidence to produce those effects. Thus the rejection by some
does not countervail the acceptance by others.]

[261] P. 294, &c.

[262] [Compare BUTLER’S Sermons; on Balaam, and on Self-deceit.]

[263] See the foregoing chapter.

[264] [“Whenever a general scheme is known to be pursued by a writer,
that scheme becomes the true key in the hands of his reader, for
unlocking the meaning of particular parts, which would otherwise not
be seen clearly to refer to such scheme. The inspired writers had one
common and predominant scheme in view, which was to _bear testimony to
Jesus_. Whatever passages occur in their writings, which bear an apt
and easy resemblance to the history of Jesus, may, or rather must in
all reasonable construction, be applied to him.”--HURD on the Proph.,
p. 117.]

[265] [Consult on this point, GULICK, Theologia Prophetica: VITRINGA,
Observationes: HENGSTENBURG, Christologia: HORSLEY’S Tracts and
Sermons: KING’S Morsels of Criticism: WAUGH’S Dissertations: LYALL’S
Propœdia Prophetica.]

[266] It appears that Porphyry did nothing worth mentioning in this
way. For Jerome on the place says: _Duas posteriores bestias--in uno
Macedonum regno ponit_. And as to the ten kings; _Decem reges enumerat,
qui fuerunt sævissimi: ipsosque reges non unius ponit regni, verbi
gratia, Macedoniæ, Syriæ, Asiæ, et Ægypti; sed de diversis regnis unum
efficit regum ordinem_. [“The two latter beasts he places in one of the
Macedonian kingdoms.” “He reckons up ten kings who had been excessively
cruel and these not kings of one country, as Macedonia, for instance,
or Syria, or Asia, or Egypt; but makes up his set of kings out of
different kingdoms.”] In this way of interpretation, any thing may be
made of any thing.

[267] P. 189, &c.

[268] John i. 3.

[269] Eph. iii. 9.

[270] Acts iii. 21.

[271] Rev. x. 7.

[272] Dan. ii. 44.

[273] Dan. vii. 22.

[274] Rev. xi. 17, 18; xx. 6.

[275] Dan. vii. 27.

[276] Chap. ii. iii. &c.

[277] Deut. xxviii. 64; xxx. 2, 3: Isa. xlv. 17.

[278] Isa. lx. 21: Jer. xxx. 11; xlvi. 28: Amos ix. 14, 15: Jer. xxxi.
36.

[279] Isa. viii. 14, 15; xlix. 5; chap. liii.: Mal. i. 10, 11, and
chap. iii.

[280] Isa. xlix. 6, chap. ii., chap, xi., chap. lvi. 7: Mal. i. 11. To
which must be added, the other prophecies of the like kind, several in
the New Testament, and very many in the Old; which describe what shall
be the completion of the revealed plan of Providence.

[281] [See DAVIDSON’S Disc. on Proph.: BLANEY on Daniel’s LXX. Weeks:
HURD’S Introd. to the Study of Proph.: JORTIN’S Ser. at Boyle Lect.:
FULLER’S Gosp. its own Witness, part ii.: WAUGH’S Diss.: APTHORPE’S
Discourses.]

[282] P. 250.

[283] [Hundreds of instances might be adduced, in which profane
historians corroborate the statements of the Scriptures. The following
are merely specimens: DIODORUS SICULUS, STRABO, TACITUS, PLINY, and
SOLINUS, speak of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. The lives of
David and Solomon are given in the remains of the PHŒNICIAN ANNALS,
in DAMASCENUS, and EUPOLEMUS. MENANDER describes the carrying away of
the Ten Tribes by Salmanasor. SUETONIUS, TACITUS, PLINY the younger,
and NUMENIUS, speak of Jesus Christ. His miracles are owned by
CELSUS, PORPHYRY, JULIAN, and Jewish writers opposed to Christianity.
SUETONIUS, TACITUS, PLINY, JULIAN, and others describe his being put
to death; and TACITUS says that many were put to death for adhering
to his religion. PHLEGON mentions the miracles of Peter; and Paul is
enumerated among eminent authors, in a fragment of LONGINUS.]

[284] [This thought is elaborated with skill by WHATELY in his
“_Historic Doubts_.” He takes up all the popular infidel objections
as to the life of Christ, and applies them with undiminished or even
increased force against the evidences that such a man as Buonaparte
ever existed.

JOHNSON in a lively sally once said--“‘It is easy to be on the negative
side. I deny that Canada is taken. The French are a much more numerous
people than we; and it is not likely they would allow us to take it.’
‘But the Government have announced the fact.’ ‘Very true. But the
ministry have put us to an enormous expense by the war in America, and
it is their interest to persuade us that we have got something for
our money.’ ‘But the fact is confirmed by thousands who were at the
taking of it.’ ‘Aye, but these men have an interest in deceiving us:
they don’t want you should think the French have beat them. Now suppose
you go over and find it so, that would only satisfy yourself; for
when you come back we will not believe you. We will say you have been
bribed.’”--BOSWELL.]

[285] P. 267, &c.

[286] P. 270, &c.

[287] Deut. xxviii. 37.

[288] All the particular things mentioned in this chapter, not
reducible to the head of certain miracles, or determinate completions
of prophecy. See p. 263.

[289] [Butler states this argument with more than his usual brevity,
and its force is not seen without reflection. “If contrivance or
accident could have given to Christianity _any_ of its apparent
testimonies, its miracles, its prophecies, its morals, its propagation,
or [the character of] its founder, there could be no room to believe,
or even imagine, that _all_ these appearances of great credibility,
could be _united together_, by any such means. If successful craft
could have contrived its public miracles, or the pretence of them,
it requires another reach of craft, to adopt its prophecies to the
same object. Further, it required not only a different, but a totally
opposite art to conceive and promulgate its admirable morals. Again,
its propagation, in defiance of the powers and terrors of the world,
implied still other qualities of action. Lastly, the model of the life
of its founder, is a work of such originality and wisdom, as could be
the offspring only of consummate powers of invention, or rather never
could have been _devised_, but must have come from real life. The
hypothesis sinks under its incredibility. Each of these suppositions of
contrivance, being arbitrary and unsupported, the climax of them is an
extravagance.”--DAVISON, on Prophecy.]

[290] 1 John iv. 18.--[“There is no fear in love,” &c.]

[291] [Obedience from dread, if it continue to be the only motive,
precludes advance toward perfection; for “He that feareth is not
made perfect in love.” But obedience from a discernment of the
reasonableness and beneficence of religion, and of the perfections of
its Author, increases love till it “casteth out fear.”]

[292] [See a discussion of this subject, in BAYLE’S Historical and
Biographical Dictionary: art. XENOPHANES: notes D, E, F, G.]

[293] See Dissertation II.

[294] [It is remarked by DEAN FITZGERALD, that “It is not inconceivable
that the Almighty should apply such a test of men’s candor and
fidelity, as should require them first to act upon a thing as true,
before they were so fully satisfied of its truth as to leave no doubt
remaining. Such a course of action might be the appointed, and for all
we know, the only possible way of overcoming habits of thought and
feeling, repugnant to the belief demanded, so that a fixed religious
faith might be the reward, as it were, of a sincere course of prudent
behavior.”]

[295] By _arguing upon the principles of others_, the reader will
observe is meant, not proving any thing _from_ those principles, but
_notwithstanding_ them. Thus religion is proved, not _from_ the opinion
of necessity; which is absurd: but, _notwithstanding_ or _even though_
that opinion were admitted to be true.

[296] P. 141, &c.

[297] Prov. xx. 27.

[298] Serm. at the _Rolls_, p. 106.

[299] John iii. 16: Heb. v. 9.

[300] P. 258, &c.

[301] Locke’s Works, vol. i. p. 146.

[302] Locke, pp. 146, 147.

[303] Locke, p. 152.

[304] See an answer to Dr. Clarke’s Third Defence of his Letter to Mr.
Podwell, 2d edit. p. 44, 56, &c.

[305] [“One is continually reminded throughout this dissertation, of
what is called _The common-sense school_ of Scotch metaphysicians. Nor
can there be any doubt that REID, in particular, was largely indebted
to Butler, of whose writings he was a diligent student, for forming
that sober and manly character of understanding which is, I think, his
great merit.”--FITZGERALD.]

[306] This way of speaking is taken from Epictetus,[A] and is made
use of as seeming the most full, and least liable to cavil. And
the moral faculty may be understood to have these two epithets,
δοκιμαστικὴ and ἀποδοκιμαστικὴ [applauding and condemning] upon a
double account; because, upon a survey of actions, whether before or
after they are done, it determines them to be good or evil; and also
because it determines itself to be the guide of action and of life,
in contradistinction from all other faculties, or natural principles
of action; in the very same manner as speculative reason _directly_
and naturally judges of speculative truth and falsehood: and at the
same time is attended with a consciousness upon _reflection_, that the
natural right to judge of them belongs to it.

[A] Arr. Epict. lib. i. cap. i.

[307] Οὐδὲ ἡ ἀρετὴ καὶ κακία--ἐν πείσει ἀλλὰ ἐνεργείᾳ, [Virtue and vice
are not in feeling, but in action,] M. Anton, lib. ix. 16. Virtutis
laus omnis in actione consistit. [The whole praise of virtue, depends
on action.] Cic. Off. lib. i. cap. 6.

[308] P. 145.




INDEX TO PART I.

REFERENCES TO THE EDITOR’S NOTES ARE IN BRACKETS.


  Abstract reasonings may mislead, 162
    fitness of things, _note_ 166

  Actions
    distinguished from their qualities, 111
    manifest character, 156
    rewarded and punished, 98
    this world a theater of, 156
    what sort exercise virtue, 152

  Active and passive impressions, 140

  Advantages of virtue, 113
    may never recur, 101

  Affections, excited by objects, 145
    need control, 166
    part of our constitution, 147

  Affliction, a discipline, 150
    chiefly of our own making, 100

  Agent, the living, not compounded, 81

  Alienation of parts of our body, 84

  All things made double, 137

  Allurements, use of, 151

  Analogy
    answers objections as to a present state of trial, 135
    as to modes of existence, 78
    carrying the force of positive argument, [105
    deals only with facts, 171
    indicates future punishment, 101
    may amount to proof, 168
    objections which it cannot answer, 171
    the only proof of some things, 79

  Antiquity of religion, 167

  Atheists not argued with, in this treatise, 181


  Beginnings of a righteous government seen on earth, 107

  Bible, teaches the existence of general laws, [99

  Bodies
    not necessary to us, 82
    not ourselves, 83
    only instruments, 85, 86
    their solid elements, 88

  Bodily and mental habits, 134

  Brain, does not think, [89

  Brahminical notion of death, 92

  Brutes,
    are they immortal?, [88
    may have greater strength than man, 119
    under man’s control, 119


  Capacities,
    state of in infancy, 88
    not destroyed by death, 89
    not dependent on the body, 79

  Causes and ends incomprehensible, 172

  Changes compatible with identity, 78, 83

  Character
    manifested by probation, 156
    not given but acquired, 155
    what it means, _note_ 163

  Conscience,
    how it acts, 164
    implies government, 115
      a rule, 164
      authority, 164
      future retribution, 165
    may be impaired, 168
    perverted, 168

  Consciousness an indiscerptible entity, 82
    presupposes identity, [77

  Consequences
    may sometimes be avoided, 102
    may be foreseen, 98
    show a moral government, 98

  Course of nature constant, 97

  Creatures finitely perfect, 147
    may fall, 148
    have each a way of life, 137


  Danger of wrong doing, how increased, 132

  Death
    and birth similar, 91
    enlarges our sphere, 92
    has no power over matter, [91
    is not a suspension of our powers, 91
    is not our destruction, 80
    what it is, 80

  Decay of vegetables, inference from, 92

  Definitions of identity, 77

  Delivering up of the Lord Jesus Christ, [111

  Destruction of seeds, 153

  Different states of human existence, 89

  Difficulties belong to all subjects, [96
    exercise the virtuous principle, 152

  Disadvantages of virtue temporary, 126

  Discipline, its true nature and use, [148

  Disease not destructive to the soul, 90
    sometimes remedial, 177

  Disorder produced by sin, 148

  Distress excites passive pity and active relief, 140

  Distributive justice a natural rule, 110

  Divine government a scheme, CHAP. VII.

  Domestic government, 114

  Dreams, what they prove, 86


  Earthly satisfactions attainable, 183

  Effects of actions on the actor, [143

  Ends often produced by unlikely means, 180

  Enjoyments in our own power to a great degree, 95

  Error, how spread, [96

  Evidence of natural religion, 166

  Evil, may possibly be useful, 177
    its possible origin, 147
    not a necessary part of probation, [128

  Exceptions to the happiness of virtue, 108

  Experience indispensable, 141


  Faculties, human, not perfect at first, 141

  Fall of man, 133, [148

  Fallacy in fatalism, 169

  Fallen creatures require discipline, 150

  Fatalism,--see _Necessity_.

  Fear a proper motive to obedience, 154

  Folly, destructive, as well as crime, 132

  Formal notion of government, 99

  Foundation of moral improvement, [108

  Future advantages, how proportioned, 93

  Future existence probable, CHAP. I.
    of brutes, [79

  Future interest dependent on conduct, 95

  Future life,
    a solemn subject, 95
    not an inactive condition, 144
    reconcilable with atheism, 94
    this life preparatory to it, CHAP. V.

  Future punishment credible, 103

  Future retribution, how proved, 125

  Future state
    different from the present, 78
    brings us into new scenes, 93
    may have temptations, [145
    social, 144
    will not require such virtues as does the present life, 154


  General laws
    govern the world, 177, [99
    produce punishment, 103
    wisdom of them, 178

  General method of God’s government, 97

  General system of religion, 124

  Gradual improvement, a wise arrangement, 141, 142

  GOD
    an intelligent governor, 106
    determined by what is fit, [166
    governs by human instruments, 111
    governs justly, [108
    has a will and a character, 163
    his aims incomprehensible, 97
    his attributes inferred from our own, [115
    his general government, 97
    his government just and good, 176
    his indirect commands, 165
    moral government of, CHAP. III.
    natural     ”      ,   ”  II.
    necessarily existent, 159
    not indifferent to human actions, 125
    not simply benevolent, 106
    rewards and punishes, 169
    the only necessary being, 159

  Good actions, how punished, 111

  Good habits necessary even to the virtuous, 149

  Good men befriended as such, 112
    cannot now all unite, 121

  Good not forced upon us, [134

  Government,
    civil, an ordinance of God, 111
    considered as a scheme, CHAP. VII.
    of God, CHAP. II.
    not perfected in this world, 107
    the formal notion of it, 98
    the perfection of, 106


  Habits,
    how formed, &c., 139
    necessary to us hereafter, [145
    of resignation, 155
    often ruinous, 101
    of virtue an improvement in virtue, 147
    passive, 138
    shape the character, 141

  Happiness
    not always the _immediate_ reward of virtue, 108
    not given promiscuously, 138
    requisites for, 137
    the result of virtue, 118

  Helplessness of man, [138

  Higher degrees of retribution probable, 127

  Hinderances to virtue, 121

  History of religion, 169

  Honest men befriend the honest, 112

  Hope and fear appeal to self-love, 153
    are just principles of action, 154

  Human life preparatory, 144

  Hume’s wonderful discovery, [162

  Human powers may be overtasked, 152


  Identity
    does not depend on the sameness of the body, 83
    of living agents, 77, 78
    not explicable, [77

  Ignorance
    acknowledged on all subjects but religion, 174
    answers objections, 175
    the argument from, 180
    total, destroys proof, 178

  Illustration of the modification of an action by its intention, [111

  Imagination a source of discontent, 154
    produces much error, 81

  Immortality of brutes, 88

  Improvement
    by discipline, 144
    by habit, 147
    of our faculties gradual, 141
    wisdom of this, 142

  Incomprehensibility of God’s plans, 97

  Inconsiderateness destructive, 102

  Inferiority of brute force, 119

  Infidelity unjustifiable, 105

  Insignificance of our knowledge, [174

  Interest coincident with virtue, 154
    not a sufficient restraint, _note_ 146

  Interpositions to prevent irregularities, 177
    would produce evil, 178

  Intentional good rewarded, 114

  Irregularities perhaps unavoidable, 177
    seeming may not be such, 176

  Inward peace attends virtue, 112


  Kingdom, idea of a perfect, 123

  Knowledge of man insignificant, [174


  Liberty does not account for the fall, 147
    implied in our present condition, 162

  Life a probation, 128
    one part of it preparatory to another, [142
    what is it intended for, 137

  Living agent not subject to death, 79

  Living powers, see _Death_.

  Locke on human identity, [77


  Maimonides, his similitude, [173

  Man
    an inferior part of creation, 133
    a system of parts, [98
    by nature social, [93
    capable of improvement, 145
    connected with present, past, and future, 181
    dealt with as if free, 162
    has a moral nature, 115
    his fall not accounted for by his free agency, 147
    his helplessness, [138
    knows nothing fully, 173
    may become qualified for new states, 137
    not a competent judge of God’s schemes, 174
    requires moral culture, 145

  Mania often produced by moral causes, [85

  Materialism, its philosophical absurdity, [81

  Matter and mind not the same, [83
    affect each other, 85

  Means
    learned by experience, 176
    man not a competent judge of the fitness of them, 178
    not always agreeable, 176

  Men often miss possible temporal good, 129

  Men’s temporal interests greatly depend on themselves, 131

  Might of unarmed virtue, [121

  Mind
    influenced by the passions, 131
    is the man, [87
    its effects on the body, [85
    may survive the body, [89
    the only real percipient, 85
    uses the body as an instrument, [87

  Miracles, properly speaking, not unnatural, 94

  Miseries as contingent as conduct, 135
    generally are avoidable, 100

  Mixture of suffering and enjoyment in this world, [128

  Moral and natural government of God similar to each other, 184

  Moral attributes of God may be inferred from our own, [115

  Moral discipline, CHAP. V.

  Moral government of God, CHAP. III.

  Moral improvement, basis of, [108

  Moral world, its apparent irregularities, 176

  Mystery of God, finished, _note_ 102


  Natural, the true meaning of the word, 94

  Natural government of God, CHAP. II.

  Natural religion,
    its evidences not affected by the doctrine of necessity, 166
    proof of, 166
    teaches the doctrine of punishment, 102

  Necessary agents may be punished, 169

  Necessary bulk of one’s self, 84

  Necessary existence of God, 159

  Necessary tendencies of virtue, 118

  Negligence and folly disastrous, 132

  Necessity
    consigns us to a fallacy, 169
    contradicts the constitution of nature, 170
    destroys no proof of religion, 170
    different kinds of, [157
    does not exclude design, 160
    doctrine of, CHAP. VI.
    not an agent, 159
    not applicable to practice, 163
    not in conflict with religion, 160
    our condition indicates freedom, 162
    reconcilable with religion, 168
    the doctrine absurd, 157
    what it means, 158
    writers for and against, [170

  New scenes in the next world, 93


  Obedience, reluctant, useful, [152

  Objections,
    against a proof and against a thing to be proved, 179
    against the scheme of Providence, 174
    analogy of plants, 92
    Christianity not universal, 169
    course of nature, 97
    destruction of seeds, 153
    difference between temporal and eternal things, [135
    discipline might have been avoided, 156
    God simply benevolent, 106
    good and evil may be mixed in the next world, 124
    gratification of appetites natural and proper, 98
    ignorance, the argument from invalidates the proof of religion, 178
    immortality of brutes, 87
    incredible that necessary agents should be punished, 169
    irregularities of the moral world, 176
    necessity destroys the proof of religion, 165
    our powers may be overtasked, 152
    probabilities may be overbalanced by probabilities, 169
    punishments are only natural events, 99
    rectitude arising from hope and fear, sordid, 153
    rewards and punishments, 95
    sin need not have entered the world, 177
    society punishes good actions, 111
    special interpositions might prevent evil, 177, 178
    to the doctrine of necessity, CHAP. VI.
    to the doctrine of future punishments, 100-103
    virtue sometimes punished, 111
    virtues of the present life not wanted hereafter, 154
    world disciplines some to vice, 153

  Obligation certain, when proofs are not, 179

  Occasional disadvantages of virtue, 117

  Occasional indulgences in wrong-doing awfully dangerous, [143

  One period of life preparatory to another, [142

  Opportunities once lost irrecoverable, 143

  Organs of sense mere instruments, 89

  Our moral nature proves a moral government, 115


  Pain, no contrivance for it in man, [110

  Partial ignorance does not destroy proof, 178

  Passions
    carry away the judgment, 131
    make our condition one of trial, 130
    may account for the fall of man, 147
    may be excited where gratification is impossible or unlawful, 146
    may remain in a future state, 147
    should be subject to the moral principle, 145
    the bare excitement of, not criminal, 145
      but dangerous, 146

  Passive habits, 138

  Passive impressions weakened by repetition, 139

  Passive submission essential, 155

  Peace of the virtuous, 112

  Perception, instruments of, 85
    possible without instruments, 86

  Perfection of moral government, 106, 107
    of an earthly kingdom, 123

  Persecution unnatural, 111

  Philosophy never arrogant, [174
    what it cannot teach, [87

  Pleasure
    not a sufficient reason for action, 98
    and pain mostly depend on ourselves, 95
    the distribution indicates moral government, 105

  Powers
    may be improved by exercise, 138
    may be overtasked, 152
    may exist and not be exercised, 80
    no reason for supposing that death will destroy them, 81

  Practical proof, what, 168

  Present existence unaccounted for by atheism, 94

  Presumptions that death will destroy us, 81
    that it will suspend our existence, 91

  Presumptuousness unjustifiable, 105

  Private vices not public benefits, [111

  Probabilities in favor of religion may be overbalanced by
      probabilities against it, 169

  Probation, CHAP. IV.
    applies to the present life as well as the future, 130
    does not necessarily imply suffering, [128
    implies allurements, 129
    is more than moral government, 128
    requires severe discipline, 150

  Proofs of natural religion, 166
    of religion not affected by the doctrine of necessity, 160

  Propensions necessarily create temptations, 146
    are excited by their appropriate objects, 147

  Proper gratification of the appetites, 98

  Prosperity of a virtuous community, 123
    may beget discontent, 154

  Providence, objections to God’s, 140, 174

  Public spirit a fruit of virtue, 120

  Punishment
    an alarming subject, 105
    especially considered, 100
    greater hereafter than now, 127
    in a future state credible, 103, 125
    is God’s voice of instruction, [108
    is sometimes capital, 102
    not unjust, 163
    often long delayed, 101
    often overtakes suddenly, 101
    of virtuous actions, 111
    religious and natural similar, 100
    results from folly as well as crime, 132
    the result of general laws, 103


  Quotations.
    Aristotle, [152
    Chalmers, [131, 138, 148
    Cicero, [82, 86
    Clarke, [97
    Fitzgerald, [145
    Robert Hall, [118
    Hume, [162
    Maimonides, [173
    Mandeville, [111
    Plato, [87, 113
    Son of Sirac, [137
    Strabo, [92


  Rashness, consequences of, 96

  Reason
    an incompetent judge of means, 178
    gives power over brute force, 119
    needs experience, 141
    not dependent on bodily powers, 89
    requires a fair opportunity, 119-121

  Recapitulation of the whole argument, 180

  Rectitude, is self-interest a proper motive to it?, 153

  References to other authors.
    Bates, [128
    Baxter, [88
    Bayle, [88
    Beattie, [170
    Belsham, [170
    Berkeley, [111
    Bonnett, [89
    Bramhall, [171
    Brown, [111
    Bryant, [171
    Butterworth, [107
    Calcott, [128
    Capp, [109
    Chalmers, [77, 79, 148
    Charnock, [158
    Cheyne, [88
    Clarke, 82, [81, 97, 171
    Colliber, [88
    Collings, [158, 170
    Compte, [170
    Crombie, [170
    Crouse, [170
    Davies, [109
    D’Holbach, [170
    Descartes, [88
    Ditton, [88
    Doddridge, [109
    Dodwell, [81
    Dwight, [109
    Edwards, [88, 170
    Fabricius, [128
    Fichte, [170
    Gibbs, [171
    Grove, [171
    Haller, [89
    Harris, [171
    Hartley, [170
    Hegel, [170
    Henly, [128
    Hobbes, [170
    Holtzfusius, [128
    Holyoake, [170
    Horseley, [109
    Hume, [88
    Hunt, [109
    Jackson, [171
    Konnicott, [128
    King, [98, 171
    Law, [98
    Lawson, [171
    Le Clerc, [128
    Leland, [109
    Leroux, [170
    Liefchild, [109
    Locke, [88
    Manton, [128
    Martineau, [170
    Martinius, [119
    Milman, [142
    Morgagni, [89
    Morton, [109
    Musæus, [128
    Palmer, [171
    Pearson, [128
    Polignac, [88
    Porteus, [109
    Price, [158
    Priestley, [142, 170
    Reid, [170
    Rutherford, [109, 158
    Search, [88
    Seed, [109
    Selden, [128
    Shaftesbury, 108
    Sherlock, [109
    Shuckford, [128
    Son of Sirac, [137
    South, [109, 128
    Stapfer, [128
    Strabo, 92
    Toplady, [128
    Topping, [109
    Twisse, [109
    Wagstaff, [88
    Warburton, [111
    Watts, [77, 88, 171
    Whately, [142, 158
    Willis, [88
    Wisheart, [109
    Witsius, [128
    Wittichius, [109

  Reflection not dependent on sensation, 91

  Reformation is attended with discomfort, 108
    may not prevent penalties, 102

  Relation between us and our bodies, 85

  Relations of things, limitless, 173

  Religion
    a question of fact, 165
    historical evidence of, 168
    professed in all ages, 167
    its proofs not affected by the doctrine of necessity, 170
    nor by our ignorance, 178

  Reluctant obedience profitable, [152

  Remedies often very disagreeable, 176

  Repentance may be too late, 104

  Requisites to the superiority of reason, 119
    of virtue, 120, 121

  Resentment of injuries, 114

  Resignation
    a temper consonant with God’s sovereignty, 155
    essential to virtue, 154
    the fruit of affliction, 155
    the habit necessary hereafter, 155

  Retributions are divine teachings, [108

  Revelation,
    antiquity of, 167
    not improbable, 167
    not universal, _note_ 107

  Rewards and punishments, how distributed, 126


  Satisfactions of virtue, 108

  Scheme of God incomprehensible, 172

  Self-denial, its relations to present happiness, 134
    not essential to piety, 152

  Self-discipline, what, [148

  Self-love
    a just principle of action, 154
    appealed to, 153
    how moderated and disciplined, 155
    not a sufficient restraint, _note_ 146
    reasonable and safe, 130

  Sensation not necessary to reflection, 91

  Senses not percipients, 85

  Severe discipline necessary, 150

  Similitude of a historical painting, [174

  Simplicity of the living agent, 83

  Sin, why not kept out of the world, 177

  Skepticism does not justify irreligion, 105

  Social, our nature essentially such, [93

  Society
    must punish vice, 110
    natural and necessary, [93
    sometimes punishes the good, 111

  Soul
    a simple substance, 82
    not destroyed with the body, 79
    not naturally immortal, [81

  Souls of brutes, 88

  Special interpositions of Providence, 177, 178

  Stages of existence, 78

  State of probation, CHAP. IV.

  State of discipline and improvement, CHAP. V.

  Submissive temper necessary, 155

  Subordinations exceedingly beneficial, 142

  Subserviencies in nature, 173

  Sufferings may be avoided, 95
    not necessary to the cultivation of virtue, [128


  Temporal and religious probation similar, 132

  Temptations
    increased by bad examples, 132
    and by former errors, 132
    intended for our improvement, 136
    involve probation, 129
    may improve or injure us, 153
    security against their evils, 146
    sources of, to upright beings, 147
    the necessary result of propensions, 146

  Tendencies of virtue, 118
    hindered, 121
    essential, not accidental, 126

  Terms “nature” and “course of nature”, [97

  Theorizing no aid to virtue, 139

  Thoughtlessness often fatal, 101

  Transmigration of souls, [87

  Trials
    manifest character, 156
    may exist in a future state, 147
    produced by our propensions, 131
    qualify for a better state, 144
    unreasonable ones are not inflicted, 133
    why we are subjected to them, 136


  Ultimate design of man, [98

  Understanding may be perverted, 168

  Uneasiness produced by former sins, 109

  Union of good beings, 122

  Unjustifiableness of religious indifference, 105

  Upright creatures may fall, 147
    need good habits, 149

  Universe and its government immense, 123


  Vice
    actually punished by society 110, 111
    must produce uneasiness, 112
    never rewarded as such, 116
    not only criminal but depraving, 149
    often increased by trials, 153
    punished as such, 114

  Vicious men lose their influence, [121

  Virtue
    a bond of union, 122
    as such, rewarded on earth, 111
    “brings its own reward”, [118
    has occasional disadvantages, [117
    hinderances accidental, 121
    how and why rewarded, 111
    improved by trials, 151
    its benefits to a community, 123
    natural, not vice, 116
    not always rewarded in this life, 108
    on the whole happier than vice, 113
    secures peace, 112
    tendencies essential, 126
    tends to give power, 118, [121

  Virtuous beings need virtuous habits, 149

  Virtuous habits a security, 147
    how formed, 139
    improve virtue, 147
    necessary in a future state, [145

  Voice of nature is for virtue, 117


  Waste of seeds, 153

  Wickedness may produce some benefits, 177
    voluntary, 136

  Will and character
    of God, how determined, _note_ 166
    what they mean, _note_ 163

  Wonderful discovery of Hume, [162

  World
    a system of subordinations, 173
    a theater for the manifestation of character, 156
    disciplines some to vice, 153
    fitted for man’s discipline, 150
    governed by fixed laws, 110


  Youth
    a determining period, 101
    if lost, not to be recovered, 143
    its beneficial subordinations, 142




INDEX TO PART II.

REFERENCES TO THE EDITOR’S NOTES ARE IN BRACKETS


  A common absurdity, 243

  Abstract truth distinguished from facts, 305, [186

  Absurdity of some objections to Christianity, 245

  Abuse of our natural endowments, 217

  Accidental, what events are so called, 226

  Accountability gradually increases, 251

  Actions,
    definition of, in morals, 261
    distinguished from things done, 261
    their bad consequences sometimes escaped, 232
    virtue and vice consist in them, 261

  Advantage, as proper a consideration in religion as in temporal
      affairs, 298
    variously bestowed, 249, 312

  Analogy
    a confirmation of all facts to which it can be applied, 306
    affords no argument against the scheme of Christianity, 203
    nor against miracles, 203
    answers presumptions against miracles, 207
    does not prove the wisdom of God, 301
    does not teach that the _whole_ of God’s government is like that on
      earth, 204
    easily cavilled at, but unanswerable, 306
    between natural information and that derived from inspiration, 212
    between the remedies of nature and those of grace, 219
    between the gospel and human discoveries, 219
    between the light of nature and of revelation, 218
    between the use of natural gifts, and miraculous, 217
    between the government of God and that of a human master, 261
    its small influence on men, 303
    how used in this treatise, 306
    may show our duty, but not the design of the requirement, 246
    objections to this mode of arguing, CHAP. VIII.
    shows that there may be infinite reasons for things, with which we
      are not acquainted, 188
    the only ground for some of our knowledge, 306

  Antidote to heresies, [191

  Apocalypse, its principal object, [249

  Appearances of men and things deceptive, 248

  Arguments proper as to human writings, are not so as to Scripture, 214

  Atonement,
    how held by the ancients, 241
    makes the innocent suffer for the guilty, 243

  Author of nature taken for granted, 298

  Authoritativeness of revelation, 189


  Baptism
    a test of obedience, [199
    commanded and important, 194
    why the form of words, 194

  Bible, how to be interpreted, [202, 215

  Brutes, their great sagacity, 216

  Boundary of human inquiry, [223


  Candor necessary in judging of Christianity, 302

  Chance, really no such thing, 226

  Characters drawn in Scripture evidently unfeigned, 287

  Christ
    a mediator, CHAP. V.
    a prophet, 240
    a priest and king, 241
    his history, as given in Scripture, 285
    his pre-existence taught, 282
    his satisfaction, 239
    his sufferings voluntary, 243
    manner of his interposition, 238
    not merely a teacher and example, 242
    offered himself a propitiatory sacrifice, 241

  Christianity
    a fearful curse, if it give no more light than natural religion, [196
    a question of fact, 301
    a remedial system, [193
    an authoritative republication of the religion of nature, 188, 189
    a particular scheme under a general plan, 194, 224
    a scheme imperfectly comprehended, CHAP. IV.
    a scheme revealed but in part, 226
    brings life and immortality to light, 190
    could not possibly be a contrivance, [222, 294
    demands attention, if barely probable, 253
    has evidences besides miracles and prophecy, 263
    in what degree remedial, [193
    is a real revelation, 213
    is conformable to the constitution of things, 295
    its benefits require the use of means, 197
    its establishment and prevalence, the most conspicuous and important
      event in history, 286
    its evidences, CHAP. VII.
    its good effects not small, 192
    its precepts plain and obvious, 218
    its proof historical, 304
    its proofs liable to objection, 260
    men bound to examine its evidence, 197
    miracles and prophecy its direct and fundamental proofs, 263
    must have mysteries, [223
    no objection to the morality of it, 214, 220, 222
    not merely a republication of natural religion, [196
    not primarily designed to remedy the defects of nature, [193
    not the discovery of reason, 188
    objections to its evidence, 210
    objections to its nature, 210
    offered to some in a corrupt state, 250
    prescribes new duties, 194
    preserves natural religion in the world, 191
    propagated against all obstructions, [294
    rashness of treating it lightly, 194, 196, 197
    requires means to accomplish ends, 225
    reveals a particular dispensation of Providence, 194
    reveals important facts, 196
    some of its dark parts may be cleared up, others cannot, [223
    teaches more than natural religion, 194
    the evils ascribed to it, are not its evils, 192
    the one great question concerning it, 213, 214
    the only religion professedly confirmed by miracles, 268
    to be transmitted by Christians, [190
    universal, in nature and intention, [248
    what alone could disprove it, 295
    why not remedial to a greater degree, 193
    why not sooner promulgated, 219

  Christians
    bound to spread Christianity, 190
    primitive, their testimony, 267

  Church
    men bound to support it, 193
    preserves a knowledge of religion, 191
    visible, its design, 190, 191

  Circumstantial evidences of Christianity, 263, 281
    often as convincing as direct testimony, 294

  Clemens Romanus, testimony of, 266
    his letter to the Corinthians, [266

  Climax of infidel extravagance, [294

  Coincidence of natural and revealed religion, 211, 218

  Coincidences of Scripture, 266

  Comparison, how it may mislead us, 201

  Compassion distinct from goodness, 233
    visible in the constitution of the world, 233

  Consequences of infidelity; more dangerous than those of faith, 294
    of sin, often averted, 233

  Conversational objections to revelation, 295

  Conversion, how produced, [225

  Course of nature
    different from what we might have supposed, previous to experience, 211
    none at the beginning, 205
    our total darkness as to its causes, 208

  Creation
    Mosaic account of, referred to by John, 282
    a different exertion of power from government, 205
    why Scripture describes it, 281

  Creatures of like moral qualities placed in different religious
      situations, 251

  Credulity of mankind acknowledged, 269

  Cumulative proof of Christianity, [207


  Daniel
    his book had more evidence of authenticity than has come to us, 279
    his predictions a support of Jewish faith, [249
    quoted by Christ, 279

  Dark parts of revelation, [223

  Degrees of evidence have degrees of weight, 255
    require nice examination, 258

  Deistical explanation of Christ’s miracles, [206

  Deists, why do they oppose Christianity, [196

  Depravity of man obvious, 238
    doctrine of, [218

  Desert of good and ill, the notion of, 305

  Development, of truth, 218
    modern, doctrine of, [218

  Differences of religious advantages may have like reasons as those for
      different temporal advantages, 251
    would remain if revelation were universal, 252

  Difficulties
    absurdity of requiring them to be all removed, 297
    as to the evidence of religion, analogous to those attending the
      practice of it, 256
    cannot be solved by analogy, 296
    speculative, may be the chief trials of some, 257
    the discernment which can see them, might suffice to see through
      them, 260

  Direct and circumstantial evidence must be taken together, 280

  Diseases of body and mind, analogous as to their remedies, 220

  Disobedience, without possible excuse, 253

  Dispensations, preparatory one to another, 310

  Disregard of religion a great profligacy, 233

  Distinction between moral and positive obligation, 198, [198
    between acts and principles, [235
    between temporary, individual, and universal commands, [188

  Doubt
    affords scope for probation, 262
    exercises our virtuous principles, 256
    implies some evidence, 252, 254, 283
    involves some obligation, 263
    puts us upon probation, 253

  Doubtful evidence should have _some_ influence, 255

  Duties arising from revealed relations, 195
    moral and positive, 194


  Earth, its appearances confirm Scripture, 238

  Effect of Adam’s transgression, 238
    of combined probabilities, 294, [294

  Efficacy of repentance, [190
    not taught by the light of nature, 190

  End, God’s not known, 246

  Enthusiasm
    is not peculiar to religion, 272
    impairs no testimony for Christianity, 271
    may often weaken testimony, 271
    sometimes mixed with knavery, 272
    the absence of all sign of it in Christianity, a presumptive proof
      in its favor, 222
    will not account for the spread of Christianity, 270

  Enthusiasts make as great sacrifices as Christians, 270

  Epistles of Paul, proof from, 266

  Eternal retribution not taught by natural religion, [190

  Ethics of natural religion distinguished from its objects, [194

  Events expound Scripture, 219

  Evidence
    of Christianity impregnable, 295
    collateral and direct to be viewed together, 294
    from miracles and prophecy, 267
    imperfect, should yet influence practice in proportion to its
      degree, 255
    of circumstances may be most direct, 294
    of religion, open to all, 260
    of religion, the same in kind as that which controls us in
      temporal things, 258
    much lower than satisfactory often determines us, 303
    not only increased but multiplied by a combination of
      probabilities, 294, [294
    reason the proper judge of, 221
    requires careful sifting, 256
    candor in judging, 302, [303
    safety always in admitting it, 294
    why liable to objection, 257

  Evil, remedies provided for it, 219, 232

  Exaggeration practised by many who will not lie, 272

  External manner of heart worship, 195

  Experience
    affords no presumption against Christianity, 203
    corroborates Christian doctrines, 245
    teaches the effects of actions, 246

  Extravagance of some objections, 187, 188


  Facts
    analogy the only proof of some, 306
    distinguished from abstract truths, 305
    of revelation distinguished from its principles, [235

  Fall of man, assumed as a fact, 236
    confirmed by appearances, 238

  Falsehood, its degrees and inducements, 272

  False miracles have deceived many, 273
    have some historic evidence, 273

  Fatalists, their principles argued upon, 304

  Fear cast out by love, [301

  Fitness, moral, 304, 305

  Flippant objections to Christianity, 295

  Folly, a real vice, 280

  Foresight of brutes, 216

  Future punishments,
    all the reasons for them not known, 234
    not arbitrarily appointed, 232
    natural sequences, 231, 232
    rendered credible by temporal punishments, 300


  Genealogy of mankind given in Scripture, 283

  General laws
    a wise arrangement, 227
    do not render miracles incredible, 227
    control the Christian dispensation, 226
    few events can be traced up to them, 226
    miracles may be their results, 226, 227
    the ground of believing there are such, 226
    things called accidental governed by them, 226

  Geology, its impressive lessons, [229

  GOD
    a master giving laws, 261
    all his reasons for giving a command must be certainly known, and
      known to have passed away, before we can safely disregard it, 188
    duties towards him as the Father, 194, 195
    governs by mediation, 230
    his government shows compassion, 233
      progressive, 229
    his means and ends we cannot distinguish, 228
    his providence, objections to it idle, 300, 301
    his reasons not assigned, 246
    his will, as absolute or conditional, 261
    how he would act in contingencies, unknown, [222
    how to be worshipped, a pure matter of revelation, 195
    instructs us by experience, 211, 246
    little known, [222
    not indifferent as to who suffer, 243
    reveals our duties, not his plans, 246
    the real author of the prophecies, 276

  Good and evil unequally distributed, 248

  Government of God sometimes, apparently, tardy in its results, 224, 225

  Gradual growth of causes, [208


  Happiness not always secured by well-laid schemes, 247

  Hazard of neglecting Christianity, 262

  Heathen world, condition of, 186, 250

  Hieroglyphic and figurative language of Scripture, 210

  Hinderances to natural and spiritual knowledge similar, 218

  History
    of miracles, 264
    of the Jews confirmed by their condition, 289, 290
    of the origin of religion, 206
    furnishes no parallel to revelation, 207
    prophecy is history anticipated, 281
    Scripture, has not been invalidated, 283

  Holy Spirit, its operations on the heart, [225

  Human contrivance unequal to some things, [222

  Human life, in what sense it may be called poor, 297

  Human testimony, reliable notwithstanding the prevalence of
      falsehood, 273


  Identity of principle between natural and revealed religion, [235

  Ignorance
    of heathen writers, [187
    of other worlds, forbids objections to Christianity on the ground
      of miracles, 207
    of the laws of miracles, not greater than of natural laws, 256
    of the reason of our present condition, 251
    much of it our own fault, 259

  Imagination may fancy unreal coincidences, 293

  Immorality not authorized in Scripture, 221, 222

  Impassable limit to human knowledge, [223

  Imperceptible accumulation of forces, [208

  Imperfect knowledge, better than acting in the dark, 297

  Imperfection of language, 216

  Importance of revelation, CHAP. I.
    an abstraction, [186
    precludes the idea that the first witnesses were careless, 274

  Improbability before and after an event, [207
    of the Deistical theory greater than that of miracles, [206

  Inadequacy of repentance, [236

  Inattention to religion, real depravity, 252, 307
    prevents convincement, 258

  Incarnation an invisible miracle, 204
    cannot be paralleled, [235

  Influence of the Holy Ghost, [225
    of the analogical argument, 303

  Innocent sometimes suffer for the guilty, 243

  Inspiration, the proper kind and extent of it not discoverable by
      reason, 212
    not to be interpreted like other writings, 212

  Inspired writers, key to their meaning, [276
    their one great scheme, [276
    show a foresight more than human, 278, 279

  Instruction from God to savages, [206

  Intercession by the good for the bad, [232

  Interest, temporal, not always apparent, 302

  Interpositions of men for each other, [232

  Internal improbabilities weaken external proof, 215

  Interpretation of Scripture, [215

  Irregularity, really no such thing, 226
    whence the appearance of, 227

  Irregularities of men, consequences proportioned to magnitude, 233

  Irreligion an aggravated sin, 233
    especially in persons in high standing, 254
    not justifiable on any pretence, 256, 312

  Invention an irregular way of information, 216

  Invisible miracles, [204
    things of God, how learned, [230


  Jews
    God’s dealing with them, 290
    their continuance, a standing miracle, 290
    their history confirmed by facts, 291
    their system of Theism, [206

  Jewish miracles, a part of civil history, [265

  John, his allusion to Christ, in the beginning of his gospel, 282
    his doctrine agrees with that of Paul, 282


  Kingdom of Christ on earth, 241

  Knowledge
    profound, not necessary to piety, 218
    scientific and religious, have the same difficulties, 218

  Knowledge of Scripture, improved in the same way as knowledge of the
      sciences, 218
    unequally distributed, 249


  Language necessarily ambiguous, 216
    of the prophecies, often figurative, 210

  Laplace, error of, [207

  Levity destructive to religious influence, 259

  Liberty
    belief of our, unavoidable, 304
    of the will, not discussed, _note_ 304
    necessary to the progress of knowledge, 218
    the principle so natural that language is formed on it, 304

  Life
    future, brought to light by the gospel, 190
    may be taken away by command, 221
    not thrown away because success is uncertain, 302
    whether desirable or not, 301

  Light of nature
    displayed in the Scriptures, 188
    does not teach our future condition, 190
    favors the doctrine of a Mediator, 230
    has left the greatest heathen in doubt, 186

  Ludicrous turn, danger of, 259


  Mahometanism not received on the footing of miracles, [268

  Mahometans and ancient Persians, how situated as to revelation, 250

  Man
    accepted according to what he hath, 251
    his circumstances no ground of complaint, 252
    his obligation to study the Scriptures, 202, 262
    must be renewed, 197

  Manasses, prayer of, [237

  Manner of worship a matter of pure revelation, 195

  Martyrs
    could not have been impostors, 272
    had full knowledge of facts, 269, 271
    the full force of their testimony, 269
    their obligations to veracity, 274
    were not enthusiasts, 271

  Means as related to ends, 225

  Mediation seen everywhere, 230
    exemplified in social life, [232

  Mediator,
    appointment of, CHAP. V.
    the notion of, natural, 230
    the Scripture doctrine of, 238-240
    whether one was necessary, 243
    why most objected to, 243

  Medium between full satisfaction of a truth and full satisfaction to
      the contrary, 313

  Memory, eloquence, &c. imprudently used, 217

  Men apt to be deluded by pretences, 273
    their conduct may be guessed at, [222

  Mercy seen in the constitution of the world, 233

  Messiah came at the expected time, 285
    his mission, 224

  Minuteness of predictions touching Christ, 207

  Miracles
    admitted evidence for such as are false does not impair the evidence
      of Christian, 273
    contrary to the course of nature?, 206
    denying them leads to Atheism, [205
    disorderly use of, 217
    distinct reasons for them, 208
    large historical evidence for their truth, 270
    manner in which related, 264
    no argument of analogy against them, 205-207
    none parallel to those of Scripture, 207
    not mere embellishments, 264
    not to be compared to common events, 209
    nowise incredible, 209
    occasions for them likely to arise in the course of ages, 208
    of the Old Testament, inseparable from history, [265
    operate by general laws, 226
    Pagan and Popish, were wrought _after_ those systems had obtained, 268
    peculiar to the Jewish and Christian religions, 268
    received as genuine from the first, 268, 269
    regulated by general laws, 227
    satisfactorily account for the existence of Christianity, 265
    should be compared to uncommon events, 209
    the credentials of Christianity, 267
    the evidence of their truth at first, 249
    the question of their truth only one of _degree_ in point of
      evidence, 208
    the only satisfactory account of some events, 265
    the real nature of presumptions against them, 208
    the term a relative one, 205
    their direct proof of Christianity, 264
    their evidence the same as that for common facts, 264
    their force as proofs, 189
    visible and invisible, 204, [204
    what evidence arises from their having been accepted as true by the
      first Christians, 268
    writers upon, [264, 268

  Miraculous power
    creation not properly an act of, 205
    misused by some, 217, 267
    pretences of, have deluded some, 273
    why bestowed, 190

  Misconduct creates need of assistance, 235

  Mistake of some of Hume’s opponents, 207

  Mistakes of philosophers dangerous, [230
    of transcribers, &c., 228

  Modern geology, lesson from, [229

  Moral action, the nature of, 261
    an action becomes such by command, [221

  Moral duties. See _Positive_.

  Moral faculty, its object, 305

  Moral government. See _Government_.

  Moral precepts. See _Positive_.

  Moral system revealed to mankind, 190

  Morality of Scripture, reason a judge of, 220

  Mysteries to be expected in revelation, 223, 224
    as many in nature as in Scripture, 246

  Mystery of godliness, 225

  Mythological writings resemble prophecy, 276


  Narratives of Scripture unadorned, 228

  Natural consequences of vice are judicial punishments, 197
    and spiritual things analogous in importance, 219
    endowments often abused, 217

  Natural light compared to revelation, 218

  Natural religion
    and revealed, coincide, 211
    as much perverted as Christianity, 192
    could not have been reasoned out, 192
    discloses no Redeemer, [194
    its ethics and objects distinguished, [194
    its light wholly insufficient, 187
    might be authenticated by miracles, 190
    moral system of, 187
    taught and confirmed by Christianity, 188, 286, 292
    what it does not teach, [190, 194

  Nature carried on by uniform laws, 226
    implies the agency of God, 231
    its light insufficient, 186

  Nature and obligation of sacraments, _note_ 195

  Necessity of revelation, [186

  Negligence prevents the recognition of truth, 258
    wholly inexcusable, 197


  Obedience from dread, [301
    or disobedience, an important matter, 188
    to a positive rite, especially indicative of piety, 199

  Objections
    to certain precepts of Scripture, as immoral, 221
    to prophecy, from its obscurity, 275
    to revelation, are of equal weight against natural religion, 97
    to the analogical argument, as such, CHAP. VIII.
    to the distribution of good and evil, 248-250
    to the doctrine of mediation, CHAP. V.
    to the evidence for miracles, CHAP. II.
    to the unequal distribution of religious knowledge, 249

  Objections to Christianity
    as a matter of fact, 301
    as a remedial system, [193, 219
    as a roundabout, perplexed contrivance, 228
    as deficient in point of truth, 247
    as a scheme, 209
    as mysterious, [223
    as to its wisdom and goodness, CHAP. IV.
    as unimportant, CHAP. I.
    atonement makes the innocent suffer for the guilty, 227, 243
    contains things unlike the course of nature, 204
    does not remove difficulties, [223
    has been perverted, 192
    has been productive of evils, 192
    has internal improbabilities, 225-227
    disclosed to the world so recently, 219
    disorderly use of miraculous gifts, 227
    has small influence, 192, 303
    if true would not be left doubtful, 299
    is not satisfactory, 260, 261
    its doctrine of mediation, CHAP. V.
    its external proof weakened by internal improbabilities, 215
    its lack of evidence, CHAP. VI.
    its late introduction, 219
    may be advanced flippantly, but cannot be so answered, 295
    natural things too unimportant to furnish analogies in its favor, 219
    not just and good, CHAP. IV.
    not necessary, 147
    not universal, CHAP. VI., 248
    slowly developed, 219
    some of its precepts immoral, 221
    sufficiency of natural religion, 187
    vicarious sufferings, 245

  Obligation arises from the bare supposableness of Christianity, 253, 262

  Obligations to God arising out of relationship, 196

  Obscurity in part of a prophecy, does not impair the evidence of
      foresight, 275

  Offenders often shielded by friends, [232

  Offices of Christ as a mediator, 238-240

  Opinions must be distinguished from facts, 270

  Ordinary rules of interpretation, [215


  Pagan and Popish miracles easily accounted for, 268

  Parables show what the author intended, 276

  Partial views give an appearance of wrong, 309

  Passion hinders correct judgment, 259

  Paul, his separate testimony, 266
    how he received the gospel, 267
    summary of his testimony, 267

  Perfection of religion, what? CHAP. VIII.

  Persons for whom this treatise is written, 309

  Philosophy, its true mode of proceeding, [230

  Piety superior to ritual observances, 201

  Pleasures and pains, which overbalance? 301

  Political events, how mentioned in Scripture, 282

  Popish doctrine of a miracle at the Eucharist, [204

  Popular conversational objections, 295

  Porphyry’s mode of interpretation frivolous, _note_ 279
    objections to the book of Daniel, 279

  Positive evidence of Christianity, CHAP. VII.

  Positive institutions
    belong to the notion of a church, 192
    lay us under the strictest obligation, 202
    means to moral ends, 199
    men disposed to depend on them, 200
    necessary to keep up and propagate religion, 246
    not to be made light of, 201
    not to supersede moral obedience, 200
    the reason of them often obvious, 198
    two modes of viewing them, 198

  Positive precepts compared with moral, 198, 201
    create moral obligations, 221

  Power of healing, [217

  Practice should be influenced by probability, 254

  Predictions of Christ very numerous and minute, 207, 208

  Prejudice a hinderance to knowledge, 258
    a mark of weakness, 280
    as hostile to truth as enthusiasm, 272
    operates contrary ways, 294

  Preservation of the Jews as a distinct race, 291

  Presumptions
    against miracles, 205
    against revelation as miraculous, CHAP. II.
    none against the _general scheme_ of Christianity, 203
    none peculiar to miracles, 207
    strong, overcome by weak proof, 207, [207

  Priesthood of Christ, 238
    Jewish, typical of Christ, 239

  Principles argued upon in this treatise, 304

  Progressions in our existence, 229

  Progress in theology probable, [218

  Probable proofs, by being added, not only increase evidence, but
      multiply it, 294

  Probability should influence practice, 254

  Profane history corroborates Scripture statements, 287

  Proofs of Christianity
    a touchstone of honesty, [259
    level to common men, 260
    some important ones omitted in this treatise, and why, 304
    why not more plain, 261

  Prophecy
    a joint review of prophecies furnishes a far stronger proof than
      examination in detail, 294
    a series of, being applicable to certain events, is proof that it
      was intended of them, 276
    compared to compiled memoirs, 278
    created the expectation of a Messiah, 284
    confirmed by appearances, 292
    evidence from, 275
    expressed in figurative language, 275
    how understood by ancient Jews, 277
    in relation to the Jews, 284
    is history anticipated, 281
    its obscurity, 275
    its proofs amazingly strong, [207
    may not _always_ have been understood by the writer, 278
    proves foresight, 276, 279
    sometimes obscured by interpreters, 210
    summary of, concerning Christ, 284
    use of, to future ages, 249
    writers upon, 277, 285

  Prophet, Christ a, 240

  Prophets
    not the _authors_ of what they wrote, 278
    their sense of their predictions not necessarily the whole
      sense, 278
    whether they had in view the events which Christians consider
      fulfilments, 277

  Proverbial, use of the word, 201

  Providence, never hasty, [229
    objections to it useless, 300, 301
    the course of, progressive, 229

  Province of reason, 220

  Prudence, its best plans often frustrated, 247
    often requires us to act with uncertain prospect of success, 247, 248

  Punishment
    follows wickedness, _of course_, 231
    instances of vicarious, 244
    not always avoided by reformation, 235
    not promiscuously inflicted, 243
    provision made for escaping it, 232, 311
    we cannot of ourselves escape it, 234
    we cannot know why such and such are inflicted, 231


  Quotations
    Angus, [202, 223
    Augustine, _note_ 187
    Arnobius, [269
    Clemens Romanus, [266
    Davidson, [294
    Fitzgerald, [303
    Grotius, [259
    Guizot, [229
    Hurd, [276
    Dr. Johnson, [288
    Mahomet, [268
    Powell, [230
    Warburton, [217, 223
    Whately, [206


  Rashness of interpreters, 210
    of treating religion lightly, 197

  Reason
    could not have invented Christianity, 206
    could not ascertain the power of penitence, 194
    discovers our relation to God the Father, 194
    but not our relation to the Son and Holy Ghost, 194, 196
    its limits very narrow, [223
    its proper province, 220
    must have right principles, 220
    needs the aid of experience in judging of the consequences of
      actions, 246
    not sufficient to construct a system of natural religion free
      from superstition, 186
    our only faculty for judging even revelation, 210
    requires the importance of a question to be taken into account, 295
    teaches nothing of the certain means of either temporal or spiritual
      good, 197
    very incompetent to judge what a revelation ought to be, 210-212

  Reasoning by analogy to any extent, leaves the mind unsatisfied, 296

  Redemption
    agreeable to our natural notions, 235
    analogous to natural remedies, 232
    conjectures about it must be uncertain, 242
    mode of, not discoverable by reason, 243
    men not competent judges of its plan, 243
    on whom are its benefits, _note_ 237
    Scripture account of, 239, 240
    we should be thankful for it, without disputing how it was
      procured, 242

  References to other authors
    Alexander, [269
    Apthorpe, [285
    Bayle, [301
    Benson, [215
    Birk, [266
    Blaney, [285
    Blunt, [266
    Bolingbroke, [265
    Boswell, [288
    Boyle, [264
    Butler, [190, 272
    Campbell, [264
    Celsus, [287
    Chalmers, [187, 194, 242
    Colliber, 195
    Damascenus, [287
    Davidson, [285
    Diodorus Siculus, [287
    Eupolemus, [287
    Featley, [215
    Fitzgerald, [193, 206, 207
    Fleetwood, [264
    Fuller, [285
    Gibbon, [268
    Graves, [266
    Grotius, [266
    Gulick, [277
    Hengstenburg, [277
    Horseley, [277
    Howe, [236
    Hurd, [285
    Jortin, [264, 285
    Julian, [257
    King, [215, 277
    Lardner, [264
    Leland, [187
    Longinus, [287
    Lyall, [277
    McCosh, [187
    Mackintosh, [223
    Magee, [236, 242
    Manasses, [237
    Menander, [287
    Michaelis, [215
    Mills, [207
    Newman, [235
    Numenius, [287
    Owen, [242
    Paley, [205, 266, 268
    Pascal, [187, 223
    Pfaffius, [264
    Phlegon, [287
    Phœnician Annals, [287
    Pliny, [287
    Porphyry, 279, [287
    Samuel Stanhope Smith, [206
    Solinus, [287
    Spinoza, [215
    Stapfer, [242
    Storr, [215
    Strabo, [287
    Suetonius, [287
    Tacitus, [287
    Taylor, [264
    Tindall, [196, 248
    Tucker, [264
    Turretin, [242
    Vitringa, [276
    Warburton, [187
    Waterland, [195
    Watson, [264
    Waugh, [277, 285
    Wayland, [188, 236
    Whately, [206, 268, 288
    Witsius, [264

  Reformation does not always preclude punishment, 235

  Regard due to the Son and Holy Spirit, 195

  Regard to God as Creator, the essence of natural religion, 195

  Rejection of Christ by many, at first, the argument from it, [269
    foretold, 285

  Relations, being learned, duties are perceived, 194

  Relations of man to Deity, 194
    to the Son and Holy Ghost, 195

  Religion
    a practical thing, 298
    a question of fact, 301, 304
    affords particular reasons for miracles, 208
    confirmed by the establishment of a church, 191
    considered as external and internal, 195
    doubt of its evidence does not release from moral obligation, 254
    has its end on all persons to whom proposed, 303, [303
    if true, why susceptible of any possible doubt? 299
    its acceptance safe, 295
    its general spirit intimated, 200, 201
    its great importance, 254
    its introduction into the world, 206
    its reasonableness fully shown, if it can only be proved that it _may_
      be reasonable, 301
    its very nature overlooked by those who insist that it should have
      overwhelming evidence, 302
    may be true, though doubtful, 299
    must be judged by its evidences _taken together_, 294
    not a thing reasoned out, 206
    not equally taught to all men, 206
    objections to it removed by analogy, 300
    presupposes candor in those who examine it, 256, 302, [303
    reason may judge of its morality, 220
    reasonable, for aught which can be shown to the contrary, 301
    the perception of, 302
    the view of it taken in this treatise, 299
    the evidence for it may be lessened, but cannot be destroyed, 295
    why its evidences are allowed to admit of doubt, 249, 253, 299

  Relief for evils provided, 232

  Remedial nature of Christianity, [193

  Remedies
    provided in nature, 219, 232
    may be unskilfully used, 220
    show the compassion of God, 233
      and also his strictness, 234

  Repentance
    cannot cancel guilt, 236, [236
    general sense of mankind on the subject, 236
    its efficacy not taught by natural religion, [190
    its efficacy taught in the Scriptures, 190
    not sufficient to preclude disaster, 234, 235

  Revelation
    a particular part of a great plan, 224
    accounts for the Theism of the Jews, [206
    at the beginning of the world, would not be miraculous, 205
    cannot be neglected with impunity, 260-262
    considered as miraculous, CHAP. II.
    considered historically, 281
    difference between its facts and its principles, [235
    discovers new relations, and so new duties, 194
    distinguished from natural religion, 195
    does not compel assent, 253
    has twice been universal, [248
    how it could be overturned, 214
    its disclosures, of course, could not have been anticipated, 211, 212
    its measure of evidence puts us on probation, 253
    its facts necessarily singular, [235
    no more different from the course of nature than some parts of the
      course of nature are different from other parts, 312
    necessary, CHAP. I.
    republishes and confirms natural religion, 188, 189
    nothing incredible in it, 271
    teaches that God’s laws are compassionate, 236
    the use of unwritten revelation, 213
    what is to be expected in revelation, 210, 212

  Reverence for the will of God, [199

  Ridicule of Scripture
    an offence against natural piety, 286
    easier than examination, 259
    the great weakness of being influenced by it, 280

  Roman Empire mentioned, 279

  Rules for health very fallible and inexact, 302
    of Biblical interpretation, [215


  Sacrifices
    commanded, 241
    expiatory, 239
    how the ancients regarded them, 242
    learned by the heathen from tradition, 241
    really efficacious, 242
    the prevalence of, 236

  Sacrifice of Christ
    an objection to it, 243
    _how_ efficacious, not taught, 242
    proper and real, 239-241
    puts us into a capacity for salvation, 242
    voluntary, 244

  Safety an important consideration in judging, 294

  Satirical writings, how understood, 276, 277

  Scheme of nature, vast, 204
    progressive, 229

  Scheme of providence, if understood, would justify facts which are
      objected to, 300

  Schemes, the best may be disconcerted, 247

  Science confirms Scripture history, 287

  Scorn of prophetic diction, 210

  Scripture
    announces a general restoration of things, 282
    antiquity of, 287
    characters evidently not feigned, 287
    confirmed by profane authors, 288
    confirmed by the state of the earth, 287
    considered historically, 281
    contains an abridged history of the world, 282
    exposed to criticism, 283
    expounded by itself, [202
    gives a history of this world as God’s world, 281
    gives an account of civil governments only as they affected
      religion, 282
    has internal evidence of truth, 287
    history genuine, 265
    how distinguished from other books, 281-283
    how to be interpreted, [202
    if false could be shown to be so, 283
    includes a history of thousands of years, 283
    includes the chronology of nearly four thousand years, 284
    its authority the great question, not its contents, 214
    its chronicles confirmed by history, 287
    its evidences comprise a series of things of great variety and reaching
      to the beginning of time, 263
    its evidences not intended to be overpowering, 253
    its great proofs are miracles and prophecy, 264
    its relation to miracles only to be accounted for on the supposition
      of their truth, 265
    its strangeness not surprising, 288
    its style objected to, 210
    its truth must be judged of by the evidence _taken together_, 295
    may contain things not yet discovered, 218
    miracles, their first reception, 265
    naturalness of its statements, 287
    not composed by rules of art, 210
    nothing improbable related in any part, 287
    not to be judged by preconceived expectation, 215
    not to be judged exactly as other books, 214
    ordinary rules of interpretation, [215
    our duty to search it, 202, 262
    precepts, some give offence, 210
    reveals our relation to the Son and Holy Spirit, 194
    the possibility of its truth demands investigation, 258
    truths not discoverable by reason, 203
    variety of topics introduced, 283
    written in a rude age, 283
    why it describes creation, 282

  Searching the Scriptures a great duty, 202

  Self-deceit, our liability to it, 262

  Serious apprehension may comport with doubt, 313

  Shameful mistakes of philosophers, [230

  Similarity of objections to religion and nature, 298

  Sincerity of belief proved by dying for it, 270

  Skepticism no justification of irreligion, 253

  Sorrow cannot of itself restore abused benefits, 234

  Speaking with tongues, [217

  Speculative difficulties similar to external temptations, 256
    the chief trial of some, 257, 259

  Spread of Christianity unaccountable if it were an imposture, 290

  Standing ministry, what for, [191

  Strangeness of some Scripture events, 288

  Stupidity of the martyrs, if insincere, [269

  Subserviences, the world a system of, 229

  Success, temporal, always uncertain, 302

  Suffering, ignorance does not prevent it either in temporal or spiritual
      things, 196

  Sufferings of Christ vindicate God’s law, 244
    of the early Christians, 269

  Sufficiency of light of nature pretended, 186

  Summary of Jewish history, 284
    of the historical evidence of Scripture, 292

  Supernatural instructions necessary from the first, [206


  Temporal interests not always discerned, 247, 248
    managed by prudent persons on the very principles proposed by religion
      as to spiritual interests, 298, 299

  Temporal interests often decided by considerations which fall short of
      demonstration, 299

  Temporary commands, distinguished from perpetual, [188

  Temptation
    a wholesome discipline, 256
    earthly and spiritual similar, 256
    calls forth virtuous effort, 257

  Testimony
    can be destroyed only by counter-testimony, or by the incompetency of
      the witness, 274
    for miracles not mentioned in Scripture, does not impair the testimony
      for those there recorded, 273
    of Paul, separate and independent, 266
    of profane authors to the truth of Scripture history, [287
    of the first Christians, 269, 271
    must be judged candidly, [259
    none counter to Christianity, 275
    slight, overcomes strong presumptions, 208
    unconfuted, must be admitted, 273
    value of, lessened by enthusiasm, 271

  Theism of the Jews accounted for, [206

  Theology of the Bible, not to be corrected, [202

  Things which it is unreasonable to dispute, 307

  Thoughtlessness of men, 233

  Tradition teaches that there was a revelation at the beginning, 205
    of the fall of man, 311

  Transubstantiation, [205

  Trial by speculative difficulties, analogous to other trials, 256

  True philosophy inductive, [230

  Truth of Christianity proved, unless the whole of its history and
      influence can be accounted for by accident, 295

  Truth, how developed, [218
    the, of an event may be fully proved, though no _one_ of sundry proofs
      may be complete, 295
    whether there is any such thing, denied by skeptics, 305

  Twofold effect of the analogical argument, 305


  Unbelievers, acknowledgment of, 289
    cannot deny a conformity between prophecy and events, 293

  Understanding, its right use, 245

  Undesigned coincidences in Bible history, [266

  Undeterminate language deceives many, 297

  Unequal distribution of religious knowledge, 249

  Unfair dealing of objectors, 297

  Unreasonableness of applying to passion for guidance, 295

  Unsatisfactory evidence, men often obliged to act upon it, 302


  Variety in the distribution of God’s gifts, 249, 312

  Vastness of the scheme of nature, 204

  Veracity of the first Christians, 274

  Vicarious punishments witnessed every day, 244
    deter from sin, 245

  Vice
    appointed to be punished, 231
    blinds men to just evidence, 255
    its effects in the present world, 234
    its natural consequences are God’s judicial inflictions, 197
    its real enormity, 234
    not palliated by any supposed lack of evidence for religion, 255

  Vindication of religion by analogy impossible, 296
    of the character of God, not attempted in this treatise, 299, 300


  Way of salvation for the helpless, [186

  Will of GOD, as absolute or conditional, 261

  World, wickedness of, 238

  Worship, mode of, a matter of pure revelation, 195

  Writers
    on the atonement, [242
    Christian sacraments, [195
    miracles, [264, 268
    necessity of revelation, [187
    prophecy, [277-285
    Scripture difficulties, [215
    undesigned coincidences, [266

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Analogy of Religion to the
Constitution and Course of Nat, by Joseph Butler

