
                                  THE
                         ANALOGY OF RELIGION,
                                TO THE
                  Constitution and Course of Nature.

                          TO WHICH ARE ADDED
                       TWO BRIEF DISSERTATIONS:
        I. ON PERSONAL IDENTITY.--II. ON THE NATURE OF VIRTUE.

                                  BY
                         JOSEPH BUTLER, D.C.L.

         Ejus [Analogiæ] hæc vis est, ut id quod dubium est ad
         aliquid simile, de quo non quæritur referat ut incerta
         certis probet.--QUINTIL. l. i. c. 6.

                                 WITH
         AN INTRODUCTION, NOTES, CONSPECTUS, AND AMPLE INDEX,
                                  BY
                          HOWARD MALCOM, D.D.
         PRESIDENT OF THE UNIVERSITY, LEWISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA.

                         SEVENTEENTH EDITION.
                             PHILADELPHIA:
                        J. B. LIPPINCOTT & CO.
                                 1873.

      Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1857, by
                        J. B. LIPPINCOTT & CO.
       in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United
        States in and for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE

  EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION                                                5

     ”     PREFACE                                                    19

     ”     CONSPECTUS                                                 21

  AUTHOR’S ADVERTISEMENT                                              66

     ”     INTRODUCTION                                               67

                                PART I.

                         OF NATURAL RELIGION.

     CHAP. I.--A Future Life                                          77

    CHAP. II.--The Government of God by Rewards and Punishments       95

   CHAP. III.--The Moral Government of God                           105

    CHAP. IV.--Probation, as implying Trial, Difficulties, and
               Danger                                                128

     CHAP. V.--Probation, as intended for Moral Discipline and
               Improvement                                           136

    CHAP. VI.--The Opinion of Necessity, considered as influencing
               Practice                                              157

   CHAP. VII.--The Government of God, considered as a Scheme or
               Constitution, imperfectly comprehended                171

  CONCLUSION                                                         180

                               PART II.

                         OF REVEALED RELIGION.

     CHAP. I.--The Importance of Christianity                        186

    CHAP. II.--The supposed Presumption against a Revelation,
               considered as miraculous                              202

   CHAP. III.--Our Incapacity of judging, what were to be expected
               in a Revelation; and the Credibility, from Analogy,
               that it must contain things appearing liable to
               Objections                                            209

    CHAP. IV.--Christianity, considered as a Scheme or Constitution,
               imperfectly comprehended                              223

     CHAP. V.--The Particular System of Christianity; the
               Appointment of a Mediator, and the Redemption of
               the World by him                                      230

    CHAP. VI.--Want of Universality in Revelation; and of the
               supposed Deficiency in the Proof of it                247

   CHAP. VII.--The Particular Evidence for Christianity              263

  CHAP. VIII.--Objections against arguing from the Analogy of
               Nature to Religion                                    296

  CONCLUSION                                                         306

                            DISSERTATIONS.

  DISSERTATION I.--Personal Identity                                 317

  DISSERTATION II.--The Nature of Virtue                             324

  INDEX TO PART I                                                    333

  INDEX TO PART II                                                   343




Editor’s Introduction


JOSEPH BUTLER was born at Wantage, England, May 18th, 1692, the
youngest of eight children. The biographies of that day were few
and meagre; and in few cases is this so much to be regretted as in
Butler’s. It would have been both interesting and profitable to trace
the development and occupations of one of the mightiest of human minds.
But no cotemporary gathered up the incidents of his life, and now all
efforts to elicit them have been without success.

His father was a prosperous dry-goods merchant, who, at the time of his
son’s birth, had retired from business with a competency, and resided
in a suburban mansion called “The Priory,” still in existence.

Being a non-conformist, he educated Joseph at a “dissenting” academy
at Gloucester, under SAMUEL JONES, a gentleman of great ability, and
a skilful instructor, who raised up some of the greatest men of their
day.[1]

It was while a member of this academy, and about the age of twenty-one,
that Butler disclosed to the world his wonderful power of abstract
reasoning, in his famous correspondence with Samuel Clarke, in relation
to that eminent author’s “_Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of
God_.” This correspondence is now generally inserted at the end of that
work.

Mr. Butler having deliberately adopted Episcopal views, and resolved
to unite himself with the Established Church, his father, with
praiseworthy liberality, sent him to Oxford, where he entered Oriel
College, March, 1714. Of his college life there is no account; nor of
the time and place of his ordination. He removed to London in 1718,
on receiving the appointment of “Preacher at the Rolls.” His famous
Fifteen Sermons were preached in that chapel, and published before
resigning the place, with a dedication to Sir Joseph Jekyl, “as a
parting mark of gratitude for the favors received during his connection
with that learned society.”

One of Butler’s warmest college friends was Edward Talbot second son
of a clergyman who afterwards became Bishop of Durham. This admirable
young man died of smallpox; in his last hours recommending Butler to
his father’s patronage; and scarcely had that gentleman attained the
see of Durham, before he gave Mr. B. the living of Haughton, from
whence he transferred him, in 1725, to the richer benefice of Stanhope.

On receiving this honorable and lucrative appointment, he resigned
the Lectureship at the Rolls, and in the autumn of 1726 retired to
his beautiful residence at Stanhope. Here, without a family to occupy
his time, he devoted himself to his great work, the Analogy: using
horseback exercise, seeing little company, living abstemiously and
caring for his flock.

Seven years thus rolled away; when to draw him from what seemed to his
friends too great retirement and application, Lord-Chancellor Talbot
made him his chaplain, and afterwards, in 1736, gave him a prebend’s
stall in Rochester. In 1736, Butler being now forty-four, Caroline,
consort of George II., appointed him “Clerk of the Closet,” an office
which merely required his attendance at the Queen’s apartments every
evening, from seven to nine.

Being now in London, convenient to the press, and enjoying both leisure
and competency, he published his immortal ANALOGY--the cherished work
of his life. The Queen was delighted with the book, and made herself
master of its glorious array of reasoning. But she died the same year,
and he lost not only a patroness, but a friend. He returned to his
benefice at Stanhope, the income of which had been held during his
residence in London.

On her death-bed, the Queen had urged her husband to promote her
honored chaplain to a bishopric; and next year, the see of Norwich
becoming vacant, the Bishop of Bristol was translated to it, and the
see of Bristol given to Butler. Bristol was the poorest bishopric
in England, its emoluments being but $2,000 per annum; less than
those of the rectorship of Stanhope. Butler distinctly disclosed his
disappointment in his letter to the minister Walpole, accepting the
position; and declared that he did not think it “very suitable to the
condition of his fortune, nor answerable to the recommendation with
which he was honored.” The king was not displeased at this candor,
and in 1740 improved his income by giving him, in addition to his
bishopric, the profitable and influential office of Dean of St.
Paul’s. Butler, who had retained the living of Stanhope along with
his bishopric, now resigned that rectorship. “The rich revenues,” says
Professor Fitzgerald, “of the Deanery of St. Paul, enabled him to
gratify his taste at Bristol.” He expended about $25,000 in improving
and beautifying the episcopal residence and gardens. He fostered useful
charities, and employed his wealth for others rather than for himself.

In 1750, upon the death of Dr. Edward Chandler, Bishop of Durham,
Butler was promoted to that see, the most honorable and lucrative
in England. He had before been offered the Primacy, on the death of
Archbishop Potter, but declined it, with the remark that “it was too
late for him to try to support a falling church.” On assuming his
diocese at Durham, Butler delivered and published his famous Charge
to the Clergy, upon “The Use and Importance of External Religion.”
He was at once assailed vigorously, in pamphlets and papers, by
Archdeacon Blackburn, the Rev. T. Lindsay, and others, on the charge
of Popery; an imputation which is still sometimes cast upon him, and
which finds some slender support in his setting up a marble cross over
the communion-table at Bristol. That he never was a Papist, is now so
evident, that we can account for the imputation only by the strong
jealousy of the Romish Church then prevalent.

Butler now became still more munificent. His private charities were
exceedingly generous, and his public ones seemed sometimes to border on
extravagance. He gave $2,000 a year to the county hospital, and often
gave away thousands of dollars at a time. But though quite lavish in
buildings and ornaments, as well as in benevolence, he was remarkably
frugal in his personal expenses. It is said of him, by Rev. John
Newton, that on one occasion, when a distinguished visitor dined with
him by appointment, the provision consisted of a single joint of meat,
and a pudding. The bishop remarked to his guest on that occasion, that
he “had long been disgusted with the fashionable expense of time and
money in entertainments, and was determined that it should receive no
countenance from his example.”

Of his amusements we know little except that he took much horseback
exercise, and often employed his secretary, Mr. Emms, to play for him
on the organ.

Butler held the see of Durham less than two years. Symptoms of general
physical decay betrayed themselves about the time of his promotion, and
in spite of all that skill and affection could prompt, he sunk to rest
June 16th, 1752, aged sixty. He was never married.

A considerable number of his sermons and charges have been printed,
but are too philosophical to be generally read. His great work is the
Analogy, published in 1736, and from that day read and admired by every
highly-cultivated mind. He was induced to write by a state of things
very remarkable in the history of religion. Debauchery and infidelity
were almost universal, not in any one class of society but in all.
England had reached the culminating point of irreligion, and the firm
re-establishment of Episcopacy had as yet done nothing to mend the
nation’s morals. Piety was deemed a mark of ignorance and vulgarity,
and multitudes of those who professed it were persecuted to dungeons
and death.

Infidel writers, warmed into life by court corruption, became more
numerous and audacious than ever before. Their methods of attacking
Christianity were various; but the most successful then, as always, was
to impugn certain doctrines and declarations of the Sacred Scriptures,
as irrational, and hence reject the whole. They generally admitted the
Being and perfection of God, and extolled the sufficiency of natural
religion; but denied any revelation, or any necessity for one. The
verdict of the world was that the Bible is not authentic, that man is
not accountable, nor even probably immortal, that God neither rewards
nor punishes, and that present indulgence, as far as our nature admits,
is both wise and safe.

Bishop Downam,[2] one of the most learned of the clergy, in the early
part of the seventeenth century writes thus: “In these times, if a
man do but labor to keep a good conscience, though he meddle not with
matters of state, if he make conscience of swearing, sanctify the
Sabbath, frequent sermons, or abstain from the common corruptions of
the times, he shall straightway be condemned for a puritan, and be less
favored than either a carnal gospeller, or a close Papist.”

It was considered settled, especially in polite circles, that
Christianity, after so long a prevalence, had been found out to be an
imposture. The clergy, as a body, did nothing to dispel this moral
gloom, but rather increased it by their violent and scandalous conduct.
In the sad language of Bishop Warburton, “Religion had lost its hold on
the minds of the people.” He adds with great point, “Though a _rule of
right_ may direct the philosopher to a principle of action; and the
_point of honor_ may keep up the thing called manners, among gentlemen:
yet nothing but _religion_ can ever fix a sober standard of behavior
among the common people.” Even the universities were on the side of
irreligion; for professorships, as well as pulpits, were given to men,
not for positive worth and fitness, but for possessing qualities then
most in vogue with those who held the appointing power. Such were the
trying times which had driven our pilgrim fathers to seek a home amid
the wilds of an unexplored continent, and to face the dangers of sea
and savage.

It must ever be regarded as among the highest instances of God’s
bringing good out of evil, that this outrageous rampancy of infidelity
brought out a host of champions for the truth of His word; who boldly
met the odium of discipleship, and waged battle in such style that the
Deistical controversy was settled forever. Never was a dispute more
determined on both sides, and never was victory more complete. Literary
infidelity not only recoiled, but was routed; and can never again
prevail. Henceforth, no _scholar_ will ever treat the evidences of
Christianity as a subject of ridicule or contempt.

When we contrast the stupendous learning, and powerful logic, of the
Christian writers of that century, with the superficial and almost
contemptible productions of the writers against whom they contended, we
are tempted to wonder why such power should be requisite to overthrow
such weakness. But we must remember, that frail logic and shallow
considerations, will persuade men to indulge their vices; while
the soundest reasonings and the most impressive inducements, with
difficulty lead them to self-restraint and true holiness.

The infidel writers of that day have sunk into such oblivion that
their works are now seldom found but in great libraries; and even
well-educated persons scarcely know more of them than their names. Yet
so perfectly did their principles accord with the temper of the times
and the universal depravity of the carnal heart, that they enjoyed the
highest popularity with all classes. Forever honored be the names of
that noble band, who, in face of such odds, established the authority
of the Bible, and left the advocates of atheism and immorality without
a lurking-place.[3] In this noble cohort Butler stands conspicuous:
and to him, I think, more than to all the others, is to be attributed
the sudden and total overthrow of infidelity, when it was in its glory.

As a metaphysician, few have equalled him. What he added to the
science, has ever since remained a part of it, which can be said
of scarcely another. He advanced more that was new, fortified old
positions more ably, and applied speculation to religion more usefully
than any before him. Our language furnishes no profounder thinking.
Merely to understand him is an honorable distinction, and requires no
small previous training of the power of attention. As a polemic, he is
keen, sagacious, candid, patient, persevering, calm, inventive, and
profound: every page indicates that repose of mind, which belongs only
to true greatness, combined with a full knowledge of the subject. So
far as I am able to judge, he never presses a consideration beyond its
just limits, and seldom introduces an illustration which has not the
force of an argument. Fallacies he seems to abolish at a touch.

The Analogy employed much of his life. It was begun in his twentieth
year, but was not published till he was forty-five. Such a mode of
writing never makes large books, for the matter, constantly revised,
becomes constantly condensed. The Analogy is so condensed, as that to
make a satisfactory synopsis is scarcely practicable. Hence, though my
Conspectus and notes have aided my pupils to understand and remember
the argument, they do not in any measure obviate the necessity of
studying the book itself. If they do not increase the number of those
who shall studiously peruse the book itself, my aim and expectations
will be disappointed.

To this work no reply has ever been attempted! Extensive as is its
diffusion, and great as is its acknowledged influence, infidelity
has had the highest inducements to attempt to set it aside. Written
for a present purpose, and most signally accomplishing it, it is yet
so written as to endure, in full value, through all coming time.
It is undoubtedly “the most original and the most profound work
extant, in any language, on the philosophy of religion,”[4] “the most
argumentative and philosophical defence of Christianity ever submitted
to the world.”[5]

Writers in defence of Christianity had, before Butler, amply discussed
the several departments of evidences; but still there remained
objections. The structure of the globe, the course of nature, the
organization of animals, &c. were affirmed to contradict revelation.
Its doctrines and duties, moreover, were pronounced inconsistent
with sound reason. Butler repeats none of the old arguments, but
confines himself to the showing that the declarations of revelation
are in perfect harmony with facts seen daily in the world, and which
all admit. That the world might not have been ordered and governed
otherwise, he does not choose to dispute. Taking things as they are,
and closely studying the connection between one thing and another,
we ought to inquire what course of action on our part, will conform
to the needs of such a nature and such circumstances. Our bodies are
constructed of parts, all adapted to each other, and also to one
general end. So too, our souls. And the two together have relations
and adaptations, which may, to some extent at least, indicate what is
designed to be the _general_ end of our existence. If Christianity
befits these several parts of our mixed nature and their obvious uses,
then there is nothing incongruous between the two; and no objections
against Christianity can be drawn from the course of nature. On the
contrary, all seems to be governed as the gospel declares it is, and
shows that the Author of man and the Author of the Bible is the same.
This is still more impressive when we consider that we have a _moral
faculty_; for it is the very object and business of this faculty to
deal with right and wrong, good and evil; the facts and magnitudes of
which are obvious in the course of nature. If Christianity does, in an
especial manner, _befit_ this faculty, if it is adapted to promote our
general rectitude and happiness, and if it contains no principle which
is not discernible in the government of the visible world, then there
is no discrepancy between Christianity and Providence.

This is Butler’s position. He confines himself to proving such
an analogy between revelation and the daily course of things, as
that nothing known in the universe can be offered in disproof of
Christianity. The mode of warfare was new. Without professing to prove
Christianity to be true, he demonstrates that it cannot be proved to be
false; and that if it be even probable, the rejection of it is a gross
folly and a tremendous hazard. Every objection against it he proves to
be equally forcible against facts which constantly occur, and which all
admit, though none profess to understand. Thus leaving the ramparts of
the church to be guarded by the mighty men who had valiantly maintained
its defence, he quietly walked out into the camp of the enemy, and
spiked every gun!

It has been said that the whole argument of the “Analogy” seems to be
built on Ecclesiasticus xlii. 24: “All things are double, one against
the other, and God hath made nothing imperfect.” If it be so, it
involves no disparagement to have received thus the seminal idea of
this immortal work. Who else has so gloriously discerned and expanded
the profound philosophy of the son of Sirac? Others have uttered
sentiments which seem to involve the whole exposition of Butler. Origen
affirms that “he who believes the Scripture to have proceeded from Him
who is the Author of nature, may well expect to find the same sort of
difficulties in it, as are found in nature.” Shall we assign to Origen
the whole credit of the “Analogy”? As well might we bestow all our
admiration for the delightful papers of Addison, in the Spectator, to
the classical authors from whom he selected appropriate mottoes! By
such a rule, the entire merit of this most Christian work of Butler
should be attributed to the pagan Quintilian, from whom he derives the
motto which so appropriately graces his title-page.

A rapid sketch of the outline of the argument will aid the student
at his outset. He begins by taking for granted the existence of an
intelligent Author and Governor of the universe. Then, from the
conditions and changes observed in the visible world, he argues the
folly of objecting to revelation on account of doctrines which do but
declare the same general laws and the same principles of government.
That there is this harmony, he proves; and hence the probability that
the same sort of government will prevail hereafter, which prevails now.
He demonstrates that man is under exactly such a probation in this
world, and as to this world, as revelation affirms him to be under,
as to the next; and that embarrassments produced by the doctrine of
necessity, involve nature no less than religion. He then evinces the
need that man should be placed in a state of training and trial, if he
is ever to be qualified for better conditions; and that this world,
as now governed, is exactly adapted to give that training, and to
produce such a character as will insure happiness under any possible
contingencies. This is the argument of Part I.

Proceeding to examine Christianity, he discusses its importance, its
proofs, the unavoidableness of its containing strange things, the
absurdity of expecting fully to comprehend its statements, and the
abundance of its evidence for candid minds, though they are not, and
ought not to be, irresistible. He answers not only the objections to
Christianity, but the objections against its proofs; which he shows
are very different things. Though he keeps rigidly to the refutation
of objections, and nowhere meddles with the direct evidence of
Christianity, yet, by removing every objection, he does in fact confirm
its claims. This clearing away of objections, _after_ the usual proofs
are presented, crowns and completes the evidence. Thus the ultimate
result of a study of his book is not only negative but positive; and
such has been its effect on every candid and competent student.

We should remember that we have no right to require the removal of
objections, and that therefore the whole of Butler’s work is in fact
supererogatory; a concession and kindness to such as have doubts,
either honest or captious. Our only rightful demand of Christianity is
for _credentials_. It presents these in its nature, its miracles, its
prophecies, its propagation, its influence, and its success. If these
are competent, we should bow to its teachings. To suppose that we are
capable of judging of the _propriety_ of all God’s law, or even to
understand his reasons for it, if they were disclosed, is absurd.

It is true we naturally presume that a revelation in words, and a
revelation by natural objects and the visible order of things, would
coincide; but to find out the fact or the extent of such coincidence,
is not our first business. We are to weigh the _testimony_ in favor of
religion, embrace it, if sufficient, and attribute the obscurity of any
part, to our present want of capacity. The solution of difficulties
serves to _confirm_ our faith in Christianity, but has no place in our
_ground of reception_: and we have no right to wait for such solution,
however painful and embarrassing may be the difficulties.

Another, and perhaps even more important, use of the “Analogy,” is to
dissipate the prejudices and objections to Christianity which prevent
a candid study of its evidences. These prepossess and poison the mind,
and obstruct or abate the force of the best arguments. Few, if any,
after a careful examination of the positive evidences of Christianity,
conclude them to be inadequate. But many are they, who having heard
objections which their scanty learning does not enable them to answer,
and their no less scanty interest in the subject does not induce them
to examine, or which their inclinations lead them to cherish, cast
it all aside. In this way they relieve themselves from the labor of
investigation, as well as their compunctions of conscience; while they
indulge both their love of sin and pride of singularity.

An instance of the use of this book to such a mind, we have in the
case of Chalmers. He had read, when a young man, several infidel
productions. Their semblance of logic and learning, and supercilious
confidence of style, disposed him to regard all religion as mere
superstition. His mind was poisoned. Accustomed as he had been to
the positive and precise reasonings of mathematics, he could not
find similar proofs for Christianity. But he was induced, by some
friends, to study Butler’s Analogy. This, as he expresses it, took
Christianity “out of the class of unlikelihoods.” It brought him to
the investigation, as if the evidence was neither plus nor minus. He
examined the evidences as he would have done a declaration that Cicero
weighed just one hundred and fifty pounds; open to the smallest proof
or presumption on the positive side of the question. Delivered from
prejudice, not only against Christianity but against its proofs, he
soon saw the madness of deism, and immovably accepted the word of God,
though he did not, at that time, feel its transforming power on his own
heart. Long afterwards he writes, “I cannot render sufficient homage to
the argument, which first, addressing itself to the _subject-matter_ of
Christianity, relieves it of all disproof, and pronounces it worthy of
a trial; and then, addressing itself to the evidence of Christianity,
relieves it of all objections, and makes good, to that evidence, all
the entireness and efficiency which natively belong to it.” Years
afterwards he said, “Butler made me a Christian.” That it did far more
for him than to effect his change of sentiment, that it continued to
be a light in his firmament, is touchingly told in the Preface of his
Bridgewater Treatise, where he says, “I have derived greater aid from
the views and reasonings of Butler, than I have been able to find,
besides, in the whole range of our extant authorship.”

To the sincere believer in the word of God the study of Butler is of
great use. Doubts are among Satan’s tried weapons, and often haunt
the holiest, especially if of a contemplative turn. They see goodness
oppressed, and vice rampant; the world ruled by wicked men, and
truth making its way with difficulty. Their hearts are traitorous,
their surroundings full of temptation, and the direct evidence of
Christianity they may never have studied. To such the analogical
argument comes with full power, meets a candid examination, and
prevails.

To no Christian is this book so useful as the minister. He is
constantly confronted by the difficulties which Butler so triumphantly
handles. Here he is furnished, not only with a shield to protect his
own mind from subtle darts, but a sword to demolish the cavil, and
defend the system of which he is a public teacher.

To _all_ persons this book is of great value. We arrive at certainty
in but few of our decisions, and are often obliged, even in matters of
great moment, to act on probability. Thus we employ precautions when
an evil is not certain to occur. If the evil would be very serious,
we adopt the precaution, when there is but little probability, or
perhaps a bare possibility, of its occurrence. Now, Butler has shown
that if the proofs of revelation were weak, nay, if it had absolutely
no proof, nay further, if on fair examination there appeared not even
a probability of its truth, still there would remain a _possibility_,
and this alone, considering the tremendous issues at stake, should make
every man a Christian. This argument cannot be applied to Mahometanism
or any other religion, because against those much may be advanced as
_disproof_. Our author, having shown the utter absence of disproof,
shuts us up to the reception of Christianity, were its truth barely
possible.

There have not been wanting persons to disparage the “Analogy,” because
it affords, as they say, no _direct_ proof of revelation. As well might
we demand a discussion of chemistry in a work on astronomy. Scores of
writers _prove_ Christianity, and here we have one to relieve us from
the difficulties which beset it, and objections which still remain.
There is an aspect in which the Analogy may be said to contribute
the best of proof. What can go further towards establishing a point,
than to demonstrate that there is no proof of the contrary? What can
show the fallacy of a set of objections, more than to prove that
they might be urged with no less force against the obvious course of
nature? This use of analogy is conformable to the severest logic, and
though offering no pretence of positive argument, goes far towards
establishing full conviction. “The probabilities,” says STEWART,
“resulting from a concurrence of different analogies, may rise so high
as to produce an effect on the belief scarcely distinguishable from
moral certainty.”

When it is considered that Butler’s argument is wholly in addition
to the cumulative mass of direct and almost irresistible evidence,
and removes even the objections which attend the subject, we see the
rejection of Christianity to be inexpressibly rash and absurd. We see
the skeptic condemned at his own bar, for acting in the most momentous
of all possible concerns, in a manner the very opposite of that which
he calls sensible and prudent in his ordinary affairs. The “Analogy”
establishes, beyond cavil, strong _presumptions_ that Christianity is
true, aside from all inspection of its proofs. The man, therefore, who
really understands this book, and refuses to be a Christian, is led by
his lusts and not his reason.

Some admirers of this book have lamented as a defect, its want of
evangelical tincture, and its exclusive reference to natural things. To
me, this is a prime recommendation. Were it otherwise, the reasoning
would be in a circle. The very structure of the argument demands that
it should avoid quotations from the Bible.

It must be admitted, however, that some expressions, taken just as they
stand, without qualification by the current of the argument, tend to
lead astray. For instance, “There is nothing in the human mind contrary
to virtue.” “Men’s happiness and virtue are left to themselves.”
“Religion requires nothing which we are not well able to perform.” “Our
repentance is accepted, to eternal life.” “Our relations to God are
made known by reason.” Such expressions are not to be taken alone, but
as explained by the general drift of sentiment and doctrine. No one can
be familiar with his works, without finding the fullest evidence that
Christianity was to Butler infinitely more than a creed or a ritual.
Nor should we forget that such expressions are not to be interpreted by
the tenor of the “Analogy” only, but by that of his whole ‘Works.’

Even if it be judged that he everywhere fails to express himself in
such phrase as we usually call evangelical, it should be remembered
that he was a Church-of-England man, at a time when there was a
powerful reaction against the evangelism of the Puritans, and when a
real lack of emotional piety was general in his church.

That he did not enjoy in his last illness, which extended over a long
period, that sustaining sense of the love of Christ which hearty
Christians generally feel, is certain. A friend, trying to relieve
his depression, reminded him of his excellent life, and especially
his wide liberalities. He immediately replied, “l am but a steward!
All is His, intrusted to me, to promote his glory and the good of
mankind; how can I know that I have not abused the trust? I reflect on
all these things, and they fill my soul with terror by the feeling of
responsibility they awaken.”

On another occasion, his chaplain sought to soothe his troubled spirit
by referring to the extensive influence of his _Analogy_ in reclaiming
skeptics. His reply was, “I _began_ the Analogy with a view to the
glory of God; but as I proceeded, visions of the fame it might bring
me mingled themselves with my motives, and all was polluted and made
sinful! The book may be a blessing to others, but it weighs like lead
on my soul.” “Admit all this,” tenderly replied the chaplain; “yet has
not Jesus said, ‘Whosoever cometh unto me shall in no wise be cast
out’?” Instantly the Bishop raised himself in the bed, exclaiming,
“How wonderful that the force of this passage never struck me before!
‘Whosoever,’--_all_, ALL! ‘In no wise,’--no amount of sin can prevent
acceptance! Christ’s righteousness will hide the iniquities of _all_
who accept his offer of mercy!”

From that time, for weeks, Butler spoke to all who approached him, of
a _full_ and _free_ salvation. He died triumphantly repeating this
passage.

If all that is said of the lack of evangelical sentiment in Butler or
his book be conceded, it certainly cannot impair either the value of
the analogical argument, or the force of our author’s use of it.

Various circumstances conspire to make the study of “The Analogy”
difficult. The nature of the reasoning--the conciseness, and often
obscurity of the style--the dislocation of parts by frequent
digressions--the arrest of a close course of reasoning to answer
objections--and the abstruseness of the subject itself--combine to
make the full comprehension of its import difficult. Mackintosh says,
“No thinker so great, was ever so bad a writer.” But this, like some
other objections of Sir James, is stated too strongly. The language is
good, sinewy Saxon, and will endure when much that is now called fine
writing, will seem grotesque. Still it is possible to write philosophy
in better phrase, as has been shown by at least two great men, Berkeley
and Stewart. Had Butler but possessed the glowing style of Berkeley,
or the smooth, graceful, and transparent diction of Dugald Stewart,
his work, instead of serving only for close thinkers, or a college
text-book, would have been read by all classes, and banished that
vulgar infidelity which flippant writers still disseminate. That it is
thus restricted in its influence is a misfortune to the world. But he
wrote for a class, and did his work completely. Literary infidelity was
conquered. Vulgar, ignorant, licentious infidelity, will always exist,
and is even now deplorably prevalent. Both Europe and America contain
conceited and malignant ignoramuses, who by their sneers, their cavils,
and their audacity, make havoc of souls. Of these, Tom Paine is a type,
whose book, the contempt of cultivated minds, continues to be sold and
read. For this class of persons, “Baxter’s Call,” or “Alleine’s Alarm,”
are far more suitable than treatises on the evidences of Christianity,
or even Butler’s Analogy.




Editor’s Preface.


The text is the result of a careful collation of the various principal
editions. Occasionally solecisms are corrected, and a word transposed
or put in italics, when a sentence could thus be made perspicuous. The
author had a fashion of beginning a large proportion of his sentences
with “and,” “but,” “now,” “indeed,” “however,” &c., which often served
to perplex, and in such cases they have been omitted. Long paragraphs,
comprehending different topics, have been so divided as to correspond
with the true analysis; which will greatly assist the student in
detecting the successive stages of the argument. Special pains has been
taken to correct and improve the punctuation. Hundreds of sentences
have thus been rendered more perspicuous, and many which were obscure,
have been made lucid. In no respect was Butler’s style, as printed, so
defective.

The Conspectus is made much ampler than any other, for this reason:
that students are apt to content themselves with such help instead of
mastering the full discussion by the author. In the present case they
cannot so do, for such is the fulness of the Conspectus, that if they
master this, they have mastered the subject itself in full.

Notes by the present editor are distinguished from those of the author
by being enclosed in brackets. They are designed to open out further
views, to elucidate the text, to facilitate extended researches, and to
suggest topics for conversation in the class-room.

The Index has cost far more labor than would be supposed, and may not
be of much benefit to the undergraduate. Its advantages will not be
small to him in after life when he desires to recur to particular
topics. The general scholar will find it enables him to make use of the
book for occasional reference. Without it the work is not complete for
the class-room, still less for the library.

That students of the Analogy need help, is confessed; and all attempts
to furnish it have been kindly received. As is remarked by Bishop
Wilson, “His argument, clear and convincing as it is to a prepared
mind, is not obvious to the young reader, whose experience of life
being small, and his habits of reflection feeble, has not the furniture
necessary for comprehending, at first, the thoughts and conclusions of
such a mind. The style is too close, too negligent, too obscure, to be
suitable for the young.”

If it be asked why, with several existing helps to the study of the
Analogy, I offer another, I frankly reply, because I have found none of
them satisfactory, either to the public or to myself.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some teachers prefer their text-books to be accompanied by a set of
questions. Such will find in this edition all they desire. They have
only to enunciate each sentence of the Conspectus in the interrogative
form, and they will have every possible question prepared to their
hand.




Conspectus of the Author’s Introduction.


I. _What is probable evidence?_

  =1.= It differs from demonstration in that it admits of degrees; of
  _all_ degrees.

    1.) One probability does not beget assurance.

    2.) But the slightest presumption makes a probability.

    3.) The repetition of it may make certainty.

  =2.= What constitutes probability is _likeness_; in regard to the
  event itself, or its kind of evidences, or its circumstances.

    1.) This daily affords presumptions, evidence, or conviction:
    according as it is occasional, common, or constant.

    2.) Measures our hopes and fears.

    3.) Regulates our expectations as to men’s conduct.

    4.) Enables us to judge of character from conduct.

  =3.= It is an imperfect mode of judging, and adapted to beings of
  limited capacities.

  =4.= Where better evidence cannot be had, it constitutes moral
  obligation, even though great doubts remain.

    1.) We are as much bound to do what, on the whole, _appears_ to
    be best, as if we _knew_ it to be so.

    2.) In questions of great moment, it is reasonable to act when
    the favorable chances are no greater than the unfavorable.

    3.) There are numberless cases in which a man would be thought
    distracted if he did not act, and that earnestly, where the
    chances of success were _greatly against_ him.


II. _The use and application of probabilities_.

Shall not go further into the _nature_ of probable evidence, nor
inquire _why_ likeness begets presumption and conviction; nor how far
analogical reasoning can be reduced to a _system_; but shall only show
how just and conclusive this mode of reasoning is.

  =1.= In determining our judgments and practice.

    1.) There may be cases in which its value is doubtful.

    2.) There may be seeming analogies, which are not really such.

    3.) But as a mode of argument, it is perfectly just and
    conclusive.

  =2.= In noting correspondencies between the different parts of God’s
  government.

    1.) We may expect to find the same sort of difficulties in the
    Bible, as we do in Nature.

    2.) To deny the Bible to be of God, because of these
    difficulties, requires us to deny that the world was made by
    him.

    3.) If there be a likeness between revelation and the system of
    nature, it affords a presumption that both have the same author.

    4.) To reason on the construction and government of the world,
    without settling foundation-principles, is mere hypothesis.

    5.) To apply principles which are certain, to cases which are
    not applicable, is no better.

    6.) But to join abstract reasonings to the observation of
    facts, and argue, from known present things, to what is likely
    or credible, must be right.

    7.) We cannot avoid acting thus, if we act at all.

  =3.= In its application to religion, revealed, as well as natural.
  This is the use which will be made of analogy in the following
  work. In so using it,

    1.) It will be taken for proved that there is an intelligent
    Creator and Ruler.

      --There are no presumptions _against_ this, prior to proof.

      --There are proofs:--from analogy, reason, tradition, &c.

      --The fact is not denied by the generality of skeptics.

    2.) No regard will be paid to those who idly speculate as to how
    the world _might_ have been made and governed.

      --Such prating would amount to this:

        · All creatures should have been made at first as happy as
        they could be.

        · Nothing of hazard should be put upon them.

        · Should have been _secured_ in their happiness.

        · All punishments avoided.

      --It is a sufficient reply to such talk that mankind have not
      faculties for such speculations.

    3.) We are, to some extent, judges as to _ends_; and may
    conclude that Nature and Providence are designed to produce
    virtue and happiness; but of the _means_ of producing these in
    the highest degree, we are not competent judges.

      --We know not the extent of the universe;

      --Nor even how one person can best be brought to perfection.

      --We are not often competent to judge of the conduct of each
      other.

      --As to God, we may presume that order will prevail in his
      universe; but are no judges of his modes for accomplishing
      this end.

    4.) Instead of vainly, and perhaps sinfully, imagining schemes
    for God’s conduct, we must _study what is_.

      --Discovering general laws.

      --Comparing the known course of things with what revelation
      teaches us to expect.


III. _The force of this use of Analogy._

  =1.= Sometimes is practically equivalent to proof.

  =2.= Confirms what is otherwise proved.

  =3.= Shows that the system of revelation is no more open to
  ridicule, than the system of nature.

  =4.= Answers almost all objections against religion.

  =5.= To a great extent answers objections against the _proofs_ of
  religion.


IV. _General scope of the book._

  =1.= The divine government is considered, as containing in it,

    Chap. 1. Man’s future existence.

      ”   2. In a state of reward or punishment.

      ”   3. This according to our behavior.

      ”   4. Our present life probationary.

      ”   5. And also disciplinary.

      ”   6. Notwithstanding the doctrine of necessity.

      ”   7. Or any apparent want of wisdom or goodness.

  =2.= Revealed religion is considered,

    Chap. 1. As important.

      ”   2. As proved by miracles.

      ”   3. As containing strange things.

      ”   4. As a scheme imperfectly comprehended.

      ”   5. As carried on by a mediator.

      ”   6. As having such an amount of evidence as God saw fit to give.

      ”   7. As having sufficient and full evidence.


Conspectus of the Analogy.


PART I.


CHAPTER I.

A FUTURE LIFE.

Will not discuss the subject of identity; but will consider what
analogy suggests from changes which do not destroy; and thus see
whether it is not _probable_ that we shall live hereafter.


I. _The probabilities that we shall survive death._

  =1.= It is a law of nature that creatures should exist in different
  stages, and in various degrees of perfection.

      --Worms turn into flies.

      --Eggs are hatched into birds.

      --Our own present state is as different from our state in the
      womb, as two states of the same being can be.

      --That we shall hereafter exist in a state as different from
      the present as the present is from our state in the womb, is
      according to analogy.

  =2.= We now have capacities for happiness, action, misery, &c., and
  there is always a probability that things will continue as they
  are, except when experience gives us reason to think they will be
  altered. This is a general law; and is our _only_ natural reason
  for expecting the continuance of any thing.

  =3.= There is no reason to apprehend that death will destroy us.
  If there was, it would arise from the nature of death; or from the
  analogy of nature.

    1.) Not from the nature of death.

      --We know not what death is.

      --But only _some_ of its _effects_.

      --These effects do not imply the destruction of the living
      agent.

      --We know little of what the _exercise_ of our powers depends
      upon; and nothing of what _the powers_ themselves depend on.

      --We may be unable to _exercise_ our powers, and yet not lose
      them--_e.g._ sleep, swoon.

    2.) Not from analogy.

      --Reason shows no connection between death and our
      destruction.

      --We have no faculties by which to trace any being beyond it.

      --The possession of living powers, up to the very moment
      when our faculties cease to be able to trace them, is a
      probability of their continuing.

      --We have already survived wonderful changes.

      --To live after death is analogous to the course of nature.


II. _Presumptions against a future life._

  =1.= That death _destroys_ us.

    _Ans._ 1. This is an assumption that we are compound and
    material beings, and hence discerptible; which is not true.

      1.) Consciousness is a single, indivisible power, and of
      course the subject of it must be.

      2.) The material body is not ourself.

      3.) We can easily conceive of our having more limbs, or of
      a different kind, or of having more or fewer senses, or of
      having no bodies at all, or of hereafter animating these same
      bodies, remodelled.

      4.) The dissolution of a succession of new and strange
      bodies, would have no tendency to destroy _us_.

    _Ans._ 2. Though the absolute simplicity of the living being
    cannot be proved by _experiment_, yet facts lead us so to
    conclude. We lose limbs, &c. Our bodies were once _very_ small,
    but we might, then, have lost part of them. There is a constant
    destruction and renewal going on.

      1.) Thus we see that no certain _bulk_ is necessary to our
      existence, and unless it were proved that there is, and that
      it is larger than an indissoluble atom, there is no reason to
      presume that death destroys us, even if we are discerptible.

      2.) The living agent is not an _internal material organism_,
      which dies with the body. Because

        --Our only ground for this presumption is our relation to
        other systems of matter. But we see these are not necessary
        to us.

        --It will not do to say that lost portions of the body were
        not _essential_--who is to determine?

        --The relation between the living agent, and the most
        essential parts of the body, is only one by which they
        mutually affect each other.

      3.) If we regard our body as made up of organs of sense, we
      come to the same result.

        --We see with the eyes, just as we do with glasses. The eye
        is not a _recipient_, any more than a telescope.

        --It is not pretended that vision, hearing, &c. can be
        traced clear up to the percipient; but so far as we can
        trace perceptions, the _organ_ does not perceive.

        --In dreams we perceive without organs.

        --When we lose a limb we do not lose the _directing power_;
        we could move a new one, if it could be made, or a wooden
        one. But the limb cut off has no power of moving.

        --Thus, our loss of the _organs_ of perception and motion,
        not being the destruction of the power, there is no
        ground to think that the destruction of other organs or
        instruments would destroy _us_.

    _Objection._ These observations apply equally to brutes.

      _Ans._ 1. Be it so. Perhaps they are immortal:--may hereafter
      improve: we know not what latent powers they may have.

        1.) The human being at one period looks as little likely to
        make great intellectual attainments; for a long time he has
        capacities for virtue and religion, but cannot use them.

        2.) Many persons go out of the world who never became able
        to exercise these capacities; _e.g._ infants.

      _Ans._ 2. If brutes were immortal, it does not prove them to
      be _moral agents_.

        1.) It may be necessary, for aught we know, that there
        should be living creatures not moral agents, nor rational.

        2.) All difficulties as to what would become of them, are
        founded in our ignorance.

  =2.= That our souls, though not material, so depend upon the
  bodily structure, that we cannot survive its destruction.

    _Ans._ 1. Reason, memory, &c. _do not_ depend on the body,
    as perceptions by the senses do. Death may destroy those
    _instruments_, and yet not destroy the _powers_ of reflection.

    _Ans._ 2. Human beings exist, here, in two very different
    states, each having its own laws: sensation and reflection. By
    the first we feel; by the second we reason and will.

      1.) Nothing which we know to be destroyed at death, is
      necessary to reflecting on ideas formerly received.

      2.) Though the senses act like scaffolds, or levers, to
      _bring in_ ideas, yet when once in, we can reflect, &c.
      without their aid.

    _Ans._ 3. There are diseases which prove fatal, &c., yet do
    not, in any part of their course, _impair_ the intellect; and
    this indicates that they do not _destroy_ it.

      1.) In the diseases alluded to, persons have their reflective
      power, in full, the very moment before death.

      2.) Now, why should a disease, at a certain degree, utterly
      destroy powers which were not even affected by it, up to that
      point?

  =3.= That death at least _suspends_ our reflective powers,
  or interrupts our continuing to exist in the like state of
  reflection which we do now.

    _Ans._ There appears so little connection between our powers of
    sensation and our powers of reflection that we cannot presume
    that what might _destroy the former_, could even _suspend the
    latter_.

      1.) We daily see reason, memory, &c. exercised without any
      assistance, that we know of, from our bodies.

      2.) Seeing them in lively exercise to the last, we must infer
      that death is not a discontinuance of their exercise, nor of
      the enjoyments and sufferings of such exercise.

      3.) Our posthumous life may be but a going on, with
      additions. Like the change at our birth--which produced not
      a suspension of the faculties we had before, nor a _total_
      change in our state of life; but a continuance of both, with
      great alterations.

      4.) Death may but at once put us into a _higher_ state of
      life, as our birth did; our relation to bodily organs may be
      the only hinderance to our entering a higher condition of the
      reflective powers.

      5.) Were we even sure that death would suspend our
      intellectual powers, it would not furnish even the lowest
      probability that it would destroy them.

    _Objec._ From the analogy of plants.

      _Ans._ This furnishes poets with apt illustrations of our
      frailty, but affords no proper analogy. Plants are destitute
      of perception and action, and this is the very matter in
      question.


REMARKS.

  =1.= It has been shown, that confining ourselves to what we
  know, we see no probability of ever ceasing to be:--it cannot be
  concluded from the reason of the thing:--nor from the analogy of
  nature.

  =2.= We are therefore to go upon the belief of a future existence.

  =3.= Our going into _new scenes_ and conditions, is just as
  natural as our coming into the world.

  =4.= Our condition may naturally be a social one.

  =5.= The advantages of it may naturally be bestowed, according to
  some fixed law, in proportion to one’s degrees in virtue.

    1.) Perhaps not so much as now _by society_; but by God’s more
    immediate action.

    2.) Yet this will be no less _natural_, _i.e._ stated, fixed,
    or settled.

    3.) Our notions of what is natural, are enlarged by greater
    knowledge of God and his works.

    4.) There may be some beings in the world, to whom the whole
    of Christianity is as natural as the visible course of nature
    seems to us.

  =6.= These probabilities of a future life, though they do not
  satisfy curiosity, answer all the purposes of religion, as well
  as demonstration.

    1.) Even a demonstration of a future state, would not
    demonstrate religion, but would be reconcilable with atheism.

    2.) But as religion implies a future state, any presumption
    against such a state, would be a presumption against religion.

    3.) The foregoing observations remove all presumptions of that
    sort, and prove to a great probability, a fundamental doctrine
    of religion.


