CHAPTER VIII.

OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE ANALOGICAL ARGUMENT.

If all made up their minds with proper care and candor, there would be
no need of this chapter. But some do not try to understand what they
condemn; and our mode of argument is open to objections, especially in
the minds of those who judge without thinking. The chief objections
will therefore be considered. They are these:--it does not solve
difficulties in revelation to say that there are as great in natural
religion:--it will not make men religious to show them that it is
_as_ important as worldly prudence, for showing that, does not make
them prudent:--the justice of God in the system of religion, is not
proved by showing it is as apparent as in his natural providence:--no
reasoning from analogy can carry full conviction:--mankind will not
renounce present pleasures, for a religion which is not free from
doubt. To each of which a reply will now be given.


I. _As to requiring a solution of all difficulties._

  =1.= This is but resolving to comprehend the nature of God, and
  the whole plan of his government throughout eternity.

  =2.= It is always right to argue from what is known, to what is
  disputed. We are constantly so doing. The most eminent physician
  does not understand all diseases, yet we do not despise what he
  does know.

  =3.= It is very important to find that objections against
  revelation are just as strong, not only against natural religion,
  but against the course of nature.


II. _As to men’s having as little reason for worldly pursuits, as they
have for being religious._

  =1.= If men can be convinced that they have as much reason to be
  religious as they have to practise worldly prudence, then _there
  is_ a reason for being religious.

  =2.= If religion proposes greater than worldly interests, and has
  the same reasons for belief, then it has proportionally a greater
  claim.

  =3.= If religion being left doubtful, proves it to be false, then
  doubts as to the success of any worldly pursuit show it to be
  wrong. Yet we constantly act, even in the most important affairs,
  without _certainty_ of being right.


III. _As to the justice and goodness of God in religion._

  =1.= Our business is not to vindicate God, but to learn our duty,
  governed as we are; which is a very different thing. It has been
  shown that if we knew all things, present, past, and future, and
  the relations of each thing to all other things, we might see to
  be just and good what now do not seem so: and it is probable we
  should.

  =2.= We do not say that objections against God’s justice and
  goodness are removed by showing the like objections against
  natural providence, but that they are not _conclusive_, because
  they apply equally to what we know to be facts.

  =3.= The existence of objections does not destroy the evidence
  of facts. The fact for instance that God rewards and punishes,
  though men may think it unjust. Even necessity, plead for human
  acts, does no more to abolish justice than it does injustice.

  =4.= Though the reasonableness of Christianity cannot be shown
  from analogy, the truth of it may. The truth of a fact may be
  proved without regard to its quality. The reasonableness of
  obeying Christianity is proved, if we barely prove Christianity
  itself to be possible.

  =5.= Though analogy may not show Christian precepts to be good,
  it proves them to be credible.


IV. _The analogical argument does not remove doubt._

  =1.= What opinion does any man hold, about which there can be no
  doubt? Even the best way of preserving and enjoying this life,
  is not agreed upon. Whether our measures will accomplish our
  objects, is always uncertain; and still more whether the objects,
  if accomplished, will give us happiness. Yet men do not on this
  account refuse to make exertion.

  =2.= This objection overlooks the very nature of religion.
  The embracing of it presupposes a certain degree of candor
  and integrity, to try which, and exercise, and improve it, is
  its intention. Just as warning a man of danger, presupposes a
  disposition to avoid danger.

  =3.= Religion is a probation, and has evidence enough as such;
  and would not be such, if it compelled assent.

  =4.= We never mean by sufficient evidence, such an amount as
  necessarily determines a man to act, but only such as will show
  an action to be prudent.


V. _As to the small influence of the analogical argument._

  =1.= As just observed, religion is a _test_, and an _exercise_,
  of character; and that some reject it is nothing to our purpose.
  We are inquiring not what sort of creature man is, but what he
  should be. This is each man’s own concern.

  =2.= Religion, as a probation, accomplishes its end, whether
  individuals believe or not.

  =3.= Even this objection admits that religion has some weight,
  and of course it should have some influence; and if so, there is
  the same reason, though not so strong, for publishing it, that
  there would be, if it were likely to have greater influence.

FURTHER. It must be considered that the reasoning in this treatise is
on the principles of other men, and arguments of the utmost importance
are omitted, because not universally admitted. Thus as to Fatalism, and
the abstract fitness or unfitness of actions. The general argument is
just a question of fact, and is here so treated. Abstract truths are
usually advanced as proof; but in this work, only _facts_ are adduced.
That the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, is
an abstract truth: but that they so appear to us, is only a matter of
fact. That there is such a thing as abstract right and wrong, which
determines the will of God in rewarding and punishing, is an assertion
of an abstract truth, as well as a fact. Suppose God in this world
rewarded and punished every man exactly as he obeyed or disobeyed his
conscience, this would not be an abstract truth, but a fact. And if
all acknowledged this as a fact, all would not see it to be right. If,
instead of his doing it now, we say he will do it hereafter, this too
is not an abstract truth, but a question of fact. This fact could be
fully proved on the abstract principles of moral fitness; but without
them, there has now been given a _conclusive practical proof_; which
though it may be cavilled at, and shown not to amount to demonstration,
cannot be answered.

Hence it may be said as to the force of this treatise,

  =1.= To such as are convinced of the truth of revelation, as
  proved on the principles of liberty and moral fitness, it will
  furnish a full confirmation. To such as do not admit those
  principles it is an original proof.

  =2.= Those who believe will find objections removed, and
  those who disbelieve will find they have no grounds for their
  scepticism; and a good deal beside.

  =3.= Thus though some may think _too much_ is here made of
  analogy, yet there can be no denying that the argument is _real_.
  It confirms _all facts_ to which it can be applied; and of
  many is the only proof. It is strong on the side of religion,
  and ought to be regarded by such as prefer facts to abstract
  reasonings.


CONCLUSION.

Recapitulates the general structure and design of the argument, the
classes of persons for whose benefit it is particularly adopted, and
declares those who reject Christianity to be wholly without excuse.




Advertisement prefixed to the First Edition.


If the reader should here meet with any thing which he had not before
attended to, it will not be in the observations upon the constitution
and course of nature, these being all obvious, but in the application
of them; in which, though there is nothing but what appears to me
of some real weight, and therefore of great importance, yet he will
observe several things, which will appear to him of very little, if
he can think things to be of little importance, which are of any real
weight at all, upon such a subject of religion. However, the proper
force of the following treatise lies in the whole general analogy
considered together.

It is come, I know not how to be taken for granted, by many persons,
that Christianity is not so much as a subject of inquiry; but that
it is, now at length, discovered to be fictitious. Accordingly they
treat it, as if, in the present age, this were an agreed point among
all people of discernment; and nothing remained, but to set it up
as a principal subject of mirth and ridicule, as it were by way of
reprisals, for its having so long interrupted the pleasures of the
world. On the contrary, thus much at least, will be here found, not
taken for granted but proved, that any reasonable man, who will
thoroughly consider the matter, may be as much assured, as he is of his
own being, that it is not so clear a case, that there is nothing in
it. There is, I think, strong evidence of its truth; but it is certain
no one can, upon principles of reason, be satisfied of the contrary.
The practical consequence to be drawn from this, is not attended to by
every one who is concerned in it.

_May, 1736._




INTRODUCTION.


Probable evidence is essentially distinguished from demonstrative by
this, that it admits of degrees; and of all variety of them, from the
highest moral certainty, to the very lowest presumption. We cannot
indeed say a thing is probably true upon one very slight presumption
for it; because, as there may be probabilities on both sides of a
question, there may be some against it; and though there be not, yet
a slight presumption does not beget that degree of conviction, which
is implied in saying a thing is probably true. But that the slightest
possible presumption is of the nature of a probability, appears from
hence; that such low presumption, often repeated, will amount even
to moral certainty. Thus a man’s having observed the ebb and flow of
the tide to-day, affords some sort of presumption, though the lowest
imaginable, that it may happen again to-morrow: but the observation of
this event for so many days, and months, and ages together, as it has
been observed by mankind, gives us a full assurance that it will.

That which chiefly constitutes _probability_ is expressed in the word
_likely_, _i.e._ like some truth,[6] or true event; like it, in itself,
in its evidence, in some (more or fewer) of its circumstances.[7] For
when we determine a thing to be probably true, suppose that an event
has or will come to pass, it is from the mind’s remarking in it a
likeness to some other event, which we have observed has come to pass.
This observation forms, in numberless daily instances, a presumption,
opinion, or full conviction, that such event has or will come to pass;
according as the observation is, that the like event has sometimes,
most commonly, or always, so far as our observation reaches, come to
pass at like distances of time, or place, or upon like occasions. Hence
arises the belief, that a child, if it lives twenty years, will grow
up to the stature and strength of a man; that food will contribute to
the preservation of its life, and the want of it for such a number of
days, be its certain destruction. So likewise the rule and measure
of our hopes and fears concerning the success of our pursuits; our
expectations that others will act so and so in such circumstances; and
our judgment that such actions proceed from such principles; all these
rely upon our having observed the like to what we hope, fear, expect,
judge; I say, upon our having observed the like, either with respect to
others or ourselves. Thus, the prince[8] who had always lived in a warm
climate, naturally concluded in the way of analogy, that there was no
such thing as water’s becoming hard, because he had always observed it
to be fluid and yielding. We, on the contrary, from analogy conclude,
that there is no presumption at all against this: that it is supposable
there may be frost in England any given day in January next; probable
that there will on some day of the month; and that there is a moral
certainty, _i.e._ ground for an expectation without any doubt of it, in
some part or other of the winter.

Probable evidence, in its very nature, affords but an imperfect kind
of information; and is to be considered as relative only to beings
of limited capacities. For nothing which is the possible object of
knowledge, whether past, present, or future, can be probable to an
infinite intelligence; since it cannot but be discerned absolutely
as it is in itself, certainly true, or certainly false. But to us,
probability is the very guide of life.

From these things it follows, that in questions of difficulty, or such
as are thought so, where more satisfactory evidence cannot be had, or
is not seen; if the result of examination be, that there appears upon
the whole, any even the lowest presumption on one side, and none on
the other, or a greater presumption on one side, though in the lowest
degree greater; this determines the question, even in matters of
speculation. In matters of practice, it will lay us under an absolute
and formal obligation, in point of prudence and of interest, to act
upon that presumption or low probability, though it be so low as to
leave the mind in very great doubt which is the truth. For surely a
man is as really bound in prudence to do what upon the whole, according
to the best of his judgment, appears to be for his happiness,[9] as
what he certainly knows to be so.

Further, in questions of great consequence, a reasonable man will think
it concerns him to remark lower probabilities and presumptions than
these; such as amount to no more than showing one side of a question
to be as supposable and credible as the other: nay, such even as but
amount to much less than this. For numberless instances might be
mentioned respecting the common pursuits of life, where a man would
be thought, in a literal sense, distracted, who would not act, and
with great application too, not only upon an even chance, but upon
much less, and where the probability or chance was greatly against his
succeeding.[10]

It is not my design to inquire further into the nature, the foundation,
and measure of probability; or whence it proceeds that _likeness_
should beget that presumption, opinion, and full conviction, which
the human mind is formed to receive from it, and which it does
necessarily produce in every one; or to guard against the errors, to
which reasoning from analogy is liable. This belongs to the subject of
Logic; and is a part of that subject which has not yet been thoroughly
considered. Indeed I shall not take upon me to say, how far the extent,
compass, and force, of analogical reasoning, can be reduced to general
heads and rules; and the whole be formed into a system. But though so
little in this way has been attempted by those who have treated of our
intellectual powers, and the exercise of them; this does not hinder but
that we may be, as we unquestionably are, assured, that analogy is of
weight, in various degrees, towards determining our judgment and our
practice. Nor does it in any wise cease to be of weight in those cases,
because persons, either given to dispute, or who require things to be
stated with greater exactness than our faculties appear to admit of
in practical matters, may find other cases in which it is not easy to
say, whether it be, or be not, of any weight; or instances of seeming
analogies, which are really of none. It is enough to the present
purpose to observe, that this general way of arguing is evidently
natural, just, and conclusive. For there is no man can make a question
but that the sun will rise to-morrow, and be seen, where it is seen at
all, in the figure of a circle, and not in that of a square.

Hence, namely from analogical reasoning, Origen[11] has with singular
sagacity observed, that “_he who believes the Scripture to have
proceeded from him who is the Author of nature, may well expect
to find the same sort of difficulties in it, as are found in the
constitution of nature_.” And in a like way of reflection it may be
added, that he who denies the Scripture to have been from God upon
account of these difficulties, may, for the very same reason, deny
the world to have been formed by him. On the other hand, if there be
an analogy or likeness between that system of things and dispensation
of Providence, which _revelation_ informs us of, and that system of
things and dispensation of Providence, which _experience_ together with
reason informs us of, _i.e._ the known course of nature; this is a
presumption, that they have both the same author and cause; at least so
far as to answer objections against the former’s being from God, drawn
from any thing which is analogical or similar to what is in the latter,
which is acknowledged to be from him; for an Author of nature is here
supposed.

Forming our notions of the constitution and government of the world
upon reasoning, without foundation for the principles which we assume,
whether from the attributes of God, or any thing else, is building
a world upon hypothesis, like Des Cartes. Forming our notions upon
reasoning from principles which are certain, but applied to cases to
which we have no ground to apply them, (like those who explain the
structure of the human body, and the nature of diseases and medicines,
from mere mathematics,) is an error much akin to the former: since what
is assumed in order to make the reasoning applicable, is Hypothesis.
But it must be allowed just, to join abstract reasonings with the
observation of facts, and argue from such facts as are known, to
others that are like them; from that part of the divine government over
intelligent creatures which comes under our view, to that larger and
more general government over them which is beyond it; and from what is
present, to collect what is likely, credible, or not incredible, will
be hereafter.

This method then of concluding and determining being practical, and
what, if we will act at all, we cannot but act upon in the common
pursuits of life; being evidently conclusive, in various degrees,
proportionable to the degree and exactness of the whole analogy or
likeness; and having so great authority for its introduction into the
subject of religion, even revealed religion; my design is to apply
it to that subject in general, both natural and revealed: taking for
proved, that there is an intelligent Author of nature, and natural
Governor of the world. For as there is no presumption against this
prior to the proof of it: so it has been often proved with accumulated
evidence; from this argument of analogy and final causes; from abstract
reasonings; from the most ancient tradition and testimony; and from
the general consent of mankind. Nor does it appear, so far as I can
find, to be denied by the generality of those who profess themselves
dissatisfied with the evidence of religion.

As there are some, who, instead of thus attending to what is in fact
the constitution of nature, form their notions of God’s government
upon hypothesis: so there are others, who indulge themselves in vain
and idle speculations, how the world might possibly have been framed
otherwise than it is; and upon supposition that things might, in
imagining that they should, have been disposed and carried on after a
better model, than what appears in the present disposition and conduct
of them.[12] Suppose now a person of such a turn of mind, to go on with
his reveries, till he had at length fixed upon some particular plan
of nature, as appearing to him the best.--One shall scarce be thought
guilty of detraction against human understanding, if one should say,
even beforehand, that the plan which this speculative person would fix
upon, though he were the wisest of the sons of men, probably would not
be the very best, even according to his own notions of _best_; whether
he thought that to be so, which afforded occasions and motives for
the exercise of the greatest virtue, or which was productive of the
greatest happiness, or that these two were necessarily connected, and
run up into one and the same plan.

It may not be amiss, once for all, to see what would be the amount
of these emendations and imaginary improvements upon the system of
nature, or how far they would mislead us. It seems there could be no
stopping, till we came to some such conclusions as these: that all
creatures should at first be made as perfect and as happy as they
were capable of ever being: that nothing, surely, of hazard or danger
should be put upon them to do; some indolent persons would perhaps
think nothing at all: or certainly, that effectual care should be
taken, that they should, whether necessarily or not, yet eventually
and in fact, always do what was right and most conducive to happiness;
which would be thought easy for infinite power to effect, either by
not giving them any principles which would endanger their going wrong,
or by laying the right motive of action in every instance before their
minds in so strong a manner, as would never fail of inducing them to
act conformably to it: and that the whole method of government by
punishments should be rejected as absurd; as an awkward roundabout
method of carrying things on; nay, as contrary to a principal purpose,
for which it would be supposed creatures were made, namely, happiness.

Now, without considering what is to be said in particular to the
several parts of this train of folly and extravagance, what has been
above intimated, is a full direct general answer to it; namely, that
we may see beforehand that we have not faculties for this kind of
speculation. For though it be admitted that, from the first principles
of our nature, we unavoidably judge or determine some ends to be
absolutely in themselves preferable to others, and that the ends now
mentioned, or if they run up into one, that this one is absolutely
the best; and consequently that we must conclude the ultimate end
designed, in the constitution of nature and conduct of Providence, is
the most virtue and happiness possible; yet we are far from being able
to judge what particular disposition of things would be most friendly
and assistant to virtue; or what means might be absolutely necessary
to produce the most happiness in a system of such extent as our own
world may be, taking in all that is past and to come, though we should
suppose it detached from the whole things. Indeed we are so far from
being able to judge of this, that we are not judges what may be the
necessary means of raising and conducting one person to the highest
perfection and happiness of his nature. Nay, even in the little affairs
of the present life, we find men of different educations and ranks are
not competent judges of the conduct of each other. Our whole nature
leads us to ascribe all moral perfection to God, and to deny all
imperfection of him. And this will forever be a practical proof of his
moral character, to such as will consider what a practical proof is;
because it is the voice of God speaking in us. Hence we conclude, that
virtue must be the happiness, and vice the misery, of every creature;
and that regularity and order and right cannot but prevail finally in a
universe under his government. But we are in no sort judges, what are
the necessary means of accomplishing this end.

Let us then, instead of that idle and not very innocent employment of
forming imaginary models of a world, and schemes of governing it, turn
our thoughts to what we experience to be the conduct of nature with
respect to intelligent creatures; which may be resolved into general
laws or rules of administration, in the same way as many of the laws of
nature respecting inanimate matter may be collected from experiments.
Let us compare the known constitution and course of things with what is
said to be the moral system of nature; the acknowledged dispensations
of Providence, or that government which we find ourselves under, with
what religion teaches us to believe and expect; and see whether they
are not analogous and of a piece. Upon such a comparison it will, I
think, be found that they are very much so: that both may be traced
up to the same general laws, and resolved into the same principles of
divine conduct.

The analogy here proposed to be considered is of pretty large extent,
and consists of several parts; in some more, in others less exact.
In some few instances perhaps, it may amount to a real practical
proof; in others not so. Yet in these it is a confirmation of what is
proved otherwise. It will undeniably show, what too many need to have
shown them, that the system of religion, both natural and revealed,
considered only as a system, and prior to the proof of it, is not
a subject of ridicule, unless that of nature be so too. And it will
afford an answer to almost all objections against the system both of
natural and revealed religion; though not perhaps an answer in so great
a degree, yet in a very considerable degree an answer to the objections
against the evidence of it: for objections against a proof, and
objections against what is said to be proved, the reader will observe
are different things.

The divine government of the world, implied in the notion of religion
in general and of Christianity, contains in it: that mankind is
appointed to live in a future state;[13] that there every one shall be
rewarded or punished;[14] rewarded or punished respectively for all
that behaviour here, which we comprehend under the words, virtuous
or vicious, morally good or evil:[15] that our present life is a
probation, a state of trial,[16] and of discipline,[17] for that future
one; notwithstanding the objections, which men may fancy they have,
from notions of necessity, against there being any such moral plan as
this at all;[18] and whatever objections may appear to lie against
the wisdom and goodness of it, as it stands so imperfectly made known
to us at present:[19] that this world being in a state of apostasy
and wickedness, and consequently of ruin, and the sense both of their
condition and duty being greatly corrupted amongst men, this gave
occasion for an additional dispensation of Providence; of the utmost
importance;[20] proved by miracles;[21] but containing in it many
things appearing to us strange, and not to have been expected;[22] a
dispensation of Providence, which is a scheme or system of things;[23]
carried on by the mediation of a divine person, the Messiah, in order
to the recovery of the world;[24] yet not revealed to all men, nor
proved with the strongest possible evidence to all those to whom it is
revealed; but only to such a part of mankind, and with such particular
evidence, as the wisdom of God thought fit.[25]

The design then of the following treatise will be to show, that
the several parts principally objected against in this moral and
Christian dispensation, including its scheme, its publication, and the
proof which God has afforded us of its truth; that the particular
parts principally objected against in this whole dispensation, are
analogous to what is experienced in the constitution and course of
nature or Providence; that the chief objections themselves which are
alleged against the former, are no other than what may be alleged
with like justness against the latter, where they are found in fact
to be inconclusive; and that this argument from analogy is in general
unanswerable, and undoubtedly of weight on the side of religion,[26]
notwithstanding the objections which may seem to lie against it, and
the real ground which there may be for difference of opinion, as to
the particular degree of weight which is to be laid upon it. This is a
general account of what may be looked for in the following treatise.
I shall begin it with that which is the foundation of all our hopes
and of all our fears; all our hopes and fears, which are of any
consideration; I mean a future life.




THE

ANALOGY OF RELIGION.




