PART IV.

THE DEVIL.


CHAPTER I.

DIABOLISM.

    Dragon and Devil distinguished--Dragons' wings--War in Heaven--
    Expulsion of Serpents--Dissolution of the Dragon--Theological
    origin of the Devil--Ideal and actual--Devil Dogma--Debasement
    of ideal persons--Transmigration of phantoms.


'We are all nothing other than Wills,' says St. Augustine; and he
adds that of the good and bad angels the nature is the same, the will
different. In harmony with this John Beaumont says, 'A good desire
of mind is a good God.' [1] To which all the mythology of Evil adds,
a bad desire of mind is a Devil. Every personification of an evil
Will looks beyond the outward phenomena of pain, and conceives a
heart that loves evil, a spirit that makes for wickedness. At this
point a new element altogether enters. The physical pain incidentally
represented by the Demon, generalised and organised into a principle
of harmfulness in the Dragon, begins now to pass under the shadow cast
by the ascending light of man's moral nature. Man becomes conscious of
moral and spiritual pains: they may be still imaginatively connected
with bodily agonies, but these drop out of the immediate conception,
disappear into a distant future, and are even replaced by the notion
of an evil symbolised by pleasure.

The fundamental difference between either a Demon or Dragon and a
Devil may be recognised in this: we never find the former voluntarily
bestowing physical pleasure or happiness on man, whereas it is a
chief part of the notion of a Devil that he often confers earthly
favours in order to corrupt the moral nature.

There are, indeed, apparent exceptions to this theorem presented
in the agatho-dragons which have already been considered in our
chapter on the Basilisk; but the reader will observe that there is
no intimation in such myths of any malign ulterior purpose in the
good omens brought by those exceptional monsters, and that they are
really forms of malevolent power whose afflictive intent is supposed
to have been vanquished by the superior might of the heroes or saints
to whose glory they are reluctantly compelled to become tributary.

Undoubtedly the Dragon attended this moral and religious development of
man's inward nature very far, and still occupies, as at once prisoner
and gaoler in the underworld, a subordinate relation to it. In the long
process he has undergone certain transformations, and in particular
his attribute of wings, if not derived from the notion of his struggle
against holier beings, seems to have been largely enhanced thereby. The
exceptional wings given to serpents in Greek art, those, for instance,
which draw Demeter and Persephone in their chariot, are trifling as
compared with the fully-developed wings of our conventional Dragon of
the christian era. Such wings might have been developed occasionally
to denote the flying cloud, the fire-breathing storm, or explain how
some Ráhu was enabled to pursue the sun and moon and swallow them
temporarily in the phenomena of eclipse. But these wings grew to
more important dimensions when they were caught up into the Semitic
conception of winged genii and destroying angels, and associated with
an ambitious assault on heaven and its divine or angelic occupants.

'There was war in Heaven,' says the Apocalypse. The traditional
descriptions of this war follow pretty closely, in dramatic details,
other and more ancient struggles which reflect man's encounters with
the hardships of nature. In those encounters man imagined the gods
descending earthward to mingle in the fray; but even where the struggle
mounted highest the scenery is mainly terrestrial and the issues those
of place and power, the dominion of visible Light established above
Darkness, or of a comparatively civilised over a savage race. The
wars between the Devas and Asuras in India, the Devs and Ahuras in
Persia, Buddha and the Nagas in Ceylon, Garúra and the Serpent-men
in the north of India, gods and Frost-giants in Scandinavia, still
concern man's relation to the fruits of the earth, to heat and frost,
to darkness or storm and sunshine.

But some of these at length find versions which reveal their tendency
towards spiritualisation. The differences presented by one of these
legends which has survived among us in nearly its ancient form from
the same which remains in a partly mystical form will illustrate
the transitional phase. Thus, Garúra expelling the serpents from
his realm in India is not a saintly legend; this exterminator of
serpents is said to have compelled the reptile race to send him one
of their number daily that he might eat it, and the rationalised
tradition interprets this as the prince's cannibalism. The expulsion
of Nagas or serpents from Ceylon by Buddha, in order that he might
consecrate that island to the holy law, marks the pious accentuation
of the fable. The expulsion of snakes from Ireland by St. Patrick
is a legend conceived in the spirit of the curse pronounced upon the
serpent in Eden, but in this case the modern myth is the more primitive
morally, and more nearly represents the exploit of Garúra. St. Patrick
expels the snakes that he may make Ireland a paradise physically,
and establish his reputation as an apostle by fulfilling the signs
of one named by Christ; [2] and in this particular it slightly rises
above the Hindu story. In the case of the serpent cursed in Eden a
further moralisation of the conflict is shown. The serpent is not
present in Eden, as in the realms of Garúra and St. Patrick, for
purposes of physical devastation or pain, but to bestow a pleasure
on man with a view to success in a further issue between himself and
the deity. Yet in this Eden myth the ancient combat is not yet fairly
spiritualised; for the issue still relates, as in that between the
Devas and Asuras, to the possession of a magical fruit which by no
means confers sanctity. In the apocalyptic legend of the war in heaven,
[3] the legend has become fairly spiritualised. The issue is no longer
terrestrial, it is no longer for mere power; the Dragon is arrayed
against the woman and child, and against the spiritual 'salvation'
of mankind, of whom he is 'accuser' and 'deceiver.'

Surely nobody could be 'deceived' by 'a great fiery-red Dragon, having
seven heads and ten horns'! In this vision the Dragon is pressed as far
as the form can go in the symbolisation of evil. To devour the child is
its legitimate work, but as 'accuser of the brethren before God day and
night' the monstrous shape were surely out of place by any mythologic
analogy; and one could hardly imagine such a physiognomy capable of
deceiving 'the whole world.' It is not wonderful, therefore, that the
Dragon's presence in heaven is only mentioned in connection with his
fall from it. It is significant that the wings are lost in this fall;
for while his 'angelic' relationship suggests the previous wings,
the woman is able to escape the fallen monster by the two wings given
her. [4] Wingless now, 'the old serpent' once more, the monster's
shape has no adaptation to the moral and religious struggle which
is to ensue. For his shape is a method, and it means the perfection
of brute force. That, indeed, also remains in the sequel of this
magnificent myth. As in the legend of the Hydra two heads spring up
in place of that which falls, so in this Christian legend out of the
overthrown monster, henceforth himself concealed, two arise from his
inspiration,--the seven-headed, ten-horned Beast who continues the work
of wrath and pain; but also a lamb-like Beast, with only two horns
(far less terrible), and able to deceive by his miracles, for he is
even able to call down fire from heaven. The ancient Serpent-dragon,
the expression of natural pain, thus goes to pieces. His older part
remains to work mischief and hurt; and the cry is uttered, 'Be merry,
ye heavens, and ye that tabernacle in them: woe to the earth and the
sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath because
he knows that he has a short time.' [5] But there is a lamb-like part
of him too, and his relation to the Dragon is only known by his voice.

This subtle adaptation of the symbol of external pain to the
representation of the moral struggle, wherein the hostile power
may assume deceptive forms of beauty and pleasure, is only one
impressive illustration of the transfer of human conceptions of evil
from outward to inward nature. The transition is from a malevolent,
fatal, principle of harmfulness to the body to a malevolent, fatal,
principle of evil to the conscience. The Demon was natural; the
Dragon was both physical and metaphysical; the Devil was and is
theological. In the primitive Zoroastrian theology, where the Devil
first appears in clear definition, he is the opponent of the Good
Mind, and the combat between the two, Ormuzd and Ahriman, is the
spiritualisation of the combat between Light and Darkness, Pain and
Happiness, in the external world. As these visible antagonists were
supposed to be exactly balanced against each other, so are their
spiritual correlatives. The Two Minds are described as Twins.

'Those old Spirits, who are twins, made known what is good and what is
evil in thoughts, words, and deeds. Those who are good distinguished
between the two; not so those who are evil-doers.

'When these two Spirits came together they made first life and death,
so that there should be at last the most wretched life for the bad,
but for the good blessedness.

'Of these two Spirits the evil one chose the worst deeds; the
kind Spirit, he whose garment is the immovable sky, chose what is
right.' [6]

This metaphysical theory follows closely the primitive scientific
observations on which it is based; it is the cold of the cold,
the gloom of the darkness, the sting of death, translated into some
order for the intellect which, having passed through the Dragon, we
find appearing in this Persian Devil; and against his blackness the
glory of the personality from whom all good things proceed shines
out in a splendour no longer marred by association with the evil
side of nature. Ormuzd is celebrated as 'father of the pure world,'
who sustains 'the earth and the clouds that they do not fall,' and
'has made the kindly light and the darkness, the kindly sleep and the
awaking;' [7] at every step being suggested the father of the impure
world, the unkindly light, darkness or sleep.

The ecstasy which attended man's first vision of an ideal life defied
the contradictory facts of outward and inward nature. So soon as he
had beheld a purer image of himself rising above his own animalism,
he must not only regard that animalism as an instigation of a devil,
but also the like of it in nature; and this conception will proceed
pari passu with the creation of pure deities in the image of that
higher self. There was as yet no philosophy demanding unity in the
Cosmos, or forbidding man to hold as accursed so much of nature as
did not obviously accord with his ideals.

Mr. Edward B. Tylor has traced the growth of Animism from man's
shadow and his breathing; Sir John Lubbock has traced the influence of
dreams in forming around him a ghostly world; Mr. Herbert Spencer has
given an analysis of the probable processes by which this invisible
environment was shaped for the mental conception in accordance
with family and social conditions. But it is necessary that we
should here recognise the shadow that walked by the moral nature,
the breathings of religious aspiration, and the dreams which visited
a man whose moral sense was so generally at variance with his animal
desires. The code established for the common good, while necessarily
having a relation to every individual conscience, is a restriction
upon individual liberty. The conflict between selfishness and duty is
thus inaugurated; it continues in the struggle between the 'law in the
members and the law in the spirit,' which led Paul to beat his body
(hypopiaxomai) to keep it in subjection; it passes from the Latin
poet to the Englishman, who turns his experience to a rune--


        I see the right, and I approve it too;
        Condemn the wrong, and yet the wrong pursue.


As the light which cast it was intense, even so intense was the shadow
it cast beneath all it could not penetrate. Passionate as was the
saintliest man's love of good, even so passionate was his spiritual
enemy's love of evil. High as was the azure vault that mingled with his
dreams of purity, so deep was the abyss beneath his lower nature. The
superficial equalities of phenomena, painful and pleasurable, to his
animal nature had cast the mould into which his theories of the inward
and the moral phenomena must be cast; and thus man--in an august
moment--surrendered himself to the dreadful conception of a supreme
Principle of Wickedness: wherever good was there stood its adversary;
wherever truth, there its denier; no light shone without the dark
presence that would quench it; innocence had its official accuser,
virtue its accomplished tempter, peace its breaker, faith its disturber
and mocker. Nay, to this impersonation was added the last feature
of fiendishness, a nature which found its supreme satisfaction in
ultimately torturing human beings for the sins instigated by himself.

It is open to question how far any average of mankind really conceived
this theological dogma. Easy as it is to put into clear verbal
statement; readily as the analogies of nature supply arguments for
and illustrations of a balance between moral light and darkness, love
and hatred; yet is man limited in subjective conceptions to his own
possibilities, and it may almost be said that to genuinely believe in
an absolute Fiend a man would have to be potentially one himself. But
any human being, animated by causeless and purposeless desire to
inflict pain on others, would be universally regarded as insane,
much more one who would without motive corrupt as well as afflict.

Even theological statements of the personality of Evil, and what that
implies, are rare. The following is brave enough to be put on record,
apart from its suggestiveness.

'It cannot be denied that as there is an inspiration of holy love,
so is there an inspiration of hatred, or frantic pleasure, with which
men surrender themselves to the impulses of destructiveness; and when
the popular language speaks of possessions of Satan, of incarnate
devils, there lies at the bottom of this the grave truth that men,
by continued sinning, may pass the ordinary limit between human and
diabolic depravity, and lay open in themselves a deep abyss of hatred
which, without any mixture of self-interest, finds its gratification
in devastation and woe.' [8]

On this it may be said that the popular commentary on cases of the
kind is contained in the very phrase alluded to, 'possession,'--the
implication being that such disinterested depravity is nowise possible
within the range of simple human experience,--and, in modern times,
'possessions' are treated in asylums. Morbid conditions, however, are
of such varied degrees that it is probable many have imagined a Being
in whom their worst impulses are unrestrained, and thus there have
been sufficient popular approximations to an imaginative conception
of a Devil to enable the theological dogma, which few can analyse,
to survive.

It must not be supposed, however, that the moral and spiritual ideals,
to which allusion has just been made, are normally represented in the
various Devils which we have to consider. It is the characteristic of
personifications, whether celestial or infernal, to supersede gradually
the ideas out of which they spring. As in the fable of Agni, who is
said to have devoured his parents when he was born, a metaphor of fire
consuming the two sticks which produce it, religious history shows both
deities and devils, by the flame of personal devotion or hatred they
engender, burning up the ideas that originate them. When instead of
unconscious forces and inanimate laws working to results called good
and evil, men see great personal Wills engaged in personal conflict,
the universe becomes a government of combat; the stars of heaven, the
angels and the imps, men and women, the very plants and animals, are
caught up in the battle, to be marshalled on one side or the other;
and in the military spirit and fury of the struggle the spiritual
ideals become as insignificant beneath the phantom-hosts they evoked
as the violets and daisies which an army tramples in its march. There
is little difference at last between the moral characteristics of
the respective armies of Ormuzd and Ahriman, Michael and Satan; their
strategy and ferocity are the same. [9] Wherever the conception is that
of a universe divided into hostile camps, the appropriate passions are
kindled, and in the thick of the field, where Cruelty and Gentleness
met, is seen at last a horned Beast confronted by a horned Lamb. [10]
On both sides is exaltation of the horn.

We need only look at the outcome of the gentle and lowly Jesus through
the exigencies of the church militant to see how potent are such
forces. Although lay Christians of ordinary education are accustomed
to rationalise their dogmas as well as they can, and dwell on the
loving and patient characteristics of Jesus, the horns which were
attached to the brow of him who said, 'Love your enemies' by ages of
Christian warfare remain still in the Christ of Theology, and they
are still depended on to overawe the 'sinner.' In an orthodox family
with which I have had some acquaintance, a little boy, who had used
naughty expressions of resentment towards a playmate was admonished
that he should be more like Christ, 'who never did any harm to his
enemies.' 'No,' answered the wrathful child, 'but he's a-going to.'

As in Demonology we trace the struggles of man with external
obstructions, and the phantasms in which these were reflected until
they were understood or surmounted, we have now to consider the forms
which report human progression on a higher plane,--that of social,
moral, and religious evolution. Creations of a crude Theology, in its
attempt to interpret the moral sentiment, the Devils to which we now
turn our attention have multiplied as the various interests of mankind
have come into relations with their conscience. Every degree of ascent
of the moral nature has been marked by innumerable new shadows cast
athwart the mind and the life of man. Every new heaven of ideas
is followed by a new earth, but ere this conformity of things to
thoughts can take place struggles must come and the old demons will
be recalled for new service. As time goes on things new grow old;
the fresh issues pass away, their battlefields grow cold; then the
brood of superstition must flit away to the next field where carrion is
found. Foul and repulsive as are these vultures of the mind--organisms
of moral sewage--every one of them is a witness to the victories of
mankind over the evils they shadow, and to the steady advance of a
new earth which supplies them no habitat but the archæologist's page.







