
                       DEMONOLOGY AND DEVIL-LORE

                                   By

                      MONCURE DANIEL CONWAY, M.A.

             B. D. of Divinity College, Harvard University
            Member of the Anthropological Institute, London



                      With numerous illustrations



                                New York
                         Henry Holt and Company

                                  1879








PREFACE.


Three Friars, says a legend, hid themselves near the Witch Sabbath
orgies that they might count the devils; but the Chief of these,
discovering the friars, said--'Reverend Brothers, our army is such
that if all the Alps, their rocks and glaciers, were equally divided
among us, none would have a pound's weight.' This was in one Alpine
valley. Any one who has caught but a glimpse of the world's Walpurgis
Night, as revealed in Mythology and Folklore, must agree that this
courteous devil did not overstate the case. Any attempt to catalogue
the evil spectres which have haunted mankind were like trying to count
the shadows cast upon the earth by the rising sun. This conviction
has grown upon the author of this work at every step in his studies
of the subject.

In 1859 I contributed, as one of the American 'Tracts for the Times,'
a pamphlet entitled 'The Natural History of the Devil.' Probably
the chief value of that essay was to myself, and this in that
its preparation had revealed to me how pregnant with interest and
importance was the subject selected. Subsequent researches in the
same direction, after I had come to reside in Europe, revealed how
slight had been my conception of the vastness of the domain upon which
that early venture was made. In 1872, while preparing a series of
lectures for the Royal Institution on Demonology, it appeared to me
that the best I could do was to print those lectures with some notes
and additions; but after they were delivered there still remained with
me unused the greater part of materials collected in many countries,
and the phantasmal creatures which I had evoked would not permit me
to rest from my labours until I had dealt with them more thoroughly.

The fable of Thor's attempt to drink up a small spring, and his
failure because it was fed by the ocean, seems aimed at such efforts
as mine. But there is another aspect of the case which has yielded
me more encouragement. These phantom hosts, however unmanageable as
to number, when closely examined, present comparatively few types;
they coalesce by hundreds; from being at first overwhelmed by their
multiplicity, the classifier finds himself at length beating bushes to
start a new variety. Around some single form--the physiognomy, it may
be, of Hunger or Disease, of Lust or Cruelty--ignorant imagination
has broken up nature into innumerable bits which, like mirrors of
various surface, reflect the same in endless sizes and distortions;
but they vanish if that central fact be withdrawn.

In trying to conquer, as it were, these imaginary monsters, they
have sometimes swarmed and gibbered around me in a mad comedy
which travestied their tragic sway over those who believed in their
reality. Gargoyles extended their grin over the finest architecture,
cornices coiled to serpents, the very words of speakers started out of
their conventional sense into images that tripped my attention. Only
as what I believed right solutions were given to their problems were
my sphinxes laid; but through this psychological experience it appeared
that when one was so laid his or her legion disappeared also. Long ago
such phantasms ceased to haunt my nerves, because I discovered their
unreality; I am now venturing to believe that their mythologic forms
cease to haunt my studies, because I have found out their reality.

Why slay the slain? Such may be the question that will arise in the
minds of many who see this book. A Scotch song says, 'The Devil is
dead, and buried at Kirkcaldy;' if so, he did not die until he had
created a world in his image. The natural world is overlaid by an
unnatural religion, breeding bitterness around simplest thoughts,
obstructions to science, estrangements not more reasonable than if
they resulted from varying notions of lunar figures,--all derived from
the Devil-bequeathed dogma that certain beliefs and disbeliefs are of
infernal instigation. Dogmas moulded in a fossil demonology make the
foundation of institutions which divert wealth, learning, enterprise,
to fictitious ends. It has not, therefore, been mere intellectual
curiosity which has kept me working at this subject these many years,
but an increasing conviction that the sequelæ of such superstitions are
exercising a still formidable influence. When Father Delaporte lately
published his book on the Devil, his Bishop wrote--'Reverend Father, if
every one busied himself with the Devil as you do, the kingdom of God
would gain by it.' Identifying the kingdom here spoken of as that of
Truth, it has been with a certain concurrence in the Bishop's sentiment
that I have busied myself with the work now given to the public.








CONTENTS


Part I.


Chapter I.

Dualism.

    Origin of Deism--Evolution from the far to the near--Illustrations
    from Witchcraft--The primitive Pantheism--The dawn of Dualism

Chapter II.

The Genesis of Demons.

    Their good names euphemistic--Their mixed character--Illustrations:
    Beelzebub, Loki--Demon-germs--The knowledge of good and
    evil--Distinction between Demon and Devil


Chapter III.

Degradation.

    The degradation of Deities--Indicated in names--Legends of
    their fall--Incidental signs of the divine origin of Demons and
    Devils


Chapter IV.

The Abgott.

    The ex-god--Deities demonised by conquest--Theological animosity--
    Illustration from the Avesta--Devil-worship an arrested Deism--
    Sheik Adi--Why Demons were painted ugly--Survivals of their beauty


Chapter V.

Classification.

    The obstructions of man--The twelve chief classes--Modifications of
    particular forms for various functions--Theological Demons


Part II.


Chapter I.

Hunger.

    Hunger-demons--Kephn--Miru--Kagura--Ráhu the Hindu sun-devourer--
    The earth monster at Pelsall--A Franconian custom--Sheitan as
    moon-devourer--Hindu offerings to the dead--Ghoul--Goblin--
    Vampyres--Leanness of demons--Old Scotch custom--The origin of
    sacrifices


Chapter II.

Heat.

    Demons of fire--Agni--Asmodeus--Prometheus--Feast of fire--Moloch
    --Tophet--Genii of the lamp--Bel-fires--Hallowe'en--Negro
    superstitions--Chinese fire-god--Volcanic and incendiary demons--
    Mangaian fire-demon--Demons' fear of water


Chapter III.

Cold.

    Descent of Ishtar into Hades--Bardism--Baldur--Herakles--Christ--
    Survivals of the Frost Giant in Slavonic and other countries--
    The Clavie--The Frozen Hell--The Northern abode of Demons--North
    side of churches


Chapter IV.

Elements.

    A Scottish Munasa--Rudra--Siva's lightning eye--The flaming
    sword--Limping Demons--Demons of the storm--Helios, Elias,
    Perun--Thor arrows--The Bob-tailed Dragon--Whirlwind--Japanese
    Thunder God--Christian survivals--Jinni--Inundations--Noah--Nik,
    Nicholas, Old Nick--Nixies--Hydras--Demons of the Danube--Tides
    --Survivals in Russia and England


Chapter V.

Animals.

    Animal demons distinguished--Trivial sources of Mythology--
    Hedgehog--Fox--Transmigrations in Japan--Horses bewitched--
    Rats--Lions--Cats--The Dog--Goethe's horror of dogs--Superstitions
    of the Parsees, people of Travancore, and American Negroes, Red
    Indians, &c.--Cynocephaloi--The Wolf--Traditions of the Nez Perces
    --Fenris--Fables--The Boar--The Bear--Serpent--Every animal power
    to harm demonised--Horns


Chapter VI.

Enemies.

    Aryas, Dasyus,
    Nagas--Yakkhos--Lycians--Ethiopians--Hirpini--Polites--Sosipolis--
    Were-wolves--Goths and Scythians--Giants and Dwarfs--Berserkers--
    Britons--Iceland--Mimacs--Gog and Magog


Chapter VII.

Barrenness.

    Indian Famine and Sun-spots--Sun-worship--Demon of the Desert--The
    Sphinx--Egyptian Plagues described by Lepsius: Locusts, Hurricane,
    Flood, Mice, Flies--The Sheikh's ride--Abaddon--Set--Typhon--The
    Cain wind--Seth--Mirage--The Desert Eden--Azazel--Tawiscara and
    the Wild-rose


Chapter VIII.

Obstacles.

    Mephistopheles on crags--Emerson on Monadnoc--Ruskin on Alpine
    peasants--Holy and unholy mountains--The Devil's Pulpit--
    Montagnards--Tarns--Tenjo--T'ai-shan--Apocatequil--Tyrolese
    legends--Rock ordeal--Scylla and Charybdis--Scottish giants--
    Pontifex--Devil's bridges--Le géant Yéous


Chapter IX.

Illusion.

    Maya--Natural Treacheries--Misleaders--Glamour--Lorelei--Chinese
    Mermaid--Transformations--Swan Maidens--Pigeon Maidens--The
    Seal-skin--Nudity--Teufelsee--Gohlitsee--Japanese Siren--Dropping
    Cave--Venusberg--Godiva--Will-o'-Wisp--Holy Fräulein--The Forsaken
    Merman--The Water-Man--Sea Phantom--Sunken Treasures--Suicide


Chapter X.

Darkness.

    Shadows--Night Deities--Kobolds--Walpurgisnacht--Night as
    Abettor of Evil-doers--Nightmare--Dreams--Invisible Foes--Jacob
    and his Phantom--Nott--The Prince of Darkness--The Brood of
    Midnight--Second-Sight--Spectres of Souter Fell--The Moonshine
    Vampyre--Glamour--Glam and Grettir--A-Story of Dartmoor


Chapter XI.

Disease.

    The Plague Phantom--Devil-dances--Destroying Angels--Ahriman in
    Astrology--Saturn--Satan and Job--Set--The Fatal Seven--Yakseyo--
    The Singhalese Pretraya--Reeri--Maha Sohon--Morotoo--Luther on
    Disease-demons--Gopolu--Madan--Cattle-demon in Russia--Bihlweisen
    --The Plough


Chapter XII.

Death.

    The Vendetta of Death--Teoyaomiqui--Demon of Serpents--Death on
    the Pale Horse--Kali--War-gods--Satan as Death--Death-beds--
    Thanatos--Yama--Yimi--Towers of Silence--Alcestis--Herakles,
    Christ, and Death--Hell--Salt--Azraël--Death and the Cobbler--
    Dance of Death--Death as Foe and as Friend



Part III.


Chapter I.

Decline of Demons.

    The Holy Tree of Travancore--The growth of Demons in India,
    and their decline--The Nepaul Iconoclast--Moral Man and unmoral
    Nature--Man's physical and mental migrations--Heine's 'Gods in
    Exile'--The Goban Saor--Master Smith--A Greek caricature of
    the Gods--The Carpenter v. Deity and Devil--Extermination of
    the Were-wolf--Refuges of Demons--The Giants reduced to Little
    People--Deities and Demons returning to nature


Chapter II.

Generalisation of Demons.

    The Demons' bequest to their
    conquerors--Nondescripts--Exaggerations of Tradition--Saurian
    Theory of Dragons--The Dragon not primitive in Mythology--Monsters
    of Egyptian, Iranian, Vedic, and Jewish Mythologies--Turner's
    Dragon--Della Bella--The Conventional Dragon


Chapter III.

The Serpent.

    The beauty of the Serpent--Emerson on ideal forms--Michelet's
    thoughts on the viper's head--Unique characters of the
    Serpent--The Monkey's horror of Snakes--The Serpent protected
    by superstition--Human defencelessness against its subtle
    powers--Dubufe's picture of the Fall of Man


Chapter IV.

The Worm.

    An African Serpent-drama in America--The Veiled Serpent--The
    Ark of the Covenant--Aaron's Rod--The Worm--An Episode on the Dii
    Involuti--The Serapes--The Bambino at Rome--Serpent-transformations


Chapter V.

Apophis.

    The Naturalistic Theory of Apophis--The Serpent of Time--Epic of
    the Worm--The Asp of Melite--Vanquishers of Time--Nachash-Beriach
    --The Serpent-Spy--Treading on Serpents


Chapter VI.

The Serpent in India.

    The Kankato na--The Vedic Serpents not worshipful--Ananta and
    Sesha--The Healing Serpent--The guardian of treasures--Miss
    Buckland's theory--Primitive rationalism--Underworld
    plutocracy--Rain and lightning--Vritra--History of the word
    'Ahi'--The Adder--Zohak--A Teutonic Laokoon


Chapter VII.

The Basilisk.

    The Serpent's gem--The Basilisk's eye--Basiliscus
    mitratus--House-snakes in Russia and Germany--King-snakes--Heraldic
    Dragon--Henry III.--Melusina--The Laidley Worm--Victorious
    Dragons--Pendragon--Merlin and Vortigern--Medicinal dragons
    361


Chapter VIII.

The Dragon's Eye.

    The Eye of Evil--Turner's Dragons--Cloud-phantoms--Paradise and
    the Snake--Prometheus and Jove--Art and Nature--Dragon forms:
    Anglo-Saxon, Italian, Egyptian, Greek, German--The modern
    conventional Dragon


Chapter IX.

The Combat.

    The pre-Munchausenite world--The Colonial Dragon--Io's
    journey--Medusa--British Dragons--The Communal Dragon--Savage
    Saviours--A Mimac helper--The Brutal Dragon--Woman protected--The
    Saint of the Mikados


Chapter X.

The Dragon-slayer.

    Demi-gods--Alcestis--Herakles--The Ghilghit Fiend--Incarnate
    deliverer of Ghilghit--A Dardistan Madonna--The religion
    of Atheism--Resuscitation of Dragons--St. George and his
    Dragon--Emerson and Ruskin on George--Saintly allies of the
    Dragon


Chapter XI.

The Dragon's Breath.

    Medusa--Phenomena of recurrence--The Brood of Echidna and their
    survival--Behemoth and Leviathan--The Mouth of Hell--The Lambton
    Worm--Ragnar--The Lambton Doom--The Worm's Orthodoxy--The Serpent,
    Superstition, and Science


Chapter XII.

Fate.

    Doré's 'Love and Fate'--Moira and Moiræ--The 'Fates'
    of Æschylus--Divine absolutism surrendered--Jove
    and Typhon--Commutation of the Demon's share--Popular
    fatalism--Theological fatalism--Fate and Necessity--Deification
    of Will--Metaphysics, past and present



Part IV.


Chapter I.

Diabolism.

    Dragon and Devil distinguished--Dragons' wings--War in Heaven--
    Expulsion of Serpents--Dissolution of the Dragon--Theological
    origin of the Devil--Ideal and Actual--Devil Dogma--Debasement
    of ideal persons--Transmigration of phantoms


Chapter II.

The Second Best.

    Respect for the Devil--Primitive Atheism--Idealisation--Birth of
    new gods--New gods diabolised--Compromise between new gods and
    old--Foreign deities degraded--Their utilisation


Chapter III.

Ahriman, the Divine Devil.

    Mr. Irving's impersonation of Superstition--Revolution against
    pious privilege--Doctrine of 'Merits'--Saintly immorality in
    India--A Pantheon turned Inferno--Zendavesta on Good and Evil--
    Parsî Mythology--The Combat of Ahriman with Ormuzd--Optimism--
    Parsî Eschatology--Final Restoration of Ahriman


Chapter IV.

Viswámitra, the Theocratic Devil.

    Priestcraft and Pessimism--An Aryan Tetzel and his Luther--Brahman
    Frogs--Evolution of the Sacerdotal Saint--Viswámitra the Accuser
    of Virtue--The Tamil Passion-Play 'Harischandra'--Ordeal of
    Goblins--The Martyr of Truth--Virtue triumphant over ceremonial
    'Merits'--Harischandra and Job


Chapter V.

Elohim and Jehovah.

    Deified power--Giants and Jehovah--Jehovah's manifesto--The various
    Elohim--Two Jehovahs and two Tables--Contradictions--Detachment
    of the Elohim from Jehovah


Chapter VI.

The Consuming Fire.

    The Shekinah--Jewish idols--Attributes of the fiery and
    cruel Elohim compared with those of the Devil--The powers of
    evil combined under a head--Continuity--The consuming fire
    spiritualised


Chapter VII.

Paradise and the Serpent.

    Herakles and Athena in a holy picture--Human significance of
    Eden--The legend in Genesis puzzling--Silence of later books
    concerning it--Its Vedic elements--Its explanation--Episode of
    the Mahábhárata--Scandinavian variant--The name of Adam--The
    story re-read--Rabbinical interpretations


Chapter VIII.

Eve.

    The Fall of Man--Fall of gods--Giants--Prajápati and Ráhu--Woman
    and Star-Serpent in Persia--Meschia and Meschiane--Bráhman
    legends of the creation of Man--The strength of Woman--Elohist
    and Jehovist creations of Man--The Forbidden Fruit--Eve reappears
    as Sara--Abraham surrenders his wife to Jehovah--The idea not
    sensual--Abraham's circumcision--The evil name of Woman--Noah's
    wife--The temptation of Abraham--Rabbinical legends concerning
    Eve--Pandora--Sentiment of the Myth of Eve


Chapter IX.

Lilith.

    Madonnas--Adam's first wife--Her flight and doom--Creation of
    Devils--Lilith marries Samaël--Tree of Life--Lilith's part
    in the Temptation--Her locks--Lamia--Bodeima--Meschia and
    Meschiane--Amazons--Maternity--Rib-theory of Woman--Káli and
    Durga--Captivity of Woman


Chapter X.

War in Heaven.

    The 'Other'--Tiamat, Bohu, 'the Deep'--Ra and Apophis--Hathors
    --Bel's combat--Revolt in Heaven--Lilith--Myth of the Devil at
    the creation of Light


Chapter XI.

War on Earth.

    The Abode of Devils--Ketef--Disorder--Talmudic legends--The
    restless Spirit--The Fall of Lucifer--Asteria, Hecate, Lilith--The
    Dragon's triumph--A Gipsy legend--Cædmon's Poem of the Rebellious
    Angels--Milton's version--The Puritans and Prince Rupert--Bel
    as ally of the Dragon--A 'Mystery' in Marionettes--European
    Hells


Chapter XII.

Strife.

    Hebrew God of War--Samaël--The father's blessing and curse--
    Esau--Edom--Jacob and the Phantom--The planet Mars--Tradesman
    and Huntsman--'The Devil's Dream'


Chapter XIII.

Barbaric Aristocracy.

    Jacob, the 'Impostor'--The Barterer--Esau, the 'Warrior'--Barbarian
    Dukes--Trade and War--Reconciliation of Jacob and Esau--Their
    Ghosts--Legend of Iblis--Pagan Warriors of Europe--Russian
    Hierarchy of Hell


Chapter XIV.

Job and the Divider.

    Hebrew Polytheism--Problem of Evil--Job's disbelief in a
    future life--The Divider's realm--Salted sacrifices--Theory
    of Orthodoxy--Job's reasoning--His humour--Impartiality of
    Fortune between the evil and good--Agnosticism of Job--Elihu's
    Eclecticism--Jehovah of the Whirlwind--Heresies of Job--Rabbinical
    legend of Job--Universality of the legend


Chapter XV.

Satan.

    Public Prosecutors--Satan as Accuser--English Devil-Worshipper
    --Conversion by Terror--Satan in the Old Testament--The trial of
    Joshua--Sender of Plagues--Satan and Serpent--Portrait of Satan
    --Scapegoat of Christendom--Catholic 'Sight of Hell'--The ally
    of Priesthoods


Chapter XVI.

Religious Despotism.

    Pharaoh and Herod--Zoroaster's mother--Ahriman's emissaries--Kansa
    and Krishna--Emissaries of Kansa--Astyages and Cyrus--Zohák--Bel
    and the Christian


Chapter XVII.

The Prince of this World.

    Temptations--Birth of Buddha--Mara--Temptation of Power--Asceticism
    and Luxury--Mara's menaces--Appearance of the Buddha's
    Vindicator--Ahriman tempts Zoroaster--Satan and Christ--Criticism
    of Strauss--Jewish traditions--Hunger--Variants


Chapter XVIII.

Trial of the Great.

    A 'Morality' at Tours--The 'St. Anthony' of Spagnoletto--Bunyan's
    Pilgrim--Milton on Christ's Temptation--An Edinburgh saint and
    Unitarian fiend--A haunted Jewess--Conversion by fever--Limit of
    courage--Woman and sorcery--Luther and the Devil--The ink-spot at
    Wartburg--Carlyle's interpretation--The cowled Devil--Carlyle's
    trial--In Rue St. Thomas d'Enfer--The Everlasting No--Devil of
    Vauvert--The latter-day conflict--New conditions--The Victory of
    Man--The Scholar and the World


Chapter XIX.

The Man of Sin.

    Hindu myth--Gnostic theories--Ophite scheme of redemption--
    Rabbinical traditions of Primitive Man--Pauline Pessimism--Law
    of death--Satan's ownership of Man--Redemption of the Elect--
    Contemporary statements--Baptism--Exorcism--The 'new man's'
    food--Eucharist--Herbert Spencer's explanation--Primitive
    ideas--Legends of Adam and Seth--Adamites--A Mormon 'Mystery'
    of initiation


Chapter XX.

The Holy Ghost.

    A Hanover relic--Mr. Atkinson on the Dove--The Dove in the Old
    Testament--Ecclesiastical symbol--Judicial symbol--A vision of
    St. Dunstan's--The witness of chastity--Dove and Serpent--The
    unpardonable sin--Inexpiable sin among the Jews--Destructive
    power of Jehovah--Potency of the breath--Third persons of
    Trinities--Pentecost--Christian superstitions--Mr. Moody on the sin
    against the Holy Ghost--Mysterious fear--Idols of the cave


Chapter XXI.

Antichrist.

    The Kali Age--Satan sifting Simon--Satan as Angel of Light--
    Epithets of Antichrist--The Cæsars--Nero--Sacraments imitated
    by Pagans--Satanic signs and wonders--Jerome on Antichrist--
    Armillus--Al Dajjail--Luther on Mohammed--'Mawmet'--Satan
    'God's ape'--Mediæval notions--Witches' Sabbath--An Infernal
    Trinity--Serpent of Sins--Antichrist Popes--Luther as Antichrist
    --Modern notions of Antichrist


Chapter XXII.

The Pride of Life.

    The curse of Iblis--Samaël as Democrat--His vindication by
    Christ and Paul--Asmodäus--History of the name--Aschmedai of the
    Jews--Book of Tobit--Doré's 'Triumph of Christianity'--Aucassin
    and Nicolette--Asmodeus in the convent--The Asmodeus of Le
    Sage--Mephistopheles--Blake's 'Marriage of Heaven and Hell'--The
    Devil and the artists--Sádi's Vision of Satan--Arts of the
    Devil--Suspicion of beauty--Earthly and heavenly mansions--Deacon
    versus Devil


Chapter XXIII.

The Curse on Knowledge.

    A Bishop on intellect--The Bible on learning--The Serpent and
    Seth--A Hebrew Renaissance--Spells--Shelley at Oxford--
    Book-burning--Japanese ink-devil--Book of Cyprianus--Devil's
    Bible--Red Letters--Dread of Science--Roger Bacon--Luther's
    Devil--Lutherans and Science


Chapter XXIV.

Witchcraft.

    Minor gods--Saint and Satyr--Tutelaries--Spells--Early Christianity
    and the poor--Its doctrine as to pagan deities--Mediæval
    Devils--Devils on the stage--An Abbot's revelations--The fairer
    deities--Oriental dreams and spirits--Calls for Nemesis--Lilith
    and her children--Neoplatonicism--Astrology and Alchemy--Devil's
    College--Shem-hammphorásch--Apollonius of Tyana--Faustus--Black Art
    Schools--Compacts with the Devil--Blood covenant--Spirit-seances in
    old times--The Fairfax delusion--Origin of its devil--Witch, goat,
    and cat--Confessions of Witches--Witchcraft in New England--Witch
    trials--Salem demonology--Testing witches--Witch trials in
    Sweden--Witch Sabbath--Mythological elements--Carriers--Scotch
    Witches--The cauldron--Vervain--Rue--Invocation of Hecaté--Factors
    of Witch persecution--Three centuries of massacre--Würzburg
    horrors--Last victims--Modern Spiritualism


Chapter XXV.

Faust and Mephistopheles.

    Mephisto and Mephitis--The Raven Book--Papal sorcery--Magic
    seals--Mephistopheles as dog--George Sabellicus alias Faustus--The
    Faust myth--Marlowe's 'Faust'--Good and evil angels--'El Magico
    Prodigioso'--Cyprian and Justina--Klinger's 'Faust'--Satan's
    sermon--Goethe's Mephistopheles--His German characters--Moral
    scepticism--Devil's gifts--Helena--Redemption through Art--Defeat
    of Mephistopheles


Chapter XXVI.

The Wild Huntsman.

    The Wild Hunt--Euphemisms--Schimmelreiter--Odinwald--Pied Piper
    --Lyeshy--Waldemar's Hunt--Palne Hunter--King Abel's Hunt--Lords
    of Glorup--Le Grand Veneur--Robert le Diable--Arthur--Hugo--Herne
    --Tregeagle--Der Freischütz--Elijah's chariot--Mahan Bali--Déhak
    --Nimrod--Nimrod's defiance of Jehovah--His Tower--Robber Knights
    --The Devil in Leipzig--Olaf hunting pagans--Hunting-horns--Raven
    --Boar--Hounds--Horse--Dapplegrimm--Sleipnir--Horse-flesh--The
    mare Chetiya--Stags--St. Hubert--The White Lady--Myths of Mother
    Rose--Wodan hunting St. Walpurga--Friar Eckhardt


Chapter XXVII.

Le Bon Diable.

    The Devil repainted--Satan a divine agent--St. Orain's
    heresy--Primitive universalism--Father Sinistrari--Salvation of
    demons--Mediæval sects--Aquinas--His prayer for Satan--Popular
    antipathies--The Devil's gratitude--Devil defending
    innocence--Devil against idle lords--The wicked ale-wife--Pious
    offenders punished--Anachronistic Devils--Devils turn to
    poems--Devil's good advice--Devil sticks to his word--His love
    of justice--Charlemagne and the Serpent--Merlin--His prison of
    Air--Mephistopheles in Heaven


Chapter XXVIII.

Animalism.

    Celsus on Satan--Ferocities of inward nature--The Devil
    of Lust--Celibacy--Blue Beards--Shudendozi--A lady in
    distress--Bahirawa--The Black Prince--Madana Yaksenyo--Fair
    fascinators--Devil of Jealousy--Eve's jealousy--Noah's wife--How
    Satan entered the Ark--Shipwright's Dirge--The Second Fall--The
    Drunken curse--Solomon's Fall--Cellar Devils--Gluttony--The Vatican
    haunted--Avarice--Animalised Devils--Man-shaped Animals


Chapter XXIX.

Thoughts and Interpretations      421








PART I.

DEMONOLATRY.


CHAPTER I.

DUALISM.

    Origin of Deism--Evolution from the far to the near--Illustrations
    from witchcraft--The primitive Pantheism--The dawn of Dualism.


A college in the State of Ohio has adopted for its motto the words
'Orient thyself.' This significant admonition to Western youth
represents one condition of attaining truth in the science of
mythology. Through neglect of it the glowing personifications and
metaphors of the East have too generally migrated to the West only to
find it a Medusa turning them to stone. Our prosaic literalism changes
their ideals to idols. The time has come when we must learn rather to
see ourselves in them: out of an age and civilisation where we live in
habitual recognition of natural forces we may transport ourselves to a
period and region where no sophisticated eye looks upon nature. The sun
is a chariot drawn by shining steeds and driven by a refulgent deity;
the stars ascend and move by arbitrary power or command; the tree is
the bower of a spirit; the fountain leaps from the urn of a naiad. In
such gay costumes did the laws of nature hold their carnival until
Science struck the hour for unmasking. The costumes and masks have
with us become materials for studying the history of the human mind,
but to know them we must translate our senses back into that phase
of our own early existence, so far as is consistent with carrying
our culture with us.

Without conceding too much to Solar mythology, it may be pronounced
tolerably clear that the earliest emotion of worship was born out
of the wonder with which man looked up to the heavens above him. The
splendours of the morning and evening; the azure vault, painted with
frescoes of cloud or blackened by the storm; the night, crowned with
constellations: these awakened imagination, inspired awe, kindled
admiration, and at length adoration, in the being who had reached
intervals in which his eye was lifted above the earth. Amid the rapture
of Vedic hymns to these sublimities we meet sharp questionings whether
there be any such gods as the priests say, and suspicion is sometimes
cast on sacrifices. The forms that peopled the celestial spaces may
have been those of ancestors, kings, and great men, but anterior to
all forms was the poetic enthusiasm which built heavenly mansions for
them; and the crude cosmogonies of primitive science were probably
caught up by this spirit, and consecrated as slowly as scientific
generalisations now are.

Our modern ideas of evolution might suggest the reverse of this--that
human worship began with things low and gradually ascended to high
objects; that from rude ages, in which adoration was directed to
stock and stone, tree and reptile, the human mind climbed by degrees
to the contemplation and reverence of celestial grandeurs. But the
accord of this view with our ideas of evolution is apparent only. The
real progress seems here to have been from the far to the near, from
the great to the small. It is, indeed, probably inexact to speak of
the worship of stock and stone, weed and wort, insect and reptile,
as primitive. There are many indications that such things were by no
race considered intrinsically sacred, nor were they really worshipped
until the origin of their sanctity was lost; and even now, ages
after their oracular or symbolical character has been forgotten, the
superstitions that have survived in connection with such insignificant
objects point to an original association with the phenomena of the
heavens. No religions could, at first glance, seem wider apart than
the worship of the serpent and that of the glorious sun; yet many
ancient temples are covered with symbols combining sun and snake,
and no form is more familiar in Egypt than the solar serpent standing
erect upon its tail, with rays around its head.

Nor is this high relationship of the adored reptile found only in
regions where it might have been raised up by ethnical combinations as
the mere survival of a savage symbol. William Craft, an African who
resided for some time in the kingdom of Dahomey, informed me of the
following incident which he had witnessed there. The sacred serpents
are kept in a grand house, which they sometimes leave to crawl in
their neighbouring grounds. One day a negro from some distant region
encountered one of these animals and killed it. The people learning
that one of their gods had been slain, seized the stranger, and having
surrounded him with a circle of brushwood, set it on fire. The poor
wretch broke through the circle of fire and ran, pursued by the crowd,
who struck him with heavy sticks. Smarting from the flames and blows,
he rushed into a river; but no sooner had he entered there than the
pursuit ceased, and he was told that, having gone through fire and
water, he was purified, and might emerge with safety. Thus, even in
that distant and savage region, serpent-worship was associated with
fire-worship and river-worship, which have a wide representation in
both Aryan and Semitic symbolism. To this day the orthodox Israelites
set beside their dead, before burial, the lighted candle and a basin
of pure water. These have been associated in rabbinical mythology with
the angels Michael (genius of Water) and Gabriel (genius of Fire);
but they refer both to the phenomenal glories and the purifying
effects of the two elements as reverenced by the Africans in one
direction and the Parsees in another.

Not less significant are the facts which were attested at the
witch-trials. It was shown that for their pretended divinations they
used plants--as rue and vervain--well known in the ancient Northern
religions, and often recognised as examples of tree-worship; but it
also appeared that around the cauldron a mock zodiacal circle was
drawn, and that every herb employed was alleged to have derived its
potency from having been gathered at a certain hour of the night or
day, a particular quarter of the moon, or from some spot where sun or
moon did or did not shine upon it. Ancient planet-worship is, indeed,
still reflected in the habit of village herbalists, who gather their
simples at certain phases of the moon, or at certain of those holy
periods of the year which conform more or less to the pre-christian
festivals.

These are a few out of many indications that the small and senseless
things which have become almost or quite fetishes were by no means such
at first, but were mystically connected with the heavenly elements
and splendours, like the animal forms in the zodiac. In one of the
earliest hymns of the Rig-Veda it is said--'This earth belongs to
Varuna (Ouranos) the king, and the wide sky: he is contained also in
this drop of water.' As the sky was seen reflected in the shining curve
of a dew-drop, even so in the shape or colour of a leaf or flower,
the transformation of a chrysalis, or the burial and resurrection
of a scarabæus' egg, some sign could be detected making it answer in
place of the typical image which could not yet be painted or carved.

The necessities of expression would, of course, operate to invest
the primitive conceptions and interpretations of celestial phenomena
with those pictorial images drawn from earthly objects of which the
early languages are chiefly composed. In many cases that are met
in the most ancient hymns, the designations of exalted objects are
so little descriptive of them, that we may refer them to a period
anterior to the formation of that refined and complex symbolism by
which primitive religions have acquired a representation in definite
characters. The Vedic comparisons of the various colours of the dawn
to horses, or the rain-clouds to cows, denotes a much less mature
development of thought than the fine observation implied in the
connection of the forked lightning with the forked serpent-tongue and
forked mistletoe, or symbolisation of the universe in the concentric
folds of an onion. It is the presence of these more mystical and
complex ideas in religions which indicate a progress of the human
mind from the large and obvious to the more delicate and occult, and
the growth of the higher vision which can see small things in their
large relationships. Although the exaltation in the Vedas of Varuna
as king of heaven, and as contained also in a drop of water, is in
one verse, we may well recognise an immense distance in time between
the two ideas there embodied. The first represents that primitive
pantheism which is the counterpart of ignorance. An unclassified
outward universe is the reflection of a mind without form and void:
it is while all within is as yet undiscriminating wonder that the
religious vesture of nature will be this undefined pantheism. The
fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil has not yet been
tasted. In some of the earlier hymns of the Rig-Veda, the Maruts,
the storm-deities, are praised along with Indra, the sun; Yama,
king of Death, is equally adored with the goddess of Dawn. 'No real
foe of yours is known in heaven, nor in earth.' 'The storms are thy
allies.' Such is the high optimism of sentences found even in sacred
books which elsewhere mask the dawn of the Dualism which ultimately
superseded the harmony of the elemental Powers. 'I create light
and I create darkness, I create good and I create evil.' 'Look unto
Yezdan, who causeth the shadow to fall.' But it is easy to see what
must be the result when this happy family of sun-god and storm-god
and fire-god, and their innumerable co-ordinate divinities, shall
be divided by discord. When each shall have become associated with
some earthly object or fact, he or she will appear as friend or foe,
and their connection with the sources of human pleasure and pain will
be reflected in collisions and wars in the heavens. The rebel clouds
will be transformed to Titans and Dragons. The adored Maruts will be
no longer storm-heroes with unsheathed swords of lightning, marching
as the retinue of Indra, but fire-breathing monsters--Vritras and
Ahis,--and the morning and evening shadows from faithful watch-dogs
become the treacherous hell-hounds, like Orthros and Cerberus. The
vehement antagonisms between animals and men and of tribe against
tribe, will be expressed in the conception of struggles among gods,
who will thus be classified as good or evil deities.

This was precisely what did occur. The primitive pantheism was broken
up: in its place the later ages beheld the universe as the arena of
a tremendous conflict between good and evil Powers, who severally,
in the process of time, marshalled each and everything, from a world
to a worm, under their flaming banners.







