CHAPTER X.

DARKNESS.

    Shadows--Night Deities--Kobolds--Walpurgisnacht--Night as
    Abettor of Evil-doers--Nightmare--Dreams--Invisible Foes--Jacob
    and his Phantom--Nott--The Prince of Darkness--The Brood of
    Midnight--Second-Sight--Spectres of Souter Fell--The Moonshine
    Vampyre--Glamour--Glam and Grettir--A Story of Dartmoor.


From the little night which clings to man even by day--his own
shadow--to the world's great shade of darkness, innumerable are the
coverts from which have emerged the black procession of phantoms which
have haunted the slumbers of the world, and betrayed the enterprise
of man.

How strange to the first man seemed that shadow walking beside him,
from the time when he saw it as a ghost tracking its steps and giving
him his name for a ghost, on to the period in which it seemed the
emanation of an occult power, as to them who brought their sick into
the streets to be healed by the passing shadow of Peter; and still
on to the day when Beaumont wrote--


            Our acts our angels are, or good or ill,
            Our fatal shadows that walk by us still;


or that in which Goethe found therein the mystical symbol of the
inward arrest of our moral development, and said 'No man can jump
off of his shadow.' And then from the culture of Europe we pass to
the Feejee-Islanders, and find them believing that every man has
two spirits. One is his shadow, which goes to Hades; the other is
his image as reflected in water, and it is supposed to stay near the
place where the man dies. [164] But, like the giants of the Brocken,
these demons of the Shadow are trembled at long after they are known
to be the tremblers themselves mirrored on air. Have we not priests
in England still fostering the belief that the baptized child goes
attended by a white spirit, the unbaptized by a dark one? Why then
need we apologise for the Fijians?

But little need be said here of demons of the Dark, for they are
closely related to the phantasms of Delusion, of Winter, and others
already described. Yet have they distinctive characters. As many as
were the sunbeams were the shadows; every goddess of the Dawn (Ushas)
cast her shadow; every Day was swallowed up by Night. This is the
cavern where hide the treacherous Panis (fog) in Vedic mythology,
they who steal and hide Indra's cows; this is the realm of Hades (the
invisible); this is the cavern of the hag Thökk (dark) in Scandinavian
mythology,--she who alone of all in the universe refused to weep
for Baldur when he was shut up in Helheim, where he had been sent
by the dart of his blind brother Hödr (darkness). In the cavern of
Night sleep the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus, and Barbarossa, and all
slumbering phantoms whose genius is the night-winged raven. Thorr,
the Norse Hercules, once tried to lift a cat--as it seemed to him--from
the ground; but it was the great mid-earth serpent which encircles the
whole earth. Impossible feat as it was for Thorr--who got only one paw
of the seeming cat off the ground--in that glassless and gasless era,
invention has accomplished much in that direction; but the black Cat
is still domiciled securely among idols of the mental cave.

There is an Anglo-Saxon word, cof-godas (lit. cove-gods), employed as
the equivalent of the Latin lares (the Penates, too, are interpreted as
cof-godu, cofa signifying the inner recess of a house, penetrale). The
word in German corresponding to this cofa, is koben; and from this
Hildebrand conjectures kob-old to be derived. The latter part of
the word he supposes to be walt (one who 'presides over,' e.g.,
Walter); so that the original form would be kob-walt. [165] Here,
then, in the recesses of the household, among the least enlightened
of its members--the menials, who still often neutralise the efforts
of rational people to dispel the delusions of their children--the
discredited deities and demons of the past found refuge, and through
a little baptismal change of names are familiars of millions unto
this day. In the words of the ancient Hebrew, 'they lay in their
own houses prisoners of darkness, fettered with the bonds of a long
night.' 'No power of the fire might give them light, neither could
the bright flames of the stars lighten that horrible night.' [166]
Well is it added, 'Fear is nothing else but a betraying of the succours
which reason offereth,' a truth which finds ample illustration in the
Kobolds. These imaginary beings were naturally associated with the dark
recesses of mines. There they gave the name to our metal Cobalt. The
value of Cobalt was not understood until the 17th century, and the
metal was first obtained by the Swedish chemist Brandt in 1733. The
miners had believed that the silver was stolen away by Kobolds, and
these 'worthless' ores left in its place. Nickel had the like history,
and is named after Old Nick. So long did those Beauties slumber in
the cavern of Ignorance till Science kissed them with its sunbeam,
and led them forth to decorate the world!

How passed this (mental) cave-dweller even amid the upper splendours
and vastnesses of his unlit world? A Faust guided by his Mephistopheles
only amid interminable Hartz labyrinths.


            How sadly rises, incomplete and ruddy,
            The moon's lone disk, with its belated glow,
            And lights so dimly, that, as one advances,
            At every step one strikes a rock or tree!
            Let us then use a Jack-o'-lantern's glances:
            I see one yonder, burning merrily.
            Ho, there! my friend! I'll levy thine attendance:
            Why waste so vainly thy resplendence?
            Be kind enough to light us up the steep!

            Tell me, if we still are standing,
            Or if further we're ascending?
            All is turning, whirling, blending,
            Trees and rocks with grinning faces,
            Wandering lights that spin in mazes,
            Still increasing and expanding. [167]


It could only have been at a comparatively late period of social
development that Sancho's benediction on the inventor of sleep could
have found general response. The Red Indian found its helplessness
fatal when the 'Nick of the Woods' was abroad; the Scotch sailor found
in it a demon's opiate when the 'Nigg of the Sea' was gathering his
storms above the sleeping watchman. It was among the problems of Job,
the coöperation of darkness with evil-doers.


            The eye of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight;
            He saith, No eye will see me,
            And putteth a mask upon his face.
            In the dark men break into houses;
            In the day-time they shut themselves up;
            They are strangers to the light.
            The morning to them is the shadow of death;
            They are familiar with the dark terrors of midnight.


Besides this fact that the night befriends and masks every treacherous
foe, it is also to be remembered that man is weakest at night. Not
only is he weaker than by day in the veil drawn over his senses,
but physiologically also. When the body is wearied out by the toils
or combats of the day, and the mind haunted by dreams of danger,
there are present all the terrors which Byron portrays around the
restless pillow of Sardanapalus. The war-horse of the day becomes
a night-mare in the darkness. In the Heimskringla it is recorded:
'Vanland, Svegdir's son, succeeded his father and ruled over the
Upsal domain. He was a great warrior, and went far around in different
lands. Once he took up his winter abode in Finland with Snio the Old,
and got his daughter Drisa in marriage; but in spring he set out
leaving Drisa behind, and although he had promised to return within
three years he did not come back for ten. Then Drisa sent a message to
the witch Hulda; and sent Visbur, her son by Vanland, to Sweden. Drisa
bribed the witch-wife Hulda, either that she should bewitch Vanland
to return to Finland or kill him. When this witch-work was going
on Vanland was at Upsal, and a great desire came over him to go to
Finland, but his friends and counsellors advised him against it, and
said the witchcraft of the Fin people showed itself in this desire of
his to go there.  He then became very drowsy, and laid himself down to
sleep; but when he had slept but a little while he cried out, saying,
'Mara was treading on him.' His men hastened to help him; but when they
took hold of his head she trod on his legs, and when they laid hold
of his legs she pressed upon his head; and it was his death.' [168]

This witch is, no doubt, Hildur, a Walkyr of the Edda, leading heroes
to Walhalla. Indeed, in Westphalia, nightmare is called Walriderske. It
is a curious fact that 'Mara' should be preserved in the French
word for nightmare, Cauche-mar, 'cauche' being from Latin calcare,
to tread. Through Teutonic folklore this Night-demon of many names,
having floated from England in a sieve paddled with cow-ribs, rides to
the distress of an increasingly unheroic part of the population. Nearly
always still the 'Mahrt' is said to be a pretty woman,--sometimes,
indeed, a sweetheart is involuntarily transformed to one,--every
rustic settlement abounding with tales of how the demoness has been
captured by stopping the keyhole, calling the ridden sleeper by his
baptismal name, and making the sign of the cross; by such process the
wicked beauty appears in human form, and is apt to marry the sleeper,
with usually evil results. The fondness of cats for getting on the
breasts of sleepers, or near their breath, for warmth, has made that
animal a common form of the 'Mahrt.' Sometimes it is a black fly with
red ring around its neck. This demoness is believed to suffer more
pain than it inflicts, and vainly endeavours to destroy herself.

In savage and nomadic times sound sleep being an element of danger, the
security which required men to sleep on their arms demanded also that
they should sleep as it were with one eye open. Thus there might have
arisen both the intense vividness which demons acquired by blending
subjective and objective impressions, and the curious inability, so
frequent among barbarians and not unknown among the men civilised, to
distinguish dream from fact. The habit of day-dreaming seems, indeed,
more general than is usually supposed. Dreams haunt all the region of
our intellectual twilight,--the borderland of mystery, where rise the
sources of the occult and the mystical which environ our lives. The
daily terrors of barbarous life avail to haunt the nerves of civilised
people, now many generations after they have passed away, with special
and irrational shudders at certain objects or noises: how then must
they have haunted the dreams of humanity when, like the daughter of
Nathan the Wise, rescued from flames, it passed the intervals of strife


                  With nerves unstrung through fear,
        And fire and flame in all she sees or fancies;
        Her soul awake in sleep, asleep when wide awake?


Among the sources of demoniac beliefs few indeed are more prolific than
Dreams. 'The witchcraft of sleep,' says Emerson, 'divides with truth
the empire of our lives. This soft enchantress visits two children
lying locked in each other's arms, and carries them asunder by wide
spans of land and sea, wide intervals of time. 'Tis superfluous to
think of the dreams of multitudes; the astonishment remains that
one should dream; that we should resign so quietly this deifying
reason and become the theatre of delusions, shows, wherein time,
space, persons, cities, animals, should dance before us in merry and
mad confusion, a delicate creation outdoing the prime and flower of
actual nature, antic comedy alternating with horrid spectres. Or we
seem busied for hours and days in peregrinations over seas and lands,
in earnest dialogues, strenuous actions for nothings and absurdities,
cheated by spectral jokes, and waking suddenly with ghostly laughter,
to be rebuked by the cold lonely silent midnight, and to rake with
confusion in memory among the gibbering nonsense to find the motive
of this contemptible cachinnation.' [169]

It has always been the worst of periods of religious excitement that
they shape the dreams of old and young, and find there a fearful
and distorted, but vivid and realistic, embodiment of their feverish
experiences. In the days of witchcraft thousands visited the Witches'
Sabbaths, as they believed and danced in the Walpurgis orgies,
borne (by hereditary orthodox canon) on their own brooms up their own
chimneys; and to-day, by the same morbid imaginations, the victims are
able to see themselves or others elongated, levitated, floating through
the air. If people only knew how few are ever really wide-awake,
these spiritual nightmares would soon reach their termination. The
natural terrors before which helpless man once cowered, have been
prolonged past all his real victories over his demons by a succession
of such nightmares, so that the vulgar religion might be portrayed
somewhat as Richard Wagner described his first tragedy, in which,
having killed off forty-two of his characters, he had to bring them
back as ghosts to carry on the fifth act!

The perils of darkness, as ambush of foes human and animal,
concealer of pitfalls, misguider of footsteps, misdirector of aims,
were more real than men can well imagine in an age of gaslight plus
the policeman. The myth of Joshua commanding the sun to stand still;
the cry of Ajax when darkness fell on the combat, 'Grant me but to
see!' refer us to the region from which come all childish shudders
at going into the dark. The limit of human courage is reached where
its foe is beyond the reach of its force. Fighting in the dark may
even be suicidal. A German fable of blindfold zeal--the awakened
sleeper demolishing his furniture and knocking out his own teeth in
the attempt to punish cats--has its tragical illustrations also. But
none of these actual dangers have been of more real evil to man than
the demonisation of them. This rendered his very skill a blunder, his
energy weakness. If it was bad to retreat in the dusk from an innocent
bush into an unrecognised well, it was worse to meet the ghost with
rune or crucifix and find it an assassin. When man fights with his
shadow, he instantly makes it the demon he fears; ghoul-like it preys
upon his paralysed strength, vampyre-like it sucks his blood, and he is
consigned disarmed to the evil that is no shadow. The Scottish Sinclair
marching through Norway, in the 16th century, owes his monument at
Wiblungen rather to the magpie believed to precede him as a spy,
with night and day upon its wings, than to his own prowess or power.

In a sense all demons, whatever their shapes, are the ancient
brood of night. Mental darkness, even more moral darkness within,
supply the phantasmagoria in which unknown things shape themselves as
demons. Esau is already reconciled, but guilty Jacob must still wrestle
with him as a phantom of Fear till daybreak. A work has already been
written on 'The Night-side of Nature,' but it would require many
volumes to tell the story of what monsters have been conjured out
of the kind protecting darkness. How great is the darkness which
man makes for himself out of the imagination which should be his
light and vision! Much of the so-called 'religion' of our time is
but elaborate demoniculture and artificial preservation of mental
Walpurgis-nights. Nott (Night) says the Edda rides first on her horse
called Hrimfaxi (frost-maned), which every morning as he ends his
course bedews the earth with the foam that falls from his bit. Though
the horse of Day--Skinfaxi, or Shining-mane--follows hard after her,
yet the foam is by no means drunk up by his fires. Foam of the old
phantasms still lingers in our mediæval liturgies, and even falls
afresh where the daylight is shut out that altar-candles may burn,
or for other dark seances are prepared the conditions necessary for
whatsoever loves not the light.

What we call the Dark Ages were indeed spiritually a perpetual seance
with lights lowered. Nay, human superstition was able to turn the
very moon and stars into mere bluish night-tapers, giving just light
enough to make the darkness visible in fantastic shapes fluttering
around the Prince of Darkness,--or Non-existence in Chief! How much
of the theosophic speculation of our time is the mere artificial
conservation of that darkness? How much that still flits bat-winged
from universities, will, in the future, be read with the same wonder
as that with which even the more respectable bats can now read account
of the midnight brood which now for the most part sleep tranquilly in
such books as Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy'? 'There are,' he says,
'certain spirits which Miraldus calls Ambulones, that walk about
midnight on great heaths and desert places, which (saith Lavater)
draw men out of their way, and lead them all night by a byway, or
quite bar them of their way. These have several names in several
places. We commonly call them Pucks. In the deserts of Lop, in Asia,
such illusions of walking spirits are often perceived, as you may read
in M. Paulus, the Venetian, his travels. If one lose his company by
chance, these devils will call him by his name, and counterfeit voices
of his companions to seduce him. Lavater and Cicogna have a variety of
examples of spirits and walking devils in this kind. Sometimes they
sit by the wayside to give men falls, and make their horses stumble
and start as they ride (according to the narration of that holy man
Ketellus in Nubrigensis, that had an especial grace to see devils);
and if a man curse and spur his horse for stumbling, they do heartily
rejoice at it.'

While observing a spirited and imaginative picture by Macallum of
the Siege of Jerusalem, it much interested me to observe the greater
or less ease with which other visitors discovered the portents in
the air which, following the narrative of Josephus, the artist had
vaguely portrayed. The chariots and horsemen said to have been seen
before that event were here faintly blent with indefinite outlines
of clouds; and while some of the artist's friends saw them with a
distinctness greater, perhaps, than that with which they impressed
the eye of the artist himself, others could hardly be made to see
anything except shapeless vapour, though of course they all agreed
that they were there and remarkably fine.

It would seem that thus, in a London studio, there were present all
the mental pigments for frescoing the air and sky with those visions
of aërial armies or huntsmen which have become so normal in history
as to be, in a subjective sense, natural. In the year 1763, an author,
styling himself Theophilus Insulanus, published at Edinburgh a book on
Second-Sight, in which he related more than a hundred instances of the
power he believed to exist of seeing events before they had occurred,
and whilst, of course, they did not exist. It is not difficult in
reading them to see that they are all substantially one and the
same story, and that the sight in operation was indeed second; for
man or woman, at once imaginative and illiterate, have a second and
supernumerary pair of eyes inherited from the traditional superstitions
and ghost stories which fill all the air they breathe from the cradle
to the grave. While the mind is in this condition, that same nature
whose apparitions and illusions originally evoked and fostered the
glamoury, still moves on with her minglings of light and shade, cloud
and mirage, giving no word of explanation. There are never wanting the
shadowy forms without that cast their shuttles to the dark idols of the
mental cave, together weaving subtle spells round the half-waking mind.

In the year 1743 all the North of England and Scotland was in alarm
on account of some spectres which were seen on the mountain of Souter
Fell in Cumberland. The mountain is about half-a-mile high. On a summer
evening a farmer and his servant, looking from Wilton Hall, half a
mile off, saw the figures of a man and a dog pursuing some horses
along the mountain-side, which is very steep; and on the following
morning they repaired to the place, expecting to find dead bodies, but
finding none. About one year later a troop of horsemen were seen riding
along the same mountain-side by one of the same persons, the servant,
who then called others who also saw the aërial troopers. After a year
had elapsed the above vision was attested before a magistrate by two
of those who saw it. The event occurred on the eve of the Rebellion,
when horsemen were exercising, and when also the popular mind along
the Border may be supposed to have been in a highly excited condition.

What was seen on this strongly-authenticated occasion? Was anything
seen? None can tell. It is open to us to believe that there may have
been some play of mirage. As there are purely aërial echoes, so are
there aërial reflectors for the eye. On the other hand, the vision so
nearly resembles the spectral processions which have passed through
the mythology of the world, that we can never be sure that it was
not the troop of King Arthur, emerging from Avallon to announce
the approaching strife. A few fleecy, strangely-shaped clouds,
chasing each other along the hillside in the evening's dusk would
have amply sufficed to create the latter vision, and the danger of
the time would easily have supplied all the Second-Sight required to
reveal it to considerable numbers. In questions of this kind a very
small circumstance--a phrase, a name, perhaps--may turn the balance
of probabilities. Thus it may be noted that, in the instance just
related, the vision was seen on the steep side of Souter Fell. Fell
means a hill or a steep rock, as in Drachenfels. But as to Souter,
although, as Mr. Robert Ferguson says, the word may originally
have meant sheep, [170] it is found in Scotland used as 'shoemaker'
in connection with the fabulous giants of that region. Sir Thomas
Urquhart, in the seventeenth century, relates it as the tradition
of the two promontories of Cromarty, called 'Soutars,' that they
were the work-stools of two giants who supplied their comrades with
shoes and buskins. Possessing but one set of implements, they used
to fling these to each other across the opening of the firth, where
the promontories are only two miles apart. In process of time the name
Soutar, shoemaker, was bequeathed by the craftsmen to their stools. It
is not improbable that the name gradually connected itself with other
places bearing traditions connecting them with the fabulous race,
and that in this way the Souter Fell, from meaning in early times
much the same as Giants' Hill, preserved even in 1743-44 enough of the
earlier uncanny associations to awaken the awe of Borderers in a time
of rebellion. The vision may therefore have been seen by light which
had journeyed all the way from the mythologic heavens of ancient India:
substantially subjective--such stuff as dreams and dreamers are made
of--no doubt there were outer clouds, shapes and afterglows enough,
even in the absence of any fata morgana to supply canvas and pigment
to the cunning artist that hides in the eye.

In an old tale, the often-slain Vampyre-bat only requests, with
pathos, that his body may be laid where no sunlight, but only the
moonlight, will fall on it--only that! But it is under the moonshine
that it always gains new life. No demon requires absolute darkness,
but half-darkness, in which to live: enough light to disclose a
Somewhat, but not enough to define and reveal its nature, is just
what has been required for the bat-eyes of fable and phantasy, which
can make vampyre of a sparrow or giant out of a windmill.

Glamour! A marvellous history has this word of the artists and
poets,--sometimes meaning the charm with which the eye invests any
object; or, in Wordsworth's phrase, 'the light that never was on
land or sea.' But no artist or poet ever rose to the full height
of the simple term itself, which well illustrates Emerson's saying,
'Words are fossil poetry.' Professor Cowell of Cambridge says: 'Glám,
or in the nominative Glámr, is also a poetical name for the Moon. It
does not actually occur in the ancient literature, but it is given in
the glossary in the Prose Edda in the list of the very old words for
the Moon.' Vigfusson in his dictionary says, 'The word is interesting
on account of its identity with Scot. Glamour, which shows that the
tale of Glam was common to Scotland and Iceland, and this much older
than Grettir (in the year 1014).' The Ghost or Goblin Glam seems
evidently to have arisen from a personification of the delusive and
treacherous effects of moonlight on the benighted traveller,


        Quale per incertam lunam sub luce malignâ,
        Est iter in sylvis.


Now, there is a curious old Sanskrit word, glau or gláv, which is
explained in all the old native lexicons as meaning 'the moon.' It
might either be taken as 'waning,' or in a casual sense 'obscuring.'

The following lines from an early mediæval poet, Bhása (seventh
century), will illustrate the deceptive character of moonlight from
a Hindu point of view. The strong and wild Norse imagination delights
in what is terrible and gloomy: the Hindu loves to dwell on the milder
and quieter aspects of human life.

'The cat laps the moonbeams in the bowl of water, thinking them to
be milk: the elephant thinks that the moonbeams, threaded through
the intervals of the trees, are the fibres of the lotus-stalk. The
woman snatches at the moonbeams as they lie on the bed, taking them
for her muslin garment: oh, how the moon, intoxicated with radiance,
bewilders all the world!'

A similar passage, no doubt imitated from this, is also quoted:

'The bewildered herdsmen place the pails under the cows, thinking
that the milk is flowing; the maidens also put the blue lotus blossom
in their ears, thinking that it is the white; the mountaineer's wife
snatches up the jujube fruit, avaricious for pearls. Whose mind is
not led astray by the thickly clustering moonbeams?' [171]

In the Icelandic legend of the struggle between the hero Grettir,
translated by Magnússen and Morris (London, 1869), the saga
supplies a scenery as archæological as if the philologists had been
consulted. 'Bright moonlight was there without, and the drift was
broken, now drawn over the moon, now driven off from her; and even as
Glam fell, a cloud was driven from the moon, and Glam glared up against
her.' When the hero beheld these glaring eyes of the giant Ghost, he
felt some fiendish craft in them, and could not draw his short sword,
and 'lay well nigh 'twixt home and hell.' This half-light of the moon,
which robs the Strong of half his power, is repeated in Glam's curse:
'Exceedingly eager hast thou sought to meet me, Grettir, but no
wonder will it be deemed, though thou gettest no good hap of me;
and this I must tell thee, that thou now hast got half the strength
and manhood which was thy lot if thou hadst not met me: now I may
not take from thee the strength which thou hast got before this;
but that may I rule, that thou shalt never be mightier than now thou
art ... therefore this weird I lay on thee, ever in those days to
see these eyes with thine eyes, and thou wilt find it hard to be
alone--and that shalt drag thee unto death.'

The Moon-demon's power is limited to the spell of illusion he can
cast. Presently he is laid low; the 'short sword' of a sunbeam pales,
decapitates him. But after Glam is burned to cold coals, and his
ashes buried in skin of a beast 'where sheep-pastures were fewest,
or the ways of men,' the spell lay upon the hero's eyes. 'Grettir
said that his temper had been nowise bettered by this, that he was
worse to quiet than before, and that he deemed all trouble worse than
it was; but that herein he found the greatest change, in that he was
become so fearsome a man in the dark, that he durst go nowhither alone
after nightfall, for then he seemed to see all kinds of horrors. And
that has fallen since into a proverb, that Glam lends eyes, or gives
Glamsight to those who see things nowise as they are.'

In reading which one may wonder how this world would look if for
a little moment one's eyes could be purged of glamour. Even at the
moon's self one tries vainly to look: where Hindu and Zulu see a hare,
the Arab sees coils of a serpent, and the Englishman sees a man; and
the most intelligent of these several races will find it hard to see in
the moon aught save what their primitive ancestors saw. And this small
hint of the degree to which the wisest, like Merlin, are bound fast
in an air-prison by a Vivien whose spells are spun from themselves,
would carry us far could we only venture to follow it out. 'The Moon,'
observed Dr. Johnson unconsciously, 'has great influence in vulgar
philosophy.' How much lunar theology have we around us, so that
many from the cradle to the grave get no clear sight of nature or of
themselves! Very closely did Carlyle come to the fable of Glam when
speaking of Coleridge's 'prophetic moonshine,' and its effect on poor
John Sterling. 'If the bottled moonshine beactually substance? Ah,
could one but believe in a church while finding it incredible!... The
bereaved young lady has taken the veil then!... To such lengths can
transcendental moonshine, cast by some morbidly radiating Coleridge
into the chaos of a fermenting life, act magically there, and produce
divulsions and convulsions and diseased developments.' One can almost
fancy Carlyle had ringing in his memory the old Scottish ballad of
the Rev. Robert Kirk, translator of the Psalms into Gaelic, who,
while walking in his night-gown at Aberfoyle, was 'snatched away to
the joyless Elfin bower.'


            It was between the night and day
            When the fairy-king has power.


The item of the night-gown might have already prepared us for the
couplet; and it has perhaps even a mystical connection with the
vestment of the 'black dragoon' which Sterling once saw patrolling
in every parish, to whom, however, he surrendered at last.

A story is told of a man wandering on a dark night over Dartmoor,
whose feet slipped over the edge of a pit. He caught the branch of
a tree suspended over the terrible chasm, but unable to regain the
ground, shrieked for help. None came, though he cried out till his
voice was gone; and there he remained dangling in agony until the grey
light revealed that his feet were only a few inches from the solid
ground. Such are the chief demons that bind man till cockcrow. Such are
the apprehensions that waste also the moral and intellectual strength
of man, and murder his peace as he regards the necessary science of his
time to be cutting some frail tenure sustaining him over a bottomless
pit, instead of a release from real terror to the solid ground.







