CHAPTER XXIII.

THE CURSE ON KNOWLEDGE.

    A Bishop on intellect--The Bible on learning--The Serpent and
    Seth--A Hebrew Renaissance--Spells--Shelley at Oxford--
    Book-burning--Japanese ink-devil--Book of Cyprianus--Devil's
    Bible--Red letters--Dread of Science--Roger Bacon--Luther's
    Devil--Lutherans and Science.


In Lucas van Leyden's picture of Satan tempting Christ (Fig. 6),
the fiend is represented in the garb of a University man of the
time. From his head falls a streamer which coils on the ground to a
serpent. From that serpent to the sceptical scholar demanding a miracle
the evolution is fully traceable. The Serpent, of old the 'seer,'
was in its Semitic adaptation a tempter to forbidden knowledge. This
was the earliest priestly outcry against 'godless education.'

During the Shakespere tercentenary festival at Stratford-on-Avon,
the Bishop of St. Andrews declared that there is not a word in the
Bible warranting homage to Intellect, and such a boast beside the
grave of the most intellectual of Englishmen is in itself a survival
illustrating the tremendous curse hurled by jealous Jehovah on man's
first effort to obtain knowledge. That same Serpent of knowledge
has passed very far, and his curse has many times been repeated. In
the Accadian poem of the fatal Seven, as we have seen, it is said,
'In watching was their office;' and the Assyrian version says,
'Unto heaven that which was not seen they raised.' On the Babylonian
cylinders is inscribed the curse of the god of Intelligence (Hea)
upon man--'Wisdom and knowledge hostilely may they injure him.' [148]
The same Serpent twined round the staff of Æsculapius and whispered
those secrets which made the gods jealous, so that Jove killed the
learned Physician with a flash of lightning. Its teeth were sown when
Cadmus imported the alphabet into Greece; and when these alphabetical
dragon's-teeth had turned to type, the ancient curse was renewed in
legends which connected Fust with the Devil.

The Hebrews are least among races responsible for the legend which
has drifted into Genesis. Nor was the Bishop's boast about their Bible
correct. The homage paid to Solomon was hardly on account of his moral
character. 'He spake of trees, from the cedar-tree that is in Lebanon,
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall; he spake also of
beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.' [149]
While the curse on man for eating the fruit of knowledge is never
quoted in the Hebrew scriptures, there are many indications of their
devotion to knowledge; and their prophets even heard Jehovah saying,
'My people are destroyed through lack of knowledge.' It is not
wonderful, therefore, that we find among the Jews the gradual growth
of a legend concerning Seth, which may be regarded as a reply to the
curse on the Serpent.

The apotheosis of Seth in rabbinical and mussulman mythology represents
a sort of Semitic Renaissance. As we have seen in a former chapter,
the Egyptians and Greeks identified Set with Typhon, but at the same
time that demon was associated with science. He is astronomically
located in Capricorn, the sphere of the hierophants in the Egyptian
Mysteries, and the mansion of the guardians of science. Thus he would
correspond with the Serpent, who, as adapted by the Hebrews in the
myth of Eden, whispers to Eve of divine knowledge. But, as detached
from Typho, Seth, while leaving behind the malignancy, carried away
the reputation for learning usually ascribed to devils. Thus, while we
have had to record so many instances of degraded deities, we may note
in Seth a converted devil. In the mussulman and rabbinical traditions
Seth is a voluminous author; he receives a library from heaven; he is
the originator of astronomy and of many arts; and, as an instructor in
cultivation, he restores many an acre which as Set he had blighted. In
the apocryphal Genesis he is represented as having been caught up to
heaven and shown the future destiny of mankind. Anastasius of Sinai
says that when God created Adam after his own image, he breathed
into him grace and illumination, and a ray of the Holy Spirit. But
when he had sinned this glory left him. Then he became the father of
Cain and Abel. But afterwards it is said Adam 'begat a son in his own
likeness, after his image, and called his name 'Seth,' which is not
said of Cain and Abel; and this means that Seth was begotten in the
likeness of unfallen man in paradise--Seth meaning 'Resurrection.' And
all those then living, when they saw how the face of Seth shone with
divine light, and heard him speak with divine wisdom, said, He is God;
therefore his sons were commonly called the sons of God. [150]

That this 'Resurrection' of departed glory and wisdom was really,
as I have said, a Renaissance--a restoration of learning from the
curse put upon it in the story of the Serpent--is indicated by
its evolution in the Gnostic myth wherein Seth was made to avenge
Satan. He took under his special care the Tree of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil, and planted it in his father's grave (Fig. 8). Rabbins
carried their homage to Seth even to the extent of vindicating Saturn,
the most notorious of planets, and say that Abraham and the Prophets
were inspired by it. [151] The Dog (Jackal) was, in Egyptian symbols,
emblem of the Scribe; Sirius was the Dog-star domiciled with Saturn;
Seth was by them identified with Sirius, as the god of occult
and infernal knowledge. He was near relative of the serpent Sesha,
familiar of Æsculapius, and so easily connected with the subtlest of
the beasts in Eden which had crept in from the Iranian mythology.

This reaction was instituted by scholars, who, in their necessarily
timid way of fable, may be said to have recovered the Tree of
Knowledge under guise of homage to Seth. It flourished, as we have seen
(chap. xi.), to the extent of finally raising the Serpent to be a god,
and lowering Jehovah who cursed him to a jealous devil!

But the terror with which Jehovah is said to have been inspired when
he said, 'The man has become as one of us, to know good and evil,'
never failed to reappear among priesthoods when anything threatened
to remove the means of learning from under their control. The causes
of this are too many to be fully considered here; but the main cause
unquestionably was the tendency of learning to release men from
the sway of the priest. The primitive man of science would speedily
discover how many things existed of which his priest was ignorant, and
thus the germ of Scepticism would be planted. The man who possessed
the Sacred Books, in whole or in part, might become master of the
'spells' supposed to be contained in its words and sentences, and
might use them against the priests; or, at any rate, he might feel
independent of the ordinary apparatus of salvation.

The anxiety of priests to keep fast hold of the keys of learning,
so that no secular son of Adam should become 'as one of them,'
coupled with the wonderful powers they professed ability to exercise,
powerfully stimulated the curiosity of intellectual men, and led
them to seek after this forbidden fruit in subtle ways, which
easily illustrated the story of the Serpent. The poet Shelley,
who was suspected at Oxford because of his fondness for chemistry,
recognised his mythological ancestry, and used to speak of 'my
cousin, the Serpent.' The joke was born of circumstances sufficiently
scandalous in the last generation to make the Oxonian of to-day blush;
but the like histories of earlier ages are so tragical that, when fully
known by the common people, they will change certain familiar badges
into brands of shame. While the cant goes on about the Church being
the protector of learning through the dark ages, the fact is that,
from the burning of valuable books at Ephesus by christian fanatics
(Acts xix. 19) to the present day, the Church has destroyed tenfold
more important works than it ever produced, and almost suffocated the
intellectual life of a thousand years. Amid the unbroken persecution
of the Jews by christian cruelty, which lasted from the early eleventh
century for five hundred years, untold numbers of manuscripts were
destroyed, which might have now been giving the world full and clear
knowledge concerning ages, for whose records archæological scholars
are painfully exploring the crumbled ruins of the East. Synagogues
were believed to be temples of Satan; they were plundered and razed
to the ground, and their precious archives strewed the streets of
many cities. On the 17th of June 1244 twenty-four cartloads of these
ancient MSS. were burned in Paris alone. "And all this by our holy
'protector of learning' through the Middle Ages!

The Japanese have pictures of a famous magician who conjured up a
demon--vast, vague, and terrible--out of his inkstand. They call
it latterly 'emblem of a licentious press,' but, no doubt, it was
originally used to terrify the country generally concerning the
press. That Devil has also haunted the ecclesiastical imagination
in Europe. Nearly every book written without priestly command was
associated with the Devil, and there are several old books in Europe,
laboriously and honestly written, which to this day are invested with
popular superstitions reporting the denunciations with which they
were visited. For some centuries it has been believed in Denmark and
neighbouring countries that a strange and formidable book exists,
by means of which you can raise or lay the Devil. It is vulgarly
known as the Book of Cyprianus. The owner of it can neither sell,
bury, or burn it, and if he cannot get rid of it before his death,
he becomes the prey of the fiend. The only way of getting rid of it is
to find somebody who will accept it as a present, well knowing what it
is. Cyprianus is said to have been a clever and virtuous young student,
but he studied the black art in Norway, and came under the power of the
Devil, who compelled him to use his unholy learning to evil ends. This
grieved him sorely, and he wrote a book, in which he shows first,
how evil shall be done, and then how to counteract it. The book is
probably one which really exists or existed, and professed to teach
the art of sorcery, and likewise the charms against it. It consists
of three parts, severally called Cyprianus, Dr. Faust, and Jacob
Ramel. The two latter are written in cypher. It teaches everything
appertaining to 'signing,' conjuring, second sight, and all the
charms alluded to in Deuteronomy xviii. 10-12. The person possessing
Cyprianus' book is said never to be in need of money, and none can
harm him. The only way of getting rid of it is to put it away in a
secret place in a church along with a clerk's fee of four shillings.

In Stockholm I saw the so-called Devil's Bible, the biggest book in
the world, in the Royal Library. It is literally as they describe it,
'gigas librorum': no single man can lift it from the floor. It was part
of the booty carried off by the Swedes after the surrender of Prague,
A.D. 1648. It contains three hundred parchment leaves, each one made of
an ass's hide, the cover being of oak planks, 1 1/2 inches thick. It
contains the Old and New Testaments; Josephi Flavii Antiquitates
Judaicæ; Isidori Episcopi L. XX. de diversis materiis; Confessio
peccatorum; and some other works. The last-named production is written
on black and dark brown ground with red and yellow letters. Here and
there sentences are marked 'hæc sunt suspecta,' 'superstitiosa,'
'prohibita.' One MS., which is headed, 'Experimentum de furto et
febribus', is a treatise in Monkish Latin on the exorcism of ghosts
and evil spirits, charms against thieves and sickness, and various
prescriptions in 'White Magic.' The age of the book is considerably
over three hundred years. The autograph of a German emperor is in it:
'Ferdinandus Imperator Romanorum, A.D. 1577.' The volume is known
in Sweden as Fan's Bibel (Devil's Bible). The legend says, that
a monk, suspected of black arts, who had been condemned to death,
begged for life, and his judge mockingly told him that he would be
pardoned only if he should produce next morning all the books here
found and in this vast size. The monk invoked the Devil's assistance,
and the ponderous volume was written in a single night. This Devil
must have been one who prided himself more on his literary powers
than his personal appearance; for the face and form said to be his
portrait, frontispiece of the volume, represent a most hideous ape,
green and hairy, with horrible curled tusks. It is, no doubt, the ape
Anerhahn of the Wagner legends; Burns's 'towzie tyke, black, grim,
and large.' [152]

I noticed particularly in this old work the recurrence of deep red
letters and sentences similar to the ink which Fust used at the close
of his earliest printed volumes to give his name, with the place and
date of printing. Now Red is sacred in one direction as symbolising
the blood of Christ, but it is also the colour of Judas, who betrayed
that blood. Hence, while red letters might denote sacred days and
sentences in priestly calendars, they might be supposed mimicry
of such sanctities by 'God's Ape' if occurring in secular works or
books of magic. It is said that these red letters were especially
noted in Paris as indications of the diabolical origin of the works
so easily produced by Fust; and, though it is uncertain whether he
suffered imprisonment, the red lines with his name appear to have
been regarded as his signature in blood.

For a long time every successive discovery of science, every invention
of material benefit to man, was believed by priest-ridden peoples
to have been secured by compact with the devil. The fate of the
artist Prometheus, fettered by jealous Jove, was repeated in each
who aspired to bring light to man, and some men of genius--such as
Cornelius Agrippa, and Paracelsus--appear to have been frightened away
from legitimate scientific research by the first connection of their
names with sorcery. They had before them the example of the greatest
scientific man of the Middle Ages, Roger Bacon, and knew how easily,
in the priestly whisper, the chemist's crucible grew to a wizard's
cauldron. The time may come when Oxford University will have learned
enough to build a true memorial of the grandest man who ever wrote
and taught within its walls. It would show Roger Bacon--rectifier
of the Julian Calendar, analyst of lenses, inventor of spectacles
and achromatic lenses, probable constructor of the first telescope,
demonstrator of the chemical action of air in combustion, inventor of
the mode of purifying saltpetre and crystallising it into gunpowder,
anticipator of the philosophical method with which his namesake is
credited--looking on a pile of his books for whose researches he had
paid two thousand French livres, to say nothing of a life's labour,
only to see them condemned by his University, their circulation
prohibited; and his sad gaze might be from the prison to which the
Council of Franciscans at Paris sentenced him whom Oxford gladly
delivered into their hands. He was condemned, says their historian
Wadding, 'propter novitates quasdam suspectas.' The suspected novelties
were crucibles, retorts, and lenses that made the stars look larger. So
was it with the Oxford six hundred years ago. Undeniably some progress
had been made even in the last generation, for Shelley was only
forbidden to study chemistry, and expelled for his metaphysics. But
now that it is claimed that Oxford is no longer partaker with them
that stoned investigators and thinkers from Bacon to Shelley, it would
be in order to build for its own great martyr of science a memorial,
that superstition may look on one whom it has pierced.

Referring to Luther's inkstand thrown at the Devil, Dr. Zerffii,
in his lecture on the Devil, says, 'He (the devil) hates nothing
so much as writing or printer's ink.' But the truth of this remark
depends upon which of two devils be considered. It would hardly
apply to the Serpent who recommended the fruit of knowledge, or to
the University man in Lucas van Leyden's picture (Fig. 6). But if
we suppose the Devil of Luther's Bible (Fig. 17) to be the one at
which the inkstand was thrown, the criticism is correct. The two
pictures mentioned may be instructively compared. Luther's Devil
is the reply of the University to the Church. These are the two
devils--the priest and the scholar--who glared at each other in the
early sixteenth century. 'The Devil smelled the roast,' says Luther,
'that if the languages revived, his kingdom would get a hole which
he could not easily stop again.' And it must be admitted that some
of the monkish execrations of the time, indeed of many times since,
have an undertone of Jahvistic jealousy. 'These Knowers will become
as one of us.' It must also be admitted that the clerical instinct
told true: the University man held in him that sceptical devil who
is always the destroyer of the priest's paradise. These two devils
which struggled with each other through the sixteenth century still
wage their war in the arena of Protestantism. Many a Lutheran now
living may remember to have smiled when Hofmann's experiments in
discovering carbonic acid gas gained him repute for raising again
Mephosto; but perhaps they did not recognise Luther's devil when,
at the annual assembly of Lutheran Pastors in Berlin (Sept. 1877), he
reappeared as the Rev. Professor Grau, and said, 'Not a few listen to
those striving to combine Christ with Belial, to reconcile redeeming
truth with modern science and culture.' But though they who take the
name of Luther in vain may thus join hands with the Devil, at whom
the Reformer threw his inkstand, the combat will still go on, and the
University Belial do the brave work of Bel till beneath his feet lies
the dragon of Darkness whether disguised as Pope or Protestant.

If the Church wishes to know precisely how far the roughness pardonable
in the past survives unpardonably in itself, let its clergy peruse
carefully the following translation by Mr. Leland of a poem by Heine;
and realise that the Devil portrayed in it is, by grace of its own
prelates, at present the most admired personage in every Court and
fashionable drawing-room in Christendom.


            I called the Devil, and he came:
            In blank amaze his form I scan.
            He is not ugly, is not lame,
            But a refined, accomplished man,--
            One in the very prime of life,
            At home in every cabinet strife,
            Who, as diplomatist, can tell
            Church and State news extremely well.
            He is somewhat pale--and no wonder either,
            Since he studies Sanskrit and Hegel together.
            His favourite poet is still Fonqué.
            Of criticism he makes no mention,
            Since all such matters unworthy attention
            He leaves to his grandmother, Hecaté.
            He praised my legal efforts, and said
            That he also when younger some law had read,
            Remarking that friendship like mine would be
            An acquisition, and bowed to me,--
            Then asked if we had not met before,
            At the Spanish Minister's soiree?
            And, as I scanned his face once more,
            I found I had known him for many a day.







