CHAPTER XII.

FATE.

    Dorè's 'Love and Fate'--Moira and Moiræ--The 'Fates' of Æschylus
    --Divine absolutism surrendered--Jove and Typhon--Commutation of
    the Demon's share--Popular fatalism--Theological fatalism--Fate
    and Necessity--Deification of Will--Metaphysics, past and present.


Gustave Dorè has painted a picture of 'Love and Fate,' in which the
terrible hag is portrayed towering above the tender Eros, and while
the latter is extending the thread as far as he can, the wrinkled
hands of Destiny are the boundaries of his power, and the fatal shears
close upon the joy he has stretched to its inevitable limit. To the
ancient mind these two forms made the two great realms of the universe,
their powers meeting in the fruit with a worm at its core, in seeds
of death germinating amid the play of life, in all the limitations
of man. They are projected in myths of Elysium and Hades, Eden and
the Serpent, Heaven and Hell, and their manifold variants.

Perhaps there is no one line of mythological development which more
clearly and impressively illustrates the forces under which grew the
idea of an evil principle, than the changes which the personification
of Fate underwent in Greece and Rome. The Moira, or Fate with Homer,
is only a secondary cause, if that, and simply carries out the
decrees of her father, Zeus. Zeus is the real Fate. Nevertheless,
while this is the Homeric theory or theology, there are intimations
(see chap. xxvii. part 4) that the real awe of men was already
transferred from Zeus to the Erinnyes. This foreshadows a change of
government. With Hesiod we find, instead of one, three Moiræ. They
are no longer offspring of Zeus, but, as it were, his Cabinet. They
do not act independently of him, but when, in pursuance of their just
counsels, Zeus issues decrees, the Moiræ administer them. Next we find
the Moiræ of Hesiod developed by other writers into final Recorders;
they write the decrees of Zeus on certain indestructible tablets,
after which they are irrevocable and inevitable. With Æschylus we
find the Moiræ developed into independent and supreme powers, above
Zeus himself. The chained Prometheus looks not to Zeus but to Fate
for his final liberation.


    Chorus. Who, then, is the guide of Necessity?

    Prometheus. The tri-form Fates and the unforgetting Furies.

    Cho. Is Zeus, then, less powerful than they?

    Prom. At least 'tis certain he cannot escape his own doom.

    Cho. And what can be Zeus' doom but everlasting rule?

    Prom. This ye may not learn; press it not.

    Cho. Surely some solemn mystery thou hidest.

    Prom. Turn to some other theme: for this disclosure time has not
    ripened: it must be veiled in deep mystery, for by the keeping of
    this secret shall come my liberty from base chains and misery.


These great landmarks represent successive revolutions in the Olympian
government. Absolutism became burthensome: as irresponsible monarch,
Zeus became responsible for the woes of the world, and his priests were
satisfied to have an increasing share of that responsibility allotted
to his counsellors, until finally the whole of it is transferred. From
that time the countenance of Zeus, or Jupiter, shines out unclouded by
responsibility for human misfortunes and earthly evils; and, on the
other hand, the once beautiful Fates are proportionately blackened,
and they become hideous hags, the aged and lame crones of popular
belief in Greece and Rome, every line of whose ugliness would have
disfigured the face of Zeus had he not been subordinated to them.

Moira means 'share,' and originally, perhaps, meant simply the
power that meted out to each his share of life, and of the pains
and pleasures woven in it till the term be reached. But as the Fates
gained more definite personality they began to be regarded as having
also a 'share' of their own. They came to typify all the dark and
formidable powers as to their inevitableness. No divine power could
set them aside, or more than temporarily subdue them. Fate measured
out her share to the remorseless Gorgon as well as to the fairest
god. But where destructive power was exercised in a way friendly to
man, the Fates are put somewhat in the background, and the feat is
claimed for some god. Such, in the 'Prometheus' of Æschylus, is the
spirit of the wonderful passage concerning Typhon, rendered with
tragic depth by Theodore Buckley:--'I commiserated too,' says the
rock-bound Prometheus, 'when I beheld the earth-born inmate of the
Cilician caverns, a tremendous prodigy, the hundred-headed impetuous
Typhon, overpowered by force; who withstood all the gods, hissing
slaughter from his hungry jaws, and from his eyes there flashed a
hideous glare as if he would perforce overthrow the sovereignty
of Jove. But the sleepless shaft of Jupiter came upon him, the
descending thunderbolt breathing forth flame which scared him out of
his presumptuous bravadoes; for having been smitten to his very soul
he was crumbled to a cinder, and thunder-blasted in his prowess. And
now, a hapless and paralysed form, is he lying hard by a narrow frith,
pressed down beneath the roots of Ætna. And, seated on the topmost
peaks, Vulcan forges the molten masses whence there shall burst forth
floods, devouring with full jaws the level fields of fruitful Sicily;
with rage such as this shall Typhon boil over in hot artillery of a
never glutted fire-breathing storm; albeit he hath been reduced to
ashes by the thunderbolt of Jupiter.'

In this passage we see Jove invested with the glory of defeating
a great demon; but we also recognise the demon still under the
protection of Fate. Destiny must bear that burthen. So was it said
in the Apocalypse Satan should be loosed after being bound in the
Pit a thousand years; and so Mohammed declared Gog and Magog should
break loose with terror and destruction from the mountain-prison in
which Allah had cast them. The destructive Principle had its 'share'
as well as the creative and preservative Principles, and could not
be permanently deprived of it. Gradually the Fates of various regions
and names were identified with the deities, whose interests, gardens,
or treasures they guarded; and when some of these deities were degraded
their retainers were still more degraded, while in other cases deities
were enabled to maintain fair fame by fables of their being betrayed
and their good intentions frustrated by such subordinates. Thus we
find a certain notion of technical and official power investing such
figures as Satan, Ahriman, Iblis, and the Dragon, as if the upper
gods could not disown or reverse altogether the bad deeds done by
these commissioners.

But the large though limited degree of control necessarily claimed for
the greatest and best gods had to be represented theologically. Hence
there was devised a system of Commutation. The Demon or Dragon,
though abusing his power, could not have it violently withdrawn, but
might be compelled to accept some sacrifice in lieu of the precise
object sought by his voracity. These substitutions are found in every
theological system, and to apply them to individuals constitutes the
raison d'être of every priesthood. In the progress towards civilisation
the substitutes diminish in value, and finally they become merely
nominal and ceremonial,--an effigy of a man instead of the man,
or wine instead of blood. At first the commutation was often in the
substitution of persons of lower for others of higher rank, as when
slaves or wives were, or are, sacrificed to assure paradise to the
master or husband. Thus, Death is allowed to take Alcestis instead
of Admetus. A higher degree of civilisation substitutes animals
for human victims. In keeping with this is the legend of Christ's
sending demons out of two men into a herd of swine: [255] which,
again, is referable to the same class of ideas as the legend that
followed concerning Jesus himself as a vicarious offering; mankind
in this case being the herd, as compared with the son of a god, and
the transfer of the Satanic power from the human race to himself,
for even a little time, being accepted in theology as an equivalent,
on account of the divine dignity of the being who descended into
hell. It was some time, however, before theology worked out this
theory as it now stands, the candid fathers having rejoiced in the
belief that the contract for commutation on its face implied that
Christ was to remain for ever in hell, Satan being outwitted in this.

The ancient Babylonian charms often end with the refrain:--'May the
enchantment go forth and to its own dwelling-place betake itself,'
Every evil spirit was supposed to have an appropriate dwelling,
as in the case of Judas, into whom Satan entered, [256] and of whom
it is said he 'by transgression fell, that he might go to his own
place. [257] Very ingenious are some of the ancient speculations
concerning the habitations and congenial resorts of demons. In some
regions the colour of a disease on the skin is supposed to indicate
the tastes of the demon causing it; and the spells of exorcism end
by assigning him to something of the same hue. The demon of jaundice
is generally consigned to the yellow parrots, and inflammation to
the red or scarlet weeds. Their colours are respected. Humanity is
little considered in the Eastern formulas of this kind, and it is
pretty generally the case that in praying against plague or famine,
populations are often found selecting a tribe to which their trouble is
adjured to betake itself. 'May Nin-cigal,' says a Babylonian exorcism,
'turn her face towards another place; may the noxious spirit go
forth and seize another; may the female cherub and the female demon
settle upon his body; may the king of heaven preserve, may the king
of earth preserve!'

So is it in regions and times which we generally think of as
semi-barbarous. But every now and then communities which fancy
themselves civilised and enlightened are brought face to face with
the popular fatalism in its pagan form, and are shocked thereat, not
remembering that it is equally the dogma of vicarious satisfaction
or atonement. A lady residing in the neighbourhood of the Traunsee,
Austria, informs me that recently two men were nearly drowned in
that lake, being rescued at the last moment and brought to life with
great difficulty. But this incident, instead of causing joy among
the neighbours of the men, excited their displeasure; and this not
because the rescued were at all unpopular, but because of a widespread
notion that the Destinies required two lives, that they would have to
be presently satisfied with two others, and that since the agonies of
the drowning men had passed into unconsciousness, it would have been
better to surrender the selected victims to their fate. At Elsinore,
in Denmark, when the sea moans it is said to 'want somebody,' and
it is generally the case that some story of a person just drowned
circulates afterwards.

While the early mythological forms of the Fates diminish and pass away
as curious superstitions, they return in metaphysical disguises. They
gather their kindred in primitive sciences and cosmogonies, and
finding their old home swept free of pagan demons, and, garnished
with philosophic phrases, they enter as grave theories; but their
subtlety and their sting is with them, and the last state of the
house they occupy is worse than the first.

Yes, worse: for all that man ever won of courage or moral freedom,
by conquering his dragons in detail, he surrenders again to the
phantom-forces they typified when he gives up his mind to belief in
a power not himself that makes for evil. The terrible conclusion that
Evil is a positive and imperishable Principle in the universe carries
in it the poisonous breath of every Dragon. It lurks in all theology
which represents the universe as an arena of struggle between good
and evil Principles, and human life as a war of the soul against the
flesh. It animates all the pious horrors which identify Materialism
with wickedness. It nestles in the mind which imagines a personal
deity opposed by any part of nature. It coils around every heart
which adores absolute sovereign Will, however apotheosised.

All of these notions, most of all belief in a supreme arbitrary Will,
are modern disguises of Fate; and belief in Fate is the one thing
fatal to human culture and energy. The notion of Fate (fatum, the
word spoken) carries in it the conception of arbitrariness in the
universe, of power deliberately exerted without necessary reference
to the nature of things; and it is precisely opposed to that idea of
Necessity taught by Science, which is another name for the supremacy of
Law. Happily the notion of a universe held at the mercy of a personal
decree is suicidal in a world full of sorrows and agonies, which,
on such a theory, can only be traced to some individual caprice
or malevolence. However long abject fear may silence the lips of
the suffering, rebellion is in their hearts. Every blow inflicted,
directly or permissively, by mere Will, however omnipotent, every
agony that is consciously detached from universal organic necessity,
in order that it may be called 'providential,' can arouse no natural
feeling in man nobler than indignation. The feeling of a suitor in
a court of law, who knows that the adverse judgment that ruins him
has no root in the facts or the law, but proceeds from the prejudice
or whim of the judge, can be nowise different from that of a mother
who sees her son stricken down by death, and hears at his grave that
he was consumed by the wrath of a god who might have yielded to her
prayer, but refused it. The heart's protest may be throttled for a
time by the lingering coil of terror, but it is there, and christian
theologians will be as anxious to protect their deity from it, at
whatever cost to his sovereignty, as their predecessors who invented
the Cabinet of Women to relieve Jove from responsibility.

Metaphysics--which appear to have developed into the art of
making things look true in words when their untruth in fact
has been detected--have indeed already set about the task just
predicted. Eminent divines are found writing about matter and spirit,
freedom and natural law, as solemnly as if all this discussion were
new, and had never been carried out to its inevitable results. They
can only put in christian or modern phraseology conclusions which have
been reached again and again in the history of human speculation. The
various schools of Buddhist and Vedantist philosophy have come by every
conceivable route to their fundamental unity of belief in God, Soul,
and Matter; in a pessimist visible nature, an ideal invisible nature,
and a human soul held in matter like a frog in a snake's mouth, but
able by certain mysterious, mostly metaphysical or verbal, tactics,
to gain release, and pass into a corresponding situation in the deity.

'As a king, whose son had strayed away from him and lived in ignorance
of his father among the Veddahs (wild men), will, on discovering
his son, exclaim, 'Come to me, my darling son!' and make him a
participator of the happiness he himself enjoys, even so will the
Supreme God present himself before the soul when in distress--the
soul enmeshed in the net of the five Veddahs (senses), and, severing
that soul from Pâsam (Matter), assimilate it to himself, and bless
it at his holy feet.'

It is too late for man to be interested in an 'omnipotent' Personality,
whose power is mysteriously limited at the precise point when it
is needed, and whose moral government is another name for man's own
control of nature. Nevertheless, this Oriental pessimism is the Pauline
theory of Matter, and it is the speculative protoplasm out of which
has been evolved, in many shapes, that personification which remains
for our consideration--the Devil.








