CHAPTER II.

GENERALISATION OF DEMONS.

    The Demons' bequest to their conquerors--Nondescripts--
    Exaggerations of tradition--Saurian Theory of Dragons--
    The Dragon not primitive in Mythology--Monsters of Egyptian,
    Iranian, Vedic, and Jewish Mythologies--Turner's Dragon--
    Della Bella--The Conventional Dragon.


After all those brave victories of man over the first chaos, organic
and inorganic, whose effect upon his phantasms has been indicated;
after fire had slain its thousands, and iron its tens of thousands of
his demons, and the rough artisan become a Nemesis with his rudder and
wheel pursuing the hosts of darkness back into Night and Invisibility;
still stood the grim fact of manyformed pain and evil in the world,
still defying the ascending purposes of mankind. Moreover, confronting
these, he is by no means so different mentally from that man he was
before conquering many foes in detail, and laying their phantoms, as
he was morally. More courage man had gained, and more defiance; and,
intellectually, a step had been taken, if only one: he had learned
that his evils are related to each other. Hunger is of many heads
and forms. Its yawning throat may be seen in the brilliant sky that
lasts till it is as brass, in the deluge, the earthquake, in claw
and fang; and then these together do but relate the hunger-brood to
Fire and Ferocity; the summer sunbeam may be venomous as a serpent,
and the end of them all is Death. Some tendency to these more general
conceptions of an opposing principle and power in the world seems
to be represented in that phase of development at which nondescript
forms arise. These were the conquered demons' bequest.

It is, of course, impossible to measure the various forces which
combined to produce the complex symbolical forms of physical
evil. Tradition is not always a good draughtsman, and in portraying
for a distant generation in Germany a big snake killed in India might
not be exact as to the number of its heads or other details. Heroes
before Falstaff were liable to overstate their foes in buckram. The
less measurable a thing by fact, the more immense in fancy: werewolves
of especial magnitude haunted regions where there had not been actual
wolves for centuries; huge serpents play a large part in the annals
of Ireland, where not even the smallest have been found. But after all
natural influences have been considered, one can hardly look upon the
sphynx, the chimæra, or on a conventional dragon, without perceiving
that he is in presence of a higher creation than a demonic bear or a
giant ruffian. The fundamental difference between the two classes is
that one is natural, the other præternatural. Of course a werewolf is
as præternatural as a gryphon to the eye of science, but as original
expressions of human imagination the former could hardly have been a
more miraculous monster than the Siamese twins to intelligent people
to-day. The demonic forms are generally natural, albeit caricatured
or exaggerated. And this effort at a præternatural conception is,
in this early form, by no means mere superstition; rather is it
poetic and artistic,--a kind of crude effort at allgemeinheit, at
realisation of the types of evil--the claw-principle, fang-principle
in the universe, the physiognomies of venom and pain detached from
forms to which they are accidental.

Some of the particular forms we have been considering are, indeed,
by no means of the prosaic type. Such conceptions as Ráhu, Cerberus,
and several others, are transitional between the natural and mystical
conceptions; while the sphynx, however complete a combination of ideal
forms, is not all demonic. In this Part III. are included those forms
whose combination is not found in objective nature, but which are
yet travesties of nature and genuine fauna of the human mind.

Perhaps it may be thought somewhat arbitrary that I should describe
all these intermediate forms between demon and devil by the term
Dragon; but I believe there is no other fabulous form which includes
so many individual types of transition, or whose evolution may be
so satisfactorily traced from the point where it is linked with the
demon to that where it bequeathes its characters to the devil. While,
however, this term is used as the best that suggests itself, it cannot
be accepted as limiting our inquiry or excluding other abstract forms
which ideally correspond to the dragon,--the generalised expression
for an active, powerful, and intelligent enemy to mankind, a being
who is antagonism organised, and able to command every weapon in
nature for an antihuman purpose.

The opinion has steadily gained that the conventional dragon is the
traditional form of some huge Saurian. It has been suggested that some
of those extinct forms may have been contemporaneous with the earliest
men, and that the traditions of conflicts with them, transmitted orally
and pictorially, have resulted in preserving their forms in fable
(proximately). The restorations of Saurians on their islet at the
Crystal Palace show how much common sense there is in this theory. The
discoveries of Professor Marsh of Yale College have proved that the
general form of the dragon is startlingly prefigured in nature; and
Mr. Alfred Tylor, in an able paper read before the Anthropological
Society, has shown that we are very apt to be on the safe side in
sticking to the theory of an 'object-origin' for most things.

Concerning this theory, it may be said that the earliest descriptions,
both written and pictorial, which have been discovered of the
reptilian monsters around which grew the germs of our dragon-myths,
are crocodiles or serpents, and not dragons of any conventional
kind,--with a few doubtful exceptions. In an Egyptian papyrus there
is a hieroglyphic picture of San-nu Hut-ur, 'plunger of the sea;'
it is a marine, dolphin-like monster, with four feet, and a tail
ending in a serpent's head. [219] With wings, this might approach
the dragon-form. Again, Amen-Ra slew Naka, and this serpent 'saved
his feet.' Possibly the phrase is ironical, and means that the
serpent saved nothing; but apart from that, the poem is too highly
metaphorical--the victorious god himself being described in it
as a 'beautiful bull'--for the phrase to be important. On Egyptian
monuments are pictured serpents with human heads and members, and the
serpent Nahab-ka is pictured on amulets with two perfect human legs
and feet. [220] Winged serpents are found on Egyptian monuments, but
almost as frequently with the incredible number of four as with the
conceivable two wings of the pterodactyl. The forms of the serpents
thus portrayed with anthropomorphic legs and slight wings are, in
their main shapes, of ordinary species. In the Iranian tradition of the
temptation of the first man and woman, Meschia and Meschiane, by the
'two-footed serpent of lies.' And it is possible that out of this myth
of the 'two-footed' serpent grew the puzzling legend of Genesis that
the serpent of Eden was sentenced thereafter to crawl on his belly. The
snake's lack of feet, however, might with equal probability have given
rise to the explanation given in mussulman and rabbinical stories of
his feet being cut off by the avenging angel. But the antiquity of the
Iranian myth is doubtful; while the superior antiquity of the Hindu
fable of Ráhu, to which it seems related, suggests that the two legs
of the Ahriman serpent, like the four arms of serpent-tailed Ráhu,
is an anthropomorphic addition. In the ancient planispheres we find
the 'crooked serpent' mentioned in the Book of Job, but no dragon.

The two great monsters of Vedic mythology, Vritra and Ahi, are
not so distinguishable from each other in the Vedas as in more
recent fables. Vritra is very frequently called Vritra Ahi--Ahi
being explained in the St. Petersburg Dictionary as 'the Serpent
of the Heavens, the demon Vritra.' Ahi literally means 'serpent,'
answering to the Greek echi-s, echi-dna; and when anything is added
it appears to be anthropomorphic--heads, arms, eyes--as in the case
of the Egyptian serpent-monsters. The Vedic demon Urana is described
as having three heads, six eyes, and ninety-nine arms.

There would appear to be as little reason for ascribing to the
Tannin of the Old Testament the significance of dragon, though it is
generally so translated. It is used under circumstances which show it
to mean whale, serpent, and various other beasts. Jeremiah (xiv. 6)
compares them to wild asses snuffing the wind, and Micah (i. 8)
describes their 'wailing.' The fiery serpents said to have afflicted
Israel in the wilderness are called seraphim, but neither in their
natural or mythological forms do they anticipate our conventional
dragon beyond the fiery character that is blended with the serpent
character. Nor do the descriptions of Behemoth and Leviathan comport
with the dragon-form.

The serpent as an animal is a consummate development. Its feet, so
far from having been amputated, as the fables say, in punishment of
its sin, have been withdrawn beneath the skin as crutches used in a
feebler period. It is found as a tertiary fossil. Since, therefore,
the dragon form ex hypothesi is a reminiscence of the huge, now fossil,
Saurians which preceded the serpent in time, the early mythologies
could hardly have so regularly described great serpents instead of
dragons. If the realistic theory we are discussing were true, the
earliest combats--those of Indra, for instance--ought to have been
with dragons, and the serpent enemies would have multiplied as time
went on; but the reverse is the case--the (alleged) extinct forms
being comparatively modern in heroic legend.

Mr. John Ruskin once remarked upon Turner's picture of the Dragon
guarding the Hesperides, that this conception so early as 1806,
when no Saurian skeleton was within the artist's reach, presented
a singular instance of the scientific imagination. As a coincidence
with such extinct forms Turner's dragon is surpassed by the monster on
which a witch rides in one of the engravings of Della Bella, published
in 1637. In that year, on the occasion of the marriage of the grand
duke Ferdinand II. in Florence, there was a masque d'Inferno, whose
representations were engraved by Della Bella, of which this is one, so
that it may be rather to some scenic artist than to the distinguished
imitator of Callot that we owe this grotesque form, which the late
Mr. Wright said 'might have been borrowed from some distant geological
period.' If so, the fact would present a curious coincidence with the
true history of Turner's Dragon; for after Mr. Ruskin had published
his remark about the scientific imagination represented in it,
an old friend of the artist declared that Turner himself had told
him that he copied that dragon from a Christmas spectacle in Drury
Lane theatre. But Turner had shown the truest scientific instinct
in repairing to the fossil-beds of human imagination, and drawing
thence the conventional form which never had existence save as the
structure of cumulative tradition.







