CHAPTER XVI.

RELIGIOUS DESPOTISM.

    Pharaoh and Herod--Zoroaster's mother--Ahriman's emissaries--Kansa
    and Krishna--Emissaries of Kansa--Astyages and Cyrus--Zohák--Bel
    and the Christian.


The Jews had already, when Christ appeared, formed the theory that
the hardening of Pharaoh's heart, and his resistance to the departure
of Israel from Egypt, were due to diabolical sorcery. The belief
afterwards matured; that Edom (Esau or Samaël) was the instigator
of Roman aggression was steadily forming. The mental conditions
were therefore favourable to the growth of a belief in the Jewish
followers of Christ that the hostility to the religious movement
of their time was another effort on the part of Samaël to crush
the kingdom of God. Herod was not, indeed, called Satan or Samaël,
nor was Pharaoh; but the splendour and grandeur of this Idumean
(the realm of Esau), notwithstanding his oppressions and crimes,
had made him a fair representative to the people of the supernatural
power they dreaded. Under these circumstances it was a powerful appeal
to the sympathies of the Jewish people to invent in connection with
Herod a myth exactly similar to that associated with Pharaoh,--namely,
a conspiracy with sorcerers, and consequent massacre of all new-born
children.

The myths which tell of divine babes supernaturally saved from royal
hostility are veritable myths, even where they occur so late in
time that historic names and places are given; for, of course, it is
impossible that by any natural means either Pharaoh or Herod should be
aware of the peculiar nature of any particular infant born in their
dominions. Such traditions, when thus presented in historical guise,
can only be explained by reference to corresponding fables written out
in simpler mythic form; while it is especially necessary to remember
that such corresponding narratives may be of independent ethnical
origin, and that the later in time may be more primitive spiritually.

In the Legend of Zoroaster [88] his mother Dogdo, previous to his
birth, has a dream in which she sees a black cloud, which, like
the wing of some vast bird, hides the sun, and brings on frightful
darkness. This cloud rains down on her house terrible beasts with
sharp teeth,--tigers, lions, wolves, rhinoceroses, serpents. One
monster especially attacks her with great fury, and her unborn babe
speaks in reassuring terms. A great light rises and the beasts fall. A
beautiful youth appears, hurls a book at the Devas (Devils), and they
fly, with exception of three,--a wolf, a lion, and a tiger. These,
however, the youth drives away with a luminous horn. He then replaces
the holy infant in the womb, and says to the mother: 'Fear nothing! The
King of Heaven protects this infant. The earth waits for him. He is
the prophet whom Ormuzd sends to his people: his law will fill the
world with joy: he will make the lion and the lamb drink in the same
place. Fear not these ferocious beasts; why should he whom Ormuzd
preserves fear the enmity of the whole world?' With these words
the youth vanished, and Dogdo awoke. Repairing to an interpreter,
she was told that the Horn meant the grandeur of Ormuzd; the Book
was the Avesta; the three Beasts betokened three powerful enemies.

Zoroaster was born laughing. This prodigy being noised abroad, the
Magicians became alarmed, and sought to slay the child. One of them
raised a sword to strike him, but his arm fell to the ground. The
Magicians bore the child to the desert, kindled a fire and threw him
into it, but his mother afterwards found him sleeping tranquilly and
unharmed in the flames. Next he was thrown in front of a drove of
cows and bulls, but the fiercest of the bulls stood carefully over
the child and protected him. The Magicians killed all the young of
a pack of wolves, and then cast the infant Zoroaster to them that
they might vent their rage upon him, but the mouths of the wolves
were shut. They abandoned the child on a lonely mountain, but two
ewes came and suckled him.

Zoroaster's father respected the ministers of the Devas (Magi),
but his child rebuked him. Zoroaster walked on the water (crossing
a great river where was no bridge) on his way to Mount Iran where he
was to receive the Law. It was then he had the vision of the battle
between the two serpent armies,--the white and black adders, the
former, from the South, conquering the latter, which had come from
the North to destroy him.

The Legend of the Infant Krishna is as follows:--The tyrant Kansa,
having given his sister Devaki in marriage to Vasudéva, as he was
returning from the wedding heard a voice declare, 'The eighth son of
Devaki is destined to be thy destroyer.' Alarmed at this, Kansa cast
his sister and her husband into a prison with seven iron doors, and
whenever a son was born he caused it to be instantly destroyed. When
Devaki became pregnant the eighth time, Brahma and Siva, with attending
Devas, appeared and sang: 'O favoured among women! in thy delivery all
nature shall have cause to exult! How ardently we long to behold that
face for the sake of which we have coursed round three worlds!' When
Krishna was born a chorus of celestial spirits saluted him; the room
was illumined with supernatural light. While Devaki was weeping at the
fatal decree of Kansa that her son should be destroyed, a voice was
heard by Vasudéva saying: 'Son of Yadu, carry this child to Gokul,
on the other side of the river Jumna, to Nauda, whose wife has just
given birth to a daughter. Leave him and bring the girl hither.' At
this the seven doors swung open, deep sleep fell on the guards,
and Vasudéva went forth with the holy infant in his arms. The river
Jumna was swollen, but the waters, having kissed the feet of Krishna,
retired on either side, opening a pathway. The great serpent of
Vishnu held its hood over this new incarnation of its Lord. Beside
sleeping Nauda and his wife the daughter was replaced by the son,
who was named Krishna, the Dark.

When all this had happened a voice came to Kansa saying: 'The boy
destined to destroy thee is born, and is now living.' Whereupon Kansa
ordered all the male children in his kingdom to be destroyed. This
being ineffectual, the whereabouts of Krishna were discovered; but the
messenger who was sent to destroy the child beheld its image in the
water and adored it. The Rakshasas worked in the interest of Kansa. One
approached the divine child in shape of a monstrous bull whose head
he wrung off; and he so burned in the stomach of a crocodile which
had swallowed him that the monster cast him from his mouth unharmed.

Finally, as a youth, Krishna, after living some time as a herdsman,
attacked the tyrant Kansa, tore the crown from his head, and dragged
him by his hair a long way; with the curious result that Kansa became
liberated from the three worlds, such virtue had long thinking about
the incarnate one, even in enmity!

The divine beings represented in these legends find their complement
in the fabulous history of Cyrus; and the hostile powers which
sought their destruction are represented in demonology by the Persian
tyrant-devil Zohák. The name of Astyages, the grandfather of Cyrus,
has been satisfactorily traced to Ashdahák, and Ajis Daháka, the
'biting snake.' The word thus connects him with Vedic Ahi and with
Iranian Zohák, the tyrant out of whose shoulders a magician evoked
two serpents which adhered to him and became at once his familiars and
the arms of his cruelty. As Astyages, the last king of Media, he had
a dream that the offspring of his daughter Mandane would reign over
Asia. He gave her in marriage to Cambyses, and when she bore a child
(Cyrus), committed it to his minister Harpagus to be slain. Harpagus,
however, moved with pity, gave it to a herdsman of Astyages, who
substituted for it a still-born child, and having so satisfied the
tyrant of its death, reared Cyrus as his own son.

The luminous Horn of the Zoroastrian legend and the diabolism
of Zohák are both recalled in the Book of Daniel (viii.) in the
terrific struggle of the ram and the he-goat. The he-goat, ancient
symbol of hairy Esau, long idealised into the Invisible Foe of
Israel, had become associated also with Babylon and with Nimrod
its founder, the Semitic Zohák. But Bel, conqueror of the Dragon,
was the founder of Babylon, and to Jewish eyes the Dragon was his
familiar; to the Jews he represented the tyranny and idolatry of
Nimrod, the two serpents of Zohák. When Cyrus supplanted Astyages,
this was the idol he found the Babylonians worshipping until Daniel
destroyed it. And so, it would appear, came about the fact that to
the Jews the power of Christendom came to be represented as the Reign
of Bel. One can hardly wonder at that. If ever there were cruelty
and oppression passing beyond the limit of mere human capacities, it
has been recorded in the tragical history of Jewish sufferings. The
disbeliever in præternatural powers of evil can no less than others
recognise in this 'Bel and the Christian,' which the Jews substituted
for 'Bel and the Dragon,' the real archfiend--Superstition, turning
human hearts to stone when to stony gods they sacrifice their own
humanity and the welfare of mankind.







