CHAPTER X.

THE DRAGON-SLAYER.

    Demigods--Alcestis--Herakles--The Ghilghit Fiend--Incarnate
    deliverer of Ghilghit--A Dardistan Madonna--The religion
    of Atheism--Resuscitation of Dragons--St. George and his
    Dragon--Emerson and Ruskin on George--Saintly allies of the Dragon.


Theology has pronounced Incarnation a mystery, but nothing is
simpler. The demigod is man's appeal from the gods. It may also
be, as Emerson says, that 'when the half-gods go the gods arrive,'
but it is equally true that their coming signals the departure of
deities which man had long invoked in vain. The great Heraklean myth
presents us the ideal of godlike force united to human sympathy. Ra
(the Sun) passing the twelve gates (Hours) of Hades (Night) [247]
is humanised in Herakles and his Twelve Labours. He is Son of Zeus
by a human mother--Alcmene--and his labours for human welfare,
as well as his miraculous conception, influenced Christianity. The
divine Man assailing the monsters of divine creation represents human
recognition of the fact that moral order in nature is co-extensive
with the control of mankind. One expression of this perception is
the Alcestis of Euripides, whose significance in relation to death
we have considered. [248]

'Alcestis,' as I have written in another work, 'is one of the few
ancient Greek melodramas.  The majority of dramas left us by the
poets of Greece turn upon religious themes, and usually they are
tragedies. It is evident that to them the popular religion around them
was itself a tragedy. Their heroes and heroines--such as Prometheus
and Macaria--were generally victims of the jealousy or caprice of the
gods; and though the poets display in their dramas the irresistible
power of the gods, they do so without reverence for that power,
and generally show the human victims to be more honourable than
the gods. But the 'Alcestis' of Euripides is not a tragedy; it ends
happily, and in the rescue of one of those victims of the gods. It
stands as about the first notice served on the gods that the human
heart had got tired of their high-handed proceedings, and they might
prepare to quit the thrones of a universe unless they could exhibit
more humanity.... Knowing that neither he nor any other deity can
legally resist the decree of another deity, Apollo is reduced to
hope for help from man. Human justice may save when divine justice
sacrifices. He prophesies to Death that although he may seize Alcestis,
a man will come who will conquer him, and deliver that woman from
the infernal realm.... Then Hercules comes on the scene. He has been
slaying lion and dragon, and he now resolves to conquer Death and
deliver Alcestis. This he does.' [249]

In this pre-christian yet christian Passion Play, the part played by
the heart of woman is equally heroic with that which represents the
honour of man. So in the religion which followed there was an effort
to set beside the incarnate vanquisher of infernal powers the pierced
heart of Mary. But among all the legends of this character it were
difficult to find one more impressive than that which Dr. Leitner
found in Dardistan, and one which, despite its length, will repay a
careful perusal. This legend of the origin of the Ghilghit tribe and
government was told by a native.

'Once upon a time there lived a race at Ghilghit whose origin is
uncertain. Whether they sprung from the soil or had immigrated from a
distant region is doubtful; so much is believed that they were Gayupí,
i.e., spontaneous, aborigines, unknown. Over them ruled a monarch who
was a descendant of the evil spirits, the Yatsh, who terrorised over
the world. His name was Shiribadatt, and he resided at a castle in
front of which was a course for the performance of the manly game of
Polo. His tastes were capricious, and in every one of his actions his
fiendish origin could be discerned. The natives bore his rule with
resignation, for what could they effect against a monarch at whose
command even magic aids were placed? However, the country was rendered
fertile, and round the capital bloomed attractive. The heavens,
or rather the virtuous Peris, at last grew tired of his tyranny,
for he had crowned his iniquities by indulging in a propensity for
cannibalism. This taste had been developed by an accident. One day
his cook brought him some mutton broth the like of which he had never
tasted. After much inquiry as to the nature of the food on which the
sheep had been brought up, it was eventually traced to an old woman,
its first owner. She stated that her child and the sheep were born
on the same day, and losing the former, she had consoled herself
by suckling the latter. This was a revelation to the tyrant. He
had discovered the secret of the palatability of the broth, and was
determined to have a never-ending supply of it. So he ordered that
his kitchen should be regularly provided with children of a tender
age, whose flesh, when converted into broth, would remind him of
the exquisite dish he had once so much relished. This cruel order was
carried out. The people of the country were dismayed at such a state of
things, and sought slightly to improve it by sacrificing, in the first
place, all orphans and children of neighbouring tribes. The tyrant,
however, was insatiable, and soon was his cruelty felt by many families
at Ghilghit, who were compelled to give up their children to slaughter.

'Relief came at last. At the top of the mountain Ko, which it takes
a day to ascend, and which overlooks the village of Doyur, below
Ghilghit, on the other side of the river, appeared three figures. They
looked like men, but much more strong and handsome. In their arms they
carried bows and arrows, and turning their eyes in the direction of
Doyur, they perceived innumerable flocks of sheep and cattle grazing
on a prairie between that village and the foot of the mountain. The
three strangers were brothers, and none of them had been born at
the same time. It was their intention to make Azru Shemsher, the
youngest, Rajah of Ghilghit, and, in order to achieve their purpose,
they hit upon the following plan. On the already noticed prairie,
which is called Didingé, a sportive calf was gambolling towards
and away from its mother. It was the pride of its owner, and its
brilliant red colour could be seen from a distance. 'Let us see who
is the best marksman,' exclaimed the eldest, and, saying this, he shot
an arrow in the direction of the calf, but missed his aim. The second
brother also tried to hit it, but also failed. At last, Azru Shemsher,
who took a deep interest in the sport, shot his arrow, which pierced
the poor animal from side to side and killed it. The brothers, whilst
descending, congratulated Azru on his sportsmanship, and on arriving at
the spot where the calf was lying, proceeded to cut its throat and to
take out from its body the titbits, namely, the kidneys and the liver.

'They then roasted these delicacies, and invited Azru to partake of
them first. He respectfully declined, on the ground of his youth,
but they urged him to do so, 'in order,' they said, 'to reward you
for such an excellent shot.' Scarcely had the meat touched the lips of
Azru than the brothers got up, and, vanishing into the air, called out,
'Brother! you have touched impure food, which Peris never should eat,
and we have made use of your ignorance of this law, because we want
to make you a human being [250] who shall rule over Ghilghit; remain,
therefore, at Doyur.' Azru, in deep grief at the separation, cried,
'Why remain at Doyur, unless it be to grind corn?' 'Then,' said the
brothers, 'go to Ghilghit.' 'Why,' was the reply, 'go to Ghilghit,
unless it be to work in the gardens?' 'No, no,' was the last and
consoling rejoinder; 'you will assuredly become the king of this
country, and deliver it from its merciless oppressor!' No more
was heard of the departing fairies, and Azru remained by himself,
endeavouring to gather consolation from the great mission which
had been bestowed on him. A villager met him, and, struck by his
appearance, offered him shelter in his house. Next morning he went
on the roof of his host's house, and calling out to him to come up,
pointed to the Ko mountain, on which, he said, he plainly discerned
a wild goat. The incredulous villager began to fear he had harboured
a maniac, if no worse character; but Azru shot off his arrow, and,
accompanied by the villager (who had assembled some friends for
protection, as he was afraid his young guest might be an associate
of robbers, and lead him into a trap), went in the direction of the
mountain. There, to be sure, at the very spot that was pointed out,
though many miles distant, was lying the wild goat, with Azru's arrow
transfixing its body. The astonished peasants at once hailed him as
their leader, but he exacted an oath of secrecy from them, for he had
come to deliver them from their tyrant, and would keep his incognito
till such time as his plans for the destruction of the monster would
be matured.

'He then took leave of the hospitable people of Doyur, and went
to Ghilghit. On reaching this place, which is scarcely four miles
distant from Doyur, he amused himself by prowling about in the
gardens adjoining the royal residence. There he met one of the
female companions of Shiribadatt's daughter fetching water for
the princess. This lady was remarkably handsome, and of a sweet
disposition. The companion rushed back, and told the young lady to look
from over the ramparts of the castle at a wonderfully handsome young
man whom she had just met. The princess placed herself in a place
from which she could observe any one approaching the fort. Her maid
then returned, and induced Azru to come with her in the Polo ground,
in front of the castle; the princess was smitten with his beauty, and
at once fell in love with him. She then sent word to the young prince
to come and see her. When he was admitted into her presence he for a
long time denied being anything more than a common labourer. At last
he confessed to being a fairy's child, and the overjoyed princess
offered him her heart and hand. It may be mentioned here that the
tyrant Shiribadatt had a wonderful horse, which could cross a mile
at every jump, and which its rider had accustomed to jump both into
and out of the fort, over its walls. So regular were the leaps which
this famous animal could take that he invariably alighted at the
distance of a mile from the fort, and at the same place. On that
very day on which the princess had admitted young Azru into the fort
King Shiribadatt was out hunting, of which he was desperately fond,
and to which he used sometimes to devote a week or two at a time.

'We must now return to Azru, whom we left conversing with the
princess. Azru remained silent when the lady confessed her love. Urged
to declare his sentiments, he said that he would not marry her unless
she bound herself to him by the most stringent oath; this she did,
and they became in the sight of God as if they were wedded man and
wife. He then announced that he had come to destroy her father, and
asked her to kill him herself. This she refused; but as she had sworn
to aid him in every way she could, he finally induced her to promise
that she would ask her father where his soul was. 'Refuse food,' said
Azru, 'for three or four days, and your father, who is devotedly fond
of you, will ask for the reason of your strange conduct; then say,
'Father, you are often staying away from me for several days at a
time, and I am getting distressed lest something should happen to
you; do reassure me by letting me know where your soul is, and let me
feel certain that your life is safe.' This the princess promised to
do, and when her father returned refused food for several days. The
anxious Shiribadatt made inquiries, to which she replied by making
the already named request. The tyrant was for a few moments thrown
into mute astonishment, and finally refused compliance with her
preposterous demand. The love-smitten lady went on starving herself,
till at last her father, fearful for his daughter's life, told her
not to fret herself about him as his soul was of snow, in the snows,
and that he could only perish by fire. The princess communicated this
information to her lover. Azru went back to Doyur and the villages
around, and assembled his faithful peasants. Them he asked to take
twigs of the fir-tree, bind them together, and light them; then to
proceed in a body with torches to the castle in a circle, keep close
together, and surround it on every side. He then went and dug out a
very deep hole, as deep as a well, in the place where Shiribadatt's
horse used to alight, and covered it with green boughs. The next
day he received information that the torches were ready. He at once
ordered the villagers gradually to draw near the fort in the manner
which he had already indicated.

King Shiribadatt was then sitting in his castle; near him his
treacherous daughter, who was so soon to lose her parent. All at
once he exclaimed, 'I feel very close; go out, dearest, and see what
has happened.' The girl went out, and saw torches approaching from a
distance; but fancying it to be something connected with the plans of
her husband, she went back and said it was nothing. The torches came
nearer and nearer, and the tyrant became exceedingly restless. 'Air,
air,' he cried, 'I feel very ill; do see, daughter, what is the
matter.' The dutiful lady went, and returned with the same answer
as before. At last the torch-bearers had fairly surrounded the fort,
and Shiribadatt, with a presentiment of impending danger, rushed out
of the room, saying, 'that he felt he was dying.' He then ran to the
stables and mounted his favourite charger, and with one blow of the
whip made him jump over the wall of the castle. Faithful to its habit
the noble animal alighted at the same place, but, alas! only to find
itself engulfed in a treacherous pit. Before the king had time to
extricate himself the villagers had run up with their torches. 'Throw
them upon him,' cried Azru. With one accord all the blazing wood was
thrown upon Shiribadatt, who miserably perished.'

Azru was then most enthusiastically proclaimed king, celebrated his
nuptials with the fair traitor, and, as sole tribute, exacted the
offering of one sheep annually, instead of the human child, from
every one of the natives.

When Azru had safely ascended the throne he ordered the tyrant's place
to be levelled to the ground. The willing peasants, manufacturing
spades of iron, flocked to accomplish a grateful task, and sang whilst
demolishing his castle:--

'My nature is of a hard metal,' said Shiri and Badatt. 'Why hard? I,
Koto, the son of the peasant Dem Singh, am alone hardy; with this iron
spade I raze to the ground thy kingly house. Behold now, although
thou art of race accursed, of Shatsho Malika, I, Dem Singh's son,
am of a hard metal; for with this iron spade I level thy very palace;
look out! look out!' [251]

An account of the Feast of Torches, instituted as a memorial of this
tradition, has already been given in another connection. [252] The
legend, the festival, and the song just quoted constitute a noble
human epic. That startling defiance of the icy-hearted god by the
human-hearted peasant, that brave cry of the long cowering wretch who
at last holds in his spade an iron weapon to wield against the hardness
of nature, are the sublime pæan of the Dragon-slayer. Look out, ye
snow-gods! Man's heart is there, and woman's heart; their courage,
plus the spade, can level your palaces; their love will melt you,
their arts and sciences kill you: so fatal may be torches!

All great religions were born in this grand atheism. As the worship
of Herakles meant the downfall of Zeus, the worship of Christ meant
the overthrow of both Jove and Jehovah. Every race adores the epoch
when their fathers grew ashamed of their gods and identified them as
dragons--the supreme cruelties of nature--welcoming the man who first
rose from his knees and defied them. But in the end the Priests of the
Dragon manage to secure a compromise, and by labelling him with the
name of his slayer, manage to resuscitate and re-enthrone him. For,
as we shall presently see, the Dragon never really dies.

Christianity did not fail to avail itself of the Dragon-slayer's
prestige, which had preceded it in Europe and in Africa. It could
not afford to offer for popular reverence saints less heroic than
pagan warriors and demigods. The old Dragon-myths, especially
those which made the fame of Herakles, were appropriated to invest
saintly forms. St. Michael, St. Andrew, St. Margaret, and many
another, were pictured subduing or treading on Dragons. Christ was
shown crushing the serpent Sin, spearing the dragon Death, or even
issuing from its impotent jaws, like Jason from the Dragon. [253]
But in this competition for the laurels of dead Dragon-slayers, and
fierce hostility to dragons already slain, the real Dragon was left
to revive and flourish in security, and in the end even inherited
the mantle and the palm of his own former conqueror.

The miscarriage of canonisation in the case of St. George is a small
and merely curious thing in itself; but it is almost mystical in its
coincidence with the great miscarriage which brought the cross of
Christ to authorise the crucifixions of the men most like him for a
thousand years.

Mr. John Ruskin has sharply challenged Ralph Waldo Emerson's
penetrating touch on the effigy that decorates the escutcheons of
England and Russia. 'George of Cappadocia,' says Emerson, 'born
at Epiphania in Cilicia, was a low parasite, who got a lucrative
contract to supply the army with bacon. A rogue and an informer,
he got rich and was forced to run from justice. He saved his money,
embraced Arianism, collected a library, and got promoted by a faction
to the episcopal throne of Alexandria. When Julian came, A.D. 361,
George was dragged to prison. The prison was burst open by the mob,
and George was lynched as he deserved. And this precious knave became
in good time Saint George of England, patron of chivalry, emblem of
victory and civility, and the pride of the best blood of the modern
world.' Whereon Emerson further remarks that 'nature trips us up when
we strut.'

It is certainly rather hard for the founder of the St. George
Association to be told that his patron was no Dragon-slayer at all,
but the Dragon's ally. Mr. Ruskin may be right in contending that
whatever may have been the facts, they who made George patron saint
of England still meant their homage for a hero, or at any rate
not for a rogue; but he is unsatisfactory in his argument that our
St. George was another who died for his faith seventy years before
the bacon-contractor. Even if the Ruskin St. George, said to have
suffered under Diocletian, could be shown historical, his was a
very commonplace martyrdom compared with that of a bishop torn in
pieces by a 'pagan' mob. The distant christian nations would never
have listened to the pagan version of the story even had it reached
them. A bishop so martyred would have been the very man to give
their armies a watchword. The martyr was portrayed as a Dragon-slayer
only as a title might be added to the name of one knighted, or the
badge of an order set upon his breast; the heraldic device grew
into a variant of the common legend which suggests the origin of the
mythical George. 'The magician Athanasius, successively an opponent
of Christianity, a convert, and a martyr, is his chief antagonist;
and the city of Alexandria appears as the Empress Alexandria, the wife
of Diocletian, and herself a convert and a martyr.' This sentence
from Smith's 'Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography' tells more
than Professor Ruskin's seventeenth-century authority. The Dragon is
the same Athanasius whose creed sends forth its anathemas in churches
dedicated to the Arian canonised for having slain him!

Though it be granted that they who made George of Cappadocia the
ideal hero of England really intended their homage for a martyr and
hero, it must equally be acknowledged that his halo was clearly drawn
from Dragon-fire. He was a man who had taken to the sword, and by it
perished; so much was known and announced in his canonisation. He
was honoured as 'the Victor' among the Greeks, therefore to-day
patron of Russia; as protector of Crusaders, therefore now patron of
England; thus is he saint of a war waged by the strong against the
weak, in interest of a church and priesthood against human freedom;
therefore George was taking the side of the Dragon against Christ,
restoring the priestly power he had assailed, and delivering up his
brave brothers in all history to be nailed to Christianity as a cross.

Let George remain! Whether naming fashionable temples or engraved on
gold coins, the fictitious Dragon-slayer will remain the right saint
in the right place so long as the real Dragon-slayer is made to name
every power he hated, and to consecrate every lie in whose mouth he
darted his spear.







