CHAPTER XII.

DEATH.

    The Vendetta of Death--Teoyaomiqui--Demon of Serpents--Death on
    the Pale Horse--Kali--War-gods--Satan as Death--Death-beds--
    Thanatos--Yama--Yimi--Towers of Silence--Alcestis--Hercules,
    Christ, and Death--Hel--Salt--Azraël--Death and the Cobbler--
    Dance of Death--Death as Foe, and as Friend.


Savage races believe that no man dies except by sorcery. Therefore
every death must be avenged. The Actas of the Philippines regard the
'Indians' as the cause of the deaths among them; and when one of them
loses a relative, he lurks and watches until he has spied an 'Indian'
and killed him. [199] It is a progress from this when primitive man
advances to the belief that the fatal sorcerer is an invisible man--a
demon. When this doctrine is taught in the form of a belief that death
entered the world through the machinations of Satan, and was not in the
original scheme of creation, it is civilised; but when it is inculcated
under a set of African or other non-christian names, it is barbarian.

The following sketch, by Mr. Gideon Lang, will show the intensity of
this conviction among the natives of New South Wales:--

'While at Nanima I constantly saw one of these, named Jemmy, a
remarkably fine man, about twenty-eight years of age, who was the
'model Christian' of the missionaries, and who had been over and
over again described in their reports as a living proof that, taken
in infancy, the natives were as capable of being truly christianised
as a people who had had eighteen centuries of civilisation. I confess
that I strongly doubted, but still there was no disputing the apparent
facts. Jemmy was not only familiar with the Bible, which he could
read remarkably well, but he was even better acquainted with the more
abstruse tenets of christianity; and so far as the whites could see,
his behaviour was in accordance with his religious acquirements. One
Sunday morning I walked down to the black fellows' camp, to have
a talk with Jemmy, as usual. I found him sitting in his gunyah,
overlooking a valley of the Macquarrie, whose waters glanced brightly
in the sunshine of the delicious spring morning. He was sitting in a
state of nudity, excepting his waistcloth, very earnestly reading the
Bible, which indeed was his constant practice; and I could see that
he was perusing the Sermon on the Mount. I seated myself, and waited
till he concluded the chapter, when he laid down the Bible, folded
his hands, and sat with his eyes fixed abstractedly on his fire. I
bade him 'good morning,' which he acknowledged without looking up. I
then said, 'Jemmy, what is the meaning of your spears being stuck
in a circle round you?' He looked me steadily in the eyes, and said
solemnly and with suppressed fierceness, 'Mother's dead!' I said that
I was very sorry to hear it; 'but what had her death to do with the
spears being stuck around so?' 'Bogan black-fellow killed her!' was
the fierce and gloomy reply. 'Killed by a Bogan black!' I exclaimed:
'why, your mother has been dying a fortnight, and Dr. Curtis did not
expect her to outlive last night, which you know as well as I do.' His
only reply was a dogged repetition of the words: 'A Bogan black-fellow
killed her!' I appealed to him as a Christian--to the Sermon on the
Mount, that he had just been reading; but he absolutely refused to
promise that he would not avenge his mother's death. In the afternoon
of that day we were startled by a yell which can never be mistaken by
any person who has once heard the wild war-whoop of the blacks when
in battle array. On marching out we saw all the black fellows of the
neighbourhood formed into a line, and following Jemmy in an imaginary
attack upon an enemy. Jemmy himself disappeared that evening. On the
following Wednesday morning I found him sitting complacently in his
gunyah, plaiting a rope of human hair, which I at once knew to be that
of his victim. Neither of us spoke; I stood for some time watching him
as he worked with a look of mocking defiance of the anger he knew I
felt. I pointed to a hole in the middle of his fire, and said, 'Jemmy,
the proper place for your Bible is there.' He looked up with his eyes
flashing as I turned away, and I never saw him again. I afterwards
learned that he had gone to the district of the Bogan tribe, where
the first black he met happened to be an old friend and companion of
his own. This man had just made the first cut in the bark of a tree,
which he was about to climb for an opossum; but on hearing footsteps
he leaped down and faced round, as all blacks do, and whites also,
when blacks are in question. Seeing that it was only Jemmy, however,
he resumed his occupation, but had no sooner set to work than Jemmy
sent a spear through his back and nailed him to the tree. [200]

Perhaps if Jemmy could have been cross-examined by the non-missionary
mind, he might have replied with some effect to Mr. Lang's suggestion
that he ought to part with his Bible. Surely he must have found
in that volume a sufficient number of instances to justify his
faith in the power of demons over human health and life. Might he
not have pondered the command, 'thou shalt not suffer a witch to
live,' and imagined that he was impaling another Manasseh, who 'used
enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit,
and with wizards (and) wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord to
provoke Him to anger.' [201] Those who hope that the Bible may carry
light into the dark places of superstition and habitations of cruelty
might, one would say, reflect upon the long contest which European
science had with bibliolators in trying to relieve the popular mind
from the terrors of witchcraft, whose genuineness it was (justly)
declared contrary to the Scriptures to deny. There are districts in
Great Britain and America, and many more on the continent of Europe,
where the spells that waste and destroy are still believed in; where
effigies of wax or even onions are labelled with some hated name,
and stuck over with pins, and set near fires to be melted or dried
up, in full belief that some subject of the charm will be consumed by
disease along with the object used. Under every roof where such coarse
superstitions dwell the Bible dwells beside them, and experience proves
that the infallibility of all such talismans diminishes pari passu.

What the savage is really trying to slay when he goes forth to avenge
his relative's death on the first alien he finds may be seen in the
accompanying figure (17), which represents the Mexican goddess of
death--Teoyaomiqui. The image is nine feet high, and is kept in
a museum in the city of Mexico. Mr. Edward B. Tylor, from whose
excellent book of travels in that country the figure is copied,
says of it:--'The stone known as the statue of the war-goddess is a
huge block of basalt covered with sculptures. The antiquaries think
that the figures on it stand for different personages, and that it is
three gods--Huitzilopochtli, the god of war; Teoyaomiqui, his wife; and
Mictlanteuctli, the god of hell. It has necklaces of alternate hearts
and dead men's hands, with death's heads for a central ornament. At the
bottom of the block is a strange sprawling figure, which one cannot
see now, for it is the base which rests on the ground; but there are
two shoulders projecting from the idol, which show plainly that it
did not stand on the ground, but was supported aloft on the tops of
two pillars. The figure carved upon the bottom represents a monster
holding a skull in each hand, while others hang from his knees and
elbows. His mouth is a mere oval ring, a common feature of Mexican
idols, and four tusks project just above it. The new moon laid down
like a bridge forms his forehead, and a star is placed on each side
of it. This is thought to have been the conventional representation
of Mictlanteuctli (Lord of the Land of the Dead), the god of hell,
which was a place of utter and eternal darkness. Probably each victim
as he was led to the altar could look up between the two pillars and
see the hideous god of hell staring down upon him from above. There is
little doubt that this is the famous war-idol which stood on the great
teocalli of Mexico, and before which so many thousands of human beings
were sacrificed. It lay undisturbed under ground in the great square,
close to the very site of the teocalli, until sixty years ago. For
many years after that it was kept buried, lest the sight of one of
their old deities might be too exciting for the Indians, who, as I
have mentioned before, had certainly not forgotten it, and secretly
ornamented it with garlands of flowers while it remained above ground.'

If my reader will now turn to the (fig. 11) portrait of the Demon
of Serpents, he will find a conception fundamentally similar to
the Mexican demoness of death or slaughter, but one that is not
shut up in a museum of antiquities; it still haunts and terrifies a
vast number of the people born in Ceylon. He is the principal demon
invoked in Ceylon by the malignant sorcerers in performing the 84,000
different charms that afflict evils (Hooniyan). His general title is
Oddy Cumara Hooniyan Dewatawa; but he has a special name for each of
his six several apparitions, the chief of these being Cali Oddisey,
or demon of incurable diseases, therefore of death, and Naga Oddisey,
demon of serpents--deadliest of animals. Beneath him is the Pale Horse
which has had its career so long and far,--even to the White Mare on
which, in some regions, Christ is believed to revisit the earth every
Christmas; and also the White Mare of Yorkshire Folklore which bore
its rider from Whitestone Cliff to hell. This Singhalese form also,
albeit now associated by Capuas with fatal disease, was probably at
first, like the Mexican, a war goddess and god combined, as is shown
by the uplifted sword, and reeking hand uplifted in triumph. Equally
a god of war is our 'Death on the Pale Horse,' which christian art,
following the so-called Apocalypse, has made so familiar. 'I looked,
and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and
Hell followed with him. And power was given to him over the fourth
part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death,
and with the beasts of the earth.' This is but a travesty of the Greek
Ares, the Roman Mars, or god of War. In the original Greek-form Ares
was not solely the god of war, but of destruction generally. In the
OEdipus Tyrannus of Sophocles we have the popular conception of him
as one to whom the deadly plague is ascribed. He is named as the
'god unhonoured among gods,' and it is said:--'The city is wildly
tossing, and no more can lift up her head from the waves of death;
withering the ripening grain in the husks, withering the kine in their
pastures; blighted are the babes through the failing labours of women;
the fire-bearing god, horrid Pestilence, having darted down, ravages
the city; by him the house of Cadmus is empty, and dark Hades enriched
with groans and lamentations.'

Mother of the deadliest 'Calas' of Singhalese demonolatry, sister of
the Scandinavian Hel in name and nature, is Kali. Although the Hindu
writers repudiate the idea that there is any devil among their three
hundred and thirty millions of deities, it is difficult to deny Kali
that distinction. Her wild dance of delight over bodies of the slain
would indicate pleasure taken in destruction for its own sake, so
fulfilling the definition of a devil; but, on the other hand, there
is a Deccan legend that reports her as devouring the dead, and this
would make her a hunger-demon. We may give her the benefit of the
doubt, and class her among the demons--or beings whose evil is not
gratuitous--all the more because the mysteriously protruding tongue,
as in the figure of Typhon (p. 185), probably suggests thirst. Hindu
legend does, indeed, give another interpretation, and say that when she
was dancing for joy at having slain a hundred-headed giant demigod, the
shaking of the earth was so formidable that Siva threw himself among
the slain, whom she was crushing at every step, hoping to induce her
to pause; but when, unheeding, she trod upon the body of her husband,
she paused and thrust out her tongue from surprise and shame. The
Vedic description of Agni as an ugra (ogre), with 'tongue of flame,'
may better interpret Kali's tongue. It is said Kali is pleased for
a hundred years by the blood of a tiger; for a thousand by that of
a man; for a hundred thousand by the blood of three men.

How are we to understand this dance of Death, and the further legend
of her tossing dead bodies into the air for amusement? Such a figure
found among a people who shudder at taking life even from the lowest
animals is hardly to be explained by the destructiveness of nature
personified in her spouse Siva.  Her looks and legends alike represent
slaughter by human violence. May it not be that Kali represents some
period when the abhorrence of taking life among a vegetarian people--a
people, too, believing in transmigration--might have become a public
danger? When Krishna appeared it was, according to the Bhágavat Gita,
as charioteer inciting Arjoon to war. There must have been various
periods when a peaceful people must fall victims to more savage
neighbours unless they could be stimulated to enter on the work of
destruction with a light heart. There may have been periods when the
human Kalis of India might stimulate their husbands and sons to war
with such songs as the women of Dardistan sing at the Feast of Fire
(p. 91). The amour of the Greek goddess of Beauty with the god of War,
leaving her lawful spouse the Smith, is full of meaning. The Assyrian
Venus, Istar, appeared in a vision, with wings and halo, bearing a bow
and arrow for Assurbanipal. The Thug appears to have taken some such
view of Kali, regarding her as patroness of their plan for reducing
population. They are said to have claimed that Kali left them one of
her teeth for a pickaxe, her rib for a knife, her garment's hem for
a noose, and wholesale murder for a religion. The uplifted right
hand of the demoness has been interpreted as intimating a divine
purpose in the havoc around her, and it is possible that some such
euphemism attached to the attitude before the Thug accepted it as his
own benediction from this highly decorated personage of human cruelty.

The ancient reverence for Kali has gradually passed to her mitigated
form--Durgá. Around her too are visible the symbols of destruction;
but she is supposed to be satisfied with pumpkin-animals, and the
weapons in her ten hands are believed to be directed against the
enemies of the gods, especially against the giant king Muheshu. She
is mother of the beautiful boy Kartik, and of the elephant-headed
inspirer of knowledge Ganesa. She is reverenced now as female energy,
the bestower of beauty and fruitfulness on women.

The identity of war-gods and death-demons, in the most frightful
conceptions which have haunted the human imagination, is of profound
significance. These forms do not represent peaceful and natural death,
not death by old age,--of which, alas, those who cowered before them
knew but little,--but death amid cruelty and agony, and the cutting
down of men in the vigour of life. That indeed was terrible,--even
more than these rude images could describe.

But there are other details in these hideous forms. The priest has
added to the horse and sword of war the adored serpent, and hideous
symbols of the 'Land of the Dead.' For it is not by terror of death,
but of what he can persuade men lies beyond, that the priest has
reigned over mankind. When Isabel (in 'Measure for Measure') is
trying to persuade her brother that the sense of death lies most in
apprehension, the sentenced youth still finds death 'a fearful thing.'


        Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
        To lie in cold obstruction and to rot;
        This sensible warm motion to become
        A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
        To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
        In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
        To be imprisoned in the viewless winds,
        And blown with violence round about
        The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
        Of these, that lawless and incertain thoughts
        Imagine howling!--'tis too horrible!
        The weariest and most loathed worldly life
        That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment
        Can lay on nature, is a paradise
        To what we fear of death.


In all these apprehensions of Claudio there is no thought of
annihilation. What if he had seen death as an eternal sleep? Let
Hamlet answer:--


                        To die,--to sleep;--
        No more;--and, by a sleep, to say we end
        The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks
        That flesh is heir to,--'tis a consummation
        Devoutly to be wished.


The greater part of the human race still belong to religions which,
in their origin, promised eternal repose as the supreme final
bliss. Had death in itself possessed horrors for the human mind,
the priest need not have conjured up beyond it those tortures that
haunted Hamlet with the dreams of possible evils beyond which make
even the wretched rather bear the ills they have than fly to others
they know not of. It would have been sufficient sanction to promise
immortality only to the pious. But as in Claudio's shuddering lines
every hell is reflected--whether of ice, fire, or brutalisation--so
are the same mixed with the very blood and brain of mankind, even
where literally outgrown. Christianity superadded to the horrors by
importing the idea that death came by human sin, and so by gradual
development ascribing to Satan the power of death; thereby forming a
new devil who bore in him the power to make death a punishment. How
the matter stood in the mediæval belief may be seen in figure 19,
copied from a Russian Bible of the (early) seventeenth century. Lazarus
smiles to see the nondescript soul of Dives torn from him by a devil
with a hook, while another drowns the groans with a drum. Satan
squirts an infernal baptism on the departing soul, and the earnest
co-operation of the archangel justifies the satisfaction of Lazarus
and Abraham. This degraded belief is still found in the almost gleeful
pulpit-picturings of physical agonies as especially attending the
death-beds of 'infidels,'--as Voltaire and Paine,--and its fearful
result is found in the degree to which priesthoods are still able
to paralyse the common sense and heart of the masses by the barbaric
ceremonials with which they are permitted to surround death, and the
arrogant line drawn between unorthodox goats and credulous sheep by
'consecrated' ground.

Mr. Keary, in his interesting volume on 'The Dawn of History,' [202]
says that it has been suggested that the youthful winged figure
on the drum of a column from the temple of Diana at Ephesus to the
British Museum, may be a representation of Thanatos, Death. It would
be agreeable to believe that the only important representation of Death
left by Greek art is that exquisite figure, whose high tribute is that
it was at first thought to be Love! The figure is somewhat like the
tender Eros of preraphaelite art, and with the same look of gentle
melancholy. Such a sweet and simple form of Death would be worthy of
the race which, amid all the fiery or cold rivers of the underworld
which had gathered about their religion, still saw running there the
soft-flowing stream of forgetfulness. Let one study this Ephesian
Thanatos reverently--no engraving or photograph can do it even partial
justice--and then in its light read those myths of Death which seem to
bear us back beyond the savagery of war and the artifices of priests
to the simpler conceptions of humanity. In its serene light we may
especially read both Vedic and Iranian hymns and legends of Yama.

The first man to die became the powerful Yama of the Hindus, the
monarch of the dead; and he became invested with metaphors of the sun
that had set. [203] In a solemn and pathetic hymn of the Vedas he is
said to have crossed the rapid waters, to have shown the way to many,
to have first known the path on which our fathers crossed over. [204]
But in the splendours of sunset human hope found its prophetic pictures
of a heaven beyond. The Vedic Yama is ever the friend. It is one of
the most picturesque facts of mythology that, after Yama had become
in India another name for Death, the same name reappeared in Persia,
and in the Avesta, as a type at once of the Golden Age in the past
and of paradise in the future.

Such was the Iranian Yima. He was that 'flos regum' whose reign
represented 'the ideal of human happiness, when there was neither
illness nor death, neither heat nor cold,' and who has never
died. 'According to the earlier traditions of the Avesta,' says
Spiegel, 'Jima does not die, but when evil and misery began to prevail
on earth, retires to a smaller space, a kind of garden or Eden, where
he continues his happy life with those who remained true to him.' Such
have been the antecedents of our many beautiful myths which ascribe
even an earthly immortality to the great,--to Barbarossa, Arthur,
and even to the heroes of humbler races as Hiawatha and Glooscap
of North American tribes,--who are or were long believed to have
'sailed into the fiery sunset,' or sought some fair island, or to
slumber in a hidden grotto, until the world shall have grown up to
their stature and requires their return.

In Japan the (Sintoo) god of Hell is now named Amma, and one may
suspect that it is some imitation of Yama by reason of the majesty he
still retains in the popular conception. He is pictured as a grave
man, wearing a judicial cap, and no cruelties seem to be attributed
to him personally, but only to the oni or demons of whom he is lord.

The kindly characteristics of the Hindu Yama seem in Persia to have
been replaced by the bitterness of Ahriman, or Anra-mainyu, the
genius of evil. Haug interprets Anra-mainyu as 'Death-darting.' The
word is the counterpart of Speñta-mainyu, and means originally the
'throttling spirit;' being thus from anh, philologically the root of
all evil, as we shall see when we consider its dragon brood. Professor
Whitney translates the name 'Malevolent.' But, whatever may be the
meaning of the word, there is little doubt that the Twins of Vedic
Mythology--Yama and Yami--parted into genii of Day and Night, and
were ultimately spiritualised in the Spirit of Light and Spirit of
Darkness which have made the basis of all popular theology from the
time of Zoroaster until this day.

Nothing can be more remarkable than the extreme difference between
the ancient Hindu and the Persian view of death. As to the former it
was the happy introduction to Yama, to the latter it was the visible
seal of Ahriman's equality with Ormuzd. They held it in absolute
horror. The Towers of Silence stand in India to-day as monuments of
this darkest phase of the Parsî belief. The dead body belonged to
Ahriman, and was left to be devoured by wild creatures; and although
the raising of towers for the exposure of the corpse, so limiting its
consumption to birds, has probably resulted from a gradual rationalism
which has from time to time suggested that by such means souls of the
good may wing their way to Ormuzd, yet the Parsî horror of death is
strong enough to give rise to such terrible suspicions, even if they
were unfounded, as those which surrounded the Tower (Khao's Dokhma)
in June 1877. The strange behaviour of the corpse-bearers in leaving
one tower, going to another, and afterwards (as was said) secretly
repairing to the first, excited the belief that a man had been found
alive in the first and was afterwards murdered. The story seems to have
begun with certain young Parsîs themselves, and, whether it be true
or not, they have undoubtedly interpreted rightly the ancient feeling
of that sect with regard to all that had been within the kingdom of
the King of Terrors. 'As sickness and death,' says Professor Whitney,
'were supposed to be the work of the malignant powers, the dead body
itself was regarded with superstitious horror. It had been gotten by
the demons into their own peculiar possession, and became a chief
medium through which they exercised their defiling action upon the
living. Everything that came into its neighbourhood was unclean, and to
a certain extent exposed to the influences of the malevolent spirits,
until purified by the ceremonies which the law prescribed.' [205]
It is to be feared this notion has crept in among the Brahmans;
the Indian Mirror (May 26, 1878) states that a Chandernagore lady,
thrown into the Ganges, but afterwards found to be alive, was believed
to be possessed by Dano (an evil spirit), and but for interference
would have found a watery grave. The Jews also were influenced by
this belief, and to this day it is forbidden a Cohen, or descendant
of the priesthood, to touch a dead body.

The audience at the Crystal Palace which recently witnessed the
performance of Euripides' Alcestis could hardly, it is to be feared,
have realised the relation of the drama to their own religion. Apollo
induces the Fates to consent that Admetus shall not die provided he
can find a substitute for him. The pure Alcestis steps forward and
devotes herself to death to save her husband. Apollo tries to persuade
Death to give back Alcestis, but Death declares her fate demanded
by justice. While Alcestis is dying, Admetus bids her entreat the
gods for pity; but Alcestis says it is a god who has brought on the
necessity, and adds, 'Be it so!' She sees the hall of the dead, with
'the winged Pluto staring from beneath his black eyebrows.' She reminds
her husband of the palace and regal sway she might have enjoyed in
Thessaly had she not left it for him. Bitterly does Pheres reproach
Admetus for accepting life through the vicarious suffering and death
of another. Then comes Hercules; he vanquishes Death; he leads forth
Alcestis from 'beneath into the light.' With her he comes into the
presence of Admetus, who is still in grief. Admetus cannot recognise
her; but when he recognises her with joy, Hercules warns him that it
is not lawful for Alcestis to address him 'until she is unbound from
her consecration to the gods beneath, and the third day come.'

It only requires a change of names to make Alcestis a Passion-play. The
unappeasable Justice which is as a Fate binding the deity, though it
may be satisfied vicariously; 'the last enemy, Death;' the atonement
by sacrifice of a saintly human being, who from a father's palace is
brought by love freely to submit to death; the son of a god (Zeus) by a
human mother (Alcmene),--the god-man Herakles,--commissioned to destroy
earthly evils by twelve great labours,--descending to conquer Death and
deliver one of the 'spirits in prison,' the risen spirit not recognised
at first, as Jesus was not by Mary; still bearing the consecration
of the grave until the third day, which forbade intercourse with the
living ('Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father'),--all
these enable us to recognise in the theologic edifices around us the
fragments of a crumbled superstition as they lay around Euripides.

From the old pictures of Christ's triumphal pilgrimage on earth
parallels for the chief Labours of Herakles may be found; he is shown
treading on the lion, asp, dragon, and Satan; but the myths converge
in the Descent into Hades and the conquest of Death. It is remarkable
that in the old pictures of Christ delivering souls from Hades he is
generally represented closely followed by Eve, whose form so emerging
would once have been to the greater part of Europe already familiar as
that of either Alcestis, Eurydice, or Persephone. One of the earliest
examples of the familiar subject, Christ conquering Death, is that in
the ancient (tenth century) Missal of Worms,--that city whose very name
preserves the record of the same combat under the guise of Siegfried
and the Worm, or Dragon. The cross is now the sword thrust near the
monster's mouth. The picture illustrates the chant of Holy Week:
'De manu Mortis liberabo eos, de Morte redimam eos. Ero Mors tua,
O Mors; morsus tuus ero, inferne.' From the pierced mouth of Death
are vomited flames, which remind us of his ethnical origin; but it
is not likely that to the christianised pagans of Worms the picture
could ever have conveyed an impression so weirdly horrible as that
of their own goddess of Death, Hel. 'Her hall is called Elvidnir,
realm of the cold storm: Hunger is her table; Starvation, her knife;
Delay, her man; Slowness, her maid; Precipice, her threshold; Care,
her bed; burning Anguish, the hangings of her apartments. One half
of her body is livid, the other half the colour of human flesh.'

With the Scandinavian picture of the Abode of Death may be compared the
description of the Abode of Nin-ki-gal, the Assyrian Queen of Death,
from a tablet in the British Museum, translated by Mr. Fox Talbot:
[206]--


    To the House men enter--but cannot depart from:
    To the Road men go--but cannot return.
    The abode of darkness and famine
    Where Earth is their food: their nourishment Clay:
    Light is not seen; in darkness they dwell:
    Ghosts, like birds, flutter their wings there;
    On the door and the gate-posts the dust lies undisturbed.


The Semitic tribes, undisturbed, like the importers of their theology
into the age of science, by the strata in which so many perished animal
kingdoms are entombed, attributed all death, even that of animals,
to the forbidden fruit. The Rabbins say that not only Adam and Eve,
but the animals in Eden, partook of that fruit, and came under the
power of Sammaël the Violent, and of his agent Azraël, the demon of
Death. The Phoenix, having refused this food, preserved the power of
renovating itself.

It is an example of the completeness and consistency with which a
theory may organise its myth, that the fatal demons are generally
represented as abhorring salt--the preserving agent and foe of
decay. The 'Covenant of Salt' among the ancient Jews probably had
this significance, and the care with which Job salted his sacrifice
is considered elsewhere. Aubrey says, 'Toads (Saturnine animals) are
killed by putting salt upon them. I have seen the experiment.' The
devil, as heir of death-demons, appears in all European folklore
as a hater of salt. A legend, told by Heine, relates that a knight,
wandering in a wood in Italy, came upon a ruin, and in it a wondrous
statue of the goddess of Beauty. Completely fascinated, the knight
haunted the spot day after day, until one evening he was met by a
servant who invited him to enter a villa which he had not before
remarked. What was his surprise to be ushered into the presence of
the living image of his adored statue! Amid splendour and flowers
the enraptured knight is presently seated with his charmer at
a banquet. Every luxury of the world is there; but there is no
salt! When he hints this want a cloud passes over the face of his
Beauty. Presently he asks the servant to bring the salt; the servant
does so, shuddering; the knight helps himself to it. The next sip of
wine he takes elicits a cry from him: it is liquid fire. Madness seizes
upon him; caresses, burning kisses follow, until he falls asleep on the
bosom of his goddess. But what visions! Now he sees her as a wrinkled
crone, next a great bat bearing a torch as it flutters around him,
and again as a frightful monster, whose head he cuts off in an agony
of terror. When the knight awakes it is in his own villa. He hastens
to his ruin, and to the beloved statue; he finds her fallen from the
pedestal, and the beautiful head cut from the neck lying at her feet.

The Semitic Angel of Death is a figure very different from any that
we have considered. He is known in theology only in the degradation
which he suffered at the hands of the Rabbins, but originally was an
awful but by no means evil genius. The Persians probably imported him,
under the name of Asuman, for we do not find him mentioned in their
earlier books, and the name has a resemblance to the Hebrew shamad,
to exterminate, which would connect it with the biblical 'destroyer'
Abaddon. This is rendered more probable because the Zoroastrians
believed in an earlier demon, Vízaresha, who carried souls after death
to the region of Deva-worshippers (India). The Chaldaic Angel of Death,
Malk-ad Mousa, may have derived his name from the legend of his having
approached Moses with the object of forcing his soul out of his body,
but, being struck by the glory of Moses' face, and by virtue of the
divine name on his rod, was compelled to retire. The legend is not
so ancient as the name, and was possibly a Saga suggested by the
name; it is obviously the origin of the tradition of the struggle
between Michael and Satan for the body of Moses (Jude 9.). This
personification had thus declined among the Jews into being evil enough
to be identified with Samaël,--who, in the Book of the Assumption of
Moses, is named as his assailant,--and subsequently with Satan himself,
named in connection with the New Testament version. It was on account
of this degradation of a being described in the earlier books of the
Bible as the commissioner of Jehovah that there was gradually developed
among the Jews two Angels of Death, one (Samaël, or his agent Azraël)
for those who died out of the land of Israel, and the other (Gabriel)
for those who had the happier lot of dying in their own country.

This relegation of Samaël to the wandering Jews--who if they died
abroad were not supposed to reach Paradise with facility, if at
all--is significant. For Samaël is pretty certainly a conception
borrowed from outlying Semitic tribes. What that conception was we
find in Job xviii. 18, where he is 'the king of Terrors,' and still
more in the Arabic Azraël. The legend of this typical Angel of Death
is that he was promoted to his high office for special service. When
Allah was about to create man he sent the angels Gabriel, Michael,
and Israfil to the earth to bring clay of different colours for that
purpose; but the Earth warned them that the being about to be formed
would rebel against his creator and draw down a curse upon her (the
Earth), and they returned without bringing the clay. Then Azraël was
sent by Allah, and he executed his commission without fear; and for
this he was appointed the angel to separate souls from bodies. Azraël
had subordinate angels under him, and these are alluded to in the
opening lines of the Sura 79 of the Koran:


    By the angels who tear forth the souls of some with violence;
    And by those who draw forth the souls of others with gentleness.


The souls of the righteous are drawn forth with gentleness, those
of the wicked torn from them in the way shown in the Russian picture
(Fig. 19), which is indeed an illustration of the same mythology.

These terrible tasks were indeed such as were only too likely to
bring Azraël into the evil repute of an executioner in the course
of time; but no degradation of him seems to have been developed
among the Moslems. He seems to have been associated in their minds
with Fate, and similar stories were told of him. Thus it is related
that once when Azraël was passing by Solomon he gazed intently upon
a man with whom Solomon was conversing. Solomon told his companion
that it was the Angel of Death who was looking at him, and the man
replied, 'He seems to want me: order the wind to carry me from hence
into India;' when this was done Azraël approached Solomon and said,
'I looked earnestly at that man from wonder, for I was commanded to
take his soul in India.' [207]

Azraël was often represented as presenting to the lips a cup of
poison. It is probable that this image arose from the ancient ordeal
by poison, whereby draughts, however manipulated beforehand with
reference to the results, were popularly held to be divinely mingled
for retributive or beneficent effects. 'Cup' thus became among Semitic
tribes a symbol of Fate. The 'cup of consolation,' 'cup of wrath,'
'cup of trembling,' which we read of in the Old Testament; the 'cup
of blessing,' and 'cup of devils,' spoken of by Paul, have this
significance. The cup of Nestor, ornamented with the dove (Iliad,
xi. 632), was probably a 'cup of blessing,' and Mr. Schliemann has
found several of the same kind at Mycenæ. The symbol was repeatedly
used by Christ,--'Let this cup pass from me,' 'The cup that my Father
hath given me to drink shall I not drink it,' 'Are ye able to drink
of the cup that I drink of,'--and the familiar association of Azraël's
cup is expressed in the phrase 'taste of death.'

One of the most pleasing modifications of the belief in the Angel of
Death is that found by Lepsius [208] among the Mohammedan negroes of
Kordofan. Osraîn (Azraël), it is said, receives the souls of the dead,
and leads the good to their reward, the bad to punishment. 'He lives
in a tree, el segerat mohana (the tree of fulfilling), which has as
many leaves as there are inhabitants in the world. On each leaf is
a name, and when a child is born a new one grows. If any one becomes
ill his leaf fades, and should he be destined to die, Osraîn breaks
it off. Formerly he used to come visibly to those whom he was going
to carry away, and thus put them in great terror. Since the prophet's
time, however, he has become invisible; for when he came to fetch
Mohammed's soul he told him that it was not good that by his visible
appearance he should frighten mankind. They might then easily die of
terror, before praying; for he himself, although a courageous and
spirited man, was somewhat perturbed at his appearance. Therefore
the prophet begged God to make Osraîn invisible, which prayer was
granted.' Mr. Mackenzie adds on this that, among the Moravian Jews,
at new moon a branch is held in its light, and the name of a person
pronounced: his face will appear between the horns of the moon,
and should he be destined to die the leaves will fade.

Mr. John Ruskin has been very severe upon the Italians for the humour
with which they introduce Death as a person of their masque. 'When I
was in Venice in 1850,' he says, 'the most popular piece of the comic
opera was "Death and the Cobbler," in which the point of the plot was
the success of a village cobbler as a physician, in consequence of
the appearance of Death to him beside the bed of every patient who
was not to recover; and the most applauded scene in it was one in
which the physician, insolent in success, and swollen with luxury,
was himself taken down into the abode of Death, and thrown into an
agony of terror by being shown lives of men, under the form of wasting
lamps, and his own ready to expire.' On which he expresses the opinion
that 'this endurance of fearful images is partly associated with
indecency, partly with general fatuity and weakness of mind.' [209]
But may it not rather be the healthy reaction from morbid images of
terror, with which a purely natural and inevitable event has so long
been invested by priests, and portrayed in such popular pictures as
'The Dance of Death?' The mocking laughter with which the skeletons
beset the knight in our picture (Fig. 20), from the wall of La Chaise
Dieu, Auvergne, marks the priestly terrorism, which could not fail
to be vulgarised even more by the frivolous. In 1424 there was a
masquerade of the Dance of Death in the Cemetery of the Innocents
at Paris, attended by the Duke of Bedford and the Duke of Burgundy,
just returned from battle. It may have been the last outcome in
the west of Kali's dance over the slain; but it is fortunate when
Fanaticism has no worse outcome than Folly. The Skeleton Death has
the advantage over earlier forms of suggesting the naturalness of
death. It is more scientific. The gradual discovery by the people
that death is not caused by sin has largely dissipated its horrors
in regions where the ignorance and impostures of priestcraft are of
daily observation; and although the reaction may not be expressed with
good taste, there would seem to be in it a certain vigour of nature,
reasserting itself in simplicity.

In the northern world we are all too sombre in the matter. It is the
ages of superstition which have moulded our brains, and too generally
given to our natural love of life the unnatural counterpart of a
terror of death. What has been artificially bred into us can be
cultivated out of us. There are indeed deaths corresponding to the
two Angels--the death that comes by lingering disease and pain, and
that which comes by old age. There are indeed Azraëls in our cities
who poison the food and drink of the people, and mingle death in the
cup of water; and of them there should be increasing horror until the
gentler angel abides with us, and death by old age becomes normal. The
departure from life being a natural condition of entering upon it,
it is melancholy indeed that it should be ideally confused with the
pains and sorrows often attending it. It is fabled that Menippus
the Cynic, travelling through Hades, knew which were the kings there
by their howling louder than the rest. They howled loudest because
they had parted from most pleasures on earth. But all the happy and
young have more reason to lament untimely death than kings. The only
tragedy of Death is the ruin of living Love. Mr. Watts, in his great
picture of Love and Death (Grosvenor Gallery, 1877), revealed the
real horror. Not that skeleton which has its right time and place,
not the winged demon (called angel), who has no right time or place,
is here, but a huge, hard, heartless form, as of man half-blocked out
of marble; a terrible emblem of the remorseless force that embodies
the incompleteness and ignorance of mankind--a force that steadily
crushes hearts where intellects are devoting their energies to alien
worlds. Poor Love has little enough science; his puny arm stretched
out to resist the colossal form is weak as the prayers of agonised
parents and lovers directed against never-swerving laws; he is almost
exhausted; his lustrous wings are broken and torn in the struggle;
the dove at his feet crouches mateless; the rose that climbed on his
door is prostrate; over his shoulder the beam-like arm has set the
stony hand against the door where the rose of joy must fall.

The aged when they die do but follow the treasures that have gone
before. One by one the old friends have left them, the sweet ties
parted, and the powers to enjoy and help become feeble. When of the
garden that once bloomed around them memory alone is left, friendly
is death to scatter also the leaves of that last rose where the loved
ones are sleeping. This is the real office of death. Nay, even when
it comes to the young and happy it is not Death but Disease that is
the real enemy; in disease there is almost no compensation at all but
learning its art of war; but Death is Nature's pity for helpless pain;
where love and knowledge can do no more it comes as a release from
sufferings which were sheer torture if prolonged. The presence of
death is recognised oftenest by the cessation of pain. Superstition
has done few heavier wrongs to humanity than by the mysterious terrors
with which it has invested that change which, to the simpler ages,
was pictured as the gentle river Lethe, flowing from the abode of
sleep, from which the shades drank oblivion alike of their woes and
of the joys from which they were torn.








