CHAPTER XI.

THE DRAGON'S BREATH.

    Medusa--Phenomena of recurrence--The Brood of Echidna and their
    survival--Behemoth and Leviathan--The Mouth of Hell--The Lambton
    Worm--Ragnar--The Lambton Doom--The Worm's Orthodoxy--The Serpent,
    Superstition, and Science.


Asura has already been mentioned as the most ancient Aryan name for
deity. The meaning of it is, the Breather. It has also been remarked
that in the course of time the word came to signify both the good
and the evil spirit. What this evil breath meant in nature is told
in Leonardo da Vinci's picture of the expiring Medusa, referred to
on p. 386, from whose breath noxious creatures are produced. It may
have been that the artist meant only to interpret the Gorgon as a
personification of the malarious vapours of nature and their organic
kindred; if so, he painted better than he knew, and has suggested
that fatal vitality of the evil power which raised it to its throne
as a principle coeternal with good.

The phenomena of recurrence in things evil made for man the mystery
of iniquity. The darkness may be dispersed, but it returns; the storm
may clear away, but it gathers again; inundations, sickly seasons,
dog-days, Cain-winds, they go and return; the cancer is cut out and
grows again; the tyrant may be slain, tyranny survives. The serpent
slipping from one skin to another coils steadily into the symbol of
endlessness. In another expression it is the poisonous breath of
the Dragon. It is this breath that cannot be killed; the special
incarnations of it, any temporary brood of it, may be destroyed,
but the principle in nature which produces them cannot be exterminated.

Dragon fables have this undertone to their brave strain. In the
Rig Veda (v. 32) it is said that when Indra slew Ahi, 'another more
powerful was generated.' Isaiah (xiv. 29) cries, 'Rejoice not thou,
whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken:
for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his
fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.' Herakles struggles with the
giant robber, Antæus, only to find the demon's strength restored by
contact with the earth. He kills one head of the Hydra only to see two
grow in its place; and even when he has managed to burn away these,
the central head is found to be immortal, and he can only hide it
under a rock. That one is the self-multiplying principle of evil. The
vast brood of Echidna in mythology expresses the brood of evil in
nature. Echidna, daughter of Ge and Tartarus, Earth and Hell--phonetic
reappearance of Ahi--is half-serpent, half-woman, with black eyes,
fearful and bloodthirsty. She becomes the mother of fire-breathing
Typhon, buried beneath the earth by Jove's lightning when he aspired
to scale Olympus; of the Dragon that guarded the Hesperian garden;
of the Sphinx which puzzled and devoured; of three-headed Cerberus;
of the eagle that preyed on rock-bound Prometheus; of the Nemæan lion
which Herakles slew; of Chimæra; and of Scylla the monster whom Homer
describes sitting between two large rocks waylaying mariners on the
way from Italy to Sicily,--possessing twelve feet, six long necks
and mouths, each with three rows of rushing teeth.

The Dragon that Cadmus slew also had terrible teeth; and it will be
remembered that when these teeth were sown they sprang up as armed
men. Like them, the ancient Dragon-myths were also sown, broadcast, in
the mental and moral fields, cleared and ploughed by a new theology,
and they sprang up as dogmas more hard and cruel than the ferocious
forces of nature which gave birth to their ancestral monsters.

What the superstitious method of interpreting nature, forced as
it is to personify its painful as well as its pleasant phenomena,
inevitably results in, finds illustration in the two great lines of
tradition--the Aryan and the Semitic--which have converged to form
the christian mythology.

The Hebrew personification, Jehovah, originating in a rude period,
became invested with many savage and immoral traditions; but when his
worshippers had reached a higher moral culture, national sentiment
had become too deeply involved with the sovereign majesty of their
deity for his alleged actions to be criticised, or his absolute
supremacy and omnipotence to be questioned, even to save his moral
character. Thus, the Rabbins appear to have been at their wits'
end to account for the existence of the two great monsters which
had got into their sacred records--from an early mythology--Behemoth
and Leviathan. Unwilling to admit that Jehovah had created foes to
his own kingdom, or that creatures which had become foes to it were
beyond his power to control, they worked out a theory that Behemoth
and Leviathan were made and preserved by special order of Jehovah to
execute his decrees at the Messianic Day of Judgment. They probably
corresponded at an earlier period with the gryphon, or grabber, and
the serpent which bit, guardians at the gate of paradise; but the
need of such guards, biters, and spies by the all-powerful all-seeing
Shaddai having been recognised, the monsters had to be rationalised
into accord with his character as a retributive ruler. Hence Behemoth
and Leviathan are represented as being fattened with the wicked,
who die in order to be the food of the righteous during the unsettled
times that follow the revelation of the Messiah! Behemoth is Jehovah's
'cattle on a thousand hills' (Ps. i. 10). In Pireque de Rabbi Eliezur
he is described as feeding daily upon a thousand mountains on which
the grass grows again every night; and the Jordan supplies him with
drink, as it is said in Job (xl. 23), 'he trusteth that he can draw up
Jordan into his mouth.' In the Talmud these monsters are divided into
two pairs, but are said to have been made barren lest their progeny
should destroy the earth. They are kept in the wilderness of Dendain,
the mythical abode of the descendants of Cain, east of Eden, for the
unique purpose mentioned.

But now we may remark the steady progress of these monsters to
the bounds of their mythological habitat. There came a time when
Behemoth and Leviathan were hardly more presentable than other
personified horrors. They too must 'take the veil,'--a period in the
history of mythical, corresponding to extinction in that of actual,
monsters. The following passage in the Book of Enoch is believed by
Professor Drummond to be a later insertion, probably from the Book
of Noah, and as early as the middle of the first century:--'In that
day two monsters shall be divided; a female monster named Leviathan,
to dwell in the abyss of the sea, above the sources of the waters;
but the male is called Behemoth, which occupies with its breast a
desolate wilderness named Dendain, on the east of the garden where
the elect and righteous dwell, where my grandfather (Enoch) was
taken up, being the seventh from Adam, the first man whom the Lord
of the spirits created. And I asked that other angel to show me the
might of these monsters, how they were separated in one day, and one
was set in the depth of the sea, the other on the firm land of the
wilderness. And he spoke to me, 'Thou son of man, thou desirest in
this to know what has been concealed.' And the other angel who went
with me, and showed me what is in concealment, spake, ... 'These two
monsters are prepared conformably to the greatness of God to be fed,
in order that the penal judgment of God may not be in vain.' [254]

We may thus see that there were antecedents to the sentiment of
Aquinas,--'Beati in regno coelesti videbunt poenas damnatorum,
ut beatitudo illis magis complaceat.' Or, perhaps, one might say
rather to the logic of Aquinas; for though he saw that it would be
necessary for souls in bliss to be happy at vision of the damned or
else deficient in bliss, it is said he could hardly be happy from
thinking of the irreversible doom of Satan himself. It would appear
that only the followers of the Genevan who anticipated his god's hell
for Servetus managed to adapt their hearts to such logic, and glory
in the endless tortures of their fellow-creatures.

An eloquent minister in New York, Octavius B. Frothingham, being
requested to write out his views on the 'question' of everlasting
damnation, began with the remark that he felt somewhat as a sportsman
suddenly called upon to hunt the Iguanodon. Really it is Behemoth and
Leviathan he was called to deal with. Leviathan transmitted from Jonah
to the Middle Ages the idea of 'the belly of Hell,' and Behemoth's
jaws expanded in the 'mouth of Hell' of the Miracle-plays; and their
utility, as described in the Book of Enoch, perhaps originated
the doctrine of souls tasting heavenly joys from the agonies of
others. The dogma of Hell has followed the course of its prototype
with precision. It has arrived at just that period when, as in the
case of Enoch's inquiring, the investigator finds it has taken the
veil. Theologians shake their heads, call it a terrible question,
write about free-will and sin, but only a few, of the fatuous sort,
confess belief in the old-fashioned Hell where the worm dieth not
and the fire is not quenched.

Let us now take under consideration the outcome of the Aryan Dragon,
which has travelled far to meet Behemoth in the west. And it is
probable that we could not, with much seeking, find an example so
pregnant with instruction for our present inquiry as our little Durham
folk-tale of the Lambton Worm.

This Worm is said to have been slain by Sir Lambton, crusader, and
ancestor of the Earls of Durham. This young Lambton was a wild fellow;
he was fond of fishing in the river Wear, which runs near Durham
Castle, and he had an especial taste for fishing there on Sunday
mornings. He was profane, and on Sundays, when the people were all
going to mass, they were often shocked by hearing the loud oaths
which Lambton uttered whenever he had no rise. One Sunday morning
something got hold of his hook, pulled strong, and he made sure of a
good trout; what was his disappointment when instead thereof he found
at the end of his line a tiny black worm. He tore it off with fierce
imprecations and threw it in a well near by. However, soon after this
the young man joined the crusaders and went off to the Holy Land,
where he distinguished himself by slaying many Saracens.

But while he was off there things were going on badly around Durham
Castle. Some peasant passing that well into which the youth had cast
the tiny black worm looked into it, and beheld a creature that made him
shudder,--a diabolical big snake with nine ferocious eyes. A little
time only had elapsed before this creature had grown too large for
the well to hold it, and it came out and crawled on, making a path
of desolation, breakfasting on a village, until it came to a small
hill. Around that hill it coiled with nine coils, each weighty enough
to make a separate terrace. One may still see this hill with its nine
terraces, and be assured of the circumstances by peasants residing
near. Having taken up its headquarters on this hill, the nine-eyed
monster was in the habit of sallying forth every day and satisfying
his hunger by devouring the plumpest family he could find, until
at length the people consulted an oracle--some say a witch, others
again a priest--and were told that the monster would be satisfied
if it were given each day the milk of nine cows. So nine cows were
got together, and a plucky dairymaid was found to milk the cows and
carry it to the dragon. If a single gill of the milk was missing
the monster took a dire revenge upon the nearest village. This was
the unpleasant situation which young Lambton found when he returned
home from the crusades. He was now an altered man. He was no longer
given to fishing and profanity. He felt keenly that by raising the
demon out of the river Wear he had brought woe upon his neighbours,
and he resolved to engage the Worm in single combat. But he learned
that it had already been fought by several knights, and had slain
them, while no wounds received by itself availed anything, since,
if it were cut in twain, the pieces grew together again. The knight
then consulted the oracle, witch or priest, and was told that he could
prevail in the combat on certain conditions. He must provide himself
with special armour, all over which must be large razor-blades. He
must manage to entice the worm into the middle of the river Wear,
in whose waters the combat must take place. And, finally, he must
vow to slay as a sacrifice the first living thing he should meet
after his victory. These conditions having been fulfilled, the knight
entered the stream. The dragon, not having received his milk as usual
that morning, crawled from his hill seeking whom he might devour,
and seeing the knight in the river, went at him. Quickly he coiled
around the armour, but its big razors cut him into many sections;
and these sections could not piece themselves together again because
the current of the river washed them swiftly away.

Now, observe how this dragon was pieced together mythologically. He is
a storm cloud. He begins smaller than a man's hand and swells to huge
dimensions; that characteristic of the howling storm was represented
in the howling wolf Fenris of Norse Mythology, who was a little pet,
a sort of lapdog for the gods at first, but when full grown broke the
chains that tied him to mountains, and was only fettered at last by
the thread finer than cobweb, which was really the sunbeam conquering
winter. Then, when this worm was cut in two, the parts came together
again. This feature of recurrence is especially characteristic of
Hydras. In the Egyptian 'Tale of Setnau,' Ptah-nefer-ka saw the
river-snake twice resume its form after he had killed it with his
sword,--he succeeded the third time by placing sand between the two
parts; and what returning floods taught the ancient scribe remained
to characterise the dragon encountered by Guy of Warwick, which
recovered from every wound by dipping its tail in the well it had
guarded. The Lernean Hydra had nine heads, the Lambton Worm nine
eyes and nine folds, and drank nine cows' milk. His fondness for
the milk of cows connects him straightly with the dragon Vritra,
whom Indra slew because he stole Indra's cows (that is, the good
clouds, whose milk is gentle rain, and do no harm), and shut them up
in a cavern to enjoy their milk himself. That is the oldest Dragon
fable on record, and it is said in the Rig-Veda that beneath Indra's
thunderbolt the monster broke up into pieces, and was washed away in a
current of water. Finally, in being destroyed at last by razor blades,
the dragon is connected with that slain by Ragnar, in whose armour the
sun-darts of Apollo had turned to icicles. In the 'Death-Song of Ragnar
Lodbrach,' preserved by Olaus Wormius, it is said that King Ella of
Northumberland having captured that terror of the North (8th cent.),
ordered him to be thrown into a pit of serpents. His surname, Lodbrach,
or Hair Breeches, had been given because of his method of slaying a
Worm which devastated Gothland, whose king had promised his daughter
to the man who should slay the same. Ragnar dressed himself in hairy
skins, and threw water over the hair, which, freezing, encased him in
an armour of ice. The Worm, unable to bite through this, was impaled by
Ragnar. Another version is that Ragnar killed two serpents which the
King of Gothland had set to guard his daughter, but which had grown
to such size that they terrified the country. It may be observed that
the Lambton story christianises the Ragnar legend, showing that to be
done in atonement for sin which in the other was done for love. The
Cornish legend of St. Petrox has also taken a hint from Ragnar, and
announces the rescue of christians from the serpent-pit in which the
pagan hero perished. The icicles reappear on the slayer of the dragon
of Wantley, represented by long spikes bristling from his armour.

The Knight Lambton, remembering his vow to slay as a sacrifice the
first living thing he might meet after the combat, had arranged that
a dog should be placed where it would attract his eye. But it turned
out that his own father came rushing to him. As he could not kill
his father, he consulted the oracle again to know what would be the
penalty of non-fulfilment of his vow. It was that no representative
of the family should die in his bed for nine generations. The notion
is still found in that neighbourhood that no Earl of Durham has since
then died in his bed. The nine generations have long passed since
any crusading Lambton lived, but several peasants of the district
closed their narrative with, 'Strange to say, no Earl of Durham has
died in his bed!' At the castle I talked with a servant on the estate
while looking at the old statues of the knight, worm, and dairymaid,
all kept there, and he told me he had heard that the late Earl, as
death drew nigh, asked to sit up--insisted--and died in a chair. If
there be any truth in this, it would show that the family itself has
some morbid feeling about the legend which has been so long told them
with pride. The old well from which the little worm emerged a monster
is now much overgrown, but I was told that it was for a long time a
wishing-well, and the pins cast in by rustics may still be seen at
the bottom of it.

Pins are the last offerings at the Worm's Well; 'wishes' its last
prayers; but where go now the coins and the prayers? To propitiate a
power and commute a doom resting upon much the same principles as those
represented in the Lambton legend. A community desolated because one
man is sinful miniatures a world's doom for Adam's sin. The demand of
a human sacrifice is more clear in the Sockburn story, where Conyers
offered up his only son to the Holy Ghost in the parish church before
engaging the Dragon, that being a condition of success prescribed by
the 'Oracle' or 'Sybil.' This claim of the infernal powers represented
by the Worm--many-eyed, all-seeing--cannot be set aside; Lambton's
filial love may resist it only to have it pass as the hereditary doom
of his family, representing an imputed sin. 'For I, the Lord thy God,
am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers on the children
unto the third and fourth generation.'

There are processes of this kind in nature, hereditary evils,
transmitted diseases and disgraces, and afflictions of many
through the offences of one. But a fearful Nemesis follows the
deification and adoration of them. 'How can I be happy in heaven,'
said a tender-hearted lady to her clerical adviser, 'when I must
see others in hell?' 'You will be made to see that it is all for the
best.' 'If I am to be made so heartless, I prefer to go to hell.' This
genuine conversation reports the doom of all deities whose extension
is in dragons. Hell implies a Dragon as its representative and
ruler. Theology may induce the abject and cowardly to subject their
human hearts to the process of induration required for loyalty to such
powers, but in the end it makes atheism the only salvation of brave,
pure, and loving natures. The Dragons' breath has clouded the ancient
heavens and blighted the old gods; but the starry ideals they pursue
in vain. Behemoth has supplied sirloins to many priesthoods for a
long time, but he has at last become too tough even for their teeth,
and they feed him less carefully every year. Nay, he is encountered
now and then by his professional feeders, and has found even in
Westminster Abbey his Guy of Warwick.


            Nor could this desp'rate champion daunt
            A Dun Cow bigger than elephant;
            But he, to prove his courage sterling,
            Cut from her enormous side a sirloin.


The Worms--whether Semitic Leviathan or Aryan Dragon--are nearly
fossilised as to their ancient form. The sacrifice of Jephtha's
daughter to the one, and of young Conyers to the other, found
commutation in the case of man's rescue from Satan by Christ's descent
to Hades, and in the substitution of nine uneasy deaths for the
demanded parricide in the Lambton case; and the most direct 'survival'
of these may be found in any country lad trying to cure his warts by
providing a weed for them to adhere to. Their end in Art was in such
forms as this starveling creature of Callot's (Fig. 32), whose thin,
spectacled rider, tilting at St. Anthony, denotes as well the doom
of all powers, however lofty, whose majesty requires tali auxilio et
istis defensoribus. The Dragon passes and leaves a roar of laughter
behind him, in which even St. Anthony could now join. But Leviathan
and Lambton Worm have combined and merged their life in a Dogma; it
is a Dogma as remorseless and voracious as its prototype, and requires
to be fed with all the milk of human kindness, or it at once begins to
gnaw the foundations of Christendom itself. Christianity rests upon the
past work of the Worm in Paradise, and its present work in Hell. It
makes no real difference whether man's belief in a universe enmeshed
in serpent-coils be expressed in the Hindu's cowering adoration
of the venomous potentate, or the christian's imprecation upon it:
fundamentally it is serpent-worship in each case. Vishnu reposes on
his celestial Serpent; the god of Dogma maintains his government by
support of the infernal Serpent. Fear beheld him appearing in Durham to
vindicate the mass and the Sabbath; but the same fear still sees him
in the fiery world punishing Sabbath-breakers and blasphemers against
his Creator and chief. That fear built every cathedral in Christendom,
and they must crumble with the phantasm evoked for their creation.

The Serpent in itself is a perfect type of all evil in nature. It is
irreconcilable with the reign of a perfectly good and omnipotent man
over the universe. No amount of casuistry can explain its co-existence
with anthropomorphic Love and Wisdom, as all acknowledge when a
parallel casuistry attempts to defend any other god than their own
from deeds that are, humanly considered, evil. It is just as easy to
defend the jealousy and cruelty of Jove, on the ground that his ways
are not as our ways, as it is to defend similar tempers in Jehovah. The
monster sent by one to devour Prometheus is ethically atwin with the
snake created by the other to bite the heel of man.

Man is saved from the superstitious evolution of the venomous Serpent
into a Dragon by recognising its real evolution as seen by the eye
of Science. Science alone can tell the true story of the Serpent,
and justify its place in nature. It forbids man his superstitious
method of making a god in his own image, and his egotistic method
of judging nature according to his private likes and dislikes, his
convenience or inconvenience. Taught by Science man may, with a freedom
the barbarian cannot feel, exterminate the Serpent; with a freedom the
christian cannot know, he may see in that reptile the perfection of
that economy in nature which has ever defended the advancing forms of
life. It judges the good and evil of every form with reference to its
adaptation to its own purposes. Thus Science alone wields the spear
of Ithuriel, and beneath its touch every Dragon shrinks instantly to
its little shape in nature to be dealt with according to what it is.







