CHAPTER IV.

THE WORM.

    An African Serpent-drama in America--The Veiled Serpent--The
    Ark of the Covenant--Aaron's Rod--The Worm--An Episode
    on the Dii Involuti--The Serapes--The Bambino at
    Rome--Serpent-transformations.


On the eve of January 1, 1863,--that historic New Year's Day on
which President Lincoln proclaimed freedom to American slaves,--I was
present at a Watchnight held by negroes in a city of that country. In
opening the meeting the preacher said,--though in words whose eloquent
shortcomings I cannot reproduce:--'Brethren and sisters, the President
of the United States has promised that, if the Confederates do not
lay down their arms, he will free all their slaves to-morrow. They
have not laid down their arms. To-morrow will be the day of liberty
to the oppressed. But we all know that evil powers are around the
President. While we sit here they are trying to make him break his
word. But we have come together to watch, and see that he does not
break his word. Brethren, the bad influences around the President
to-night are stronger than any Copperheads. [223] The Old Serpent
is abroad to-night, with all his emissaries, in great power. His
wrath is great, because he knows his hour is near. He will be in this
church this evening. As midnight comes on we shall hear his rage. But,
brethren and sisters, don't be alarmed. Our prayers will prevail. His
head will be bruised. His back will be broken. He will go raging to
hell, and God Almighty's New Year will make the United States a true
land of freedom.'

The sensation caused among the hundreds of negroes present by these
words was profound; they were frequently interrupted by cries of
'Glory!' and there were tears of joy. But the scene and excitement
which followed were indescribable. A few moments before midnight
the congregation were requested to kneel, which they did, and prayer
succeeded prayer with increasing fervour. Presently a loud, prolonged
hiss was heard. There were cries--'He's here! he's here!' Then came a
volley of hisses; they seemed to proceed from every part of the room,
hisses so entirely like those of huge serpents that the strongest
nerves were shaken; above them rose the preacher's prayer that
had become a wild incantation, and ecstatic ejaculations became so
universal that it was a marvel what voices were left to make the
hisses. Finally, from a neighbouring steeple the twelve strokes
of midnight sounded on the frosty air, and immediately the hisses
diminished, and presently died away altogether, and the New Year
that brought freedom to four millions of slaves was ushered in by
the jubilant chorus of all present singing a hymn of victory.

Far had come those hisses and that song of victory, terminating the
dragon-drama of America. In them was the burden of Ezekiel: 'Son of
man, set thy face against Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and prophesy against
him and against all Egypt, saying, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah:
Behold I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon
that lieth in the midst of the rivers ... I will put a hook in thy
jaws.' In them was the burden of Isaiah: 'In that day Jehovah with
his sore and great and strong sword shall punish Leviathan the
piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked serpent: he shall
slay the dragon that is in the sea.' In it was the cry of Zophar:
'His meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps within
him. He hath swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again:
God shall cast them out of his belly.' And these Hebrew utterances,
again, were but the distant echoes of far earlier voices of those
African slaves still seen pictured with their chains on the ruined
walls of Egypt,--voices that gathered courage at last to announce the
never-ending struggle of man with Oppression, as that combat between
god and serpent which never had a nobler event than when the dying
hiss of Slavery was heard in America, and the victorious Sun rose
upon a New World of free and equal men.

The Serpent thus exalted in America to a type of oppression is very
different from any snake that may this day be found worshipped as a
deity by the African in his native land. The swarthy snake-worshipper
in his migration took his god along with him in his chest or
basket--at once ark and altar--and in that hiding-place it underwent
transformations. He emerged as the protean emblem of both good and
evil. In a mythologic sense the serpent certainly held its tail in its
mouth. No civilisation has reached the end of its typical supremacy.

Concerning the accompanying Eleusinian form (Fig. 24), Calmet
says:--'The mysterious trunk, coffer, or basket, may be justly
reckoned among the most remarkable and sacred instruments of worship,
which formed part of the processional ceremonies in the heathen
world. This was held so sacred that it was not publicly exposed to
view, or publicly opened, but was reserved for the inspection of the
initiated, the fully initiated only. Completely to explain this symbol
would require a dissertation; and, indeed, it has been considered,
more or less, by those who have written on the nature of the Ark of
the testimony among the Hebrews. Declining the inquiry at present, we
merely call the attention of the reader to what this mystical coffer
was supposed to contain--a serpent!' The French Benedictine who wrote
this passage, though his usual candour shames the casuistry of our own
time, found it necessary to conceal the Hebrew Ark: it was precisely
so that the occupant of the Ark was originally concealed; and though
St. John exorcised it from the Chalice its genius lingers in the Pyx,
before whose Host 'lifted up' the eyes of worshippers are lowered.

The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews (chap. ix.), describing
the Tabernacle, says: 'After the second veil, the tabernacle which
is called the Holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the
ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was
the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the
tables of the covenant.' But this rod of Aaron, which, by budding,
had swallowed up all rival pretensions to the tribal priesthood,
was the same rod which had been changed to a serpent, and swallowed
up the rod-serpents of the sorcerers in Pharaoh's presence. So soft
and subtle is 'the way of a serpent upon a rock!'

This veiling of the Serpent, significant of a great deal, is
characteristic even of the words used to name it. Of these I have
selected one to head this chapter, because it is one of the innumerable
veils which shielded this reptile's transformation from a particular
external danger to a demonic type. This general description of things
that wind about or turn (vermes, traced by some to the Sanskrit
root hvar, 'curved'), gradually came into use to express the demon
serpents. Dante and Milton call Satan a worm. No doubt among the two
hundred names for the Serpent, said to be mentioned in an Arabic work,
we should find parallels to this old adaptation of the word 'worm.' In
countries--as Germany and England--where no large serpents are found,
the popular imagination could not be impressed by merely saying that
Siegfried or Lambton had slain a snake. The tortuous character of
the snake was preserved, but, by that unconscious dexterity which so
often appears in the making of myths, it was expanded so as to include
a power of supernatural transformation. The Lambton worm comes out of
the well very small, but it afterwards coils in nine huge folds around
its hill. The hag-ridden daughter of the King of Northumberland, who


                  crept into a hole a worm
            And out stept a fair ladye,


did but follow the legendary rule of the demonic serpent tribe.

Why was the Serpent slipped into the Ark or coffer and hid behind
veils? To answer this will require here an episode.

In the Etruscan theology and ceremonial the supreme power was lodged
with certain deities that were never seen. They were called the Dii
Involuti, the veiled gods. Not even the priests ever looked upon
them. When any dire calamity occurred, it was said these mysterious
deities had spoken their word in the council of the gods,--a word
always final and fatal.

There have been fine theories on the subject, and the Etruscans
have been complimented for having high transcendental views of the
invisible nature of the Divine Being. But a more prosaic theory is
probably true. These gods were wrapped up because they were not fit to
be seen. The rude carvings of some savage tribe, they had been seen and
adored at first: temples had been built for them, and their priesthood
had grown powerful; but as art advanced and beautiful statues arose,
these rude designs could not bear the contrast, and the only way of
preserving reverence for them, and the institutions grown up around
them, was to hide them out of sight altogether. Then it could be said
they were so divinely beautiful that the senses would be overpowered
by them.

There have been many veiled deities, and though their veils have
been rationalised, they are easily pierced. The inscription on the
temple of Isis at Sais was: 'I am that which has been, which is,
and which shall be, and no one has yet lifted the veil that hides
me.' Isis at this time had probably become a negro Madonna, like
that still worshipped in Spain as holiest of images, and called by
the same title, 'Our Immaculate Lady.' As the fair race and the dark
mingled in Egypt, the primitive Nubian complexion and features of
Isis could not inspire such reverence as more anciently, and before
her also a curtain was hung. The Ark of Moses carried this veil
into the wilderness, and concealed objects not attractive to look
at--probably two scrawled stones, some bones said to be those of
Joseph, a pot of so-called manna, and the staff said to have once
been a serpent and afterwards blossomed. Fashioned by a rude tribe,
the Ark was a fit thing to hide, and hidden it has been to this
day. When the veil of the Temple was rent,--allegorically at the
death of Christ, actually by Titus,--nothing of the kind was found;
and it would seem that the Jews must long have been worshipping before
a veil with emptiness behind it. Paul discovered that the veil said
to have covered the face of Moses when he descended from Sinai was a
myth; it meant that the people should not see to the end of what was
nevertheless transient. 'Their minds were blinded; for unto this day,
when Moses is read, that veil is on their heart.'

Kircher says the Seraphs of Egypt were images without any eminency of
limbs, rolled as it were in swaddling clothes, partly made of stone,
partly of metal, wood, or shell. Similar images, he says, were called
by the Romans 'secret gods.' As an age of scepticism advanced, it was
sometimes necessary that these 'involuti' should be slightly revealed,
lest it should be said there was no god there at all.  Such is the
case with the famous bambino of Aracoeli Church in Rome. This effigy,
said to have been carved by a pilgrim out of a tree on the Mount of
Olives, and painted by St. Luke while the pilgrim was sleeping, is now
kept in its ark, and visitors are allowed to see part of its painted
face. When the writer of this requested a sight of the whole form, or
of the head at any rate, the exhibiting priest was astounded at the
suggestion. No doubt he was right: the only wonder is that the face
is not hid also, for a more ingeniously ugly thing than the flat,
blackened, and rouged visage of the bambino it were difficult to
conceive. But it wears a very cunning veil nevertheless. The face is
set in marvellous brilliants, but these are of less effect in hiding
its ugliness than the vesture of mythology around it. The adjacent
walls are covered with pictures of the miracles it has performed,
and which have attracted to it such faith that it is said at one
time to have received more medical fees than all the physicians in
Rome together. Priests have discovered that a veil over the mind
is thicker than a veil on the god. Such is the popular veneration
for the bambino, that, in 1849, the Republicans thought it politic
to present the monks with the Pope's state coach to carry the idol
about. In the end it was proved that the Pope was securely seated
beside the bambino, and he presently emerged from behind his veil also.

There came, then, a period when the Serpent crept behind the veil,
or lid of the ark, or into a chalice,--a very small worm, but yet
able to gnaw the staff of Solomon. No wisdom could be permitted to
rise above fear itself, though its special sources might be here and
there reduced or vanquished. The snake had taught man at last its arts
of war. Man had summoned to his aid the pig, and the ibis made havoc
among the reptiles; and some of that terror which is the parent of
that kind of devotion passed away. When it next emerged, it was in
twofold guise,--as Agathodemon and Kakodemon,--but in both forms as
the familiar of some higher being. It was as the genius of Minerva,
of Esculapius, of St. Euphemia. We have already seen him (Fig. 13)
as the genius of the Eleans, the Sosopolis, where also we see the
Serpent hurrying into his cavern, leaving the mother and child to
be worshipped in the temple of Lucina. In Christian symbolism the
Seraphim--'burning (sáraf) serpents'--veiled their faces and forms
beneath their huge wings, crossed in front, and so have been able to
become 'the eminent,' and to join in the praises of modern communities
at being delivered from just such imaginary fiery worms as themselves!







