PART III

FORM

_There is a beauty of form._

§ 19. The most remarkable and characteristic problem of aesthetics
is that of beauty of form. Where there is a sensuous delight, like
that of colour, and the impression of the object is in its elements
agreeable, we have to look no farther for an explanation of the
charm we feel. Where there is expression, and an object indifferent
to the senses is associated with other ideas which are interesting,
the problem, although complex and varied, is in principle
comparatively plain. But there is an intermediate effect which is
more mysterious, and more specifically an effect of beauty. It is
found where sensible elements, by themselves indifferent, are so
united as to please in combination. There is something unexpected
in this phenomenon, so much so that those who cannot conceive its
explanation often reassure themselves by denying its existence. To
reduce beauty of form, however, to beauty of elements would not
be easy, because the creation and variation of effect, by changing
the relation of the simplest lines, offers too easy an experiment in
refutation. And it would, moreover, follow to the comfort of the
vulgar that all marble houses are equally beautiful.

To attribute beauty of form to expression is more plausible. If I
take the meaningless short lines in the figure and arrange them in
the given ways, intended to represent the human face, there appear
at once notably different aesthetic values.

[Illustration of long and short lines]

[Illustration of lines arranged into three facial profiles]

Two of the forms are differently grotesque and one approximately
beautiful. Now these effects are due to the expression of the lines;
not only because they make one think of fair or ugly faces, but
because, it may be said, these faces would in reality be fair or ugly
according to their expression, according to the vital and moral
associations of the different types.

Nevertheless, beauty of form cannot be reduced to expression
without denying the existence of immediate aesthetic values
altogether, and reducing them all to suggestions of moral good. For
if the object expressed by the form, and from which the form
derives its value, had itself beauty of form, we should not advance;
we must come somewhere to the point where the expression is of
something else than beauty; and this something else would of
course be some practical or moral good. Moralists are fond of such
an interpretation, and it is a very interesting one. It puts beauty in
the same relation to morals in which morals stand to pleasure and
pain; both would be intuitions, qualitatively new, but with the same
materials; they would be new perspectives of the same object.

But this theory is actually inadmissible. Innumerable aesthetic
effects, indeed all specific and unmixed ones, are direct
transmutations of pleasures and pains; they express nothing
extrinsic to themselves, much less moral excellences. The detached
lines of our figure signify nothing, but they are not absolutely
uninteresting; the straight line is the simplest and not the least
beautiful of forms. To say that it owes its interest to the thought of
the economy of travelling over the shortest road, or of other
practical advantages, would betray a feeble hold on psychological
reality. The impression of a straight line differs in a certain almost
emotional way from that of a curve, as those of various curves do
from one another. The quality of the sensation is different, like that
of various colours or sounds. To attribute the character of these
forms to association would be like explaining sea-sickness as the
fear of shipwreck. There is a distinct quality and value, often a
singular beauty, in these simple lines that is intrinsic in the
perception of their form.

It would be pedantic, perhaps, anywhere but in a treatise on
aesthetics, to deny to this quality the name of expression; we might
commonly say that the circle has one expression and the oval
another. But what does the circle express except circularity, or the
oval except the nature of the ellipse? Such expression _expresses_
nothing; it is really impression. There may be analogy between it
and other impressions; we may admit that odours, colours, and
sounds correspond, and may mutually suggest one another; but this
analogy is a superadded charm felt by very sensitive natures, and
does not constitute the original value of the sensations. The
common emotional tinge is rather what enables them to suggest
one another, and what makes them comparable. Their expression,
such as it is, is therefore due to the accident that both feelings have
a kindred quality; and this quality has its effectiveness for sense
independently of the perception of its recurrence in a different
sphere. We shall accordingly take care to reserve the term
"expression" for the suggestion of some other and assignable
object, from which the expressive thing borrows an interest; and
we shall speak of the intrinsic quality of forms as their emotional
tinge or specific value.

_Physiology of the perception of form._

§ 20. The charm of a line evidently consists in the relation of its
parts; in order to understand this interest in spatial relations, we
must inquire how they are perceived.[4] If the eye had its sensitive
surface, the retina, exposed directly to the light, we could never
have a perception of form any more than in the nose or ear, which
also perceive the object through media. When the perception is not
through a medium, but direct, as in the case of the skin, we might
get a notion of form, because each point of the object would excite
a single point in the skin, and as the sensations in different parts of
the skin differ in quality, a manifold of sense, in which
discrimination of parts would be involved, could be presented to
the mind. But when the perception is through a medium, a
difficulty arises.

Any point, a, in the object will send a ray to every point, _a', b',
c',_ of the sensitive surface; every point of the retina will therefore
be similarly affected, since each will receive rays from every part
of the object.

[Illustration of light rays]

If all the rays from one point of the object, a, are to be concentrated
on a corresponding point of the retina, a which would then
become the exclusive representative of a, we must have one or
more refracting surfaces interposed, to gather the rays together.
The presence of the lens, with its various coatings, has made
representation of point by point possible for the eye. The absence
of such an instrument makes the same sort of representation
impossible to other senses, such as the nose, which does not smell
in one place the effluvia of one part of the environment and in
another place the effluvia of another, but smells indiscriminately
the combination of all. Eyes without lenses like those possessed by
some animals, undoubtedly give only a consciousness of diffused
light, without the possibility of boundaries or divisions in the field
of view. The abstraction of colour from form is therefore by no
means an artificial one, since, by a simplification of the organ of
sense, one may be perceived without the other.

But even if the lens enables the eye to receive a distributed image
of the object, the manifold which consciousness would perceive
would not be necessarily a manifold of parts juxtaposed in space.
Bach point of the retina might send to the brain a detached
impression; these might be comparable, but not necessarily in their
spatial position. The ear sends to the brain such a manifold of
impressions (since the ear also has an apparatus by which various
external differences in rapidity of vibrations are distributed into
different parts of the organ). But this discriminated manifold is a
manifold of pitches, not of positions. How does it happen that the
manifold conveyed by the optic nerve appears in consciousness as
spatial, and that the relation between its elements is seen as a
relation of position?

An answer to this question has been suggested by various
psychologists. The eye, by an instinctive movement, turns so as to
bring every impression upon that point of the retina, near its centre,
which has the acutest sensibility. A series of muscular sensations
therefore always follows upon the conspicuous excitement of any
outlying point. The object, as the eye brings it to the centre of
vision, excites a series of points upon the retina; and the local sign,
or peculiar quality of sensation, proper to each of these spots, is
associated with that series of muscular feelings involved in turning
the eyes. These feelings henceforth revive together; it is enough
that a point in the periphery of the retina should receive a ray, for
the mind to feel, together with that impression, the suggestion of a
motion, and of the line of points that lies between the excited point
and the centre of vision. A network of associations is thus formed,
whereby the sensation of each retinal point is connected with all
the others in a manner which is that of points in a plane. Every
visible point becomes thus a point in a field, and has a felt
radiation of lines of possible motion about it. Our notion of visual
space has this origin, since the manifold of retinal impressions is
distributed in a manner which serves as the type and exemplar of
what we mean by a surface.

_Values of geometrical figures._

§ 21. The reader will perhaps pardon these details and the strain
they put on his attention, when he perceives how much they help
us to understand the value of forms. The sense, then, of the
position of any point consists in the tensions in the eye, that not
only tends to bring that point to the centre of vision, but feels the
suggestion of all the other points which are related to the given one
in the web of visual experience. The definition of space as the
possibility of motion is therefore an accurate and significant one,
since the most direct and native perception of space we can have is
the awakening of many tendencies to move our organs.

For example, if a circle is presented, the eye will fall upon its
centre, as to the centre of gravity, as it were, of the balanced
attractions of all the points; and there will be, in that position, an
indifference and sameness of sensation, in whatever direction some
accident moves the eye, that accounts very well for the emotional
quality of the circle. It is a form which, although beautiful in its
purity and simplicity, and wonderful in its continuity, lacks any
stimulating quality, and is often ugly in the arts, especially when
found in vertical surfaces where it is not always seen in perspective.
For horizontal surfaces it is better because it is there always an
ellipse to vision, and the ellipse has a less dull and stupefying
effect. The eye can move easily, organize and subordinate its parts,
and its relations to the environment are not similar in all directions.
Small circles, like buttons, are not in the same danger of becoming
ugly, because the eye considers them as points, and they diversify
and help to divide surfaces, without appearing as surfaces
themselves.

The straight line offers a curious object for analysis. It is not for
the eye a very easy form to grasp. We bend it or we leave it.
Unless it passes through the centre of vision, it is obviously a
tangent to the points which have analogous relations to that centre.
The local signs or tensions of the points in such a tangent vary in
an unseizable progression; there is violence in keeping to it, and
the effect is forced. This makes the dry and stiff quality of any long
straight line, which the skilful Greeks avoided by the curves of
their columns and entablatures, and the less economical barbarians
by a profusion of interruptions and ornaments.

The straight line, when made the direct object of attention, is, of
course, followed by the eye and not seen by the outlying parts of
the retina in one eccentric position. The same explanation is good
for this more common case, since the consciousness that the eye
travels in a straight line consists in the surviving sense of the
previous position, and in the manner in which the tensions of these
various positions overlap. If the tensions change from moment to
moment entirely, we have a broken, a fragmentary effect, as that of
zigzag, where all is dropping and picking up again of associated
motions; in the straight line, much prolonged, we have a gradual
and inexorable rending of these tendencies to associated
movements.

In the curves we call flowing and graceful, we have, on the
contrary, a more natural and rhythmical set of movements in the
optic muscles; and certain points in the various gyrations make
rhymes and assonances, as it were, to the eye that reaches them.
We find ourselves at every turn reawakening, with a variation, the
sense of the previous position. It is easy to understand by analogy
with the superficially observed conditions of pleasure, that such
rhythms and harmonies should be delightful. The deeper question
of the physical basis of pleasure we have not intended to discuss.
Suffice it that measure, in quantity, in intensity, and in time, must
involve that physiological process, whatever it may be, the
consciousness of which is pleasure.

_Symmetry._

§ 22. An important exemplification of these physiological
principles is found in the charm of symmetry. When for any reason
the eye is to be habitually directed to a single point, as to the
opening of a gate or window, to an altar, a throne, a stage, or a
fireplace, there will be violence and distraction caused by the
tendency to look aside in the recurring necessity of looking
forward, if the object is not so arranged that the tensions of eye are
balanced, and the centre of gravity of vision lies in the point which
one is obliged to keep in sight. In all such objects we therefore
require bilateral symmetry. The necessity of vertical symmetry is
not felt because the eyes and head do not so readily survey objects
from top to bottom as from side to side. The inequality of the upper
and lower parts does not generate the same tendency to motion, the
same restlessness, as does the inequality of the right and left sides
of an object in front of us. The comfort and economy that comes
from muscular balance in the eye, is therefore in some cases the
source of the value of symmetry.[5]

In other cases symmetry appeals to us through the charm of
recognition and rhythm. When the eye runs over a facade, and
finds the objects that attract it at equal intervals, an expectation,
like the anticipation of an inevitable note or requisite word, arises
in the mind, and its non-satisfaction involves a shock. This shock,
if caused by the emphatic emergence of an interesting object, gives
the effect of the picturesque; but when it comes with no
compensation, it gives us the feeling of ugliness and imperfection
-- the defect which symmetry avoids. This kind of symmetry is
accordingly in itself a negative merit, but often the condition of the
greatest of all merits, -- the permanent power to please. It
contributes to that completeness which delights without
stimulating, and to which our jaded senses return gladly, after all
sorts of extravagances, as to a kind of domestic peace. The
inwardness and solidity of this quiet beauty comes from the
intrinsic character of the pleasure which makes it up. It is no
adventitious charm; but the eye in its continual passage over the
object finds always the same response, the same adequacy; and the
very process of perception is made delightful by the object's fitness
to be perceived. The parts, thus coalescing, form a single object,
the unity and simplicity of which are based upon the rhythm and
correspondence of its elements.

Symmetry is here what metaphysicians call a principle of
individuation. By the emphasis which it lays upon the recurring
elements, it cuts up the field into determinate units; all that lies
between the beats is one interval, one individual. If there were no
recurrent impressions, no corresponding points, the field of
perception would remain a fluid continuum, without defined and
recognizable divisions. The outlines of most things are
symmetrical because we choose what symmetrical lines we find to
be the boundaries of objects. Their symmetry is the condition of
their unity, and their unity of their individuality and separate
existence.

Experience, to be sure, can teach us to regard unsymmetrical
objects as wholes, because their elements move and change
together in nature; but this is a principle of individuation, _a
posteriori,_ founded on the association of recognized elements.
These elements, to be recognized and seen to go together and form
one thing, must first be somehow discriminated; and the symmetry,
either of their parts, or of their position as wholes, may enable us
to fix their boundaries and to observe their number. The category
of unity, which we are so constantly imposing upon nature and its
parts, has symmetry, then, for one of its instruments, for one of its
bases of application.

If symmetry, then, is a principle of individuation and helps us to
distinguish objects, we cannot wonder that it helps us to enjoy the
perception. For our intelligence loves to perceive; water is
not more grateful to a parched throat than a principle of
comprehension to a confused understanding. Symmetry clarifies,
and we all know that light is sweet. At the same time, we can see
why there are limits to the value of symmetry. In objects, for
instance, that are too small or too diffused for composition,
symmetry has no value. In an avenue symmetry is stately and
impressive, but in a large park, or in the plan of a city, or the side
wall of a gallery it produces monotony in the various views rather
than unity in any one of them. Greek temples, never being very
large, were symmetrical on all their facades; Gothic churches were
generally designed to be symmetrical only in the west front, and in
the transepts, while the side elevation as a whole was eccentric.
This was probably an accident, due to the demands of the interior
arrangement; but it was a fortunate one, as we may see by
contrasting its effect with that of our stations, exhibition buildings,
and other vast structures, where symmetry is generally introduced
even in the most extensive facades which, being too much
prolonged for their height, cannot be treated as units. The eye is
not able to take them in at a glance, and does not get the effect of
repose from the balance of the extremes, while the mechanical
sameness of the sections, surveyed in succession, makes the
impression of an unmeaning poverty of resource.

Symmetry thus loses its value when it cannot, on account of the
size of the object, contribute to the unity of our perception. The
synthesis which it facilitates must be instantaneous. If the
comprehension by which we unify our object is discursive, as, for
instance, in conceiving the arrangement and numbering of the
streets of New York, or the plan of the Escurial, the advantage of
symmetry is an intellectual one; we can better imagine the relations
of the parts, and draw a map of the whole in the fancy; but there is
no advantage to direct perception, and therefore no added beauty.
Symmetry is superfluous in those objects. Similarly animal and
vegetable forms gain nothing by being symmetrically displayed, if
the sense of their life and motion is to be given. When, however,
these forms are used for mere decoration, not for the expression of
their own vitality, then symmetry is again required to accentuate
their unity and organization. This justifies the habit of
conventionalizing natural forms, and the tendency of some kinds of
hieratic art, like the Byzantine or Egyptian, to affect a rigid
symmetry of posture. We can thereby increase the unity and force
of the image without suggesting that individual life and mobility,
which would interfere with the religious function of the object, as
the symbol and embodiment of an impersonal faith.

_Form the unity of a manifold._

§ 23. Symmetry is evidently a kind of unity in variety, where a
whole is determined by the rhythmic repetition of similars. We
have seen that it has a value where it is an aid to unification. Unity
would thus appear to be the virtue of forms; but a moment's
reflection will show us that unity cannot be absolute and be a form;
a form is an aggregation, it must have elements, and the manner in
which the elements are combined constitutes the character of the
form. A perfectly simple perception, in which there was no
consciousness of the distinction and relation of parts, would not be
a perception of form; it would be a sensation. Physiologically these
sensations may be aggregates and their values, as in the case of
musical tones, may differ according to the manner in which certain
elements, beats, vibrations, nervous processes, or what not, are
combined; but for consciousness the result is simple, and the value
is the pleasantness of a datum and not of a process. Form, therefore,
does not appeal to the unattentive; they get from objects only a
vague sensation which may in them awaken extrinsic associations;
they do not stop to survey the parts or to appreciate their relation,
and consequently are insensible to the various charms of various
unifications; they can find in objects only the value of material or
of function, not that of form.

Beauty of form, however, is what specifically appeals to an
aesthetic nature; it is equally removed from the crudity of formless
stimulation and from the emotional looseness of reverie and
discursive thought. The indulgence in sentiment and suggestion, of
which our time is fond, to the sacrifice of formal beauty, marks an
absence of cultivation as real, if not as confessed, as that of the
barbarian who revels in gorgeous confusion.

The synthesis, then, which constitutes form is an activity of the
mind; the unity arises consciously, and is an insight into the
relation of sensible elements separately perceived. It differs from
sensation in the consciousness of the synthesis, and from
expression in the homogeneity of the elements, and in their
common presence to sense.

The variety of forms depends upon the character of the elements
and on the variety of possible methods of unification. The elements
may be all alike, and their only diversity be numerical. Their unity
will then be merely the sense of their uniformity.[6] Or they may
differ in kind, but so as to compel the mind to no particular order
in their unification. Or they may finally be so constituted that they
suggest inevitably the scheme of their unity; in this case there is
organization in the object, and the synthesis of its parts is one and
pre-determinate. We shall discuss these various forms in
succession, pointing out the effects proper to each.

_Multiplicity in uniformity._

§ 24. The radical and typical case of the first kind of unity in
variety is found in the perception of extension itself. This
perception, if we look to its origin, may turn out to be primitive; no
doubt the feeling of "crude extensity" is an original sensation;
every inference, association, and distinction is a thing that looms
up suddenly before the mind, and the nature and actuality of which
is a datum of what -- to indicate its irresistible immediacy and
indescribability -- we may well call sense. Forms are seen, and if
we think of the origin of the perception, we may well call this
vision a sensation. The distinction between a sensation of form,
however, and one which is formless, regards the content and
character, not the genesis of the perception. A distinction and
association, or an inference, is a direct experience, a sensible fact;
but it is the experience of a process, of a motion between two terms,
and a consciousness of their coexistence and distinction; it is a
feeling of relation. Now the sense of space is a feeling of this kind;
the essence of it is the realization of a variety of directions and of
possible motions, by which the relation of point to point is vaguely
but inevitably given. The perception of extension is therefore a
perception of form, although of the most rudimentary kind. It is
merely _Auseinandersein,_ and we might call it the _materia
prima_ of form, were it not capable of existing without further
determination. For we can have the sense of space without the
sense of boundaries; indeed, this intuition is what tempts us to
declare space infinite. Space would have to consist of a finite
number of juxtaposed blocks, if our experience of extension
carried with it essentially the realization of limits.

The aesthetic effect of extensiveness is also entirely different from
that of particular shapes. Some things appeal to us by their surfaces,
others by the lines that limit those surfaces. And this effect of
surface is not necessarily an effect of material or colour; the
evenness, monotony, and vastness of a great curtain of colour
produce an effect which is that of the extreme of uniformity in the
extreme of multiplicity; the eye wanders over a fluid infinity of
unrecognizable positions, and the sense of their numberlessness
and continuity is precisely the source of the emotion of extent. The
emotion is primary and has undoubtedly a physiological ground,
while the idea of size is secondary and involves associations and
inferences. A small photograph of St. Peter's gives the idea of size;
as does a distant view of the same object. But this is of course
dependent on our realization of the distance, or of the scale of the
representation. The value of size becomes immediate only when
we are at close quarters with the object; then the surfaces really
subtend a large angle in the field of vision, and the sense of
vastness establishes its standard, which can afterwards be applied
to other objects by analogy and contrast. There is also, to be sure, a
moral and practical import in the known size of objects, which, by
association, determines their dignity; but the pure sense of
extension, based upon the attack of the object upon the
apperceptive resources of the eye, is the truly aesthetic value which
it concerns us to point out here, as the most rudimentary example
of form.

Although the effect of extension is not that of material, the two are
best seen in conjunction. Material must appear in some form; but
when its beauty is to be made prominent, it is well that this form
should attract attention as little as possible to itself. Now, of all
forms, absolute uniformity in extension is the simplest and most
allied to the material; it gives the latter only just enough form to
make it real and perceptible. Very rich and beautiful materials
therefore do well to assume this form. You will spoil the beauty
you have by superimposing another; as if you make a statue of
gold, or flute a jasper column, or bedeck a velvet cloak. The beauty
of stuffs appears when they are plain. Even stone gives its specific
quality best in great unbroken spaces of wall; the simplicity of the
form emphasizes the substance. And again, the effect of extensity
is never long satisfactory unless it is superinduced upon some
material beauty; the dignity of great hangings would suffer if they
were not of damask, but of cotton, and the vast smoothness of the
sky would grow oppressive if it were not of so tender a blue.

_Example of the stars._

§ 25. Another beauty of the sky -- the stars -- offers so striking and
fascinating an illustration of the effect of multiplicity in uniformity,
that I am tempted to analyze it at some length. To most people, I
fancy, the stars are beautiful; but if you asked why, they would be
at a loss to reply, until they remembered what they had heard about
astronomy, and the great size and distance and possible habitation
of those orbs. The vague and illusive ideas thus aroused fall in so
well with the dumb emotion we were already feeling, that we
attribute this emotion to those ideas, and persuade ourselves that
the power of the starry heavens lies in the suggestion of
astronomical facts.

The idea of the insignificance of our earth and of the
incomprehensible multiplicity of worlds is indeed immensely
impressive; it may even be intensely disagreeable. There is
something baffling about infinity; in its presence the sense of finite
humility can never wholly banish the rebellious suspicion that we
are being deluded. Our mathematical imagination is put on the rack
by an attempted conception that has all the anguish of a nightmare
and probably, could we but awake, all its laughable absurdity. But
the obsession of this dream is an intellectual puzzle, not an
aesthetic delight. It is not essential to our admiration. Before the
days of Kepler the heavens declared the glory of God; and we
needed no calculation of stellar distances, no fancies about a
plurality of worlds, no image of infinite spaces, to make the stars
sublime.

Had we been taught to believe that the stars governed our fortunes,
and were we reminded of fate whenever we looked at them, we
should similarly tend to imagine that this belief was the source of
their sublimity; and, if the superstition were dispelled, we should
think the interest gone from the apparition. But experience would
soon undeceive us, and prove to us that the sensuous character of
the object was sublime in itself. Indeed, on account of that intrinsic
sublimity the sky can be fitly chosen as a symbol for a sublime
conception; the common quality in both makes each suggest the
other. For that reason, too, the parable of the natal stars governing
our lives is such a natural one to express our subjection to
circumstances, and can be transformed by the stupidity of disciples
into a literal tenet. In the same way, the kinship of the emotion
produced by the stars with the emotion proper to certain religious
moments makes the stars seem a religious object. They become,
like impressive music, a stimulus to worship. But fortunately there
are experiences which remain untouched by theory, and which
maintain the mutual intelligence of men through the estrangements
wrought by intellectual and religious systems. When the
superstructures crumble, the common foundation of human
sentience and imagination is exposed beneath.

The intellectual suggestion of the infinity of nature can, moreover,
be awakened by other experiences which are by no means sublime.
A heap of sand will involve infinity as surely as a universe of suns
and planets. Any object is infinitely divisible and, when we press
the thought, can contain as many worlds with as many winged
monsters and ideal republics as can the satellites of Sirius. But the
infinitesimal does not move us aesthetically; it can only awaken an
amused curiosity. The difference cannot lie in the import of the
idea, which is objectively the same in both cases. It lies in the
different immediate effect of the crude images which give us the
type and meaning of each; the crude image that underlies the idea
of the infinitesimal is the dot, the poorest and most uninteresting of
impressions; while the crude image that underlies the idea of
infinity is space, multiplicity in uniformity, and this, as we have
seen, has a powerful effect on account of the breadth, volume, and
omnipresence of the stimulation. Every point in the retina is evenly
excited, and the local signs of all are simultaneously felt. This
equable tension, this balance and elasticity in the very absence of
fixity, give the vague but powerful feeling that we wish to describe.
Did not the infinite, by this initial assault upon our senses, awe us
and overwhelm us, as solemn music might, the idea of it would be
abstract and moral like that of the infinitesimal, and nothing but an
amusing curiosity.

Nothing is objectively impressive; things are impressive only when
they succeed in touching the sensibility of the observer, by finding
the avenues to his brain and heart. The idea that the universe is a
multitude of minute spheres circling, like specks of dust, in a dark
and boundless void, might leave us cold and indifferent, if not
bored and depressed, were it not that we identify this hypothetical
scheme with the visible splendour, the poignant intensity, and the
baffling number of the stars. So far is the object from giving value
to the impression, that it is here, as it must always ultimately be,
the impression that gives value to the object. For all worth leads us
back to actual feeling somewhere, or else evaporates into nothing
-- into a word and a superstition.

Now, the starry heavens are very happily designed to intensify the
sensations on which their beauties must rest. In the first place, the
continuum of space is broken into points, numerous enough to give
the utmost idea of multiplicity and yet so distinct and vivid that it
is impossible not to remain aware of their individuality. The
variety of local signs, without becoming organized into forms,
remains prominent and irreducible. This makes the object infinitely
more exciting than a plane surface would be. In the second place,
the sensuous contrast of the dark background, -- blacker the clearer
the night and the more stars we can see, -- with the palpitating fire
of the stars themselves, could not be exceeded by any possible
device. This material beauty adds incalculably, as we have already
pointed out, to the inwardness and sublimity of the effect. To
realize the great importance of these two elements, we need but to
conceive their absence, and observe the change in the dignity of
the result.

Fancy a map of the heavens and every star plotted upon it, even
those invisible to the naked eye: why would this object, as full of
scientific suggestion surely as the reality, leave us so
comparatively cold? Quite indifferent it might not leave us, for I
have myself watched stellar photographs with almost inexhaustible
wonder. The sense of multiplicity is naturally in no way
diminished by the representation; but the poignancy of the
sensation, the life of the light, are gone; and with the dulled
impression the keenness of the emotion disappears. Or imagine the
stars, undiminished in number, without losing any of their
astronomical significance and divine immutability, marshalled in
geometrical patterns; say in a Latin cross, with the words _In hoc
signo vinces_ in a scroll around them. The beauty of the
illumination would be perhaps increased, and its import, practical,
religious, and cosmic, would surely be a little plainer; but where
would be the sublimity of the spectacle? Irretrievably lost: and lost
because the form of the object would no longer tantalize us with its
sheer multiplicity, and with the consequent overpowering sense of
suspense and awe.

In a word, the infinity which moves us is the sense of multiplicity
in uniformity. Accordingly things which have enough multiplicity,
as the lights of a city seen across water, have an effect similar to
that of the stars, if less intense; whereas a star, if alone, because the
multiplicity is lacking, makes a wholly different impression. The
single star is tender, beautiful, and mild; we can compare it to the
humblest and sweetest of things:

     A violet by a mossy stone
     Half hidden from the eye,
     Fair as _a star when only one
     Is shining in the sky._

It is, not only in fact but in nature, an attendant on the moon,
associated with the moon, if we may be so prosaic here, not only
by contiguity but also by similarity.

     Fairer than Phoebe's sapphire-regioned star
     Or vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky.

The same poet can say elsewhere of a passionate lover:

          He arose
     Ethereal, flushed, and like a throbbing star,
     Amid the sapphire heaven's deep repose.

How opposite is all this from the cold glitter, the cruel and
mysterious sublimity of the stars when they are many! With these
we have no Sapphic associations; they make us think rather of
Kant who could hit on nothing else to compare with his categorical
imperative, perhaps because he found in both the same baffling
incomprehensibility and the same fierce actuality. Such ultimate
feelings are sensations of physical tension.

_Defects of pure multiplicity._

§ 26. This long analysis will be a sufficient illustration of the
power of multiplicity in uniformity; we may now proceed to point
out the limitations inherent in this form. The most obvious one is
that of monotony; a file of soldiers or an iron railing is impressive
in its way, but cannot long entertain us, nor hold us with that depth
of developing interest, with which we might study a crowd or a
forest of trees.

The tendency of monotony is double, and in two directions
deadens our pleasure. When the repeated impressions are acute,
and cannot be forgotten in their endless repetition, their monotony
becomes painful. The constant appeal to the same sense, the
constant requirement of the same reaction, tires the system, and we
long for change as for a relief. If the repeated stimulations are not
very acute, we soon become unconscious of them; like the ticking
of the clock, they become merely a factor in our bodily one, a
cause, as the case may be, of a diffused pleasure or unrest; but they
cease to present a distinguishable object.

The pleasures, therefore, which a kindly but monotonous
environment produces, often fail to make it beautiful, for the
simple reason that the environment is not perceived. Likewise the
hideousness of things to which we are accustomed -- the blemishes
of the landscape, the ugliness of our clothes or of our walls -- do
not oppress us, not so much because we do not see the ugliness as
because we overlook the things. The beauties or defects of
monotonous objects are easily lost, because the objects are
themselves intermittent in consciousness. But it is of some
practical importance to remark that this indifference of
monotonous values is more apparent than real. The particular
object ceases to be of consequence; but the congruity of its
structure and quality with our faculties of perception remains, and
its presence in our environment is still a constant source of vague
irritation and friction, or of subtle and pervasive delight. And this
value, although not associated with the image of the monotonous
object, lies there in our mind, like all the vital and systemic
feelings, ready to enhance the beauty of any object that arouses our
attention, and meantime adding to the health and freedom of our
life -- making whatever we do a little easier and pleasanter for us.
A grateful environment is a substitute for happiness. It can quicken
us from without as a fixed hope and affection, or the consciousness
of a right life, can quicken us from within. To humanize our
surroundings is, therefore, a task which should interest the
physicians both of soul and body.

But the monotony of multiplicity is not merely intrinsic in the form;
what is perhaps even of greater consequence in the arts is the fact
that its capacity for association is restricted. What is in itself
uniform cannot have a great diversity of relations. Hence the
dryness, the crisp definiteness and hardness, of those products of
art which contain an endless repetition of the same elements. Their
affinities are necessarily few; they are not fit for many uses, nor
capable of expressing many ideas. The heroic couplet, now too
much derided, is a form of this kind. Its compactness and
inevitableness make it excellent for an epigram and adequate it for
a satire, but its perpetual snap and unvarying rhythm are thin for an
epic, and impossible for a song. The Greek colonnade, a form in
many ways analogous, has similar limitations. Beautiful with a
finished and restrained beauty, which our taste is hardly refined
enough to appreciate, it is incapable of development. The
experiments of Roman architecture sufficiently show it; the glory
of which is their Roman frame rather than their Hellenic ornament.

When the Greeks themselves had to face the problem of larger and
more complex buildings, in the service of a supernatural and
hierarchical system, they transformed their architecture into what
we call Byzantine, and St. Sophia took the place of the Parthenon.
Here a vast vault was introduced, the colonnade disappeared, the
architrave was rounded into an arch from column to column, the
capitals of these were changed from concave to convex, and a
thousand other changes in structure and ornament introduced
flexibility and variety. Architecture could in this way, precisely
because more vague and barbarous, better adapt itself to the
conditions of the new epoch. Perfect taste is itself a limitation, not
because it intentionally excludes any excellence, but because it
impedes the wandering of the arts into those bypaths of caprice and
grotesqueness in which, although at the sacrifice of formal beauty,
interesting partial effects might still be discovered. And this
objection applies with double force to the first crystallizations of
taste, when tradition has carried us but a little way in the right
direction. The authorized effects are then very simple, and if we
allow no others, our art becomes wholly inadequate to the
functions ultimately imposed upon it. Primitive arts might furnish
examples, but the state of English poetry at the time of Queen
Anne is a sufficient illustration of this possibility. The French
classicism, of which, the English school was an echo, was more
vital and human, because it embodied a more native taste and a
wider training.

_Aesthetics of democracy._

§ 27. It would be an error to suppose that aesthetic principles apply
only to our judgments of works of art or of those natural objects
which we attend to chiefly on account of their beauty. Every idea
which is formed in the human mind, every activity and emotion,
has some relation, direct or indirect, to pain and pleasure. If, as is
the case in all the more important instances, these fluid activities
and emotions precipitate, as it were, in their evanescence certain
psychical solids called ideas of things, then the concomitant
pleasures are incorporated more or less in those concrete ideas and
the things acquire an aesthetic colouring. And although this
aesthetic colouring may be the last quality we notice in objects of
practical interest, its influence upon us is none the less real, and
often accounts for a great deal in our moral and practical attitude.

In the leading political and moral idea of our time, in the idea of
democracy, I think there is a strong aesthetic ingredient, and the
power of the idea of democracy over the imagination is an
illustration of that effect of multiplicity in uniformity which we
have been studying. Of course, nothing could be more absurd than
to suggest that the French Revolution, with its immense
implications, had an aesthetic preference for its basis; it sprang, as
we know, from the hatred of oppression, the rivalry of classes, and
the aspiration after a freer social and strictly moral organization.
But when these moral forces were suggesting and partly realizing
the democratic idea, this idea was necessarily vividly present to
men's thoughts; the picture of human life which it presented was
becoming familiar, and was being made the sanction and goal of
constant endeavour. Nothing so much enhances a good as to make
sacrifices for it. The consequence was that democracy, prized at
first as a means to happiness and as an instrument of good
government, was acquiring an intrinsic value; it was beginning to
seem good in itself, in fact, the only intrinsically right and perfect
arrangement. A utilitarian scheme was receiving an aesthetic
consecration. That which was happening to democracy had
happened before to the feudal and royalist systems; they too had
come to be prized in themselves, for the pleasure men took in
thinking of society organized in such an ancient, and thereby to
their fancy, appropriate and beautiful manner. The practical value
of the arrangement, on which, of course, it is entirely dependent for
its origin and authority, was forgotten, and men were ready to
sacrifice their welfare to their sense of propriety; that is, they
allowed an aesthetic good to outweigh a practical one. That seems
now a superstition, although, indeed, a very natural and even noble
one. Equally natural and noble, but no less superstitious, is our
own belief in the divine right of democracy. Its essential right is
something purely aesthetic.

Such aesthetic love of uniformity, however, is usually disguised
under some moral label: we call it the lore of justice, perhaps
because we have not considered that the value of justice also, in so
far as it is not derivative and utilitarian, must be intrinsic, or, what
is practically the same thing, aesthetic. But occasionally the
beauties of democracy are presented to us undisguised. The
writings of Walt Whitman are a notable example. Never, perhaps,
has the charm of uniformity in multiplicity been felt so completely
and so exclusively. Everywhere it greets us with a passionate
preference; not flowers but leaves of grass, not music but
drum-taps, not composition but aggregation, not the hero but the average
man, not the crisis but the vulgarest moment; and by this resolute
marshalling of nullities, by this effort to show us everything as a
momentary pulsation of a liquid and structureless whole, he
profoundly stirs the imagination. We may wish to dislike this
power, but, I think, we must inwardly admire it. For whatever
practical dangers we may see in this terrible levelling, our aesthetic
faculty can condemn no actual effect; its privilege is to be pleased
by opposites, and to be capable of finding chaos sublime without
ceasing to make nature beautiful.

_Values of types and values of examples._

§ 28. It is time we should return to the consideration of abstract
forms. Nearest in nature to the example of uniformity in
multiplicity, we found those objects, like a reversible pattern, that
having some variety of parts invite us to survey them in different
orders, and so bring into play in a marked manner the faculty of
apperception.

There is in the senses, as we have seen, a certain form of
stimulation, a certain measure and rhythm of waves with which the
aesthetic value of the sensation is connected. So when, in the
perception of the object, a notable contribution is made by memory
and mental habit, the value of the perception will be due, not only
to the pleasantness of the external stimulus, but also to the
pleasantness of the apperceptive reaction; and the latter source of
value will be more important in proportion as the object perceived
is more dependent, for the form and meaning it presents, upon our
past experience and imaginative trend, and less on the structure of
the external object.

Our apperception of form varies not only with our constitution, age,
and health, as does the appreciation of sensuous values, but also
with our education and genius. The more indeterminate the object,
the greater share must subjective forces have in determining our
perception; for, of course, every perception is in itself perfectly
specific, and can be called indefinite only in reference to an
abstract ideal which it is expected to approach. Every cloud has
just the outline it has, although we may call it vague, because we
cannot classify its form under any geometrical or animal species; it
would be first definitely a whale, and then would become
indefinite until we saw our way to calling it a camel. But while in
the intermediate stage, the cloud would be a form in the perception
of which there would be little apperceptive activity little reaction
from the store of our experience, little sense of form; its value
would be in its colour and transparency, and in the suggestion of
lightness and of complex but gentle movement.

But the moment we said "Yes, very like a whale," a new kind of
value would appear; the cloud could now be beautiful or ugly, not
as a cloud merely, but as a whale. We do not speak now of the
associations of the idea, as with the sea, or fishermen's yarns; that
is an extrinsic matter of expression. We speak simply of the
intrinsic value of the form of the whale, of its lines, its movement,
its proportion. This is a more or less individual set of images which
are revived in the act of recognition; this revival constitutes the
recognition, and the beauty of the form is the pleasure of that
revival. A certain musical phrase, as it were, is played in the brain;
the awakening of that echo is the act of apperception and the
harmony of the present stimulation with the form of that phrase;
the power of this particular object to develope and intensify that
generic phrase in the direction of pleasure, is the test of the formal
beauty of this example. For these cerebral phrases have a certain
rhythm; this rhythm can, by the influence of the stimulus that now
reawakens it, be marred or enriched, be made more or less marked
and delicate; and as this conflict or reinforcement comes, the
object is ugly or beautiful in form.

Such an aesthetic value is thus dependent on two things. The first
is the acquired character of the apperceptive form evoked; it may
be a cadenza or a trill, a major or a minor chord, a rose or a violet,
a goddess or a dairy-maid; and as one or another of these is
recognized, an aesthetic dignity and tone is given to the object. But
it will be noticed that in such mere recognition very little pleasure
is found, or, what is the same thing, different aesthetic types in the
abstract have little difference in intrinsic beauty. The great
difference lies in their affinities. What will decide us to like or not
to like the type of our apperception will be not so much what this
type is, as its fitness to the context of our mind. It is like a word in
a poem, more effective by its fitness than by its intrinsic beauty,
although that is requisite too. We can be shocked at an incongruity
of natures more than we can be pleased by the intrinsic beauty of
each nature apart, so long, that is, as they remain abstract natures,
objects recognized without being studied. The aesthetic dignity of
the form, then, tells us the kind of beauty we are to expect, affects
us by its welcome or unwelcome promise, but hardly gives us a
positive pleasure in the beauty itself.

Now this is the first thing in the value of a form, the value of the
type as such; the second and more important element is the relation
of the particular impression to the form under which it is
apperceived. This determines the value of the object as an example
of its class. After our mind is pitched to the key and rhythm of a
certain idea, say of a queen, it remains for the impression to fulfil,
aggrandize, or enrich this form by a sympathetic embodiment of it.
Then we have a queen that is truly royal. But if instead there is
disappointment, if this particular queen is an ugly one, although
perhaps she might have pleased as a witch, this is because the
apperceptive form and the impression give a cerebral discord. The
object is unideal, that is, the novel, external element is
inharmonious with the revived and internal element by suggesting
which the object has been apperceived.

_Origin of types._

§ 29. A most important thing, therefore, in the perception of form
is the formation of types in our mind, with reference to which
examples are to be judged. I say the formation of them, for we can
hardly consider the theory that they are eternal as a possible one in
psychology. The Platonic doctrine on that point is a striking
illustration of an equivocation we mentioned in the beginning;[7]
namely, that the import of an experience is regarded as a
manifestation of its cause -- the product of a faculty substituted for
the description of its function. Eternal types are the instrument of
aesthetic life, not its foundation. Take the aesthetic attitude, and
you have for the moment an eternal idea; an idea, I mean, that you
treat as an absolute standard, just as when you take the perceptive
attitude you have an external object which you treat as an absolute
existence. But the aesthetic, like the perceptive faculty, can be
made an object of study in turn, and its theory can be sought; and
then the eternal idea, like the external object, is seen to be a
product of human nature, a symbol of experience, and an
instrument of thought.

The question whether there are not, in external nature or in the
mind of God, objects and eternal types, is indeed not settled, it is
not even touched by this inquiry; but it is indirectly shown to be
futile, because such transcendent realities, if they exist, can have
nothing to do with our ideas of them. The Platonic idea of a tree
may exist; how should I deny it? How should I deny that I might
some day find myself outside the sky gazing at it, and feeling that I,
with my mental vision, am beholding the plenitude of arboreal
beauty, perceived in this world only as a vague essence haunting
the multiplicity of finite trees? But what can that have to do with
my actual sense of what a tree should be? Shall we take the
Platonic myth literally, and say the idea is a memory of the tree I
have already seen in heaven? How else establish any relation
between that eternal object and the type in my mind? But why, in
that case, this infinite variability of ideal trees? Was the Tree
Beautiful an oak, or a cedar, an English or an American elm? My
actual types are finite and mutually exclusive; that heavenly type
must be one and infinite. The problem is hopeless.

Very simple, on the other hand, is the explanation of the existence
of that type as a residuum of experience. Our idea of an individual
thing is a compound and residuum of our several experiences of it;
and in the same manner our idea of a class is a compound and
residuum of our ideas of the particulars that compose it. Particular
impressions have, by virtue of their intrinsic similarity or of the
identity of their relations, a tendency to be merged and identified,
so that many individual perceptions leave but a single blurred
memory that stands for them all, because it combines their several
associations. Similarly, when various objects have many common
characteristics, the mind is incapable of keeping them apart. It
cannot hold clearly so great a multitude of distinctions and
relations as would be involved in naming and conceiving
separately each grain of sand, or drop of water, each fly or horse or
man that we have ever seen. The mass of our experience has
therefore to be classified, if it is to be available at all. Instead of a
distinct image to represent each of our original impressions, we
have a general resultant -- a composite photograph -- of those
impressions.

This resultant image is the idea of the class. It often has very few,
if any, of the sensible properties of the particulars that underlie it,
often an artificial symbol -- the sound of a word -- is the only
element, present to all the instances, which the generic image
clearly contains. For, of course, the reason why a name can
represent a class of objects is that the name is the most
conspicuous element of identity in the various experiences of
objects in that class. We have seen many horses, but if we are not
lovers of the animal, nor particularly keen observers, very likely
we retain no clear image of all that mass of impressions except the
reverberation of the sound "horse," which really or mentally has
accompanied all those impressions. This sound, therefore, is the
content of our general idea, and to it cling all the associations
which constitute our sense of what the word means. But a person
with a memory predominantly visual would probably add to this
remembered sound a more or less detailed image of the animal;
some particular horse in some particular attitude might possibly be
recalled, but more probably some imaginative construction,
some dream image, would accompany the sound. An image which
reproduced no particular horse exactly, but which was a
spontaneous fiction of the fancy, would serve, by virtue of its felt
relations, the same purpose as the sound itself. Such a spontaneous
image would be, of course, variable. In fact, no image can, strictly
speaking, ever recur. But these percepts, as they are called,
springing up in the mind like flowers from the buried seeds of past
experience, would inherit all the powers of suggestion which are
required by any instrument of classification.

These powers of suggestion have probably a cerebral basis. The
new percept -- the generic idea -- repeats to a great extent, both in
nature and localization, the excitement constituting the various
original impressions; as the percept reproduces more or less of
these it will be a more or less full and impartial representative of
them. Not all the suggestions of a word or image are equally ripe.
A generic idea or type usually presents to us a very inadequate and
biassed view of the field it means to cover. As we reflect and seek
to correct this inadequacy, the percept changes on our hands. The
very consciousness that other individuals and other qualities fall
under our concept, changes this concept, as a psychological
presence, and alters its distinctness and extent. When I remember,
to use a classical example, that the triangle is not isosceles, nor
scalene, nor rectangular, but each and all of those, I reduce my
percept to the word and its definition, with perhaps a sense of the
general motion of the hand and eye by which we trace a three-cornered
figure.

Since the production of a general idea is thus a matter of subjective
bias, we cannot expect that a type should be the exact average of
the examples from which it is drawn. In a rough way, it is the
average; a fact that in itself is the strongest of arguments against
the independence or priority of the general idea. The beautiful
horse, the beautiful speech, the beautiful face, is always a medium
between the extremes which our experience has offered. It is
enough that a given characteristic should be generally present in
our experience, for it to become an indispensable element of the
ideal. There is nothing in itself beautiful or necessary in the shape
of the human ear, or in the presence of nails on the fingers and toes;
but the ideal of man, which the preposterous conceit of our
judgment makes us set up as divine and eternal, requires these
precise details; without them the human form would be repulsively
ugly.

It often happens that the accidents of experience make us in this
way introduce into the ideal, elements which, if they could be
excluded without disgusting us, would make possible satisfactions
greater than those we can now enjoy. Thus the taste formed by one
school of art may condemn the greater beauties created by another.
In morals we have the same phenomenon. A barbarous ideal of life
requires tasks and dangers incompatible with happiness; a rude and
oppressed conscience is incapable of regarding as good a state
which excludes its own acrid satisfactions. So, too, a fanatical
imagination cannot regard God as just unless he is represented as
infinitely cruel. The purpose of education is, of course, to free us
from these prejudices, and to develope our ideals in the direction of
the greatest possible good. Evidently the ideal has been formed by
the habit of perception; it is, in a rough way, that average form
which we expect and most readily apperceive. The propriety and
necessity of it is entirely relative to our experience and faculty of
apperception. The shock of surprise, the incongruity with the
formed percept, is the essence and measure of ugliness.

_The average modified in the direction of pleasure._

§ 30. Nevertheless we do not form aesthetic ideals any more than
other general types, entirely without bias. We have already
observed that a percept seldom gives an impartial compound of the
objects of which it is the generic image. This partiality is due to a
variety of circumstances. One is the unequal accuracy of our
observation. If some interest directs our attention to a particular
quality of objects, that quality will be prominent in our percept; it
may even be the only content clearly given in our general idea; and
any object, however similar in other respects to those of the given
class, will at once be distinguished as belonging to a different
species if it lacks that characteristic on which our attention is
particularly fixed. Our percepts are thus habitually biassed in the
direction of practical interest, if practical interest does not indeed
entirely govern their formation. In the same manner, our aesthetic
ideals are biassed in the direction of aesthetic interest. Not all parts
of an object are equally congruous with our perceptive faculty; not
all elements are noted with the same pleasure. Those, therefore,
which are agreeable are chiefly dwelt upon by the lover of beauty,
and his percept will give an average of things with a great
emphasis laid on that part of them which is beautiful. The ideal
will thus deviate from the average in the direction of the observer's
pleasure.

For this reason the world is so much more beautiful to a poet or an
artist than to an ordinary man. Each object, as his aesthetic sense is
developed, is perhaps less beautiful than to the uncritical eye; his
taste becomes difficult, and only the very best gives him unalloyed
satisfaction. But while each work of nature and art is thus
apparently blighted by his greater demands and keener susceptibility,
the world itself, and the various natures it contains, are
to him unspeakably beautiful. The more blemishes he can see
in men, the more excellence he sees in man, and the more bitterly
he laments the fate of each particular soul, the more reverence and
love he has for the soul in its ideal essence. Criticism and
idealization involve each other. The habit of looking for beauty in
everything makes us notice the shortcomings of things; our sense,
hungry for complete satisfaction, misses the perfection it demands.
But this demand for perfection becomes at the same time the
nucleus of our observation; from every side a quick affinity draws
what is beautiful together and stores it in the mind, giving body
there to the blind yearnings of our nature. Many imperfect things
crystallize into a single perfection. The mind is thus peopled by
general ideas in which beauty is the chief quality; and these ideas
are at the same time the types of things. The type is still a natural
resultant of particular impressions; but the formation of it has been
guided by a deep subjective bias in favour of what has delighted
the eye.

This theory can be easily tested by asking whether, in the case
where the ideal differs from the average form of objects, this
variation is not due to the intrinsic pleasantness or impressiveness
of the quality exaggerated. For instance, in the human form, the
ideal differs immensely from the average. In many respects the
extreme or something near it is the most beautiful. Xenophon
describes the women of Armenia as kalai kai megalai, and we
should still speak of one as fair and tall and of another as fair but
little. Size is therefore, even where least requisite, a thing in which
the ideal exceeds the average. And the reason -- apart from
associations of strength -- is that unusual size makes things
conspicuous. The first prerequisite of effect is impression, and size
helps that; therefore in the aesthetic ideal the average will be
modified by being enlarged, because that is a change in the
direction of our pleasure, and size will be an element of beauty.[8]

Similarly the eyes, in themselves beautiful, will be enlarged also;
and generally whatever makes by its sensuous quality, by its
abstract form, or by its expression, a particular appeal to our
attention and contribution to our delight, will count for more in the
ideal type than its frequency would warrant. The generic image has
been constructed under the influence of a selective attention, bent
upon aesthetic worth.

To praise any object for approaching the ideal of its kind is
therefore only a roundabout way of specifying its intrinsic merit
and expressing its direct effect on our sensibility. If in referring to
the ideal we were not thus analyzing the real, the ideal would be an
irrelevant and unmeaning thing. We know what the ideal is
because we observe what pleases us in the reality. If we allow the
general notion to tyrannize at all over the particular impression and
to blind us to new and unclassified beauties which the latter may
contain, we are simply substituting words for feelings, and making
a verbal classification pass for an aesthetic judgment. Then the
sense of beauty is gone to seed. Ideals have their uses, but their
authority is wholly representative. They stand for specific
satisfactions, or else they stand for nothing at all.

In fact, the whole machinery of our intelligence, our general ideas
and laws, fixed and external objects, principles, persons, and gods,
are so many symbolic, algebraic expressions. They stand for
experience; experience which we are incapable of retaining and
surveying in its multitudinous immediacy. We should flounder
hopelessly, like the animals, did we not keep ourselves afloat and
direct our course by these intellectual devices. Theory helps us to
bear our ignorance of fact.

The same thing happens, in a way, in other fields. Our armies
are devices necessitated by our weakness; our property an
encumbrance required by our need. If our situation were not
precarious, these great engines of death and life would not be
invented. And our intelligence is such another weapon against fate.
We need not lament the fact, since, after all, to build these various
structures is, up to a certain point, the natural function of human
nature. The trouble is not that the products are always subjective,
but that they are sometimes unfit and torment the spirit which they
exercise. The pathetic part of our situation appears only when we
so attach ourselves to those necessary but imperfect fictions, as to
reject the facts from which they spring and of which they seek to
be prophetic. We are then guilty of that substitution of means for
ends, which is called idolatry in religion, absurdity in logic, and
folly in morals. In aesthetics the thing has no name, but is
nevertheless very common; for it is found whenever we speak of
what ought to please, rather than of what actually pleases.

_Are all things beautiful?_

§ 31. These principles lead to an intelligible answer to a question
which is not uninteresting in itself and crucial in a system of
aesthetics. Are all things beautiful? Are all types equally beautiful
when we abstract from our practical prejudices? If the reader has
given his assent to the foregoing propositions, he will easily see
that, in one sense, we must declare that no object is essentially ugly.
If impressions are painful, they are objectified with difficulty; the
perception of a thing is therefore, under normal circumstances,
when the senses are not fatigued, rather agreeable than
disagreeable. And when the frequent perception of a class of
objects has given rise to an apperceptive norm, and we have an
ideal of the species, the recognition and exemplification of that
norm will give pleasure, in proportion to the degree of interest
and accuracy with which we have made our observations. The
naturalist accordingly sees beauties to which the academic artist is
blind, and each new environment must open to us, if we allow it to
educate our perception, a new wealth of beautiful forms.

But we are not for this reason obliged to assert that all gradations
of beauty and dignity are a matter of personal and accidental bias.
The mystics who declare that to God there is no distinction in the
value of things, and that only our human prejudice makes us prefer
a rose to an oyster, or a lion to a monkey, have, of course, a reason
for what they say. If we could strip ourselves of our human nature,
we should undoubtedly find ourselves incapable of making these
distinctions, as well as of thinking, perceiving, or willing in any
way which is now possible to us. But how things would appear to
us if we were not human is, to a man, a question of no importance.
Even, the mystic to whom the definite constitution of his own mind
is so hateful, can only paralyze without transcending his faculties.
A passionate negation, the motive of which, although morbid, is in
spite of itself perfectly human, absorbs all his energies, and his
ultimate triumph is to attain the absoluteness of indifference.

What is true of mysticism in general, is true also of its
manifestation in aesthetics. If we could so transform our taste as to
find beauty everywhere, because, perhaps, the ultimate nature of
things is as truly exemplified in one thing as in another, we should,
in fact, have abolished taste altogether. For the ascending series of
aesthetic satisfactions we should have substituted a monotonous
judgment of identity. If things are beautiful not by virtue of their
differences but by virtue of an identical something which they
equally contain, then there could be no discrimination in beauty.
Like substance, beauty would be everywhere one and the same,
and any tendency to prefer one thing to another would be a proof
of finitude and illusion. When we try to make our judgments
absolute, what we do is to surrender our natural standards and
categories, and slip into another genus, until we lose ourselves in
the satisfying vagueness of mere being.

Relativity to our partial nature is therefore essential to all our
definite thoughts, judgments, and feelings. And when once the
human bias is admitted as a legitimate, because for us a necessary,
basis of preference, the whole wealth of nature is at once organized
by that standard into a hierarchy of values. Everything is beautiful
because everything is capable in some degree of interesting and
charming our attention; but things differ immensely in this
capacity to please us in the contemplation of them, and therefore
they differ immensely in beauty. Could our nature be fixed and
determined once for all in every particular, the scale of aesthetic
values would become certain. We should not dispute about tastes,
no longer because a common principle of preference could not be
discovered, but rather because any disagreement would then be
impossible.

As a matter of fact, however, human nature is a vague abstraction;
that which is common to all men is the least part of their natural
endowment. Aesthetic capacity is accordingly very unevenly
distributed; and the world of beauty is much vaster and more
complex to one man than to another. So long, indeed, as the
distinction is merely one of development, so that we recognize in
the greatest connoisseur only the refinement of the judgments of
the rudest peasant, our aesthetic principle has not changed; we
might say that, in so far, we had a common standard more or less
widely applied. We might say so, because that standard would be
an implication of a common nature more or less fully developed.

But men do not differ only in the degree of their susceptibility,
they differ also in its direction. Human nature branches into
opposed and incompatible characters. And taste follows this
bifurcation. We cannot, except whimsically, say that a taste for
music is higher or lower than a taste for sculpture. A man might be
a musician and a sculptor by turns; that would only involve a
perfectly conceivable enlargement in human genius. But the union
thus effected would be an accumulation of gifts in the observer, not
a combination of beauties in the object. The excellence of
sculpture and that of music would remain entirely independent and
heterogeneous. Such divergences are like those of the outer senses
to which these arts appeal. Sound and colour have analogies only
in their lowest depth, as vibrations and excitement; as they grow
specific and objective, they diverge; and although the same
consciousness perceives them, it perceives them as unrelated and
uncombinable objects.

The ideal enlargement of human capacity, therefore, has no
tendency to constitute a single standard of beauty. These standards
remain the expression of diverse habits of sense and imagination.
The man who combines the greatest range with the greatest
endowment in each particular, will, of course, be the critic most
generally respected. He will express the feelings of the greater
number of men. The advantage of scope in criticism lies not in the
improvement of our sense in each particular field; here the artist
will detect the amateur's shortcomings. But no man is a specialist
with his whole soul. Some latent capacity he has for other
perceptions; and it is for the awakening of these, and their
marshalling before him, that the student of each kind of beauty
turns to the lover of them all.

The temptation, therefore, to say that all things are really equally
beautiful arises from an imperfect analysis, by which the
operations of the aesthetic consciousness are only partially
disintegrated. The dependence of the _degrees_ of beauty upon
our nature is perceived, while the dependence of its _essence_
upon our nature is still ignored. All things are not equally beautiful
because the subjective bias that discriminates between them is the
cause of their being beautiful at all. The principle of personal
preference is the same as that of human taste; real and objective
beauty, in contrast to a vagary of individuals, means only an
affinity to a more prevalent and lasting susceptibility, a
response toa more general and fundamental demand. And the keener
discrimination, by which the distance between beautiful and ugly
things is increased, far from being a loss of aesthetic insight, is a
development of that faculty by the exercise of which beauty comes
into the world.

_Effects of indeterminate organization._

§ 32. It is the free exercise of the activity of apperception that gives
so peculiar an interest to indeterminate objects, to the vague, the
incoherent, the suggestive, the variously interpretable. The more
this effect is appealed to, the greater wealth of thought is presumed
in the observer, and the less mastery is displayed by the artist. A
poor and literal mind cannot enjoy the opportunity for reverie and
construction given by the stimulus of indeterminate objects; it
lacks the requisite resources. It is nonplussed and annoyed, and
turns away to simpler and more transparent things with a feeling of
helplessness often turning into contempt. And, on the other hand,
the artist who is not artist enough, who has too many irrepressible
talents and too little technical skill, is sure to float in the region of
the indeterminate. He sketches and never paints; he hints and never
expresses; he stimulates and never informs. This is the method of
the individuals and of the nations that have more genius than art.

The consciousness that accompanies this characteristic is the sense
of profundity, of mighty significance. And this feeling is not
necessarily an illusion. The nature of our materials -- be they
words, colours, or plastic matter -- imposes a limit and bias upon
our expression. The reality of experience can never be quite
rendered through these media. The greatest mastery of technique
will therefore come short of perfect adequacy and exhaustiveness;
there must always remain a penumbra and fringe of suggestion if
the most explicit representation is to communicate a truth. When
there is real profundity, -- when the living core of things is most
firmly grasped, -- there will accordingly be a felt inadequacy of
expression, and an appeal to the observer to piece out our
imperfections with his thoughts. But this should come only after
the resources of a patient and well-learned art have been exhausted;
else what is felt as depth is really confusion and incompetence. The
simplest thing becomes unutterable, if we have forgotten how to
speak. And a habitual indulgence in the inarticulate is a sure sign
of the philosopher who has not learned to think, the poet who has
not learned to write, the painter who has not learned to paint, and
the impression that has not learned to express itself -- all of which
are compatible with an immensity of genius in the inexpressible
soul.

Our age is given to this sort of self-indulgence, and on both the
grounds mentioned. Our public, without being really trained, -- for
we appeal to too large a public to require training in it, -- is well
informed and eagerly responsive to everything; it is ready to work
pretty hard, and do its share towards its own profit and
entertainment. It becomes a point of pride with it to understand and
appreciate everything. And our art, in its turn, does not overlook
this opportunity. It becomes disorganized, sporadic, whimsical,
and experimental. The crudity we are too distracted to refine, we
accept as originality, and the vagueness we are too pretentious to
make accurate, we pass off as sublimity. This is the secret of
making great works on novel principles, and of writing hard books
easily.

_Example of landscape._

§ 33. An extraordinary taste for landscape compensates us for this
ignorance of what is best and most finished in the arts. The natural
landscape is an indeterminate object; it almost always contains
enough diversity to allow the eye a great liberty in selecting,
emphasizing, and grouping its elements, and it is furthermore rich
in suggestion and in vague emotional stimulus. A landscape to be
seen has to be composed, and to be loved has to be moralized. That
is the reason why rude or vulgar people are indifferent to their
natural surroundings. It does not occur to them that the work-a-day
world is capable of aesthetic contemplation. Only on holidays,
when they add to themselves and their belongings some unusual
ornament, do they stop to watch the effect. The far more beautiful
daily aspects of their environment escape them altogether. When,
however, we learn to apperceive; when we grow fond of tracing
lines and developing vistas; when, above all, the subtler influences
of places on our mental tone are transmuted into an expressiveness
in those places, and they are furthermore poetized by our
day-dreams, and turned by our instant fancy into so many hints of a
fairyland of happy living and vague adventure, -- then we feel that
the landscape is beautiful. The forest, the fields, all wild or rural
scenes, are then full of companionship and entertainment.

This is a beauty dependent on reverie, fancy, and objectified
emotion. The promiscuous natural landscape cannot be enjoyed in
any other way. It has no real unity, and therefore requires to have
some form or other supplied by the fancy; which can be the more
readily done, in that the possible forms are many, and the constant
changes in the object offer varying suggestions to the eye. In fact,
psychologically speaking, there is no such thing as a landscape;
what we call such is an infinity of different scraps and glimpses
given in succession. Even a painted landscape, although it tends to
select and emphasize some parts of the field, is composed by
adding together a multitude of views. When this painting is
observed in its turn, it is surveyed as a real landscape would be,
and apperceived partially and piecemeal; although, of course, it
offers much less wealth of material than its living original, and is
therefore vastly inferior.

Only the extreme of what is called impressionism tries to give
upon canvas one absolute momentary view; the result is that when
the beholder has himself actually been struck by that aspect, the
picture has an extraordinary force and emotional value -- like the
vivid power of recalling the past possessed by smells. But, on the
other hand, such a work is empty and trivial in the extreme; it is
the photograph of a detached impression, not followed, as it would
be in nature, by many variations of itself. An object so unusual is
often unrecognizable, if the vision thus unnaturally isolated has
never happened to come vividly into our own experience. The
opposite school -- what might be called _discursive_ landscape
painting -- collects so many glimpses and gives so fully the sum of
our positive observations of a particular scene, that its work is sure
to be perfectly intelligible and plain. If it seems unreal and
uninteresting, that is because it is formless, like the collective
object it represents, while it lacks that sensuous intensity and
movement which might have made the reality stimulating.

The landscape contains, of course, innumerable things which have
determinate forms; but if the attention is directed specifically to
them, we have no longer what, by a curious limitation of the word,
is called the love of nature. Not very long ago it was usual for
painters of landscapes to introduce figures, buildings, or ruins to
add some human association to the beauty of the place. Or, if
wildness and desolation were to be pictured, at least one weary
wayfarer must be seen sitting upon a broken column. He might
wear a toga and then be Marius among the ruins of Carthage. The
landscape without figures would have seemed meaningless; the
spectator would have sat in suspense awaiting something, as at
the theatre when the curtain rises on an empty stage. The
indeterminateness of the suggestions of an unhumanized scene was
then felt as a defect; now we feel it rather as an exaltation. We
need to be free; our emotion suffices us; we do not ask for a
description of the object which interests us as a part of ourselves.
We should blush to say so simple and obvious a thing as that to us
"the mountains are a feeling"; nor should we think of apologizing
for our romanticism as Byron did:

     I love not man the less but nature more
     From these our interviews, in which I steal,
     From all I may be, or have been before,
     To mingle with the universe, and feel
     What I can ne'er express.

This ability to rest in nature unadorned and to find entertainment in
her aspects, is, of course, a great gain. Aesthetic education consists
in training ourselves to see the maximum of beauty. To see it in the
physical world, which must continually be about us, is a great
progress toward that marriage of the imagination with the reality
which is the goal of contemplation.

While we gain this mastery of the formless, however, we should
not lose the more necessary capacity of seeing form in those things
which happen to have it. In respect to most of those things which
are determinate as well as natural, we are usually in that state of
aesthetic unconsciousness which the peasant is in in respect to the
landscape. We treat human life and its environment with the same
utilitarian eye with which he regards the field and mountain. That
is beautiful which is expressive of convenience and wealth; the rest
is indifferent. If we mean by love of nature aesthetic delight in the
world in which we casually live (and what can be more _natural_
than man and all his arts?), we may say that the absolute love of
_nature_ hardly exists among us. What we love is the stimulation
of our own personal emotions and dreams; and landscape appeals
to us, as music does to those who have no sense for musical form.

There would seem to be no truth in the saying that the ancients
loved nature less than we. They loved landscape less -- less, at
least, in proportion to their love of the definite things it contained.
The vague and changing effects of the atmosphere, the masses of
mountains, the infinite and living complexity of forests, did not
fascinate them. They had not that preponderant taste for the
indeterminate that makes the landscape a favourite subject of
contemplation. But love of nature, and comprehension of her, they
had in a most eminent degree; in fact, they actually made explicit
that objectification of our own soul in her, which for the romantic
poet remains a mere vague and shifting suggestion. What are the
celestial gods, the nymphs, the fauns, the dryads, but the definite
apperceptions of that haunting spirit which we think we see in the
sky, the mountains, and the woods? We may think that our vague
intuition grasps the truth of what their childish imagination turned
into a fable. But our belief, if it is one, is just as fabulous, just as
much a projection of human nature into material things; and if we
renounce all positive conception of quasi-mental principles in
nature, and reduce our moralizing of her to a poetic expression of
our own sensations, then can we say that our verbal and illusive
images are comparable as representations of the life of nature to
the precision, variety, humour, and beauty of the Greek mythology?

_Extensions to objects usually not regarded authentically._

§ 34. It may not be superfluous to mention here certain analogous
fields where the human mind gives a series of unstable forms to
objects in themselves indeterminate.[9] History, philosophy,
natural as well as moral, and religion are evidently such fields. All
theory is a subjective form given to an indeterminate material. The
material is experience; and although each part of experience is, of
course, perfectly definite in itself, and just that experience which it
is, yet the recollection and relating together of the successive
experiences is a function of the theoretical faculty. The systematic
relations of things in time and space, and their dependence upon
one another, are the work of our imagination. Theory can therefore
never have the kind of truth which belongs to experience; as
Hobbes has it, no discourse whatsoever can end in absolute
knowledge of fact.

It is conceivable that two different theories should be equally true
in respect to the same facts. All that is required is that they should
be equally complete schemes for the relation and prediction of the
realities they deal with. The choice between them would be an
arbitrary one, determined by personal bias, for the object being
indeterminate, its elements can be apperceived as forming all kinds
of unities. A theory is a form of apperception, and in applying it to
the facts, although our first concern is naturally the adequacy of
our instrument of comprehension, we are also influenced, more
than we think, by the ease and pleasure with which we think in its
terms, that is, by its beauty.

The case of two alternative theories of nature, both exhaustive and
adequate, may seem somewhat imaginary. The human mind is,
indeed, not rich and indeterminate enough to drive, as the saying is,
many horses abreast; it wishes to have one general scheme of
conception only, under which it strives to bring everything. Yet the
philosophers, who are the scouts of common sense, have come in
sight of this possibility of a variety of methods of dealing with the
same facts. As at the basis of evolution generally there are many
variations, only some of which remain fixed, so at the origin of
conception there are many schemes; these are simultaneously
developed, and at most stages of thought divide the intelligence
among themselves. So much is thought of on one principle -- say
mechanically -- and so much on another -- say teleologically. In
those minds only that have a speculative turn, that is, in whom the
desire for unity of comprehension outruns practical exigencies,
does the conflict become intolerable. In them one or another of
these theories tends to swallow all experience, but is commonly
incapable of doing so.

The final victory of a single philosophy is not yet won, because
none as yet has proved adequate to all experience. If ever unity
should be attained, our unanimity would not indicate that, as the
popular fancy conceives it, the truth had been discovered; it would
only indicate that the human mind had found a definitive way of
classifying its experience. Very likely, if man still retained his
inveterate habit of hypostatizing his ideas, that definitive scheme
would be regarded as a representation of the objective relations of
things; but no proof that it was so would ever be found, nor even
any hint that there were external objects, not to speak of relations
between them. As the objects are hypostatized percepts, so the
relations are hypostatized processes of the human understanding.

To have reached a final philosophy would be only to have
formulated the typical and satisfying form of human apperception;
the view would remain a theory, an instrument of comprehension
and survey fitted to the human eye; it would be for ever utterly
heterogeneous from fact, utterly unrepresentative of any of those
experiences which it would artificially connect and weave into a
pattern. Mythology and theology are the most striking illustrations
of this human method of incorporating much diffuse experience
into graphic and picturesque ideas; but steady reflection will hardly
allow us to see anything else in the theories of science and
philosophy. These, too, are creatures of our intelligence, and have
their only being in the movement of our thought, as they have their
only justification in their fitness to our experience.

Long before we can attain, however, the ideal unification of
experience under one theory, the various fields of thought demand
provisional surveys; we are obliged to reflect on life in a variety of
detached and unrelated acts, since neither can the whole material
of life be ever given while we still live, nor can that which is given
be impartially retained in the human memory. When omniscience
was denied us, we were endowed with versatility. The picturesqueness
of human thought may console us for its imperfection.

History, for instance, which passes for the account of facts, is in
reality a collection of apperceptions of an indeterminate material;
for even the material of history is not fact, but consists of
memories and words subject to ever-varying interpretation. No
historian can be without bias, because the bias defines the history.
The memory in the first place is selective; official and other
records are selective, and often intentionally partial. Monuments
and ruins remain by chance. And when the historian has set
himself to study these few relics of the past, the work of his own
intelligence begins. He must have some guiding interest. A history
is not an indiscriminate register of every known event; a file of
newspapers is not an inspiration of Clio. A history is a view of the
fortunes of some institution or person; it traces the development of
some interest. This interest furnishes the standard by which the
facts are selected, and their importance gauged. Then, after the
facts are thus chosen, marshalled, and emphasized, comes the
indication of causes and relations; and in this part of his work the
historian plunges avowedly into speculation, and becomes a
philosophical poet. Everything will then depend on his genius, on
his principles, on his passions, -- in a word, on his apperceptive
forms. And the value of history is similar to that of poetry, and
varies with the beauty, power, and adequacy of the form in which
the indeterminate material of human life is presented.

_Further dangers of indeterminateness._

§ 35. The fondness of a race or epoch for any kind of effect is a
natural expression of temperament and circumstances, and cannot
be blamed or easily corrected. At the same time we may stop to
consider some of the disadvantages of a taste for the indeterminate.
We shall be registering a truth and at the same time, perhaps,
giving some encouragement to that rebellion which we may
inwardly feel against this too prevalent manner. The indeterminate
is by its nature ambiguous; it is therefore obscure and uncertain in
its effect, and if used, as in many arts it often is, to convey a
meaning, must fail to do so unequivocally. Where a meaning is not
to be conveyed, as in landscape, architecture, or music, the
illusiveness of the form is not so objectionable: although in all
these objects the tendency to observe forms and to demand them is
a sign of increasing appreciation. The ignorant fail to see the forms
of music, architecture, and landscape, and therefore are insensible
to relative rank and technical values in these spheres; they regard
the objects only as so many stimuli to emotion, as soothing or
enlivening influences. But the sensuous and associative values of
these things -- especially of music -- are so great, that even without
an appreciation of form considerable beauty may be found in them.

In literature, however, where the sensuous value of the words is
comparatively small, indeterminateness of form is fatal to beauty,
and, if extreme, even to expressiveness. For meaning is conveyed
by the _form_ and order of words, not by the words themselves,
and no precision of meaning can be reached without precision of
style. Therefore no respectable writer is voluntarily obscure in the
structure of his phrases -- that is an abuse reserved for the clowns
of literary fashion. But a book is a larger sentence, and if it is
formless it fails to mean anything, for the same reason that an
unformed collection of words means nothing. The chapters and
verses may have said something, as loose words may have a
known sense and a tone; but the book will have brought no
message.

In fact, the absence of form in composition has two stages: that in
which, as in the works of Emerson, significant fragments are
collected, and no system, no total thought, constructed out of them;
and secondly, that in which, as in the writings of the Symbolists of
our time, all the significance is kept back in the individual words,
or even in the syllables that compose them. This mosaic of
word-values has, indeed, a possibility of effect, for the absence of form
does not destroy materials, but, as we have observed, rather allows
the attention to remain fixed upon them; and for this reason
absence of sense is a means of accentuating beauty of sound and
verbal suggestion. But this example shows how the tendency to
neglect structure in literature is a tendency to surrender the use of
language as an instrument of thought The descent is easy from
ambiguity to meaninglessness.

The indeterminate in form is also indeterminate in value. It needs
completion by the mind of the observer and as this completion
differs, the value of the result must vary. An indeterminate object
is therefore beautiful to him who can make it so, and ugly to him
who cannot. It appeals to a few and to them diversely. In fact, the
observer's own mind is the storehouse from which the beautiful
form has to be drawn. If the form is not there, it cannot be applied
to the half-finished object; it is like asking a man without skill to
complete another man's composition. The indeterminate object
therefore requires an active and well-equipped mind, and is
otherwise without value.

It is furthermore unprofitable even to the mind which takes it up; it
stimulates that mind to action, but it presents it with no new object.
We can respond only with those forms of apperception which we
already are accustomed to. A formless object cannot _inform_ the
mind, cannot mould it to a new habit. That happens only when the
data, by their clear determination, compel the eye and imagination
to follow new paths and see new relations. Then we are introduced
to a new beauty, and enriched to that extent. But the indeterminate,
like music to the sentimental, is a vague stimulus. It calls forth at
random such ideas and memories as may lie to hand, stirring the
mind, but leaving it undisciplined and unacquainted with any new
object. This stirring, like that of the pool of Bethesda, may indeed
have its virtue. A creative mind, already rich in experience and
observation, may, under the influence of such a stimulus, dart into
a new thought, and give birth to that with which it is already
pregnant; but the fertilizing seed came from elsewhere, from study
and admiration of those definite forms which nature contains, or
which art, in imitation of nature, has conceived and brought to
perfection.

_Illusion of infinite perfection._

§ 36. The great advantage, then, of indeterminate organization is
that it cultivates that spontaneity, intelligence, and imagination
without which many important objects would remain unintelligible,
and because unintelligible, uninteresting. The beauty of landscape,
the forms of religion and science, the types of human nature itself,
are due to this apperceptive gift. Without it we should have a chaos;
but its patient and ever-fresh activity carves out of the fluid
material a great variety of forms. An object which stimulates us to
this activity, therefore, seems often to be more sublime and
beautiful than one which presents to us a single unchanging form,
however perfect. There seems to be a life and infinity in
the incomplete, which the determinate excludes by its own
completeness and petrifaction. And yet the effort in this very
activity is to reach determination; we can only see beauty in so far
as we introduce form. The instability of the form can be no
advantage to a work of art; the determinate keeps constantly what
the indeterminate reaches only in those moments in which the
observer's imagination is especially propitious. If we feel a certain
disappointment in the monotonous limits of a definite form and its
eternal, unsympathizing message, might we not feel much more
the melancholy transiency of those glimpses of beauty which elude
us in the indeterminate? Might not the torment and uncertainty of
this contemplation, with the self-consciousness it probably
involves, more easily tire us than the quiet companionship of a
constant object? May we not prefer the unchangeable to the
irrecoverable?

We may; and the preference is one which we should all more
clearly feel, were it not for an illusion, proper to the romantic
temperament, which lends a mysterious charm to things which are
indefinite and indefinable. It is the suggestion of infinite perfection.
In reality, perfection is a synonym of finitude. Neither in nature
nor in the fancy can anything be perfect except by realizing a
definite type, which excludes all variation, and contrasts sharply
with every other possibility of being. There is no perfection apart
from a form of apperception or type; and there are as many kinds
of perfection as there are types or forms of apperception latent in
the mind.

Now these various perfections are mutually exclusive. Only in a
kind of aesthetic orgy -- in the madness of an intoxicated
imagination -- can we confuse them. As the Roman emperor
wished that the Roman people had but a single neck, to murder
them at one blow, so we may sometimes wish that all beauties had
but one form, that we might behold them together. But in the
nature of things beauties are incompatible. The spring cannot
coexist with the autumn, nor day with night; what is beautiful in a
child is hideous in a man, and _vice versa;_ every age,
every country, each sex, has a peculiar beauty, finite and
incommunicable; the better it is attained the more completely it
excludes every other. The same is evidently true of schools of art,
of styles and languages, and of every effect whatsoever. It exists
by its finitude and is great in proportion to its determination.

But there is a loose and somewhat helpless state of mind in which
while we are incapable of realizing any particular thought or vision
in its perfect clearness and absolute beauty, we nevertheless feel its
haunting presence in the background of consciousness. And one
reason why the idea cannot emerge from that obscurity is that it is
not alone in the brain; a thousand other ideals, a thousand other
plastic tendencies of thought, simmer there in confusion; and if any
definite image is presented in response to that vague agitation of
our soul, we feel its inadequacy to our need in spite of, or perhaps
on account of, its own particular perfection. We then say that the
classic does not satisfy us, and that the "Grecian cloys us with his
perfectness." We are not capable of that concentrated and serious
attention to one thing at a time which would enable us to sink into
its being, and enjoy the intrinsic harmonies of its form, and the
bliss of its immanent particular heaven; we flounder in the vague,
but at the same time we are full of yearnings, of half-thoughts and
semi-visions, and the upward tendency and exaltation of our mood
is emphatic and overpowering in proportion to our incapacity to
think, speak, or imagine.

The sum of our incoherences has, however, an imposing volume
and even, perhaps, a vague, general direction. We feel ourselves
laden with an infinite burden; and what delights us most and seems
to us to come nearest to the ideal is not what embodies any one
possible form, but that which, by embodying none, suggests many,
and stirs the mass of our inarticulate imagination with a pervasive
thrill. Each thing, without being a beauty in itself, by stimulating
our indeterminate emotion, seems to be a hint and expression of
infinite beauty. That infinite perfection which cannot be realized,
because it is self-contradictory, may be thus suggested, and on
account of this suggestion an indeterminate effect may be regarded
as higher, more significant, and more beautiful than any
determinate one.

The illusion, however, is obvious. The infinite perfection
suggested is an absurdity. What exists is a vague emotion, the
objects of which, if they could emerge from the chaos of a
confused imagination, would turn out to be a multitude of
differently beautiful determinate things. This emotion of infinite
perfection is the _materia prima -- rudis indigestaque moles --_ out
of which attention, inspiration, and art can bring forth an infinity of
particular perfections. Every aesthetic success, whether in
contemplation or production, is the birth of one of these
possibilities with which the sense of infinite perfection is pregnant.
A work of art or an act of observation which remains indeterminate
is, therefore, a failure, however much it may stir our emotion. It is
a failure for two reasons. In the first place this emotion is seldom
wholly pleasant; it is disquieting and perplexing; it brings a desire
rather than a satisfaction. And in the second place, the emotion, not
being embodied, fails to constitute the beauty of anything; and
what we have is merely a sentiment, a consciousness that values
are or might be there, but a failure to extricate those values, or to
make them explicit and recognizable in an appropriate object.

These gropings after beauty have their worth as signs of aesthetic
vitality and intimations of future possible accomplishment; but in
themselves they are abortive, and mark the impotence of the
imagination. Sentimentalism in the observer and romanticism in
the artist are examples of this aesthetic incapacity. Whenever
beauty is really seen and loved, it has a definite embodiment: the
eye has precision, the work has style, and the object has perfection.
The kind of perfection may indeed be new; and if the discovery of
new perfections is to be called romanticism, then romanticism is
the beginning of all aesthetic life. But if by romanticism we mean
indulgence in confused suggestion and in the exhibition of turgid
force, then there is evidently need of education, of attentive labour,
to disentangle the beauties so vaguely felt, and give each its
adequate embodiment. The breadth of our inspiration need not be
lost in this process of clarification, for there is no limit to the
number and variety of forms which the world may be made to wear;
only, if it is to be appreciated as beautiful and not merely felt as
unutterable, it must be seen as a kingdom of forms. Thus the works
of Shakespeare give us a great variety, with a frequent marvellous
precision of characterization, and the forms of his art are definite
although its scope is great.

But by a curious anomaly, we are often expected to see the greatest
expressiveness in what remains indeterminate, and in reality
expresses nothing. As we have already observed, the sense of
profundity and significance is a very detachable emotion; it can
accompany a confused jumble of promptings quite as easily as it
can a thorough comprehension of reality. The illusion of infinite
perfection is peculiarly apt to produce this sensation. That illusion
arises by the simultaneous awakening of many incipient thoughts
and dim ideas; it stirs the depths of the mind as a wind stirs the
thickets of a forest; and the unusual consciousness of the life and
longing of the soul, brought by that gust of feeling, makes us
recognize in the object a singular power, a mysterious meaning.

But the feeling of significance signifies little. All we have in this
case is a potentiality of imagination; and only when this
potentiality begins to be realized in definite ideas, does a real
meaning, or any object which that meaning can mean, arise in the
mind. The highest aesthetic good is not that vague potentiality, nor
that contradictory, infinite perfection so strongly desired; it is the
greatest number and variety of finite perfections. To learn to see in
nature and to enshrine in the arts the typical forms of things; to
study and recognize their variations; to domesticate the
imagination in the world, so that everywhere beauty can be seen,
and a hint found for artistic creation, -- that is the goal of
contemplation. Progress lies in the direction of discrimination and
precision, not in that of formless emotion and reverie.

_Organized nature the source of apperceptive forms; example of
sculpture._

§ 37. The form of the material world is in one sense always
perfectly definite, since the particles that compose it are at each
moment in a given relative position; but a world that had no other
form than that of such a constellation of atoms would remain
chaotic to our perception, because we should not be able to survey
it as a whole, or to keep our attention suspended evenly over its
innumerable parts. According to evolutionary theory, mechanical
necessity has, however, brought about a distribution and
aggregation of elements such as, for our purposes, constitutes
individual things. Certain systems of atoms move together as units;
and these organisms reproduce themselves and recur so often in
our environment, that our senses become accustomed to view their
parts together. Their form becomes a natural and recognizable one.
An order and sequence is established in our imagination by virtue
of the order and sequence in which the corresponding impressions
have come to our senses. We can remember, reproduce, and in
reproducing vary, by kaleidoscopic tricks of the fancy, the forms in
which our perceptions have come.

The mechanical organization of external nature is thus the source
of apperceptive forms in the mind. Did not sensation, by a constant
repetition of certain sequences, and a recurring exactitude of
mathematical relations, keep our fancy clear and fresh, we should
fall into an imaginative lethargy. Idealization would degenerate
into indistinctness, and, by the dulling of our memory, we should
dream a world daily more poor and vague.

This process is periodically observable in the history of the arts.
The way in which the human figure, for instance, is depicted, is an
indication of the way in which it is apperceived. The arts give back
only so much of nature as the human eye has been able to master.
The most primitive stage of drawing and sculpture presents man
with his arms and legs, his ten fingers and ten toes, branching out
into mid-air; the apperception of the body has been evidently
practical and successive, and the artist sets down what he knows
rather than any of the particular perceptions that conveyed that
knowledge. Those perceptions are merged and lost in the haste to
reach the practically useful concept of the object. By a naïve
expression of the same principle, we find in some Assyrian
drawings the eye seen from the front introduced into a face seen in
profile, each element being represented in that form in which it
was most easily observed and remembered. The development of
Greek sculpture furnishes a good example of the gradual
penetration of nature into the mind, of the slowly enriched
apperception of the object. The quasi-Egyptian stiffness melts
away, first from the bodies of the minor figures, afterwards of
those of the gods, and finally the face is varied, and the hieratic
smile almost disappears.[10]

But this progress has a near limit; once the most beautiful and
inclusive apperception reached, once the best form caught at its
best moment, the artist seems to have nothing more to do. To
reproduce the imperfections of individuals seems wrong, when
beauty, after all, is the thing desired. And the ideal, as caught by
the master's inspiration, is more beautiful than anything his pupils
can find for themselves in nature. From its summit, the art
therefore declines in one of two directions. It either becomes
academic, forsakes the study of nature, and degenerates into empty
convention, or else it becomes ignoble, forsakes beauty, and sinks
into a tasteless and unimaginative technique. The latter was the
course of sculpture in ancient times, the former, with moments of
reawakening, has been its dreadful fate among the moderns.

This reawakening has come whenever there has been a return to
nature, for a new form of apperception and a new ideal. Of this
return there is continual need in all the arts; without it our
apperceptions grow thin and worn, and subject to the sway of
tradition and fashion. We continue to judge about beauty, but we
give up looking for it. The remedy is to go back to the reality, to
study it patiently, to allow new aspects of it to work upon the mind,
sink into it, and beget there an imaginative offspring after their
own kind. Then a new art can appear, which, having the same
origin in admiration for nature which the old art had, may hope to
attain the same excellence in a new direction.

In fact, one of the dangers to which a modern artist is exposed is
the seduction of his predecessors. The gropings of our muse, the
distracted experiments of our architecture, often arise from the
attraction of some historical school; we cannot work out our own
style because we are hampered by the beauties of so many others.
The result is an eclecticism, which, in spite of its great historical
and psychological interest, is without aesthetic unity or permanent
power to please. Thus the study of many schools of art may
become an obstacle to proficiency in any.

_Utility the principle of organization in nature._

§ 38. Utility (or, as it is now called, adaptation, and natural
selection) organizes the material world into definite species and
individuals. Only certain aggregations of matter are in equilibrium
with the prevailing forces of the environment. Gravity, for instance,
is in itself a chaotic force; it pulls all particles indiscriminately
together without reference to the wholes into which the human eye
may have grouped them. But the result is not chaos, because matter
arranged in some ways is welded together by the very tendency
which disintegrates it when arranged in other forms. These forms,
selected by their congruity with gravity, are therefore fixed in
nature, and become types. Thus the weight of the stones keeps the
pyramid standing: here a certain shape has become a guarantee of
permanence in the presence of a force in itself mechanical and
undiscriminating. It is the utility of the pyramidal form -- its fitness
to stand -- that has made it a type in building. The Egyptians
merely repeated a process that they might have observed going on
of itself in nature, who builds a pyramid in every hill, not indeed
because she wishes to, or because pyramids are in any way an
object of her action, but because she has no force which can easily
dislodge matter that finds itself in that shape.

Such an accidental stability of structure is, in this moving world, a
sufficient principle of permanence and individuality. The same
mechanical principles, in more complex applications, insure the
persistence of animal forms and prevent any permanent deviation
from them. What is called the principle of self-preservation, and
the final causes and substantial forms of the Aristotelian
philosophy, are descriptions of the result of this operation. The
tendency of everything to maintain and propagate its nature is
simply the inertia of a stable juxtaposition of elements, which are
not enough disturbed by ordinary accidents to lose their
equilibrium; while the incidence of a too great disturbance causes
that disruption we call death, or that variation of type, which, on
account of its incapacity to establish itself permanently, we call
abnormal.

Nature thus organizes herself into recognizable species; and the
aesthetic eye, studying her forms, tends, as we have already shown,
to bring the type within even narrower limits than do the external
exigencies of life.

_The relation of utility to beauty._

§ 39. This natural harmony between utility and beauty, when its
origin is not understood, is of course the subject of much perplexed
and perplexing theory. Sometimes we are told that utility is itself
the essence of beauty, that is, that our consciousness of the
practical advantages of certain forms is the ground of our aesthetic
admiration of them. The horse's legs are said to be beautiful
because they are fit to run, the eye because it is made to see, the
house because it is convenient to live in. An amusing application --
which might pass for a _reductio ad absurdum,_ -- of this dense
theory is put by Xenophon into the mouth of Socrates. Comparing
himself with a youth present at the same banquet, who was about
to receive the prize of beauty, Socrates declares himself more
beautiful and more worthy of the crown. For utility makes beauty,
and eyes bulging out from the head like his are the most
advantageous for seeing; nostrils wide and open to the air, like his,
most appropriate for smell; and a mouth large and voluminous, like
his, best fitted for both eating and kissing.[11]

Now since these things are, in fact, hideous, the theory that shows
they _ought to be_ beautiful, is vain and ridiculous. But that
theory contains this truth: that had the utility of Socratic features
been so great that men of all other type must have perished,
Socrates would have been beautiful. He would have represented
the human type. The eye would have been then accustomed to that
form, the imagination would have taken it as the basis of its
refinements, and accentuated its naturally effective points. The
beautiful does not depend on the useful; it is constituted by the
imagination in ignorance and contempt of practical advantage; but
it is not independent of the necessary, for the necessary must also
be the habitual and consequently the basis of the type, and of all its
imaginative variations.

There are, moreover, at a late and derivative stage in our aesthetic
judgment, certain cases in which the knowledge of fitness and
utility enters into our sense of beauty. But it does so very indirectly,
rather by convincing us that we should tolerate what practical
conditions have imposed on an artist, by arousing admiration of his
ingenuity, or by suggesting the interesting things themselves with
which the object is known to be connected. Thus a cottage-chimney,
stout and tall, with the smoke floating from it, pleases because
we fancy it to mean a hearth, a rustic meal, and a comfortable
family. But that is all extraneous association. The most
ordinary way in which utility affects us is negatively; if we
know a thing to be useless and fictitious, the uncomfortable
haunting sense of waste and trickery prevents all enjoyment, and
therefore banishes beauty. But this is also an adventitious
complication. The intrinsic value of a form is in no way affected by it.

Opposed to this utilitarian theory stands the metaphysical one that
would make the beauty or intrinsic rightness of things the source of
their efficiency and of their power to survive. Taken literally, as it
is generally meant, this idea must, from our point of view, appear
preposterous. Beauty and rightness are relative to our judgment
and emotion; they in no sense exist in nature or preside over her.
She everywhere appears to move by mechanical law. The types of
things exist by what, in relation to our approbation, is mere chance,
and it is our faculties that must adapt themselves to our
environment and not our environment to our faculties. Such is the
naturalistic point of view which we have adopted.

To say, however, that beauty is in some sense the ground of
practical fitness, need not seem to us wholly unmeaning. The fault
of the Platonists who say things of this sort is seldom that of
emptiness. They have an intuition; they have sometimes a strong
sense of the facts of consciousness. But they turn their discoveries
into so many revelations, and the veil of the infinite and absolute
soon covers their little light of specific truth. Sometimes, after
patient digging, the student comes upon the treasure of some
simple fact, some common experience, beneath all their mystery
and unction. And so it may be in this case. If we make allowances
for the tendency to express experience in allegory and myth, we
shall see that the idea of beauty and rationality presiding over
nature and guiding her, as it were, for their own greater glory, is a
projection and a writing large of a psychological principle.

The mind that perceives nature is the same that understands and
enjoys her; indeed, these three functions are really elements of one
process. There is therefore in the mere perceptibility of a thing a
certain prophecy of its beauty; if it were not on the road to beauty,
if it had no approach to fitness to our faculties of perception, the
object would remain eternally unperceived. The sense, therefore,
that the whole world is made to be food for the soul; that beauty is
not only its own, but all things' excuse for being; that universal
aspiration towards perfection is the key and secret of the world, --
that sense is the poetical reverberation of a psychological fact -- of
the fact that our mind is an organism tending to unity, to
unconsciousness of what is refractory to its action, and to
assimilation and sympathetic transformation of what is kept within
its sphere. The idea that nature could be governed by an aspiration
towards beauty is, therefore, to be rejected as a confusion, but at
the same time we must confess that this confusion is founded on a
consciousness of the subjective relation between the perceptibility,
rationality, and beauty of things.

_Utility the principle of organization in the arts._

§ 40. This subjective relation is, however, exceedingly loose. Most
things that are perceivable are not perceived so distinctly as to be
intelligible, nor so delightfully as to be beautiful. If our eye had
infinite penetration, or our imagination infinite elasticity, this
would not be the case; to see would then be to understand and to
enjoy. As it is, the degree of determination needed for perception is
much less than that needed for comprehension or ideality. Hence
there is room for hypothesis and for art. As hypothesis organizes
experiences imaginatively in ways in which observation has not
been able to do, so art organizes objects in ways to which nature,
perhaps, has never condescended.

The chief thing which the imitative arts add to nature is
permanence, the lack of which is the saddest defect of many
natural beauties. The forces which determine natural forms,
therefore, determine also the forms of the imitative arts. But the
non-imitative arts supply organisms different in kind from those
which nature affords. If we seek the principle by which these
objects are organized, we shall generally find that it is likewise
utility. Architecture, for instance, has all its forms suggested by
practical demands. Use requires our buildings to assume certain
determinate forms; the mechanical properties of our materials, the
exigency of shelter, light, accessibility, economy, and convenience,
dictate the arrangements of our buildings.

Houses and temples have an evolution like that of animals and
plants. Various forms arise by mechanical necessity, like the cave,
or the shelter of overhanging boughs. These are perpetuated by a
selection in which the needs and pleasures of man are the
environment to which the structure must be adapted. Determinate
forms thus establish themselves, and the eye becomes accustomed
to them. The line of use, by habit of apperception, becomes the line
of beauty. A striking example may be found in the pediment of the
Greek temple and the gable of the northern house. The exigencies
of climate determine these forms differently, but the eye in each
case accepts what utility imposes. We admire height in one and
breadth in the other, and we soon find the steep pediment heavy
and the low gable awkward and mean.

It would be an error, however, to conclude that habit alone
establishes the right proportion in these various types of building.
We have the same intrinsic elements to consider as in natural
forms. That is, besides the unity of type and correspondence of
parts which custom establishes, there are certain appeals to more
fundamental susceptibilities of the human eye and imagination.
There is, for instance, the value of abstract form, determined by the
pleasantness and harmony of implicated retinal or muscular
tensions. Different structures contain or suggest more or less of
this kind of beauty, and in that proportion may be called
intrinsically better or worse. Thus artificial forms may be arranged
in a hierarchy like natural ones, by reference to the absolute values
of their contours and masses. Herein lies the superiority of a Greek
to a Chinese vase, or of Gothic to Saracenic construction. Thus
although every useful form is capable of proportion and beauty,
when once its type is established, we cannot say that this beauty is
always potentially equal; and an iron bridge, for instance, although
it certainly possesses and daily acquires aesthetic interest, will
probably never, on the average, equal a bridge of stone.

_Form and adventitious ornament._

§ 41. Beauty of form is the last to be found or admired in artificial
as in natural objects. Time is needed to establish it, and training
and nicety of perception to enjoy it. Motion or colour is what first
interests a child in toys, as in animals; and the barbarian artist
decorates long before he designs. The cave and wigwam are
daubed with paint, or hung with trophies, before any pleasure is
taken in their shape; and the appeal to the detached senses, and to
associations of wealth and luxury, precedes by far the appeal to the
perceptive harmonies of form. In music we observe the same
gradation; first, we appreciate its sensuous and sentimental value;
only with education can we enjoy its form. The plastic arts begin,
therefore, with adventitious ornament and with symbolism. The
aesthetic pleasure is in the richness of the material, the profusion of
the ornament, the significance of the shape -- in everything, rather
than in the shape itself.

We have accordingly, in works of art two independent sources of
effect. The first is the useful form, which generates the type, and
ultimately the beauty of form, when the type has been idealized by
emphasizing its intrinsically pleasing traits. The second is the
beauty of ornament, which comes from the excitement of the
senses, or of the imagination, by colour, or by profusion or
delicacy of detail. Historically, the latter is first developed, and
applied to a form as yet merely useful. But the very presence of
ornament attracts contemplation; the attention lavished on the
object helps to fix its form in the mind, and to make us
discriminate the less from the more graceful. The two kinds of
beauty are then felt, and, yielding to that tendency to unity which
the mind always betrays, we begin to subordinate and organize
these two excellences. The ornament is distributed so as to
emphasize the aesthetic essence of the form; to idealize it even
more, by adding adventitious interests harmoniously to the
intrinsic interest of the lines of structure.

There is here a great field, of course, for variety of combination
and compromise. Some artists are fascinated by the decoration, and
think of the structure merely as the background on which it can be
most advantageously displayed. Others, of more austere taste,
allow ornament only to emphasize the main lines of the design, or
to conceal such inharmonious elements as nature or utility may
prevent them from eliminating.[12] We may thus oscillate between
decorative and structural motives, and only in one point, for each
style, can we find the ideal equilibrium, in which the greatest
strength and lucidity is combined with the greatest splendour.

A less subtle, but still very effective, combination is that hit upon
by many oriental and Gothic architects, and found, also, by
accident perhaps, in many buildings of the plateresque style; the
ornament and structure are both presented with extreme emphasis,
but locally divided; a vast rough wall, for instance, represents the
one, and a profusion of mad ornament huddled around a central
door or window represents the other.

Gothic architecture offers us in the pinnacle and flying buttress a
striking example of the adoption of a mechanical feature, and its
transformation into an element of beauty. Nothing could at first
sight be more hopeless than the external half-arch propping the
side of a pier, or the chimney-like weight of stones pressing it
down from above; but a courageous acceptance of these necessities,
and a submissive study of their form, revealed a new and strange
effect: the bewildering and stimulating intricacy of masses
suspended in mid-air; the profusion of line, variety of surface, and
picturesqueness of light and shade. It needed but a little applied
ornament judiciously distributed; a moulding in the arches; a florid
canopy and statue amid the buttresses; a few grinning monsters
leaning out of unexpected nooks; a leafy budding of the topmost
pinnacles; a piercing here and there of some little gallery, parapet,
or turret into lacework against the sky -- and the building became a
poem, an inexhaustible emotion. Add some passing cloud casting
its moving shadow over the pile, add the circling of birds about the
towers, and you have an unforgettable type of beauty; not perhaps
the noblest, sanest, or most enduring, but one for the existence of
which the imagination is richer, and the world more interesting.

In this manner we accept the forms imposed upon us by utility, and
train ourselves to apperceive their potential beauty. Familiarity
breeds contempt only when it breeds inattention. When the mind is
absorbed and dominated by its perceptions, it incorporates into
them more and more of its own functional values, and makes them
ultimately beautiful and expressive. Thus no language can be ugly
to those who speak it well, no religion unmeaning to those who
have learned to pour their life into its moulds.

Of course these forms vary in intrinsic excellence; they are by their
specific character more or less fit and facile for the average mind.
But the man and the age are rare who can choose their own path;
we have generally only a choice between going ahead in the
direction already chosen, or halting and blocking the path for
others. The only kind of reform usually possible is reform from
within; a more intimate study and more intelligent use of the
traditional forms. Disaster follows rebellion against tradition or
against utility, which are the basis and root of our taste and
progress. But, within the given school, and as exponents of its
spirit, we can adapt and perfect our works, if haply we are better
inspired than our predecessors. For the better we know a given
thing, and the more we perceive its strong and weak points, the
more capable we are of idealizing it.

_Form in words._

§ 42. The main effect of language consists in its meaning, in the
ideas which it expresses. But no expression is possible without a
presentation, and this presentation must have a form. This form of
the instrument of expression is itself an element of effect, although
in practical life we may overlook it in our haste to attend to the
meaning it conveys. It is, moreover, a condition of the kind of
expression possible, and often determines the manner in which the
object suggested shall be apperceived. No word has the exact value
of any other in the same or in another language.[13] But the
intrinsic effect of language does not stop there. The single word is
but a stage in the series of formations which constitute language,
and which preserve for men the fruit of their experience, distilled
and concentrated into a symbol.

This formation begins with the elementary sounds themselves,
which have to be discriminated and combined to make recognizable
symbols. The evolution of these symbols goes on spontaneously,
suggested by our tendency to utter all manner of sounds,
and preserved by the ease with which the ear discriminates
these sounds when made. Speech would be an absolute and
unrelated art, like music, were it not controlled by utility. The
sounds have indeed no resemblance to the objects they symbolize;
but before the system of sounds can represent the system of objects,
there has to be a correspondence in the groupings of both. The
structure of language, unlike that of music, thus becomes a mirror
of the structure of the world as presented to the intelligence.

Grammar, philosophically studied, is akin to the deepest
metaphysics, because in revealing the constitution of speech, it
reveals the constitution of thought, and the hierarchy of those
categories by which we conceive the world. It is by virtue of this
parallel development that language has its function of expressing
experience with exactness, and the poet -- to whom language is an
instrument of art -- has to employ it also with a constant reference
to meaning and veracity; that is, he must be a master of experience
before he can become a true master of words. Nevertheless,
language is primarily a sort of music, and the beautiful effects
which it produces are due to its own structure, giving, as it
crystallizes in a new fashion, an unforeseen form to experience.

Poets may be divided into two classes: the musicians and the
psychologists. The first are masters of significant language
as harmony; they know what notes to sound together and in
succession; they can produce, by the marshalling of sounds and
images, by the fugue of passion and the snap of wit, a thousand
brilliant effects out of old materials. The Ciceronian orator, the
epigrammatic, lyric, and elegiac poets, give examples of this art.
The psychologists, on the other hand, gain their effect not by the
intrinsic mastery of language, but by the closer adaptation of it to
things. The dramatic poets naturally furnish an illustration.

But however transparent we may wish to make our language,
however little we may call for its intrinsic effects, and direct our
attention exclusively to its expressiveness, we cannot avoid the
limitations of our particular medium. The character of the tongue a
man speaks, and the degree of his skill in speaking it, must always
count enormously in the aesthetic value of his compositions; no
skill in observation, no depth of thought or feeling, but is spoiled
by a bad style and enhanced by a good one. The diversities of
tongues and their irreducible aesthetic values, begins with the very
sound of the letters, with the mode of utterance, and the
characteristic inflections of the voice; notice, for instance, the
effect of the French of these lines of Alfred de Musset,

     Jamais deux yeux plus doux n'ont du ciel le plus pur
     Sondé la profondeur et réfléchi l'azur.

and compare with its flute-like and treble quality the breadth, depth,
and volume of the German in this inimitable stanza of Goethe's:

     Ueber alien Gipfeln
     Ist Ruh,
     In allen Wipfeln
     Spürest du
     Kaum einen Hauch;
     Die Vögelein schweigen im Walde.
     Warte nur, balde
     Ruhest du auch.

Even if the same tune could be played on both these vocal
instruments, the difference in their _timbre_ would make the value
of the melody entirely distinct in each case.

_Syntactical form._

§ 43. The known impossibility of adequate translation appears here
at the basis of language. The other diversities are superadded upon
this diversity of sound. The syntax is the next source of effect.
What could be better than Homer, or what worse than almost any
translation of him? And this holds even of languages so closely
allied as the Indo-European, which, after all, have certain
correspondences of syntax and inflection. If there could be a
language with other parts of speech than ours, -- a language
without nouns, for instance, -- how would that grasp of experience,
that picture of the world, which all our literature contains, be
reproduced in it? Whatever beauties that language might be
susceptible of, none of the effects produced on us, I will not say by
poets, but even by nature itself, could be expressed in it.

Nor is such a language inconceivable. Instead of summarizing all
our experiences of a thing by one word, its name, we should have
to recall by appropriate adjectives the various sensations we had
received from it; the objects we think of would be disintegrated, or,
rather, would never have been unified. For "sun," they would say
"high, yellow, dazzling, round, slowly moving," and the
enumeration of these qualities (as we call them), without any
suggestion of a unity at their source, might give a more vivid, and
profound, if more cumbrous, representation of the facts. But how
could the machinery of such an imagination be capable of
repeating the effects of ours, when the objects to us most obvious
and real would be to those minds utterly indescribable?

The same diversity appears in the languages we ordinarily know,
only in a lesser degree. The presence or absence of case-endings in
nouns and adjectives, their difference of gender, the richness of
inflections in the verbs, the frequency of particles and conjunctions,
-- all these characteristics make one language differ from another
entirely in genius and capacity of expression. Greek is probably the
best of all languages in melody, richness, elasticity, and simplicity;
so much so, that in spite of its complex inflections, when once a
vocabulary is acquired, it is more easy and natural for a modern
than his ancestral Latin itself. Latin is the stiffer tongue; it is by
nature at once laconic and grandiloquent, and the exceptional
condensation and transposition of which it is capable make its
effects entirely foreign to a modern, scarcely inflected, tongue.
Take, for instance, these lines of Horace:

          me tabula sacer
     votiva paries indicat uvida
     suspendisse potenti
     vestimenta maris deo,

or these of Lucretius:

     Jauaque caput quassans grandis suspirat arator
     Crebrius incassum magnum cecidisse laborem.

What conglomerate plebeian speech of our time could utter the
stately grandeur of these Lucretian words, every one of which is
noble, and wears the toga?

As a substitute for the inimitable interpenetration of the words in
the Horatian strophe, we might have the external links of rhyme;
and it seems, in fact, to be a justification of rhyme, that besides
contributing something to melody and to the distribution of parts, it
gives an artificial relationship to the phrases between which it
obtains, which, but for it, would run away from one another in a
rapid and irrevocable flux. In such a form as the sonnet, for
instance, we have, by dint of assonance, a real unity forced upon
the thought; for a sonnet in which the thought is not distributed
appropriately to the structure of the verse, has no excuse for being
a sonnet. By virtue of this interrelation of parts, the sonnet, the
_non plus ultra_ of rhyme, is the most classic of modern poetical
forms: much more classic in spirit than blank verse, which lacks
almost entirely the power of synthesizing the phrase, and making
the unexpected seem the inevitable.

This beauty given to the ancients by the syntax of their language,
the moderns can only attain by the combination of their rhymes. It
is a bad substitute perhaps, but better than the total absence of form,
favoured by the atomic character of our words, and the flat
juxtaposition of our clauses. The art which was capable of making
a gem of every prose sentence, -- the art which, carried, perhaps, to,
a pitch at which it became too conscious, made the phrases of
Tacitus a series of cameos, -- that art is inapplicable to our looser
medium; we cannot give clay the finish and nicety of marble. Our
poetry and speech in general, therefore, start out upon a lower level;
the same effort will not, with this instrument, attain the same
beauty. If equal beauty is ever attained, it comes from the wealth of
suggestion, or the refinement of sentiment. The art of words
remains hopelessly inferior. And what best proves this, is that
when, as in our time, a reawakening of the love of beauty has
prompted a refinement of our poetical language, we pass so soon
into extravagance, obscurity, and affectation. Our modern
languages are not susceptible of great formal beauty.

_Literary form. The plot._

§ 44. The forms of composition in verse and prose which are
practised in each language are further organizations of words, and
have formal values. The most exacting of these forms and that
which has been carried to the greatest perfection is the drama; but
it belongs to rhetoric and poetics to investigate the nature of these
effects, and we have here sufficiently indicated the principle which
underlies them. The plot, which Aristotle makes, and very justly,
the most important element in the effect of a drama, is the formal
element of the drama as such: the ethos and sentiments are the
expression, and the versification, music, and stage settings are the
materials. It is in harmony with the romantic tendency of modern
times that modern dramatists -- Shakespeare as well as Molière,
Calderon, and the rest -- excel in ethos rather than in plot; for it is
the evident characteristic of modern genius to study and enjoy
expression, -- the suggestion of the not-given, -- rather than form,
the harmony of the given.

Ethos is interesting mainly for the personal observations which it
summarizes and reveals, or for the appeal to one's own actual or
imaginative experience; it is portrait-painting, and enshrines
something we love independently of the charm which at this
moment and in this place it exercises over us. It appeals to our
affections; it does not form them. But the plot is the synthesis of
actions, and is a reproduction of those experiences from which our
notion of men and things is originally derived; for character can
never be observed in the world except as manifested in action.

Indeed, it would be more fundamentally accurate to say that a
character is a symbol and mental abbreviation for a peculiar set of
acts, than to say that acts are a manifestation of character. For the
acts are the data, and the character the inferred principle, and a
principle, in spite of its name, is never more than a description _a
posteriori,_ and a summary of what is subsumed under it. The plot,
moreover, is what gives individuality to the play, and exercises
invention; it is, as Aristotle again says, the most difficult portion of
dramatic art, and that for which practice and training are most
indispensable. And this plot, giving by its nature a certain picture
of human experience, involves and suggests the ethos of its actors.

What the great characterizes, like Shakespeare, do, is simply to
elaborate and develope (perhaps far beyond the necessities of the
plot) the suggestion of human individuality which that plot
contains. It is as if, having drawn from daily observation some
knowledge of the tempers of our friends, we represented them
saying and doing all manner of ultra-characteristic things, and in
an occasional soliloquy laying bare, even more clearly than by any
possible action, that character which their observed behaviour had
led us to impute to them. This is an ingenious and fascinating
invention, and delights us with the clear discovery of a hidden
personality; but the serious and equable development of a plot has
a more stable worth in its greater similarity to life, which allows us
to see other men's minds through the medium of events, and not
events through the medium of other men's minds.

_Character as an aesthetic form._

§ 45. We have just come upon one of the unities most coveted in
our literature, and most valued by us when attained, -- the portrait,
the individuality, the character. The construction of a plot we call
invention, but that of a character we dignify with the name of
creation. It may therefore not be amiss, in finishing our discussion
of form, to devote a few pages to the psychology of character-drawing.
How does the unity we call a character arise, how is it described, and
what is the basis of its effect?

We may set it down at once as evident that we have here a case of
the type: the similarities of various persons are amalgamated, their
differences cancelled, and in the resulting percept those traits
emphasized which have particularly pleased or interested us. This,
in the abstract, may serve for a description of the origin of an idea
of character quite as well as of an idea of physical form. But the
different nature of the material -- the fact that a character is not a
presentation to sense, but a rationalistic synthesis of successive
acts and feelings, not combinable into any image -- makes such a
description much more unsatisfying in this case than in that
of material forms. We cannot understand exactly how these
summations and cancellings take place when we are not dealing
with a visible object. And we may even feel that there is a
wholeness and inwardness about the development of certain ideal
characters, that makes such a treatment of them fundamentally
false and artificial. The subjective element, the spontaneous
expression of our own passion and will, here counts for so much,
that the creation of an ideal character becomes a new and peculiar
problem.

There is, however, a way of conceiving and delineating character
which still bears a close resemblance to the process by which the
imagination produces the type of any physical species. We may
gather, for instance, about the nucleus of a word, designating some
human condition or occupation, a number of detached observations.
We may keep a note-book in our memory, or even in our pocket,
with studious observations of the language, manners, dress, gesture,
and history of the people _we_ meet, classifying our statistics
under such heads as innkeepers, soldiers, housemaids, governesses,
adventuresses, Germans, Frenchmen, Italians, Americans, actors,
priests, and professors. And then, when occasion offers, to describe,
or to put into a book or a play, any one of these types, all we have
to do is to look over our notes, to select according to the needs of
the moment, and if we are skilful in reproduction, to obtain by that
means a life-like image of the sort of person we wish to represent.

This process, which novelists and playwrights may go through
deliberately, we all carry on involuntarily. At every moment
experience is leaving in our minds some trait, some expression,
some image, which will remain there attached to the name of a
person, a class, or a nationality. Our likes and dislikes, our
summary judgments on whole categories of men, are nothing but
the distinct survival of some such impression. These traits have
vivacity. If the picture they draw is one-sided and inadequate, the
sensation they recall may be vivid, and suggestive of many other
aspects of the thing. Thus the epithets in Homer, although they are
often far from describing the essence of the object -- glankopis Athena
enkeides Achaioi -- seem to recall a sensation, and to give
vitality to the narrative. By bringing you, through one sense, into
the presence of the object, they give you that same hint of further
discovery, that same expectation of experience, which we have at
the sight of whatever we call real.

The graphic power of this method of observation and aggregation
of characteristic traits is thus seen to be great. But it is not by this
method that the most famous or most living characters have been
conceived. This method gives the average, or at most the salient,
points of the type, but the great characters of poetry -- a Hamlet, a
Don Quixote, an Achilles -- are no averages, they are not even a
collection of salient traits common to certain classes of men. They
seem to be persons; that is, their actions and words seem to spring
from the inward nature of an individual soul. Goethe is reported to
have said that he conceived the character of his Gretchen entirely
without observation of originals. And, indeed, he would probably
not have found any. His creation rather is the original to which we
may occasionally think we see some likeness in real maidens. It is
the fiction here that is the standard of naturalness. And on this, as
on so many occasions, we may repeat the saying that poetry is
truer than history. Perhaps no actual maid ever spoke and acted so
naturally as this imaginary one.

If we think there is any paradox in these assertions, we should
reflect that the standard of naturalness, individuality, and truth is in
us. A real person seems to us to have character and consistency
when his behaviour is such as to impress a definite and simple
image upon our mind. In themselves, if we could count all their
undiscovered springs of action, all men have character and
consistency alike: all are equally fit to be types. But their
characters are not equally intelligible to us, their behaviour is not
equally deducible, and their motives not equally appreciable.
Those who appeal most to us, either in themselves or by the
emphasis they borrow from their similarity to other individuals, are
those we remember and regard as the centres around which
variations oscillate. These men are natural: all others are more or
less eccentric.

_Ideal characters._

§ 46. The standard of naturalness being thus subjective, and
determined by the laws of our imagination, we can understand why
a spontaneous creation of the mind can be more striking and living
than any reality, or any abstraction from realities. The artist can
invent a form which, by its adaptation to the imagination, lodges
there, and becomes a point of reference for all observations, and a
standard of naturalness and beauty. A type may be introduced to
the mind suddenly, by the chance presentation of a form that by its
intrinsic impressiveness and imaginative coherence, acquires that
pre-eminence which custom, or the mutual reinforcement of
converging experiences, ordinarily gives to empirical percepts.

This method of originating types is what we ordinarily describe as
artistic creation. The name indicates the suddenness, originality,
and individuality of the conception thus attained. What we call
idealization is often a case of it. In idealization proper, however,
what happens is the elimination of individual eccentricities; the
result is abstract, and consequently meagre. This meagreness is
often felt to be a greater disadvantage than the accidental and
picturesque imperfection of real individuals, and the artist
therefore turns to the brute fact, and studies and reproduces that
with indiscriminate attention, rather than lose strength and
individuality in the presentation of an insipid type. He seems
forced to a choice between an abstract beauty and an unlovely
example.

But the great and masterful presentations of the ideal are somehow
neither the one nor the other. They present ideal beauty with just
that definiteness with which nature herself sometimes presents it.
When we come in a crowd upon an incomparably beautiful face,
we know it immediately as an embodiment of the ideal; while it
contains the type, -- for if it did not we should find it monstrous
and grotesque, -- it clothes that type in a peculiar splendour of
form, colour, and expression. It has an individuality. And just so
the imaginary figures of poetry and plastic art may have an
individuality given them by the happy affinities of their elements
in the imagination. They are not idealizations, they are
spontaneous variations, which can arise in the mind quite as easily
as in the world. They spring up in

     The wreathèd trellis of a working brain;
     . . . With all the gardener fancy e'er could feign
     Who, breeding flowers, will never breed the same.

Imagination, in a word, generates as well as abstracts; it observes,
combines, and cancels; but it also dreams. Spontaneous syntheses
arise in it which are not mathematical averages of the images it
receives from sense; they are effects of diffused excitements left in
the brain by sensations. These excitements vary constantly in their
various renewals, and occasionally take such a form that the soul is
surprised by the inward vision of an unexampled beauty. If this
inward vision is clear and steady, we have an aesthetic inspiration,
a vocation to create; and if we can also command the technique of
an appropriate art, we shall hasten to embody that inspiration, and
realize an ideal. This ideal will be gradually recognized as
supremely beautiful for the same reason that the object, had it been
presented in the real world, would have been recognized as
supremely beautiful; because while embodying a known type of
form, -- being, that is, a proper man, animal, or vegetable, -- it
possessed in an extraordinary degree those direct charms which
most subjugate our attention.

Imaginary forms then differ in dignity and beauty not according to
their closeness to fact or type in nature, but according to the ease
with which the normal imagination reproduces the synthesis they
contain. To add wings to a man has always been a natural fancy;
because man can easily imagine himself to fly, and the idea is
delightful to him. The winged man is therefore a form generally
recognized as beautiful; although it can happen, as it did to
Michael Angelo, that our appreciation of the actual form of the
human body should be too keen and overmastering to allow us to
relish even so charming and imaginative an extravagance. The
centaur is another beautiful monster. The imagination can easily
follow the synthesis of the dream in which horse and man melted
into one, and first gave the glorious suggestion of their united
vitality.

The same condition determines the worth of imaginary
personalities. From the gods to the characters of comedy, all are, in
proportion to their beauty, natural and exhilarating expressions of
possible human activity. We sometimes remould visible forms into
imaginary creatures; but our originality in this respect is meagre
compared with the profusion of images of action which arise in us,
both asleep and awake; we constantly dream of new situations,
extravagant adventures, and exaggerated passions. Even our
soberer thoughts are very much given to following the possible
fortunes of some enterprise, and foretasting the satisfactions of
love and ambition. The mind is therefore particularly sensitive to
pictures of action and character; we are easily induced to follow
the fortunes of any hero, and share his sentiments.

Our will, as Descartes said in a different context, is infinite, while
our intelligence is finite; we follow experience pretty closely in our
ideas of things, and even the furniture of fairyland bears a sad
resemblance to that of earth; but there is no limit to the elasticity of
our passion; and we love to fancy ourselves kings and beggars,
saints and villains, young and old, happy and unhappy. There
seems to be a boundless capacity of development in each of us,
which the circumstances of life determine to a narrow channel; and
we like to revenge ourselves in our reveries for this imputed
limitation, by classifying ourselves with all that we are not, but
might so easily have been. We are full of sympathy for every
manifestation of life, however unusual; and even the conception of
infinite knowledge and happiness -- than which nothing could be
more removed from our condition or more unrealizable to our
fancy -- remains eternally interesting to us.

The poet, therefore, who wishes to delineate a character need not
keep a note-book. There is a quicker road to the heart -- if he has
the gift to find it. Probably his readers will not themselves have
kept note-books, and his elaborate observations will only be
effective when he describes something which they also happen to
have noticed. The typical characters describable by the empirical
method are therefore few: the miser, the lover, the old nurse, the
ingénue, and the other types of traditional comedy. Any greater
specification would appeal only to a small audience for a short
time, because the characteristics depicted would no longer exist to
be recognized. But whatever experience a poet's hearers may have
had, they are men. They will have certain imaginative capacities to
conceive and admire those forms of character and action which,
although never actually found, are felt by each man to express
what he himself might and would have been, had circumstances
been more favourable.

The poet has only to study himself, and the art of expressing his
own ideals, to find that he has expressed those of other people. He
has but to enact in himself the part of each of his personages, and if
he possesses that pliability and that definiteness of imagination
which together make genius, he may express for his fellows those
inward tendencies which in them have remained painfully dumb.
He will be hailed as master of the human soul. He may know
nothing of men, he may have almost no experience; but his
creations will pass for models of naturalness, and for types of
humanity. Their names will be in every one's mouth, and the lives
of many generations will be enriched by the vision, one might
almost say by the friendship, of these imaginary beings. They have
individuality without having reality, because individuality is a
thing acquired in the mind by the congeries of its impressions.
They have power, also, because that depends on the appropriateness
of a stimulus to touch the springs of reaction in the soul.
And they of course have beauty, because in them is embodied
the greatest of our imaginative delights, -- that of giving body to
our latent capacities, and of wandering, without the strain and
contradiction of actual existence, into all forms of possible being.

_The religious imagination._

§ 47. The greatest of these creations hare not been the work of any
one man. They have been the slow product of the pious and poetic
imagination. Starting from some personification of nature or some
memory of a great man, the popular and priestly tradition has
refined and developed the ideal; it has made it an expression of
men's aspiration and a counterpart of their need. The devotion of
each tribe, shrine, and psalmist has added some attribute to the god
or some parable to his legend; and thus, around the kernel of some
original divine function, the imagination of a people has gathered
every possible expression of it, creating a complete and beautiful
personality, with its history, its character, and its gifts. No poet has
ever equalled the perfection or significance of these religious
creations. The greatest characters of fiction are uninteresting and
unreal compared with the conceptions of the gods; so much so that
men have believed that their gods have objective reality.

The forms men see in dreams might have been a reason for
believing in vague and disquieting ghosts; but the belief in
individual and well-defined divinities, with which the visions of
the dreams might be identified, is obviously due to the intrinsic
coherence and impressiveness of the conception of those deities.
The visions would never have suggested the legend and attributes
of the god; but when the figure of the god was once imaginatively
conceived, and his name and aspect fixed in the imagination, it
would be easy to recognize him in any hallucination, or to interpret
any event as due to his power. These manifestations, which
constitute the evidence of his actual existence, can be regarded as
manifestations of him, rather than of a vague, unknown power,
only when the imagination already possesses a vivid picture of him,
and of his appropriate functions. This picture is the work of a
spontaneous fancy.

No doubt, when the belief is once specified, and the special and
intelligible god is distinguished in the night and horror of the
all-pervading natural power, the belief in his reality helps to
concentrate our attention on his nature, and thus to develope and
enrich our idea. The belief in the reality of an ideal personality
brings about its further idealization. Had it ever occurred to any
Greek seer to attribute events to the influence of Achilles, or to
offer sacrifices to him in the heat of the enthusiasm kindled by the
thought of his beauty and virtue, the legend of Achilles, now
become a god, would have grown and deepened; it would have
been moralized like the legend of Hercules, or naturalized like that
of Persephone, and what is now but a poetic character of
extraordinary force and sublimity would have become the adored
patron of generation after generation, and a manifestation of the
divine man.

Achilles would then have been as significant and unforgettable a
figure as Apollo or his sister, as Zeus, Athena, and the other
greater gods. If ever, while that phase of religion lasted, his
character had been obscured and his features dimmed, he would
have been recreated by every new votary: poets would never have
tired of singing his praises, or sculptors of rendering his form.
When, after the hero had been the centre and subject of so much
imaginative labour, the belief in his reality lapsed, to be transferred
to some other conception of cosmic power, he would have
remained an ideal of poetry and art, and a formative influence of
all cultivated minds. This he is still, like all the great creations of
avowed fiction, but he would have been immensely more so, had
belief in his reality kept the creative imagination continuously
intent upon his nature.

The reader can hardly fail to see that all this applies with equal
force to the Christian conception of the sacred personalities. Christ,
the Virgin Mary, and the saints may have been exactly what our
imagination pictures them to be; that is entirely possible; nor can I
see that it is impossible that the conceptions of other religions
might themselves have actual counterparts somewhere in the
universe. That is a question of faith and empirical evidence with
which we are not here concerned. But however descriptive of truth
our conceptions may be, they have evidently grown up in our
minds by an inward process of development. The materials of
history and tradition have been melted and recast by the devout
imagination into those figures in the presence of which our piety
lives.

That is the reason why the reconstructed logical gods of the
metaphysicians are always an offence and a mockery to the
religious consciousness. There is here, too, a bare possibility that
some one of these absolutes may be a representation of the truth;
but the method by which this representation is acquired is violent
and artificial; while the traditional conception of God is the
spontaneous embodiment of passionate contemplation and long
experience.

As the God of religion differs from that of metaphysics, so does
the Christ of tradition differ from that of our critical historians.
Even if we took the literal narrative of the Gospels and accepted it
as all we could know of Christ, without allowing ourselves any
imaginative interpretation of the central figure, we should get an
ideal of him, I will not say very different from that of St. Francis or
St. Theresa, but even from that of the English, prayer-book. The
Christ men have loved and adored is an ideal of their own hearts,
the construction of an ever-present personality, living and
intimately understood, out of the fragments of story and doctrine
connected with a name. This subjective image has inspired all the
prayers, all the conversions, all the penances, charities, and
sacrifices, as well as half the art of the Christian world.

The Virgin Mary, whose legend is so meagre, but whose power
over the Catholic imagination is so great, is an even clearer
illustration of this inward building up of an ideal form. Everything
is here spontaneous sympathetic expansion of two given events:
the incarnation and the crucifixion. The figure of the Virgin, found
in these mighty scenes, is gradually clarified and developed, until
we come to the thought on the one hand of her freedom from
original sin, and on the other to that of her universal maternity. We
thus attain the conception of one of the noblest of conceivable
rôles and of one of the most beautiful of characters. It is a pity that
a foolish iconoclasm should so long have deprived the Protestant
mind of the contemplation of this ideal.

Perhaps it is a sign of the average imaginative dulness or fatigue of
certain races and epochs that they so readily abandon these
supreme creations. For, if we are hopeful, why should we not
believe that the best we can fancy is also the truest; and if we are
distrustful in general of our prophetic gifts, why should we cling
only to the most mean and formless of our illusions? From the
beginning to the end of our perceptive and imaginative activity, we
are synthesizing the material of experience into unities the
independent reality of which is beyond proof, nay, beyond the
possibility of a shadow of evidence. And yet the life of intelligence,
like the joy of contemplation, lies entirely in the formation and
inter-relation of these unities. This activity yields us all the objects
with which we can deal, and endows them with the finer and more
intimate part of their beauty. The most perfect of these forms,
judged by its affinity to our powers and its stability in the presence
of our experience, is the one with which we should be content; no
other kind of veracity could add to its value.

The greatest feats of synthesis which the human mind has yet
accomplished will, indeed, be probably surpassed and all ideals yet
formed be superseded, because they were not based upon enough
experience, or did not fit that experience with adequate precision.
It is also possible that changes in the character of the facts, or in
the powers of intelligence, should necessitate a continual
reconstruction of our world. But unless human nature suffers an
inconceivable change, the chief intellectual and aesthetic value of
our ideas will always come from the creative action of the
imagination.


