PART I

THE NATURE OF BEAUTY

_The philosophy of beauty is a theory of values._

§ 1.  It would be easy to find a definition of beauty that should give
in a few words a telling paraphrase of the word. We know on
excellent authority that beauty is truth, that it is the expression of
the ideal, the symbol of divine perfection, and the sensible
manifestation of the good. A litany of these titles of honour might
easily be compiled, and repeated in praise of our divinity. Such
phrases stimulate thought and give us a momentary pleasure, but
they hardly bring any permanent enlightenment. A definition that
should really define must be nothing less than the exposition of the
origin, place, and elements of beauty as an object of human
experience. We must learn from it, as far as possible, why, when,
and how beauty appears, what conditions an object must fulfil to
be beautiful, what elements of our nature make us sensible of
beauty, and what the relation is between the constitution of the
object and the excitement of our susceptibility. Nothing less will
really define beauty or make us understand what aesthetic
appreciation is. The definition of beauty in this sense will be the
task of this whole book, a task that can be only very imperfectly
accomplished within its limits.

The historical titles of our subject may give us a hint towards the
beginning of such a definition. Many writers of the last century
called the philosophy of beauty _Criticism,_ and the word is still
retained as the title for the reasoned appreciation of works of art.
We could hardly speak, however, of delight in nature as criticism.
A sunset is not criticised; it is felt and enjoyed. The word
"criticism," used on such an occasion, would emphasize too much
the element of deliberate judgment and of comparison with
standards. Beauty, although often so described, is seldom so
perceived, and all the greatest excellences of nature and art are so
far from being approved of by a rule that they themselves furnish
the standard and ideal by which critics measure inferior effects.

This age of science and of nomenclature has accordingly adopted a
more learned word, _Aesthetics,_ that is, the theory of perception
or of susceptibility. If criticism is too narrow a word, pointing
exclusively to our more artificial judgments, aesthetics seems to be
too broad and to include within its sphere all pleasures and pains, if
not all perceptions whatsoever. Kant used it, as we know, for his
theory of time and space as forms of all perception; and it has at
times been narrowed into an equivalent for the philosophy of art.

If we combine, however, the etymological meaning of criticism
with that of aesthetics, we shall unite two essential qualities of the
theory of beauty. Criticism implies judgment, and aesthetics
perception. To get the common ground, that of perceptions which
are critical, or judgments which are perceptions, we must widen
our notion of deliberate criticism so as to include those judgments
of value which are instinctive and immediate, that is, to include
pleasures and pains; and at the same time we must narrow our
notion of aesthetics so as to exclude all perceptions which are not
appreciations, which do not find a value in their objects. We thus
reach the sphere of critical or appreciative perception, which is,
roughly speaking, what we mean to deal with. And retaining the
word "aesthetics," which is now current, we may therefore say that
aesthetics is concerned with the perception of values. The meaning
and conditions of value is, then, what we must first consider.

Since the days of Descartes it has been a conception familiar to
philosophers that every visible event in nature might be explained
by previous visible events, and that all the motions, for instance, of
the tongue in speech, or of the hand in painting, might have merely
physical causes. If consciousness is thus accessory to life and not
essential to it, the race of man might have existed upon the earth
and acquired all the arts necessary for its subsistence without
possessing a single sensation, idea, or emotion. Natural selection
might have secured the survival of those automata which made
useful reactions upon their environment. An instinct of
self-preservation would have been developed, dangers would have been
shunned without being feared, and injuries revenged without being
felt.

In such a world there might have come to be the most perfect
organization. There would have been what we should call the
expression of the deepest interests and the apparent pursuit of
conceived goods. For there would have been spontaneous and
ingrained tendencies to avoid certain contingencies and to produce
others; all the dumb show and evidence of thinking would have
been patent to the observer. Yet there would surely have been no
thinking, no expectation, and no conscious achievement in the
whole process.

The onlooker might have feigned ends and objects of forethought,
as we do in the case of the water that seeks its own level, or in that
of the vacuum which nature abhors. But the particles of matter
would have remained unconscious of their collocation, and all
nature would have been insensible of their changing arrangement.
We only, the possible spectators of that process, by virtue of our
own interests and habits, could see any progress or culmination in
it. We should see culmination where the result attained satisfied
our practical or aesthetic demands, and progress wherever such a
satisfaction was approached. But apart from ourselves, and our
human bias, we can see in such a mechanical world no element of
value whatever. In removing consciousness, we have removed the
possibility of worth.

But it is not only in the absence of all consciousness that value
would be removed from the world; by a less violent abstraction
from the totality of human experience, we might conceive beings
of a purely intellectual cast, minds in which the transformations of
nature were mirrored without any emotion. Every event would then
be noted, its relations would be observed, its recurrence might even
be expected; but all this would happen without a shadow of desire,
of pleasure, or of regret. No event would be repulsive, no situation
terrible. We might, in a word, have a world of idea without a world
of will. In this case, as completely as if consciousness were absent
altogether, all value and excellence would be gone. So that for the
existence of good in any form it is not merely consciousness but
emotional consciousness that is needed. Observation will not do,
appreciation is required.

_Preference is ultimately irrational._

§ 2. We may therefore at once assert this axiom, important for all
moral philosophy and fatal to certain stubborn incoherences of
thought, that there is no value apart from some appreciation of it,
and no good apart from some preference of it before its absence or
its opposite. In appreciation, in preference, lies the root and
essence of all excellence. Or, as Spinoza clearly expresses it, we
desire nothing because it is good, but it is good only because we
desire it.

It is true that in the absence of an instinctive reaction we can still
apply these epithets by an appeal to usage. We may agree that an
action is bad, or a building good, because we recognize in them a
character which we have learned to designate by that adjective; but
unless there is in us some trace of passionate reprobation or of
sensible delight, there is no moral or aesthetic judgment. It is all a
question of propriety of speech, and of the empty titles of things.
The verbal and mechanical proposition, that passes for judgment of
worth, is the great cloak of ineptitude in these matters. Insensibility
is very quick in the conventional use of words. If we appealed
more often to actual feeling, our judgments would be more diverse,
but they would be more legitimate and instructive. Verbal
judgments are often useful instruments of thought, but it is not by
them that worth can ultimately be determined.

Values spring from the immediate and inexplicable reaction of
vital impulse, and from the irrational part of our nature. The
rational part is by its essence relative; it leads us from data to
conclusions, or from parts to wholes; it never furnishes the data
with which it works. If any preference or precept were declared to
be ultimate and primitive, it would thereby be declared to be
irrational, since mediation, inference, and synthesis are the essence
of rationality. The ideal of rationality is itself as arbitrary, as much
dependent on the needs of a finite organization, as any other ideal.
Only as ultimately securing tranquillity of mind, which the
philosopher instinctively pursues, has it for him any necessity. In
spite of the verbal propriety of saying that reason demands
rationality, what really demands rationality, what makes it a good
and indispensable thing and gives it all its authority, is not its own
nature, but our need of it both in safe and economical action and in
the pleasures of comprehension.

It is evident that beauty is a species of value, and what we have
said of value in general applies to this particular kind. A first
approach to a definition of beauty has therefore been made by the
exclusion of all intellectual judgments, all judgments of matter of
fact or of relation. To substitute judgments of fact for judgments of
value, is a sign of a pedantic and borrowed criticism. If we
approach a work of art or nature scientifically, for the sake of its
historical connexions or proper classification, we do not approach
it aesthetically. The discovery of its date or of its author may be
otherwise interesting; it only remotely affects our aesthetic
appreciation by adding to the direct effect certain associations. If
the direct effect were absent, and the object in itself uninteresting,
the circumstances would be immaterial. Molière's _Misanthrope_
says to the court poet who commends his sonnet as written in a
quarter of an hour,

     Voyons, monsieur, le temps ne fait rien à l'affaire,

and so we might say to the critic that sinks into the archaeologist,
show us the work, and let the date alone.

In an opposite direction the same substitution of facts for values
makes its appearance, whenever the reproduction of fact is made
the sole standard of artistic excellence. Many half-trained
observers condemn the work of some naïve or fanciful masters
with a sneer, because, as they truly say, it is out of drawing. The
implication is that to be correctly copied from a model is the
prerequisite of all beauty. Correctness is, indeed, an element of
effect and one which, in respect to familiar objects, is almost
indispensable, because its absence would cause a disappointment
and dissatisfaction incompatible with enjoyment. We learn to value
truth more and more as our love and knowledge of nature increase.
But fidelity is a merit only because it is in this way a factor in our
pleasure. It stands on a level with all other ingredients of effect.
When a man raises it to a solitary pre-eminence and becomes
incapable of appreciating anything else, he betrays the decay of
aesthetic capacity. The scientific habit in him inhibits the artistic.

That facts have a value of their own, at once complicates and
explains this question. We are naturally pleased by every
perception, and recognition and surprise are particularly acute
sensations. When we see a striking truth in any imitation, we are
therefore delighted, and this kind of pleasure is very legitimate,
and enters into the best effects of all the representative arts. Truth
and realism are therefore aesthetically good, but they are not
all-sufficient, since the representation of everything is not equally
pleasing and effective. The fact that resemblance is a source of
satisfaction justifies the critic in demanding it, while the aesthetic
insufficiency of such veracity shows the different value of truth in
science and in art. Science is the response to the demand for
information, and in it we ask for the whole truth and nothing but
the truth. Art is the response to the demand for entertainment, for
the stimulation of our senses and imagination, and truth enters into
it only as it subserves these ends.

Even the scientific value of truth is not, however, ultimate or
absolute. It rests partly on practical, partly on aesthetic interests.
As our ideas are gradually brought into conformity with the facts
by the painful process of selection, -- for intuition runs equally into
truth and into error, and can settle nothing if not controlled
by experience, -- we gain vastly in our command over our
environment. This is the fundamental value of natural science, and
the fruit it is yielding in our day. We have no better vision of
nature and life than some of our predecessors, but we have greater
material resources. To know the truth about the composition and
history of things is good for this reason. It is also good because of
the enlarged horizon it gives us, because the spectacle of nature is
a marvellous and fascinating one, full of a serious sadness and
large peace, which gives us back our birthright as children of the
planet and naturalizes us upon the earth. This is the poetic value of
the scientific _Weltanschauung._ From these two benefits, the
practical and the imaginative, all the value of truth is derived.

Aesthetic and moral judgments are accordingly to be classed
together in contrast to judgments intellectual; they are both
judgments of value, while intellectual judgments are judgments of
fact. If the latter have any value, it is only derivative, and our
whole intellectual life has its only justification in its connexion
with our pleasures and pains.

_Contrast between moral and aesthetic values._

§ 3. The relation between aesthetic and moral judgments, between
the spheres of the beautiful and the good, is close, but the
distinction between them is important. One factor of this
distinction is that while aesthetic judgments are mainly positive,
that is, perceptions of good, moral judgments are mainly and
fundamentally negative, or perceptions of evil. Another factor of
the distinction is that whereas, in the perception of beauty, our
judgment is necessarily intrinsic and based on the character of the
immediate experience, and never consciously on the idea of an
eventual utility in the object, judgments about moral worth, on the
contrary, are always based, when they are positive, upon the
consciousness of benefits probably involved. Both these
distinctions need some elucidation.

Hedonistic ethics have always had to struggle against the moral
sense of mankind. Earnest minds, that feel the weight and dignity
of life, rebel against the assertion that the aim of right conduct is
enjoyment. Pleasure usually appears to them as a temptation, and
they sometimes go so far as to make avoidance of it a virtue. The
truth is that morality is not mainly concerned with the attainment
of pleasure; it is rather concerned, in all its deeper and more
authoritative maxims, with the prevention of suffering. There is
something artificial in the deliberate pursuit of pleasure; there is
something absurd in the obligation to enjoy oneself. We feel no
duty in that direction; we take to enjoyment naturally enough after
the work of life is done, and the freedom and spontaneity of our
pleasures is what is most essential to them.

The sad business of life is rather to escape certain dreadful evils to
which our nature exposes us, -- death, hunger, disease, weariness,
isolation, and contempt. By the awful authority of these things,
which stand like spectres behind every moral injunction,
conscience in reality speaks, and a mind which they have duly
impressed cannot but feel, by contrast, the hopeless triviality of the
search for pleasure. It cannot but feel that a life abandoned to
amusement and to changing impulses must run unawares into fatal
dangers. The moment, however, that society emerges from the
early pressure of the environment and is tolerably secure against
primary evils, morality grows lax. The forms that life will farther
assume are not to be imposed by moral authority, but are
determined by the genius of the race, the opportunities of the
moment, and the tastes and resources of individual minds. The
reign of duty gives place to the reign of freedom, and the law and
the covenant to the dispensation of grace.

The appreciation of beauty and its embodiment in the arts are
activities which belong to our holiday life, when we are redeemed
for the moment from the shadow of evil and the slavery to fear,
and are following the bent of our nature where it chooses to lead us.
The values, then, with which we here deal are positive; they were
negative in the sphere of morality. The ugly is hardly an exception,
because it is not the cause of any real pain. In itself it is rather a
source of amusement. If its suggestions are vitally repulsive, its
presence becomes a real evil towards which we assume a practical
and moral attitude. And, correspondingly, the pleasant is never, as
we hare seen, the object of a truly moral injunction.

_Work and play._

§ 4. We have here, then, an important element of the distinction
between aesthetic and moral values. It is the same that has been
pointed to in the famous contrast between work and play. These
terms may be used in different senses and their importance in
moral classification differs with the meaning attached to them. We
may call everything play which is useless activity, exercise that
springs from the physiological impulse to discharge the energy
which the exigencies of life have not called out. Work will then be
all action that is necessary or useful for life. Evidently if work and
play are thus objectively distinguished as useful and useless action,
work is a eulogistic term and play a disparaging one. It would be
better for us that all our energy should be turned to account, that
none of it should be wasted in aimless motion. Play, in this sense,
is a sign of imperfect adaptation. It is proper to childhood, when
the body and mind are not yet fit to cope with the environment, but
it is unseemly in manhood and pitiable in old age, because it marks
an atrophy of human nature, and a failure to take hold of the
opportunities of life.

Play is thus essentially frivolous. Some persons, understanding the
term in this sense, have felt an aversion, which every liberal mind
will share, to classing social pleasures, art, and religion under the
head of play, and by that epithet condemning them, as a certain
school seems to do, to gradual extinction as the race approaches
maturity. But if all the useless ornaments of our life are to be cut
off in the process of adaptation, evolution would impoverish
instead of enriching our nature. Perhaps that is the tendency of
evolution, and our barbarous ancestors amid their toils and wars,
with their flaming passions and mythologies, lived better lives than
are reserved to our well-adapted descendants.

We may be allowed to hope, however, that some imagination may
survive parasitically even in the most serviceable brain. Whatever
course history may take, -- and we are not here concerned with
prophecy, -- the question of what is desirable is not affected. To
condemn spontaneous and delightful occupations because they are
useless for self-preservation shows an uncritical prizing of life
irrespective of its content. For such a system the worthiest function
of the universe should be to establish perpetual motion.
Uselessness is a fatal accusation to bring against any act which is
done for its presumed utility, but those which are done for their
own sake are their own justification.

At the same time there is an undeniable propriety in calling all the
liberal and imaginative activities of man play, because they are
spontaneous, and not carried on under pressure of external
necessity or danger. Their utility for self-preservation may be very
indirect and accidental, but they are not worthless for that reason.
On the contrary, we may measure the degree of happiness and
civilization which any race has attained by the proportion of its
energy which is devoted to free and generous pursuits, to the
adornment of life and the culture of the imagination. For it is in the
spontaneous play of his faculties that man finds himself and his
happiness. Slavery is the most degrading condition of which he is
capable, and he is as often a slave to the niggardness of the earth
and the inclemency of heaven, as to a master or an institution. He
is a slave when all his energy is spent in avoiding suffering and
death, when all his action is imposed from without, and no breath
or strength is left him for free enjoyment.

Work and play here take on a different meaning, and become
equivalent to servitude and freedom. The change consists in the
subjective point of view from which the distinction is now made.
We no longer mean by work all that is done usefully, but only what
is done unwillingly and by the spur of necessity. By play we are
designating, no longer what is done fruitlessly, but whatever is
done spontaneously and for its own sake, whether it have or not an
ulterior utility. Play, in this sense, may be our most useful
occupation. So far would a gradual adaptation to the environment
be from making this play obsolete, that it would tend to abolish
work, and to make play universal. For with the elimination of all
the conflicts and errors of instinct, the race would do
spontaneously whatever conduced to its welfare and we should live
safely and prosperously without external stimulus or restraint.

_All values are in one sense aesthetic._

§ 5. In this second and subjective sense, then, work is the
disparaging term and play the eulogistic one. All who feel the
dignity and importance of the things of the imagination, need not
hesitate to adopt the classification which designates them as play.
We point out thereby, not that they have no value, but that their
value is intrinsic, that in them is one of the sources of all worth.
Evidently all values must be ultimately intrinsic. The useful is
good because of the excellence of its consequences; but these must
somewhere cease to be merely useful in their turn, or only
excellent as means; somewhere we must reach the good that is
good in itself and for its own sake, else the whole process is futile,
and the utility of our first object illusory. We here reach the second
factor in our distinction, between aesthetic and moral values,
which regards their immediacy.

If we attempt to remove from life all its evils, as the popular
imagination has done at times, we shall find little but aesthetic
pleasures remaining to constitute unalloyed happiness. The
satisfaction of the passions and the appetites, in which we chiefly
place earthly happiness, themselves take on an aesthetic tinge
when we remove ideally the possibility of loss or variation. What
could the Olympians honour in one another or the seraphim
worship in God except the embodiment of eternal attributes, of
essences which, like beauty, make us happy only in contemplation?
The glory of heaven could not be otherwise symbolized than by
light and music. Even the knowledge of truth, which the most
sober theologians made the essence of the beatific vision, is an
aesthetic delight; for when the truth has no further practical utility,
it becomes a landscape. The delight of it is imaginative and the
value of it aesthetic.

This reduction of all values to immediate appreciations, to
sensuous or vital activities, is so inevitable that it has struck even
the minds most courageously rationalistic. Only for them, instead
of leading to the liberation of aesthetic goods from practical
entanglements and their establishment as the only pure and
positive values in life, this analysis has led rather to the denial of
all pure and positive goods altogether. Such thinkers naturally
assume that moral values are intrinsic and supreme; and since these
moral values would not arise but for the existence or imminence of
physical evils, they embrace the paradox that without evil no good
whatever is conceivable.

The harsh requirements of apologetics have no doubt helped them
to this position, from which one breath of spring or the sight of one
well-begotten creature should be enough to dislodge them. Their
ethical temper and the fetters of their imagination forbid them to
reconsider their original assumption and to conceive that morality
is a means and not an end; that it is the price of human
non-adaptation, and the consequence of the original sin of unfitness. It
is the compression of human conduct within the narrow limits of
the safe and possible. Remove danger, remove pain, remove the
occasion of pity, and the need of morality is gone. To say "thou
shalt not" would then be an impertinence.

But this elimination of precept would not be a cessation of life.
The senses would still be open, the instincts would still operate,
and lead all creatures to the haunts and occupations that befitted
them. The variety of nature and the infinity of art, with the
companionship of our fellows, would fill the leisure of that ideal
existence. These are the elements of our positive happiness, the
things which, amid a thousand vexations and vanities, make the
clear profit of living.

_Aesthetic consecration of general principles._

§ 6. Not only are the various satisfactions which morals are meant
to secure aesthetic in the last analysis, but when the conscience is
formed, and right principles acquire an immediate authority, our
attitude to these principles becomes aesthetic also. Honour,
truthfulness, and cleanliness are obvious examples. When the
absence of these virtues causes an instinctive disgust, as it does in
well-bred people, the reaction is essentially aesthetic, because it is
not based on reflection and benevolence, but on constitutional
sensitiveness. This aesthetic sensitiveness is, however, properly
enough called moral, because it is the effect of conscientious
training and is more powerful for good in society than laborious
virtue, because it is much more constant and catching. It is
Kalokagathia, the aesthetic demand for the morally good, and
perhaps the finest flower of human nature.

But this tendency of representative principles to become
independent powers and acquire intrinsic value is sometimes
mischievous. It is the foundation of the conflicts between
sentiment and justice, between intuitive and utilitarian morals.
Every human reform is the reassertion of the primary interests of
man against the authority of general principles which have ceased
to represent those interests fairly, but which still obtain the
idolatrous veneration of mankind. Nor are chivalry and religion
alone liable to fall into this moral superstition. It arises wherever
an abstract good is substituted for its concrete equivalent. The
miser's fallacy is the typical case, and something very like it is the
ethical principle of half our respectable population. To the exercise
of certain useful habits men come to sacrifice the advantage which
was the original basis and justification of those habits. Minute
knowledge is pursued at the expense of largeness of mind, and
riches at the expense of comfort and freedom.

This error is all the more specious when the derived aim has in
itself some aesthetic charm, such as belongs to the Stoic idea of
playing one's part in a vast drama of things, irrespective of any
advantage thereby accruing to any one; somewhat as the miser's
passion is rendered a little normal when his eye is fascinated not
merely by the figures of a bank account, but by the glitter of the
yellow gold. And the vanity of playing a tragic part and the glory
of conscious self-sacrifice have the same immediate fascination.
Many irrational maxims thus acquire a kind of nobility. An object
is chosen as the highest good which has not only a certain
representative value, but also an intrinsic one, -- which is not
merely a method for the realization of other values, but a value in
its own realization.

Obedience to God is for the Christian, as conformity to the laws of
nature or reason is for the Stoic, an attitude which has a certain
emotional and passionate worth, apart from its original justification
by maxims of utility. This emotional and passionate force is the
essence of fanaticism, it makes imperatives categorical, and gives
them absolute sway over the conscience in spite of their
one-sidedness and their injustice to the manifold demands of human
nature.

Obedience to God or reason can originally recommend itself to a
man only as the surest and ultimately least painful way of
balancing his aims and synthesizing his desires. So necessary is
this sanction even to the most impetuous natures, that no martyr
would go to the stake if he did not believe that the powers of nature,
in the day of judgment, would be on his side. But the human mind
is a turbulent commonwealth, and the laws that make for the
greatest good cannot be established in it without some partial
sacrifice, without the suppression of many particular impulses.
Hence the voice of reason or the command of God, which makes
for the maximum ultimate satisfaction, finds itself opposed by
sundry scattered and refractory forces, which are henceforth
denominated bad. The unreflective conscience, forgetting the
vicarious source of its own excellence, then assumes a solemn and
incomprehensible immediacy, as if its decrees were absolute and
intrinsically authoritative, not of to-day or yesterday, and no one
could tell whence they had arisen. Instinct can all the more easily
produce this mystification when it calls forth an imaginative
activity full of interest and eager passion. This effect is
conspicuous in the absolutist conscience, both devotional and
rationalistic, as also in the passion of love. For in all these a certain
individuality, definiteness, and exclusiveness is given to the
pursued object which is very favourable to zeal, and the heat of
passion melts together the various processes of volition into the
consciousness of one adorable influence.

However deceptive these complications may prove to men of
action and eloquence, they ought not to impose on the critic of
human nature. Evidently what value general goods do not derive
from the particular satisfactions they stand for, they possess in
themselves as ideas pleasing and powerful over the imagination.
This intrinsic advantage of certain principles and methods is none
the less real for being in a sense aesthetic. Only a sordid
utilitarianism that subtracts the imagination from human nature, or
at least slurs over its immense contribution to our happiness, could
fail to give these principles the preference over others practically
as good.

If it could be shown, for instance, that monarchy was as apt, in a
given case, to secure the public well-being as some other
form of government, monarchy should be preferred, and would
undoubtedly be established, on account of its imaginative and
dramatic superiority. But if, blinded by this somewhat ethereal
advantage, a party sacrificed to it important public interests, the
injustice would be manifest. In a doubtful case, a nation decides,
not without painful conflicts, how much it will sacrifice to its
sentimental needs. The important point is to remember that the
representative or practical value of a principle is one thing, and its
intrinsic or aesthetic value is another, and that the latter can be
justly counted only as an item in its favour to be weighed; against
possible external disadvantages. Whenever this comparison and
balancing of ultimate benefits of every kind is angrily dismissed in
favour of some absolute principle, laid down in contempt of human
misery and happiness, we have a personal and fantastic system of
ethics, without practical sanctions. It is an evidence that the
superstitious imagination has invaded the sober and practical
domain of morals.

_Aesthetic and physical pleasure._

§ 7. We have now separated with some care intellectual and moral
judgments from the sphere of our subject, and found that we are to
deal only with perceptions of value, and with these only when they
are positive and immediate. But even with these distinctions the
most remarkable characteristic of the sense of beauty remains
undefined. All pleasures are intrinsic and positive values, but all
pleasures are not perceptions of beauty. Pleasure is indeed the
essence of that perception, but there is evidently in this particular
pleasure a complication which is not present in others and which is
the basis of the distinction made by consciousness and language
between it and the rest. It will be instructive to notice the degrees
of this difference.

The bodily pleasures are those least resembling perceptions of
beauty. By bodily pleasures we mean, of course, more than
pleasures with a bodily seat; for that class would include them all,
as well as all forms and elements of consciousness. Aesthetic
pleasures have physical conditions, they depend on the activity of
the eye and the ear, of the memory and the other ideational
functions of the brain. But we do not connect those pleasures with
their seats except in physiological studies; the ideas with which
aesthetic pleasures are associated are not the ideas of their bodily
causes. The pleasures we call physical, and regard as low, on the
contrary, are those which call our attention to some part of our own
body, and which make no object so conspicuous to us as the organ
in which they arise.

There is here, then, a very marked distinction between physical and
aesthetic pleasure; the organs of the latter must be transparent, they
must not intercept our attention, but carry it directly to some
external object. The greater dignity and range of aesthetic pleasure
is thus made very intelligible. The soul is glad, as it were, to forget
its connexion with the body and to fancy that it can travel over the
world with the liberty with which it changes the objects of its
thought. The mind passes from China to Peru without any
conscious change in the local tensions of the body. This illusion of
disembodiment is very exhilarating, while immersion in the flesh
and confinement to some organ gives a tone of grossness
and selfishness to our consciousness. The generally meaner
associations of physical pleasures also help to explain their
comparative crudity.

_The differetia of aesthetic pleasure not its disinterestedness._

§ 8. The distinction between pleasure and the sense of beauty has
sometimes been said to consist in the unselfishness of aesthetic
satisfaction. In other pleasures, it is said, we gratify our senses and
passions; in the contemplation of beauty we are raised above
ourselves, the passions are silenced and we are happy in the
recognition of a good that we do not seek to possess. The painter
does not look at a spring of water with the eyes of a thirsty man,
nor at a beautiful woman with those of a satyr. The difference lies,
it is urged, in the impersonality of the enjoyment. But this
distinction is one of intensity and delicacy, not of nature, and it
seems satisfactory only to the least aesthetic minds.[1]

In the second place, the supposed disinterestedness of aesthetic
delights is not truly fundamental. Appreciation of a picture is not
identical with the desire to buy it, but it is, or ought to be, closely
related and preliminary to that desire. The beauties of nature and of
the plastic arts are not consumed by being enjoyed; they retain all
the efficacy to impress a second beholder. But this circumstance is
accidental, and those aesthetic objects which depend upon change
and are exhausted in time, as are all performances, are things the
enjoyment of which is an object of rivalry and is coveted as much
as any other pleasure. And even plastic beauties can often not be
enjoyed except by a few, on account of the necessity of travel or
other difficulties of access, and then this aesthetic enjoyment is as
selfishly pursued as the rest.

The truth which the theory is trying to state seems rather to be that
when we seek aesthetic pleasures we have no further pleasure in
mind; that we do not mix up the satisfactions of vanity and
proprietorship with the delight of contemplation. This is true, but it
is true at bottom of all pursuits and enjoyments. Every real
pleasure is in one sense disinterested. It is not sought with ulterior
motives, and what fills the mind is no calculation, but the image of
an object or event, suffused with emotion. A sophisticated
consciousness may often take the idea of self as the touchstone of
its inclinations; but this self, for the gratification and
aggrandizement of which a man may live, is itself only a complex
of aims and memories, which once had their direct objects, in
which he had taken a spontaneous and unselfish interest. The
gratifications which, merged together, make the selfishness are
each of them ingenuous, and no more selfish than the most
altruistic, impersonal emotion. The content of selfishness is a mass
of unselfishness. There is no reference to the nominal essence
called oneself either in one's appetites or in one's natural affections;
yet a man absorbed in his meat and drink, in his houses and lands,
in his children and dogs, is called selfish because these interests,
although natural and instinctive in him, are not shared by others.
The unselfish man is he whose nature has a more universal
direction, whose interests are more widely diffused.

But as impersonal thoughts are such only in their object, not in
their subject or agents, since, all thoughts are the thoughts of
somebody: so also unselfish interests have to be somebody's
interests. If we were not interested in beauty, if it were of no
concern to our happiness whether things were beautiful or ugly, we
should manifest not the maximum, but the total absence of
aesthetic faculty. The disinterestedness of this pleasure is, therefore,
that of all primitive and intuitive satisfactions, which are in no way
conditioned by a reference to an artificial general concept, like that
of the self, all the potency of which must itself be derived from the
independent energy of its component elements. I care about myself
because "myself" is a name for the things I have at heart. To set up
the verbal figment of personality and make it an object of concern
apart from the interests which were its content and substance, turns
the moralist into a pedant, and ethics into a superstition. The self
which is the object of _amour propre_ is an idol of the tribe, and
needs to be disintegrated into the primitive objective interests that
underlie it before the cultus of it can be justified by reason.

_The differentia of aesthetic pleasure not its universality._

§ 9. The supposed disinterestedness of our love of beauty passes
into another characteristic of it often regarded as essential, -- its
universality. The pleasures of the senses have, it is said, no
dogmatism in them; that anything gives me pleasure involves no
assertion about its capacity to give pleasure to another. But when I
judge a thing to be beautiful, my judgment means that the thing is
beautiful in itself, or (what is the same thing more critically
expressed) that it should seem so to everybody.  The claim to
universality is, according to this doctrine, the essence of the
aesthetic; what makes the perception of beauty a judgment rather
than a sensation. All aesthetic precepts would be impossible, and
all criticism arbitrary and subjective, unless we admit a paradoxical
universality in our judgment, the philosophical implications of
which we may then go on to develope. But we are fortunately not
required to enter the labyrinth into which this method leads; there
is a much simpler and clearer way of studying such questions,
which is to challenge and analyze the assertion before us and seek
its basis in human nature. Before this is done, we should run the
risk of expanding a natural misconception or inaccuracy of thought
into an inveterate and pernicious prejudice by making it the centre
of an elaborate construction.

That the claim of universality is such a natural inaccuracy will not
be hard to show. There is notoriously no great agreement upon
aesthetic matters; and such agreement as there is, is based upon
similarity of origin, nature, and circumstance among men, a
similarity which, where it exists, tends to bring about identity in all
judgments and feelings. It is unmeaning to say that what is
beautiful to one man _ought_ to be beautiful to another. If their
senses are the same, their associations and dispositions similar,
then the same thing will certainly be beautiful to both. If their
natures are different, the form which to one will be entrancing will
be to another even invisible, because his classifications and
discriminations in perception will be different, and he may see a
hideous detached fragment or a shapeless aggregate of things, in
what to another is a perfect whole -- so entirely are the unities of
function and use. It is absurd to say that what is invisible to a given
being _ought_ to seem beautiful to him. Evidently this obligation
of recognizing the same qualities is conditioned by the possession
of the same faculties. But no two men have exactly the same
faculties, nor can things have for any two exactly the same values.

What is loosely expressed by saying that any one ought to see this
or that beauty is that he would see it if his disposition, training, or
attention were what our ideal demands for him; and our ideal of
what any one should be has complex but discoverable sources. We
take, for instance, a certain pleasure in having our own judgments
supported by those of others; we are intolerant, if not of the
existence of a nature different from our own, at least of
its expression in words and judgments. We are confirmed or
made happy in our doubtful opinions by seeing them accepted
universally. We are unable to find the basis of our taste in our own
experience and therefore refuse to look for it there. If we were sure
of our ground, we should be willing to acquiesce in the naturally
different feelings and ways of others, as a man who is conscious of
speaking his language with the accent of the capital confesses its
arbitrariness with gayety, and is pleased and interested in the
variations of it he observes in provincials; but the provincial is
always zealous to show that he has reason and ancient authority to
justify his oddities. So people who have no sensations, and do not
know why they judge, are always trying to show that they judge by
universal reason.

Thus the frailty and superficiality of our own judgments cannot
brook contradiction. We abhor another man's doubt when we
cannot tell him why we ourselves believe. Our ideal of other men
tends therefore to include the agreement of their judgments with
our own; and although we might acknowledge the fatuity of this
demand in regard to natures very different from the human, we
may be unreasonable enough to require that all races should admire
the same style of architecture, and all ages the same poets.

The great actual unity of human taste within the range of
conventional history helps the pretension. But in principle it is
untenable. Nothing has less to do with the real merit of a work of
imagination than the capacity of all men to appreciate it; the true
test is the degree and kind of satisfaction it can give to him who
appreciates it most. The symphony would lose nothing if half
mankind had always been deaf, as nine-tenths of them actually are
to the intricacies of its harmonies; but it would have lost much if
no Beethoven had existed. And more: incapacity to appreciate
certain types of beauty may be the condition _sine qua non_ for the
appreciation of another kind; the greatest capacity both for
enjoyment and creation is highly specialized and exclusive, and
hence the greatest ages of art have often been strangely intolerant.

The invectives of one school against another, perverse as they are
philosophically, are artistically often signs of health, because they
indicate a vital appreciation of certain kinds of beauty, a love of
them that has grown into a jealous passion. The architects that have
pieced out the imperfections of ancient buildings with their own
thoughts, like Charles V. when he raised his massive palace beside
the Alhambra, may be condemned from a certain point of view.
They marred much by their interference; but they showed a
splendid confidence in their own intuitions, a proud assertion of
their own taste, which is the greatest evidence of aesthetic sincerity.
On the contrary, our own gropings, eclecticism, and archaeology
are the symptoms of impotence. If we were less learned and less
just, we might be more efficient. If our appreciation were less
general, it might be more real, and if we trained our imagination
into exclusiveness, it might attain to character.

_The differentia of aesthetic pleasure: its objectification._

§ 10. There is, however, something more in the claim to
universality in aesthetic judgments than the desire to generalize our
own opinions. There is the expression of a curious but well-known
psychological phenomenon, viz., the transformation of an element
of sensation into the quality of a thing. If we say that other men
should see the beauties we see, it is because _we_ think those
beauties _are in the object,_ like its colour, proportion, or size. Our
judgment appears to us merely the perception and discovery of an
external existence, of the real excellence that is without. But this
notion is radically absurd and contradictory. Beauty, as we have
seen, is a value; it cannot be conceived as an independent existence
which affects our senses and which we consequently perceive. It
exists in perception, and cannot exist otherwise. A beautynot
perceived is a pleasure not felt, and a contradiction. But modern
philosophy has taught us to say the same thing of every element of
the perceived world; all are sensations; and their grouping into
objects imagined to be permanent and external is the work of
certain habits of our intelligence. We should be incapable of
surveying or retaining the diffused experiences of life, unless we
organized and classified them, and out of the chaos of impressions
framed the world of conventional and recognizable objects.

How this is done is explained by the current theories of perception.
External objects usually affect various senses at once, the
impressions of which are thereby associated. Repeated experiences
of one object are also associated on account of their similarity;
hence a double tendency to merge and unify into a single percept,
to which a name is attached, the group of those memories and
reactions which in fact had one external thing for their cause. But
this percept, once formed, is clearly different from those particular
experiences out of which it grew. It is permanent, they are variable.
They are but partial views and glimpses of it. The constituted
notion therefore comes to be the reality, and the materials of it
merely the appearance. The distinction between substance and
quality, reality and appearance, matter and mind, has no other
origin.

The objects thus conceived and distinguished from our ideas of
them, are at first compacted of all the impressions, feelings, and
memories, which offer themselves for association and fall within
the vortex of the amalgamating imagination. Every sensation we
get from a thing is originally treated as one of its qualities.
Experiment, however, and the practical need of a simpler
conception of the structure of objects lead us gradually to reduce
the qualities of the object to a minimum, and to regard most
perceptions as an effect of those few qualities upon us. These few
primary qualities, like extension which we persist in treating as
independently real and as the quality of a substance, are those
which suffice to explain the order of our experiences. All the rest,
like colour, are relegated to the subjective sphere, as merely effects
upon our minds, and apparent or secondary qualities of the object.

But this distinction has only a practical justification. Convenience
and economy of thought alone determine what combination of our
sensations we shall continue to objectify and treat as the cause of
the rest. The right and tendency to be objective is equal in all, since
they are all prior to the artifice of thought by which we separate the
concept from its materials, the thing from our experiences.

The qualities which we now conceive to belong to real objects are
for the moat part images of sight and touch. One of the first classes
of effects to be treated as secondary were naturally pleasures and
pains, since it could commonly conduce very little to intelligent
and successful action to conceive our pleasures and pains as
resident in objects. But emotions are essentially capable of
objectification, as well as impressions of sense; and one may well
believe that a primitive and inexperienced consciousness would
rather people the world with ghosts of its own terrors and passions
than with projections of those luminous and mathematical concepts
which as yet it could hardly have formed.

This animistic and mythological habit of thought still holds its own
at the confines of knowledge, where mechanical explanations are
not found. In ourselves, where nearness makes observation
difficult, in the intricate chaos of animal and human life, we still
appeal to the efficacy of will and ideas, as also in the remote night
of cosmic and religious problems. But in all the intermediate realm
of vulgar day, where mechanical science has made progress, the
inclusion of emotional or passionate elements in the concept of the
reality would be now an extravagance. Here our idea of things is
composed exclusively of perceptual elements, of the ideas of form
and of motion.

The beauty of objects, however, forms an exception to this rule.
Beauty is an emotional element, a pleasure of ours, which
nevertheless we regard as a quality of things. But we are now
prepared to understand the nature of this exception. It is the
survival of a tendency originally universal to make every effect of
a thing upon us a constituent of its conceived nature. The scientific
idea of a thing is a great abstraction from the mass of perceptions
and reactions which that thing produces the aesthetic idea is less
abstract, since it retains the emotional reaction, the pleasure of the
perception, as an integral part of the conceived thing.

Nor is it hard to find the ground of this survival in the sense of
beauty of an objectification of feeling elsewhere extinct. Most of
the pleasures which objects cause are easily distinguished and
separated from the perception of the object: the object has to be
applied to a particular organ, like the palate, or swallowed like
wine, or used and operated upon in some way before the pleasure
arises. The cohesion is therefore slight between the pleasure and
the other associated elements of sense; the pleasure is separated in
time from the perception, or it is localized in a different organ, and
consequently is at once recognized as an effect and not as a quality
of the object. But when the process of perception itself is pleasant,
as it may easily be, when the intellectual operation, by which the
elements of sense are associated and projected, and the concept of
the form and substance of the thing produced, is naturally
delightful, then we have a pleasure intimately bound up in the
thing, inseparable from its character and constitution, the seat of
which in us is the same as the seat of the perception. We naturally
fail, under these circumstances, to separate the pleasure from the
other objectified feelings. It becomes, like them, a quality of the
object, which we distinguish from pleasures not so incorporated in
the perception of things, by giving it the name of beauty.

_The definition of beauty._

§ 11. We have now reached our definition of beauty, which, in the
terms of our successive analysis and narrowing of the conception,
is value positive, intrinsic, and objectified. Or, in less technical
language, Beauty is pleasure regarded as the quality of a thing.

This definition is intended to sum up a variety of distinctions and
identifications which should perhaps be here more explicitly set
down. Beauty is a value, that is, it is not a perception of a matter of
fact or of a relation: it is an emotion, an affection of our volitional
and appreciative nature. An object cannot be beautiful if it can give
pleasure to nobody: a beauty to which all men were forever
indifferent is a contradiction in terms.

In the second place this value is positive, it is the sense of the
presence of something good, or (in the case of ugliness) of its
absence. It is never the perception of a positive evil, it is never a
negative value. That we are endowed with the sense of beauty is a
pure gain which brings no evil with it. When the ugly ceases to be
amusing or merely uninteresting and becomes disgusting, it
becomes indeed a positive evil: but a moral and practical, not an
aesthetic one. In aesthetics that saying is true -- often so
disingenuous in ethics -- that evil is nothing but the absence of
good: for even the tedium and vulgarity of an existence without
beauty is not itself ugly so much as lamentable and degrading. The
absence of aesthetic goods is a moral evil: the aesthetic evil is
merely relative, and means less of aesthetic good than was
expected at the place and time. No form in itself gives pain,
although some forms give pain by causing a shock of surprise even
when they are really beautiful: as if a mother found a fine bull pup
in her child's cradle, when her pain would not be aesthetic in its
nature.

Further, this pleasure must not be in the consequence of the utility
of the object or event, but in its immediate perception; in other
words, beauty is an ultimate good, something that gives
satisfaction to a natural function, to some fundamental need or
capacity of our minds. Beauty is therefore a positive value that is
intrinsic; it is a pleasure. These two circumstances sufficiently
separate the sphere of aesthetics from that of ethics. Moral values
are generally negative, and always remote. Morality has to do with
the avoidance of evil and the pursuit of good: aesthetics only with
enjoyment.

Finally, the pleasures of sense are distinguished from the
perception of beauty, as sensation in general is distinguished from
perception; by the objectification of the elements and their
appearance as qualities rather of things than of consciousness. The
passage from sensation to perception is gradual, and the path may
be sometimes retraced: so it is with beauty and the pleasures of
sensation. There is no sharp line between them, but it depends
upon the degree of objectivity my feeling has attained at the
moment whether I say "It pleases me," or "It is beautiful." If I am
self-conscious and critical, I shall probably use, one phrase; if I am
impulsive and susceptible, the other. The more remote, interwoven,
and inextricable the pleasure is, the more objective it will appear;
and the union of two pleasures often makes one beauty. In
Shakespeare's LIVth sonnet are these words:

     O how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
     By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
     The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
     For that sweet odour which doth in it live.
     The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye
     As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
     Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
     When summer's breath their masked buds discloses.
     But, for their beauty only is their show,
     They live unwooed and unrespected fade;
     Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so:
     Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made.

One added ornament, we see, turns the deep dye, which was but
show and mere sensation before, into an element of beauty and
reality, and as truth is here the co-operation of perceptions, so
beauty is the co-operation of pleasures. If colour, form, and motion
are hardly beautiful without the sweetness of the odour, how much
more necessary would they be for the sweetness itself to become a
beauty! If we had the perfume in a flask, no one would think of
calling it beautiful: it would give us too detached and controllable
a sensation. There would be no object in which it could be easily
incorporated. But let it float from the garden, and it will add
another sensuous charm to objects simultaneously recognized, and
help to make them beautiful. Thus beauty is constituted by the
objectification of pleasure. It is pleasure objectified.


