Part IV. — Expression
§ 48. Expression defined                                             192
§ 49. The associative process                                        198
§ 50. Kinds of value in the second term                              201
§ 51. Aesthetic value in the second term                             205
§ 52. Practical value in the same                                    208
§ 53. Cost as an element of effect                                   211
§ 54. The expression of economy and fitness                          214
§ 55. The authority of morals over aesthetics                        218
§ 56. Negative values in the second term                             221
§ 57. Influence of the first term in the pleasing expression of evil 226
§ 58. Mixture of other expressions, including that of truth          228
§ 59. The liberation of self                                         233
§ 60. The sublime independent of the expression of evil              239
§ 61. The comic                                                      245
§ 62. Wit                                                            250
§ 63. Humour                                                         253
§ 64. The grotesque                                                  256
§ 65. The possibility of finite perfection                           258
§ 66. The stability of the ideal                                     263

§ 67. Conclusion                                                 266-270
Footnotes
Index                                                            271-275



PREFACE

This little work contains the chief ideas gathered together for a
course of lectures on the theory and history of aesthetics given at
Harvard College from 1892 to 1895. The only originality I can
claim is that which may result from the attempt to put together the
scattered commonplaces of criticism into a system, under the
inspiration of a naturalistic psychology. I have studied sincerity
rather than novelty, and if any subject, as for instance the
excellence of tragedy, is presented in a new light, the change
consists only in the stricter application to a complex subject of the
principles acknowledged to obtain in our simple judgments. My
effort throughout has been to recall those fundamental aesthetic
feelings the orderly extension of which yields sanity of judgment
and distinction of taste.

The influences under which the book has been written are rather
too general and pervasive to admit of specification; yet the student
of philosophy will not fail to perceive how much I owe to writers,
both living and dead, to whom no honour could be added by my
acknowledgments. I have usually omitted any reference to them in
foot-notes or in the text, in order that the air of controversy might
be avoided, and the reader might be enabled to compare what is
said more directly with the reality of his own experience.

          G. S.
     September, 1906.


INTRODUCTION

The sense of beauty has a more important place in life than
aesthetic theory has ever taken in philosophy. The plastic arts, with
poetry and music, are the most conspicuous monuments of this
human interest, because they appeal only to contemplation, and yet
have attracted to their service, in all civilized ages, an amount of
effort, genius, and honour, little inferior to that given to industry,
war, or religion. The fine arts, however, where aesthetic feeling
appears almost pure, are by no means the only sphere in which
men show their susceptibility to beauty. In all products of human
industry we notice the keenness with which the eye is attracted to
the mere appearance of things: great sacrifices of time and labour
are made to it in the most vulgar manufactures; nor does man
select his dwelling, his clothes, or his companions without
reference to their effect on his aesthetic senses. Of late we have
even learned that the forms of many animals are due to the survival
by sexual selection of the colours and forms most attractive to the
eye. There must therefore be in our nature a very radical and
wide-spread tendency to observe beauty, and to value it. No account of
the principles of the mind can be at all adequate that passes over so
conspicuous a faculty.

That aesthetic theory has received so little attention from the world
is not due to the unimportance of the subject of which it treats, but
rather to lack of an adequate motive for speculating upon it, and to
the small success of the occasional efforts to deal with it. Absolute
curiosity, and love of comprehension for its own sake, are not
passions we have much leisure to indulge: they require not only
freedom from affairs but, what is more rare, freedom from
prepossessions and from the hatred of all ideas that do not make
for the habitual goal of our thought.

Now, what has chiefly maintained such speculation as the world
has seen has been either theological passion or practical use. All
we find, for example, written about beauty may be divided into
two groups: that group of writings in which philosophers have
interpreted aesthetic facts in the light of their metaphysical
principles, and made of their theory of taste a corollary or footnote
to their systems; and that group in which artists and critics have
ventured into philosophic ground, by generalizing somewhat the
maxims of the craft or the comments of the sensitive observer. A
treatment of the subject at once direct and theoretic has been very
rare: the problems of nature and morals have attracted the
reasoners, and the description and creation of beauty have
absorbed the artists; between the two reflection upon aesthetic
experience has remained abortive or incoherent.

A circumstance that has also contributed to the absence or to the
failure of aesthetic speculation is the subjectivity of the
phenomenon with which it deals. Man has a prejudice against
himself: anything which is a product of his mind seems to him to
be unreal or comparatively insignificant. We are satisfied
only when we fancy ourselves surrounded by objects and laws
independent of our nature. The ancients long speculated about the
constitution of the universe before they became aware of that mind
which is the instrument of all speculation. The moderns, also, even
within the field of psychology, have studied first the function of
perception and the theory of knowledge, by which we seem to be
informed about external things; they have in comparison neglected
the exclusively subjective and human department of imagination
and emotion. We have still to recognize in practice the truth that
from these despised feelings of ours the great world of perception
derives all its value, if not also its existence. Things are interesting
because we care about them, and important because we need them.
Had our perceptions no connexion with our pleasures, we should
soon close our eyes on this world; if our intelligence were of no
service to our passions, we should come to doubt, in the lazy
freedom of reverie, whether two and two make four.

Yet so strong is the popular sense of the unworthiness and
insignificance of things purely emotional, that those who have
taken moral problems to heart and felt their dignity have often
been led into attempts to discover some external right and beauty
of which, our moral and aesthetic feelings should be perceptions or
discoveries, just as our intellectual activity is, in men's opinion, a
perception or discovery of external fact. These philosophers seem
to feel that unless moral and aesthetic judgments are expressions of
objective truth, and not merely expressions of human nature, they
stand condemned of hopeless triviality. A judgment is not trivial,
however, because it rests on human feelings; on the contrary,
triviality consists in abstraction from human interests; only those
judgments and opinions are truly insignificant which wander
beyond the reach of verification, and have no function in the
ordering and enriching of life.

Both ethics and aesthetics have suffered much from the prejudice
against the subjective. They have not suffered more because both
have a subject-matter which is partly objective. Ethics deals with
conduct as much as with emotion, and therefore considers the
causes of events and their consequences as well as our judgments
of their value. Esthetics also is apt to include the history and
philosophy of art, and to add much descriptive and critical matter
to the theory of our susceptibility to beauty. A certain confusion is
thereby introduced into these inquiries, but at the same time the
discussion is enlivened by excursions into neighbouring provinces,
perhaps more interesting to the general reader.

We may, however, distinguish three distinct elements of ethics and
aesthetics, and three different ways of approaching the subject. The
first is the exercise of the moral or aesthetic faculty itself, the
actual pronouncing of judgment and giving of praise, blame, and
precept. This is not a matter of science but of character, enthusiasm,
niceness of perception, and fineness of emotion. It is aesthetic or
moral activity, while ethics and aesthetics, as sciences, are
intellectual activities, having that aesthetic or moral activity for
their subject-matter.

The second method consists in the historical explanation of
conduct or of art as a part of anthropology, and seeks to discover
the conditions of various types of character, forms of polity,
conceptions of justice, and schools of criticism and of art. Of this
nature is a great deal of what has been written on aesthetics. The
philosophy of art has often proved a more tempting subject than
the psychology of taste, especially to minds which were not so
much fascinated by beauty itself as by the curious problem of the
artistic instinct in man and of the diversity of its manifestations in
history.

The third method in ethics and aesthetics is psychological, as the
other two are respectively didactic and historical. It deals with
moral and aesthetic judgments as phenomena of mind and products
of mental evolution. The problem here is to understand the origin
and conditions of these feelings and their relation to the rest of our
economy. Such an inquiry, if pursued successfully, would yield an
understanding of the reason why we think anything right or
beautiful, wrong or ugly, it would thus reveal the roots of
conscience and taste in human nature and enable us to distinguish
transitory preferences and ideals, which rest on peculiar conditions,
from those which, springing from those elements of mind which all
men share, are comparatively permanent and universal.

To this inquiry, as far as it concerns aesthetics, the following pages
are devoted. No attempt will be made either to impose particular
appreciations or to trace the history of art and criticism. The
discussion will be limited to the nature and elements of our
aesthetic judgments. It is a theoretical inquiry and has no directly
hortatory quality. Yet insight into the basis of our preferences, if it
could be gained, would not fail to have a good and purifying
influence upon them. It would show us the futility of a dogmatism
that would impose upon another man judgments and emotions for
which the needed soil is lacking in his constitution and experience;
and at the same time it would relieve us of any undue diffidence or
excessive tolerance towards aberrations of taste, when we know
what are the broader grounds of preference and the habits that
make for greater and more diversified aesthetic enjoyment.

Therefore, although nothing has commonly been less attractive
than treatises on beauty or less a guide to taste than disquisitions
upon it, we may yet hope for some not merely theoretical gain
from these studies. They have remained so often without practical
influence because they have been pursued under unfavourable
conditions. The writers have generally been audacious metaphysicians
and somewhat incompetent critics; they have represented
general and obscure principles, suggested by other parts
of their philosophy, as the conditions of artistic excellence
and the essence of beauty. But if the inquiry is kept close to the
facts of feeling, we may hope that the resulting theory may have a
clarifying effect on the experience on which it is based. That is,
after all, the use of theory. If when a theory is bad it narrows our
capacity for observation and makes all appreciation vicarious and
formal, when it is good it reacts favourably upon our powers,
guides the attention to what is really capable of affording
entertainment, and increases, by force of new analogies, the range
of our interests. Speculation is an evil if it imposes a foreign
organization on our mental life; it is a good if it only brings to light,
and makes more perfect by training, the organization already
inherent in it.

We shall therefore study human sensibility itself and our actual
feelings about beauty, and we shall look for no deeper,
unconscious causes of our aesthetic consciousness. Such value as
belongs to metaphysical derivations of the nature of the beautiful,
comes to them not because they explain our primary feelings,
which they cannot do, but because they express, and in fact
constitute, some of our later appreciations. There is no explanation,
for instance, in calling beauty an adumbration of divine attributes.
Such a relation, if it were actual, would not help us at all to
understand why the symbols of divinity pleased. But in certain
moments of contemplation, when much emotional experience lies
behind us, and we have reached very general ideas both of nature
and of life, our delight in any particular object may consist in
nothing but the thought that this object is a manifestation of
universal principles. The blue sky may come to please chiefly
because it seems the image of a serene conscience, or of the eternal
youth and purity of nature after a thousand partial corruptions. But
this expressiveness of the sky is due to certain qualities of the
sensation, which bind it to all things happy and pure, and, in a
mind in which the essence of purity and happiness is embodied in
an idea of God, bind it also to that idea.

So it may happen that the most arbitrary and unreal theories, which
must be rejected as general explanations of aesthetic life, may be
reinstated as particular moments of it. Those intuitions which we
call Platonic are seldom scientific, they seldom explain the
phenomena or hit upon the actual law of things, but they are often
the highest expression of that activity which they fail to make
comprehensible. The adoring lover cannot understand the natural
history of love; for he is all in all at the last and supreme stage of
its development. Hence the world has always been puzzled in its
judgment of the Platonists; their theories are so extravagant, yet
their wisdom seems so great. Platonism is a very refined and
beautiful expression of our natural instincts, it embodies
conscience and utters our inmost hopes. Platonic philosophers have
therefore a natural authority, as standing on heights to which
the vulgar cannot attain, but to which they naturally and
half-consciously aspire.

When a man tells you that beauty is the manifestation of God to
the senses, you wish you might understand him, you grope for a
deep truth in his obscurity, you honour him for his elevation of
mind, and your respect may even induce you to assent to what he
says as to an intelligible proposition. Your thought may in
consequence be dominated ever after by a verbal dogma, around
which all your sympathies and antipathies will quickly gather, and
the less you have penetrated the original sense of your creed, the
more absolutely will you believe it. You will have followed
Mephistopheles' advice: --

     Im ganzen haltet euch an Worte,
     So geht euch durch die sichere Pforte
     Zum Tempel der Gewissheit ein.

Yet reflection might have shown you that the word of the master
held no objective account of the nature and origin of beauty, but
was the vague expression of his highly complex emotions.

It is one of the attributes of God, one of the perfections which we
contemplate in our idea of him, that there is no duality or
opposition between his will and his vision, between the impulses
of his nature and the events of his life. This is what we commonly
designate as omnipotence and creation.  Now, in the contemplation
of beauty, our faculties of perception have the same perfection: it is
indeed from the experience of beauty and happiness, from the
occasional harmony between our nature and our environment, that
we draw our conception of the divine life. There is, then, a real
propriety in calling beauty a manifestation of God to the senses,
since, in the region of sense, the perception of beauty exemplifies
that adequacy and perfection which in general we objectify in an
idea of God.

But the minds that dwell in the atmosphere of these analogies are
hardly those that will care to ask what are the conditions and the
varieties of this perfection of function, in other words, how it
comes about that we perceive beauty at all, or have any inkling of
divinity. Only the other philosophers, those that wallow in
Epicurus' sty, know anything about the latter question. But it is
easier to be impressed than to be instructed, and the public is very
ready to believe that where there is noble language not
without obscurity there must be profound knowledge. We should
distinguish, however, the two distinct demands in the case. One is
for comprehension; we look for the theory of a human function
which must cover all possible cases of its exercise, whether noble
or base. This the Platonists utterly fail to give us. The other
demand is for inspiration; we wish to be nourished by the maxims
and confessions of an exalted mind, in whom the aesthetic function
is pre-eminent. By responding to this demand the same thinkers
may win our admiration.

To feel beauty is a better thing than to understand how we come to
feel it. To have imagination and taste, to love the best, to be carried
by the contemplation of nature to a vivid faith in the ideal, all this
is more, a great deal more, than any science can hope to be. The
poets and philosophers who express this aesthetic experience and
stimulate the same function in us by their example, do a greater
service to mankind and deserve higher honour than the discoverers
of historical truth. Reflection is indeed a part of life, but the last
part. Its specific value consists in the satisfaction of curiosity, in
the smoothing out and explanation of things: but the greatest
pleasure which we actually get from reflection is borrowed from
the experience on which we reflect. We do not often indulge in
retrospect for the sake of a scientific knowledge of human life, but
rather to revive the memories of what once was dear. And I should
have little hope of interesting the reader in the present analyses, did
I not rely on the attractions of a subject associated with so many of
his pleasures.

But the recognition of the superiority of aesthetics in experience to
aesthetics in theory ought not to make us accept as an explanation
of aesthetic feeling what is in truth only an expression of it. When
Plato tells us of the eternal ideas in conformity to which all
excellence consists, he is making himself the spokesman of the
moral consciousness. Our conscience and taste establish these
ideals; to make a judgment is virtually to establish an ideal, and all
ideals are absolute and eternal for the judgment that involves them,
because in finding and declaring a thing good or beautiful, our
sentence is categorical, and the standard evoked by our judgment is
for that case intrinsic and ultimate. But at the next moment, when
the mind is on another footing, a new ideal is evoked, no less
absolute for the present judgment than the old ideal was for the
previous one. If we are then expressing our feeling and confessing
what happens to us when we judge, we shall be quite right in
saying that we have always an absolute ideal before us, and that
value lies in conformity with that ideal. So, also, if we try to define
that ideal, we shall hardly be able to say of it anything less noble
and more definite than that it is the embodiment of an infinite good.
For it is that incommunicable and illusive excellence that haunts
every beautiful thing, and

          like a star
     Beacons from the abode where the eternal are.

For the expression of this experience we should go to the poets, to
the more inspired critics, and best of all to the immortal parables of
Plato. But if what we desire is to increase our knowledge rather
than to cultivate our sensibility, we should do well to close all
those delightful books; for we shall not find any instruction there
upon the questions which most press upon us; namely, how an
ideal is formed in the mind, how a given object is compared with it,
what is the common element in all beautiful things, and what the
substance of the absolute ideal in which all ideals tend to be lost;
and, finally, how we come to be sensitive to beauty at all, or to
value it. These questions must be capable of answers, if any
science of human nature is really possible. -- So far, then, are we
from ignoring the insight of the Platonists, that we hope to explain
it, and in a sense to justify it, by showing that it is the natural and
sometimes the supreme expression of the common principles of
our nature.


