PART IV

EXPRESSION

_Expression defined._

§ 48. We have found in the beauty of material and form the
objectification of certain pleasures connected with the process of
direct perception, with the formation, in the one case of a sensation,
or quality, in the other of a synthesis of sensations or qualities. But
the human consciousness is not a perfectly clear mirror, with
distinct boundaries and clear-cut images, determinate in number
and exhaustively perceived. Our ideas half emerge for a moment
from the dim continuum of vital feeling and diffused sense, and are
hardly fixed before they are changed and transformed, by the
shifting of attention and the perception of new relations, into ideas
of really different objects. This fluidity of the mind would make
reflection impossible, did we not fix in words and other symbols
certain abstract contents; we thus become capable of recognizing
in one perception the repetition of another, and of recognizing in
certain recurrences of impressions a persistent object. This
discrimination and classification of the contents of consciousness
is the work of perception and understanding, and the pleasures that
accompany these activities make the beauty of the sensible world.

But our hold upon our thoughts extends even further. We not only
construct visible unities and recognizable types, but remain aware
of their affinities to what is not at the time perceived; that is, we
find in them a certain tendency and quality, not original to them, a
meaning and a tone, which upon investigation we shall see to have
been the proper characteristics of other objects and feelings,
associated with them once in our experience. The hushed
reverberations of these associated feelings continue in the brain,
and by modifying our present reaction, colour the image upon
which our attention is fixed. The quality thus acquired by objects
through association is what we call their expression. Whereas in
form or material there is one object with its emotional effect, in
expression there are two, and the emotional effect belongs to the
character of the second or suggested one. Expression may thus
make beautiful by suggestion things in themselves indifferent, or it
may come to heighten the beauty which they already possess.

Expression is not always distinguishable in consciousness
from the value of material or form, because we do not always
have a distinguishable memory of the related idea which the
expressiveness implies. When we have such a memory, as at
the sight of some once frequented garden, we clearly and
spontaneously attribute our emotion to the memory and not to the
present fact which it beautifies. The revival of a pleasure and its
embodiment in a present object which in itself might have been
indifferent, is here patent and acknowledged.

The distinctness of the analysis may indeed be so great as to
prevent the synthesis; we may so entirely pass to the suggested
object, that our pleasure will be embodied in the memory of that,
while the suggestive sensation will be overlooked, and the
expressiveness of the present object will fail to make it beautiful.
Thus the mementos of a lost friend do not become beautiful by
virtue of the sentimental associations which may make them
precious. The value is confined to the images of the memory; they
are too clear to let any of that value escape and diffuse itself over
the rest of our consciousness, and beautify the objects which we
actually behold. We say explicitly: I value this trifle for its
associations. And so long as this division continues, the worth of
the thing is not for us aesthetic.

But a little dimming of our memory will often make it so. Let the
images of the past fade, let them remain simply as a halo and
suggestion of happiness hanging about a scene; then this scene,
however empty and uninteresting in itself, will have a deep and
intimate charm; we shall be pleased by its very vulgarity. We shall
not confess so readily that we value the place for its associations;
we shall rather say: I am fond of this landscape; it has for me an
ineffable attraction. The treasures of the memory have been melted
and dissolved, and are now gilding the object that supplants them;
they are giving this object expression.

Expression then differs from material or formal value only as habit
differs from instinct -- in its origin. Physiologically, they are both
pleasurable radiations of a given stimulus; mentally, they are both
values incorporated in an object. But an observer, looking at the
mind historically, sees in the one case the survival of an experience,
in the other the reaction of an innate disposition. This experience,
moreover, is generally rememberable, and then the extrinsic source
of the charm which expression gives becomes evident even to the
consciousness in which it arises. A word, for instance, is often
beautiful simply by virtue of its meaning and associations; but
sometimes this expressive beauty is added to a musical quality in
the world itself.  In all expression we may thus distinguish two
terms: the first is the object actually presented, the word, the image,
the expressive thing; the second is the object suggested, the further
thought, emotion, or image evoked, the thing expressed.

These lie together in the mind, and their union constitutes
expression. If the value lies wholly in the first term, we have no
beauty of expression. The decorative inscriptions in Saracenic
monuments can have no beauty of expression for one who does not
read Arabic; their charm is wholly one of material and form. Or if
they have any expression, it is by virtue of such thoughts as they
might suggest, as, for instance, of the piety and oriental
sententiousness of the builders and of the aloofness from us of all
their world. And even these suggestions, being a wandering of our
fancy rather than a study of the object, would fail to arouse a
pleasure which would be incorporated in the present image. The
scroll would remain without expression, although its presence
might have suggested to us interesting visions of other things. The
two terms would be too independent, and the intrinsic values of
each would remain distinct from that of the other. There would be
no visible expressiveness, although there might have been
discursive suggestions.

Indeed, if expression were constituted by the external relation of
object with object, everything would be expressive equally,
indeterminately, and universally. The flower in the crannied wall
would express the same thing as the bust of Caesar or the _Critique
of Pure Reason._ What constitutes the individual expressiveness of
these things is the circle of thoughts allied to each in a given mind;
my words, for instance, express the thoughts which they actually
arouse in the reader; they may express more to one man than to
another, and to me they may have expressed more or less than to
yon. My thoughts remain unexpressed, if my words do not arouse
them in you, and very likely your greater wisdom will find in what
I say the manifestation of a thousand principles of which I never
dreamed. Expression depends upon the union of two terms, one of
which must be furnished by the imagination; and a mind cannot
furnish what it does not possess. The expressiveness of everything
accordingly increases with the intelligence of the observer.

But for expression to be an element of beauty, it must, of course,
fulfil another condition. I may see the relations of an object, I may
understand it perfectly, and may nevertheless regard it with entire
indifference. If the pleasure fails, the very substance and
protoplasm of beauty is wanting. Nor, as we have seen, is even the
pleasure enough; for I may receive a letter full of the most joyous
news, but neither the paper, nor the writing, nor the style, need
seem beautiful to me. Not until I confound the impressions, and
suffuse the symbols themselves with the emotions they arouse, and
find joy and sweetness in the very words I hear, will the
expressiveness constitute a beauty; as when they sing, _Gloria in
excelsis Deo_.

The value of the second term must be incorporated in the first; for
the beauty of expression is as inherent in the object as that of
material or form, only it accrues to that object not from the bare act
of perception, but from the association with it of further processes,
due to the existence of former impressions. We may conveniently
use the word "expressiveness" to mean all the capacity of
suggestion possessed by a thing, and the word "expression" for the
aesthetic modification which that expressiveness may cause in it.
Expressiveness is thus the power given by experience to any image
to call up others in the mind; and this expressiveness becomes an
aesthetic value, that is, becomes expression, when the value
involved in the associations thus awakened are incorporated in the
present object.

_The associative process._

§ 49. The purest case in which, an expressive value could arise
might seem to be that in which both terms were indifferent in
themselves, and what pleased was the activity of relating them. We
have such a phenomenon in mathematics, and in any riddle, puzzle,
or play with symbols. But such pleasures fall without the aesthetic
field in the absence of any objectification; they are pleasures of
exercise, and the objects involved are not regarded as the
substances in which those values inhere. We think of more or less
interesting problems or calculations, but it never occurs to the
mathematician to establish a hierarchy of forms according to their
beauty. Only by a metaphor could he say that (a + b)2 = a2 + 2ab +
b2 was a more beautiful formula than 2 + 2 = 4. Yet in proportion
as such conceptions become definite and objective in the mind,
they approach aesthetic values, and the use of aesthetic epithets in
describing them becomes more constant and literal.

The beauties of abstract music are but one step beyond such
mathematical relations -- they are those relations presented in a
sensible form, and constituting an imaginable object. But, as we
see clearly in this last case, when the relation and not the terms
constitute the object, we have, if there is beauty at all, a beauty of
form, not of expression; for the more mathematical the charm of
music is the more form and the less expression do we see in it. In
fact, the sense of relation is here the essence of the object itself,
and the activity of passing from term to term, far from taking us
beyond our presentation to something extrinsic, constitutes that
presentation. The pleasure of this relational activity is therefore the
pleasure of conceiving a determined form, and nothing could be
more thoroughly a formal beauty.

And we may here insist upon a point of fundamental importance;
namely, that the process of association enters consciousness as
directly, and produces as simple a sensation, as any process in any
organ. The pleasures and pains of cerebration, the delight and the
fatigue of it, are felt exactly like bodily impressions; they have the
same directness, although not the same localization. Their seat is
not open to our daily observation, and therefore we leave them
disembodied, and fancy they are peculiarly spiritual and intimate to
the soul. Or we try to think that they flow by some logical
necessity from the essences of objects simultaneously in our mind.
We involve ourselves in endless perplexities in trying to deduce
excellence and beauty, unity and necessity, from the describable
qualities of things; we repeat the rationalistic fiction of turning the
notions which we abstract from the observation of facts into the
powers that give those facts character and being.

We have, for instance, in the presence of two images a sense of
their incongruity; and we say that the character of the images
causes this emotion; whereas in dreams we constantly have the
most rapid transformations and patent contradictions without any
sense of incongruity at all; because the brain is dozing and the
necessary shock and mental inhibition is avoided. Add this
stimulation, and the incongruity returns. Had such a shock never
been felt, we should not know what incongruity meant; no more
than without eyes we should know the meaning of blue or yellow.

In saying this, we are not really leaning upon physiological theory.
The appeal to our knowledge of the brain facilitates the conception
of the immediacy of our feelings of relation; but that immediacy
would be apparent to a sharp introspection. We do not need to
think of the eye or skin to feel that light and heat are ultimate data;
no more do we need to think of cerebral excitements to see that
right and left, before and after, good and bad, one and two, like and
unlike, are irreducible feelings. The categories are senses without
organs, or with organs unknown. Just as the discrimination of our
feelings of colour and sound might never have been distinct and
constant, had we not come upon the organs that seem to convey
and control them; so perhaps our classification of our inner
sensations will never be settled until their respective organs are
discovered; for psychology has always been physiological, without
knowing it. But this truth remains -- quite apart from physical
conceptions, not to speak of metaphysical materialism -- that
whatever the historical conditions of any state of mind may be said
to be, it exists, when it does exist, immediately and absolutely;
each of its distinguishable parts might conceivably have been
absent from it; and its character, as well as its existence, is a mere
datum of sense.

The pleasure that belongs to the consciousness of relations is
therefore as immediate as any other; indeed, our emotional
consciousness is always single, but we treat it as a resultant of
many and even of conflicting feelings because we look at it
historically with a view to comprehending it, and distribute it into
as many factors as we find objects or causes to which to attribute it.
The pleasure of association is an immediate feeling, which we
account for by its relation to a feeling in the past, or to cerebral
structure modified by a former experience; just as memory itself,
which we explain by a reference to the past, is a peculiar
complication of present consciousness.

_Kinds of value in the second term._

§ 50. These reflections may make less surprising to us what is the
most striking fact about the philosophy of expression; namely, that
the value acquired by the expressive thing is often of an entirely
different kind from that which the thing expressed possesses. The
expression of physical pleasure, of passion, or even of pain, may
constitute beauty and please the beholder. Thus the value of the
second term may be physical, or practical, or even negative; and it
may be transmuted, as it passes to the first term, into a value at
once positive and aesthetic. The transformation of practical values
into aesthetic has often been noted, and has even led to the theory
that beauty is utility seen at arm's length; a premonition of pleasure
and prosperity, much as smell is a premonition of taste. The
transformation of negative values into positive has naturally
attracted even more attention, and given rise to various theories of
the comic, tragic, and sublime. For these three species of aesthetic
good seem to please us by the suggestion of evil; and the problem
arises how a mind can be made happier by having suggestions of
unhappiness stirred within it; an unhappiness it cannot understand
without in some degree sharing in it. We must now turn to the
analysis of this question.

The expressiveness of a smile is not discovered exactly through
association of images. The child smiles (without knowing it) when
he feels pleasure; and the nurse smiles back; his own pleasure is
associated with her conduct, and her smile is therefore expressive
of pleasure. The fact of his pleasure at her smile is the ground of
his instinctive belief in her pleasure in it. For this reason the
circumstances expressive of happiness are not those that are
favourable to it in reality, but those that are congruous with it in
idea. The green of spring, the bloom of youth, the variability of
childhood, the splendour of wealth and beauty, all these are
symbols of happiness, not because they have been known to
accompany it in fact, -- for they do not, any more than their
opposites, -- but because they produce an image and echo of it in
us aesthetically. We believe those things to be happy which it
makes us happy to think of or to see; the belief in the blessedness
of the supreme being itself has no other foundation. Our joy in the
thought of omniscience makes us attribute joy to the possession of
it, which it would in fact perhaps be very far from involving or
even allowing.

The expressiveness of forms has a value as a sign of the life that
actually inhabits those forms only when they resemble our own
body; it is then probable that similar conditions of body involve, in
them and in us, similar emotions; and we should not long continue
to regard as the expression of pleasure an attitude that we know, by
experience in our own person, to accompany pain. Children,
indeed, may innocently torture animals, not having enough sense
of analogy to be stopped by the painful suggestions of their
writhings; and, although in a rough way we soon correct these
crying misinterpretations by a better classification of experience,
we nevertheless remain essentially subject to the same error. We
cannot escape it, because the method which involves it is the only
one that justifies belief in objective consciousness at all. Analogy
of bodies helps us to distribute and classify the life we conceive
about us; but what leads us to conceive it is the direct association
of our own feeling with images of things, an association which
precedes any clear representation of our own gestures and attitude.
I know that smiles mean pleasure before I have caught myself
smiling in the glass; they mean pleasure because they give it.

Since these aesthetic effects include some of the most moving and
profound beauties, philosophers have not been slow to turn the
unanalyzed paradox of their formation into a principle, and to
explain by it the presence and necessity of evil. As in the tragic and
the sublime, they have thought, the sufferings and dangers to
which a hero is exposed seem to add to his virtue and dignity, and
to our sacred joy in the contemplation of him, so the sundry evils
of life may be elements in the transcendent glory of the whole.
And once fired by this thought, those who pretend to justify the
ways of God to man have, naturally, not stopped to consider
whether so edifying a phenomenon was not a hasty illusion. They
have, indeed, detested any attempt to explain it rationally, as
tending to obscure one of the moral laws of the universe. In
venturing, therefore, to repeat such an attempt, we should not be
too sanguine of success; for we have to encounter not only the
intrinsic difficulties of the problem, but also a wide-spread and
arrogant metaphysical prejudice.

For the sake of greater clearness we may begin by classifying the
values that can enter into expression; we shall then be better able to
judge by what combinations of them various well-known effects
and emotions are produced. The intrinsic value of the first term can
be entirely neglected, since it does not contribute to expression. It
does, however, contribute greatly to the beauty of the expressive
object. The first term is the source of stimulation, and the
acuteness and pleasantness of this determine to a great extent the
character and sweep of the associations that will be aroused. Very
often the pleasantness of the medium will counterbalance the
disagreeableness of the import, and expressions, in themselves
hideous or inappropriate, may be excused for the sake of the object
that conveys them. A beautiful voice will redeem a vulgar song, a
beautiful colour and texture an unmeaning composition. Beauty in
the first term -- beauty of sound, rhythm, and image -- will make
any thought whatever poetic, while no thought whatever can be so
without that immediate beauty of presentation.[14]

_Aesthetic value in the second term._

§ 51. That the noble associations of any object should embellish
that object is very comprehensible. Homer furnishes us with a
good illustration of the constant employment of this effect. The
first term, one need hardly say, leaves with him little to be desired.
The verse is beautiful. Sounds, images, and composition conspire
to stimulate and delight. This immediate beauty is sometimes used
to clothe things terrible and sad; there is no dearth of the tragic in
Homer. But the tendency of his poetry is nevertheless to fill the
outskirts of our consciousness with the trooping images of things
no less fair and noble than the verse itself. The heroes are virtuous.
There is none of importance who is not admirable in his way. The
palaces, the arms, the horses, the sacrifices, are always excellent.
The women are always stately and beautiful. The ancestry and the
history of every one are honourable and good. The whole Homeric
world is clean, clear, beautiful, and providential, and no small part
of the perennial charm of the poet is that he thus immerses us in an
atmosphere of beauty; a beauty not concentrated and reserved for
some extraordinary sentiment, action, or person, but permeating
the whole and colouring the common world of soldiers and sailors,
war and craft, with a marvellous freshness and inward glow. There
is nothing in the associations of life in this world or in another to
contradict or disturb our delight. All is beautiful, and beautiful
through and through.

Something of this quality meets us in all simple and idyllic
compositions. There is, for instance, a popular demand that stories
and comedies should "end well." The hero and heroine must be
young and handsome; unless they die, -- which is another matter, --
they must not in the end be poor. The landscape in the play must
be beautiful; the dresses pretty; the plot without serious mishap. A
pervasive presentation of pleasure must give warmth and ideality
to the whole. In the proprieties of social life we find the same
principle; we study to make our surroundings, manner, and
conversation suggest nothing but what is pleasing. We hide the
ugly and disagreeable portion of our lives, and do not allow the
least hint of it to come to light upon festive and public occasions.
Whenever, in a word, a thoroughly pleasing effect is found, it is
found by the expression, as well as presentation, of what is in itself
pleasing -- and when this effect is to be produced artificially, we
attain it by the suppression of all expression that is not suggestive
of something good.

If our consciousness were exclusively aesthetic, this kind of
expression would be the only one allowed in art or prized in nature.
We should avoid as a shock or an insipidity, the suggestion of
anything not intrinsically beautiful. As there would be no values
not aesthetic, our pleasure could never be heightened by any other
kind of interest. But as contemplation is actually a luxury in our
lives, and things interest us chiefly on passionate and practical
grounds, the accumulation of values too exclusively aesthetic
produces in our minds an effect of closeness and artificiality. So
selective a diet cloys, and our palate, accustomed to much daily
vinegar and salt, is surfeited by such unmixed sweet.

Instead we prefer to see through the medium of art -- through the
beautiful first term of our expression -- the miscellaneous world
which is so well known to us -- perhaps so dear, and at any rate so
inevitable, an object. We are more thankful for this presentation, of
the unlovely truth in a lovely form, than for the like presentation of
an abstract beauty; what is lost in the purity of the pleasure is
gained in the stimulation of our attention, and in the relief of
viewing with aesthetic detachment the same things that in practical
life hold tyrannous dominion over our souls. The beauty that is
associated only with other beauty is therefore a sort of aesthetic
dainty; it leads the fancy through a fairyland of lovely forms,
where we must forget the common objects of our interest. The
charm of such an idealization is undeniable; but the other
important elements of our memory and will cannot long be
banished. Thoughts of labour, ambition, lust, anger, confusion,
sorrow, and death must needs mix with our contemplation and lend
their various expressions to the objects with which in experience
they are so closely allied. Hence the incorporation in the beautiful
of values of other sorts, and the comparative rareness in nature or
art of expressions the second term of which has only aesthetic
value.

_Practical value in the same._

§ 52. More important and frequent is the case of the expression of
utility. This is found whenever the second term is the idea of
something of practical advantage to us, the premonition of which
brings satisfaction; and this satisfaction prompts an approval of the
presented object. The tone of our consciousness is raised by the
foretaste of a success; and this heightened pleasure is objectified in
the present image, since the associated image to which the
satisfaction properly belongs often fails to become distinct. We do
not conceive clearly what this practical advantage will be; but the
vague sense that an advantage is there, that something desirable
has been done, accompanies the presentation, and gives it
expression.

The case that most resembles that of which we have been just
speaking, is perhaps that in which the second term is a piece of
interesting information, a theory, or other intellectual datum. Our
interest in facts and theories, when not aesthetic, is of course
practical; it consists in their connexion with our interests, and in
the service they can render us in the execution of our designs.
Intellectual values are utilitarian in their origin but aesthetic in
their form, since the advantage of knowledge is often lost sight of,
and ideas are prized for their own sake. Curiosity can become a
disinterested passion, and yield intimate and immediate satisfaction
like any other impulse.

When we have before us, for instance, a fine map, in which the line
of coast, now rocky, now sandy, is clearly indicated, together with
the windings of the rivers, the elevations of the land, and the
distribution of the population, we have the simultaneous
suggestion of so many facts, the sense of mastery over so much
reality, that we gaze at it with delight, and need no practical motive
to keep us studying it, perhaps for hours together. A map is not
naturally thought of as an aesthetic object; it is too exclusively
expressive. The first term is passed over as a mere symbol, and the
mind is filled either with imaginations of the landscape the country
would really offer, or with thoughts about its history and
inhabitants. These circumstances prevent the ready objectification
of our pleasure in the map itself. And yet, let the tints of it be a
little subtle, let the lines be a little delicate, and the masses of land
and sea somewhat balanced, and we really have a beautiful thing; a
thing the charm of which consists almost entirely in its meaning,
but which nevertheless pleases us in the same way as a picture or a
graphic symbol might please. Give the symbol a little intrinsic
worth of form, line, and colour, and it attracts like a magnet all the
values of the things it is known to symbolize. It becomes beautiful
in its expressiveness.

Hardly different from this example is that of travel or of reading;
for in these employments we get many aesthetic pleasures, the
origin of which is in the satisfaction of curiosity and intelligence.
When we say admiringly of anything that it is characteristic, that it
embodies a whole period or a whole man, we are absorbed by the
pleasant sense that it offers innumerable avenues of approach to
interesting and important things. The less we are able to specify
what these are, the more beautiful will the object be that expresses
them. For if we could specify them, the felt value would
disintegrate, and distribute itself among the ideas of the suggested
things, leaving the expressive object bare of all interest, like the
letters of a printed page.

The courtiers of Philip the Second probably did not regard his
rooms at the Escurial as particularly interesting, but simply as
small, ugly, and damp. The character which we find in them and
which makes us regard them as eminently expressive of whatever
was sinister in the man, probably did not strike them. They knew
the king, and had before them words, gestures, and acts enough in
which to read his character. But all these living facts are wanting to
our experience; and it is the suggestion of them in their
unrealizable vagueness that fills the apartments of the monarch
with such pungent expression. It is not otherwise with all emphatic
expressiveness -- moonlight and castle moats, minarets and
cypresses, camels filing through the desert -- such images get their
character from the strong but misty atmosphere of sentiment and
adventure which clings about them. The profit of travel, and the
extraordinary charm of all visible relics of antiquity, consists in the
acquisition of images in which to focus a mass of discursive
knowledge, not otherwise felt together. Such images are concrete
symbols of much latent experience, and the deep roots of
association give them the same hold upon our attention which
might be secured by a fortunate form or splendid material.

_Cost as an element of effect._

§ 53. There is one consideration which often adds much to the
interest with which we view an object, but which we might be
virtuously inclined not to admit among aesthetic values. I mean
cost. Cost is practical value expressed in abstract terms, and from
the price of anything we can often infer what relation it has to the
desires and efforts of mankind. There is no reason why cost, or the
circumstances which are its basis, should not, like other practical
values, heighten the tone of consciousness, and add to the pleasure
with which we view an object. In fact, such is our daily experience;
for great as is the sensuous beauty of gems, their rarity and price
adds an expression of distinction to them, which they would never
have if they were cheap.

The circumstance that makes the appreciation of cost often
unaesthetic is the abstractness of that quality. The price of an
object is an algebraic symbol, it is a conventional term, invented to
facilitate our operations, which remains arid and unmeaning if we
stop with it and forget to translate it again at the end into its
concrete equivalent. The commercial mind dwells in that
intermediate limbo of symbolized values; the calculator's senses
are muffled by his intellect and by his habit of abbreviated thinking.
His mental process is a reckoning that loses sight of its original
values, and is over without reaching any concrete image. Therefore
the knowledge of cost, when expressed in terms of money, is
incapable of contributing to aesthetic effect, but the reason is not
so much that the suggested value is not aesthetic, as that no real
value is suggested at all. No object of any kind is presented to the
mind by the numerical expression. If we reinterpret our price,
however, and translate it back into the facts which constitute it,
into the materials employed, their original place and quality, and
the labour and art which transformed them into the present thing,
then we add to the aesthetic value of the object, by the expression
which we find in it, not of its price in money, but of its human cost.
We have now the consciousness of the real values which it
represents, and these values, sympathetically present to the fancy,
increase our present interest and admiration.

I believe economists count among the elements of the value of an
object the rarity of its material, the labour of its manufacture, and
the distance from which it is brought. Now all these qualities, if
attended to in themselves, appeal greatly to the imagination. We
have a natural interest in what is rare and affects us with unusual
sensations. What comes from a far country carries our thoughts
there, and gains by the wealth and picturesqueness of its
associations. And that on which human labour has been spent,
especially if it was a labour of love, and is apparent in the product,
has one of the deepest possible claims to admiration. So that the
standard of cost, the most vulgar of all standards, is such only
when it remains empty and abstract. Let the thoughts wander back
and consider the elements of value, and our appreciation, from
being verbal and commercial, becomes poetic and real.

We have in this one more example of the manner in which
practical values, when suggested by and incorporated in any object,
contribute to its beauty. Our sense of what lies behind, unlovely
though that background may be, gives interest and poignancy to
that which is present; our attention and wonder are engaged, and a
new meaning and importance is added to such intrinsic beauty as
the presentation may possess.

_The expression of economy and fitness._

§ 54. The same principle explains the effect of evident cleanliness,
security, economy, and comfort. This Dutch charm hardly needs
explanation; we are conscious of the domesticity and neatness
which pleases us in it. There are few things more utterly
discomforting to our minds than waste: it is a sort of pungent
extract and quintessence of folly. The visible manifestation of it is
therefore very offensive; and that of its absence very reassuring.
The force of our approval of practical fitness and economy in
things rises into an appreciation that is half-aesthetic, and which
becomes wholly so when the fit form becomes fixed in a type, to
the lines of which we are accustomed; so that the practical
necessity of the form is heightened and concentrated into the
aesthetic propriety of it.

The much-praised expression of function and truth in architectural
works reduces itself to this principle. The useful contrivance at
first appeals to our practical approval; while we admire its
ingenuity, we cannot fail to become gradually accustomed to its
presence, and to register with attentive pleasure the relation of its
parts. Utility, as we have pointed out in its place, is thus the
guiding principle in the determination of forms.

The recurring observation of the utility, economy, and fitness of
the traditional arrangement in buildings or other products of art,
re-enforces this formal expectation with a reflective approval. We are
accustomed, for instance, to sloping roofs; the fact that they were
necessary has made them familiar, and the fact that they are
familiar has made them objects of study and of artistic enjoyment.
If at any moment, however, the notion of condemning them passes
through the mind, -- if we have visions of the balustrade against
the sky, -- we revert to our homely image with kindly loyalty,
when we remember the long months of rain and snow, and the
comfortless leaks to be avoided. The thought of a glaring, practical
unfitness is enough to spoil our pleasure in any form, however
beautiful intrinsically, while the sense of practical fitness is enough
to reconcile us to the most awkward and rude contrivances.

This principle is, indeed, not a fundamental, but an auxiliary one;
the expression of utility modifies effect, but does not constitute it.
There would be a kind of superstitious haste in the notion that what
is convenient and economical is necessarily and by miracle
beautiful. The uses and habits of one place and society require
works which are or may easily become intrinsically beautiful; the
uses and habits of another make these beautiful works impossible.
The beauty has a material and formal basis that we have already
studied; no fitness of design will make a building of ten equal
storeys as beautiful as a pavilion or a finely proportioned tower; no
utility will make a steamboat as beautiful as a sailing vessel. But
the forms once established, with their various intrinsic characters,
the fitness we know to exist in them will lend them some added
charm, or their unfitness will disquiet us, and haunt us like a
conscientious qualm. The other interests of our lives here mingle
with the purely aesthetic, to enrich or to embitter it.

If Sybaris is so sad a name to the memory -- and who is without
some Sybaris of his own? -- if the image of it is so tormenting and
in the end so disgusting, this is not because we no longer think its
marbles bright, its fountains cool, its athletes strong, or its roses
fragrant; but because, mingled with all these supreme beauties,
there is the ubiquitous shade of Nemesis, the sense of a vacant will
and a suicidal inhumanity. The intolerableness of this moral
condition poisons the beauty which continues to be felt. If this
beauty did not exist, and was not still desired, the tragedy would
disappear and Jehovah would be deprived of the worth of his
victim. The sternness of moral forces lies precisely in this, that the
sacrifices morality imposes upon us are real, that the things it
renders impossible are still precious.

We are accustomed to think of prudence as estranging us only
from low and ignoble things; we forget that utility and the need of
system in our lives is a bar also to the free flights of the spirit. The
highest instincts tend to disorganization as much as the lowest,
since order and benefit is what practical morality everywhere
insists upon, while sanctity and genius are as rebellious as vice.
The constant demands of the heart and the belly can allow man
only an incidental indulgence in the pleasures of the eye and the
understanding. For this reason, utility keeps close watch over
beauty, lest in her wilfulness and riot she should offend against our
practical needs and ultimate happiness. And when the conscience
is keen, this vigilance of the practical imagination over the
speculative ceases to appear as an eventual and external check. The
least suspicion of luxury, waste, impurity, or cruelty is then a
signal for alarm and insurrection. That which emits this _sapor
hoereticus_ becomes so initially horrible, that naturally no beauty
can ever be discovered in it; the senses and imagination are in that
case inhibited by the conscience.

For this reason, the doctrine that beauty is essentially nothing but
the expression of moral or practical good appeals to persons of
predominant moral sensitiveness, not only because they wish it
were the truth, but because it largely describes the experience of
their own minds, somewhat warped in this particular. It will further
be observed that the moralists are much more able to condemn
than to appreciate the effects of the arts. Their taste is delicate
without being keen, for the principle on which they judge is one
which really operates to control and extend aesthetic effects; it is a
source of expression and of certain _nuances_ of satisfaction; but it
is foreign to the stronger and more primitive aesthetic values to
which the same persons are comparatively blind.

_The authority of morals over aesthetics._

§ 55. The extent to which aesthetic goods should be sacrificed is,
of course, a moral question; for the function of practical reason is
to compare, combine, and harmonize all our interests, with a view
to attaining the greatest satisfactions of which our nature is capable.
We must expect, therefore, that virtue should place the same
restraint upon all our passions -- not from superstitious aversion to
any one need, but from an equal concern for them all. The
consideration to be given to our aesthetic pleasures will depend
upon their greater or less influence upon our happiness; and as this
influence varies in different ages and countries, and with different
individuals, it will be right to let aesthetic demands count for more
or for less in the organization of life.

We may, indeed, according to our personal sympathies, prefer one
type of creature to another. We may love the martial, or the angelic,
or the political temperament. We may delight to find in others that
balance of susceptibilities and enthusiasms which we feel in our
own breast. But no moral precept can require one species or
individual to change its nature in order to resemble another, since
such a requirement can have no power or authority over those on
whom we would impose it. All that morality can require is the
inward harmony of each life: and if we still abhor the thought of a
possible being who should be happy without love, or knowledge,
or beauty, the aversion we feel is not moral but instinctive, not
rational but human. What revolts us is not the want of excellence
in that other creature, but his want of affinity to ourselves. Could
we survey the whole universe, we might indeed assign to each
species a moral dignity proportionate to its general beneficence
and inward wealth; but such an absolute standard, if it exists, is
incommunicable to us; and we are reduced to judging of the
excellence of every nature by its relation to the human.

All these matters, however, belong to the sphere of ethics, nor
should we give them here even a passing notice, but for the
influence which moral ideas exert over aesthetic judgments. Our
sense of practical benefit not only determines the moral value of
beauty, but sometimes even its existence as an aesthetic good.
Especially in the right _selection_ of effects, these considerations
have weight. Forms in themselves pleasing may become disagreeable
when the practical interests then uppermost in the mind
cannot, without violence, yield a place to them. Thus too
much eloquence in a diplomatic document, or in a familiar letter,
or in a prayer, is an offence not only against practical sense, but
also against taste. The occasion has tuned us to a certain key of
sentiment, and deprived us of the power to respond to other stimuli.

If things of moment are before us, we cannot stop to play with
symbols and figures of speech. We cannot attend to them with
pleasure, and therefore they lose the beauty they might elsewhere
have had. They are offensive, not in themselves, -- for nothing is
intrinsically ugly, -- but by virtue of our present demand for
something different. A prison as gay as a bazaar, a church as dumb
as a prison, offend by their failure to support by their aesthetic
quality the moral emotion with, which we approach them. The arts
must study their occasions; they must stand modestly aside until
they can slip in fitly into the interstices of life. This is the
consequence of the superficial stratum on which they flourish;
their roots, as we have seen, are not deep in the world, and they
appear only as unstable, superadded activities, employments of our
freedom, after the work of life is done and the terror of it is allayed.
They must, therefore, fit their forms, like parasites, to the stouter
growths to which they cling.

Herein lies the greatest difficulty and nicety of art. It must not only
create things abstractly beautiful, but it must conciliate all the
competitors these may have to the attention of the world, and must
know how to insinuate their charms among the objects of our
passion. But this subserviency and enforced humility of beauty is
not without its virtue and reward. If the aesthetic habit lie under the
necessity of respecting and observing our passions, it possesses the
privilege of soothing our griefs. There is no situation so terrible
that it may not be relieved by the momentary pause of the mind to
contemplate it aesthetically.

Grief itself becomes in this way not wholly pain; a sweetness is
added to it by our reflection. The saddest scenes may lose their
bitterness in their beauty. This ministration makes, as it were, the
piety of the Muses, who succour their mother, Life, and repay her
for their nurture by the comfort of their continual presence. The
aesthetic world is limited in its scope; it must submit to the control
of the organizing reason, and not trespass upon more useful and
holy ground. The garden must not encroach upon the corn-fields;
but the eye of the gardener may transform the corn-fields
themselves by dint of loving observation into a garden of a soberer
kind. By finding grandeur in our disasters, and merriment in our
mishaps, the aesthetic sense thus mollifies both, and consoles us
for the frequent impossibility of a serious and perfect beauty.

_Negative values in the second term._

§ 56. All subjects, even the most  repellent, when the
circumstances of life thrust them before us, can thus be observed
with curiosity and treated with art. The calling forth of these
aesthetic functions softens the violence of our sympathetic reaction.
If death, for instance, did not exist and did not thrust itself upon
our thoughts with painful importunity, art would never have been
called upon to soften and dignify it, by presenting it in beautiful
forms and surrounding it with consoling associations. Art does not
seek out the pathetic, the tragic, and the absurd; it is life that has
imposed them upon our attention, and enlisted art in their service,
to make the contemplation of them, since it is inevitable, at least as
tolerable as possible.

The agreeableness of the presentation is thus mixed with the horror
of the thing; and the result is that while we are saddened by the
truth we are delighted by the vehicle that conveys it to us. The
mixture of these emotions constitutes the peculiar flavour and
poignancy of pathos. But because unlovely objects and feelings are
often so familiar as to be indifferent or so momentous as to be
alone in the mind, we are led into the confusion of supposing that
beauty depends upon them for its aesthetic value; whereas the truth
is that only by the addition of positive beauties can these evil
experiences be made agreeable to contemplation.

There is, in reality, no such paradox in the tragic, comic, and
sublime, as has been sometimes supposed. We are not pleased by
virtue of the suggested evils, but in spite of them; and if ever the
charm of the beautiful presentation sinks so low, or the vividness
of the represented evil rises so high, that the balance is in favour of
pain, at that very moment the whole object becomes horrible,
passes out of the domain of art, and can be justified only by its
scientific or moral uses. As an aesthetic value it is destroyed; it
ceases to be a benefit; and the author of it, if he were not made
harmless by the neglect that must soon overtake him, would have
to be punished as a malefactor who adds to the burden of mortal
life. For the sad, the ridiculous, the grotesque, and the terrible,
unless they become aesthetic goods, remain moral evils.

We have, therefore, to study the various aesthetic, intellectual, and
moral compensations by which the mind can be brought to
contemplate with pleasure a thing which, if experienced alone,
would be the cause of pain. There is, to be sure, a way of avoiding
this inquiry. We might assert that since all moderate excitement is
pleasant, there is nothing strange in the fact that the representation
of evil should please; for the experience is evil by virtue of the
pain it gives; but it gives pain only when felt with great intensity.
Observed from afar, it is a pleasing impression; it is vivid enough
to interest, but not acute enough to wound. This simple explanation
is possible in all those cases where aesthetic effect is gained by the
inhibition of sympathy.

The term "evil" is often a conventional epithet; a conflagration
may be called an evil, because it usually involves loss and
suffering; but if, without caring for a loss and suffering we do not
share, we are delighted by the blaze, and still say that what pleases
us is an evil, we are using this word as a conventional appellation,
not as the mark of a felt value. We are not pleased by an evil; we
are pleased by a vivid and exciting sensation, which is a good, but
which has for objective cause an event which may indeed be an
evil to others, but about the consequences of which we are not
thinking at all. There is, in this sense, nothing in all nature, perhaps,
which is not an evil; nothing which is not unfavourable to some
interest, and does not involve some infinitesimal or ultimate
suffering in the universe of life.

But when we are ignorant or thoughtless, this suffering is to us as
if it did not exist. The pleasures of drinking and walking are not
tragic to us, because we may be poisoning some bacillus or
crushing some worm. To an omniscient intelligence such acts may
be tragic by virtue of the insight into their relations to conflicting
impulses; but unless these impulses are present to the same mind,
there is no consciousness of tragedy. The child that, without
understanding of the calamity, should watch a shipwreck from the
shore, would hare a simple emotion of pleasure as from a jumping
jack; what passes for tragic interest is often nothing but this. If he
understood the event, but was entirely without sympathy, he would
have the aesthetic emotion of the careless tyrant, to whom the
notion of suffering is no hindrance to the enjoyment of the lyre. If
the temper of his tyranny were purposely cruel, he might add to
that aesthetic delight the luxury of _Schadenfreude;_ but the
pathos and horror of the sight could only appeal to a man who
realized and shared the sufferings he beheld.

A great deal of brutal tragedy has been endured in the world
because the rudeness of the representation, or of the public, or of
both, did not allow a really sympathetic reaction to arise. We all
smile when Punch beats Judy in the puppet show. The treatment
and not the subject is what makes a tragedy. A parody of _Hamlet_
or of _King Lear_ would not be a tragedy; and these tragedies
themselves are not wholly such, but by the strain of wit and
nonsense they contain are, as it were, occasional parodies on
themselves. By treating a tragic subject bombastically or satirically
we can turn it into an amusement for the public; they will not feel
the griefs which we have been careful to harden them against by
arousing in them contrary emotions. A work, nominally a work of
art, may also appeal to non-aesthetic feelings by its political bias,
brutality, or obscenity. But if an effect of true pathos is sought, the
sympathy of the observer must be aroused; we must awaken in him
the emotion we describe. The intensity of the impression must not
be so slight that its painful quality is not felt; for it is this very
sense of pain, mingling with the aesthetic excitement of the
spectacle, that gives it a tragic or pathetic colouring.

We cannot therefore rest in the assertion that the slighter degree of
excitement is pleasant, when a greater degree of the same would be
disagreeable; for that principle does not express the essence of the
matter, which is that we must be aware of the evil, and conscious
of it as such, absorbed more or less in the experience of the
sufferer, and consequently suffering ourselves, before we can
experience the essence of tragic emotion. This emotion must
therefore be complex; it must contain an element of pain
overbalanced by an element of pleasure; in our delight there must
be a distinguishable touch of shrinking and sorrow; for it is this
conflict and rending of our will, this fascination by what is
intrinsically terrible or sad, that gives these turbid feelings their
depth and pungency.

_Influence of the first term in the pleasing expression of self._

§ 57. A striking proof of the compound nature of tragic effects can
be given by a simple experiment. Remove from any drama -- say
from _Othello_ -- the charm of the medium of presentation; reduce
the tragedy to a mere account of the facts and of the words spoken,
such as our newspapers almost daily contain; and the tragic dignity
and beauty is entirely lost. Nothing remains but a disheartening
item of human folly, which may still excite curiosity, but which
will rather defile than purify the mind that considers it. A French
poet has said:

     Il n'est de vulgaire chagrin
     Qua celui d'une âme vulgaire.

The counterpart of this maxim is equally true. There is no noble
sorrow except in a noble mind, because what is noble is the
reaction upon the sorrow, the attitude of the man in its presence,
the language in which he clothes it, the associations with which he
surrounds it, and the fine affections and impulses which shine
through it. Only by suffusing some sinister experience with this
moral light, as a poet may do who carries that light within him, can
we raise misfortune into tragedy and make it better for us to
remember our lives than to forget them.

There are times, although rare, when men are noble in the very
moment of passion: when that passion is not unqualified, but
already mastered by reflection and levelled with truth. Then the
experience is itself the tragedy, and no poet is needed to make it
beautiful in representation, since the sufferer has been an artist
himself, and has moulded what he has endured. But usually these
two stages have to be successive: first we suffer, afterwards we
sing. An interval is necessary to make feeling presentable, and
subjugate it to that form in which alone it is beautiful.

This form appeals to us in itself, and without its aid no
subject-matter could become an aesthetic object. The more terrible the
experience described, the more powerful must the art be which is
to transform it. For this reason prose and literalness are more
tolerable in comedy than in tragedy; any violent passion, any
overwhelming pain, if it is not to make us think of a demonstration
in pathology, and bring back the smell of ether, must be rendered
in the most exalted style. Metre, rhyme, melody, the widest nights
of allusion, the highest reaches of fancy, are there in place. For
these enable the mind swept by the deepest cosmic harmonies, to
endure and absorb the shrill notes which would be intolerable in a
poorer setting.

The sensuous harmony of words, and still more the effects of
rhythm, are indispensable at this height of emotion. Evolutionists
have said that violent emotion naturally expresses itself in rhythm.
That is hardly an empirical observation, nor can the expressiveness
of rhythms be made definite enough to bear specific association
with complex feelings. But the suspension and rush of sound and
movement have in themselves a strong effect; we cannot undergo
them without profound excitement; and this, like martial music,
nerves us to courage and, by a sort of intoxication, bears us along
amid scenes which might otherwise be sickening. The vile effect of
literal and disjointed renderings of suffering, whether in writing or
acting, proves how necessary is the musical quality to tragedy -- a
fact Aristotle long ago set forth. The afflatus of rhythm, even if it
be the pomp of the Alexandrine, sublimates the passion, and
clarifies its mutterings into poetry. This breadth and rationality are
necessary to art, which is not skill merely, but skill in the service
of beauty.

_Mixture of other expressions, including that of truth._

§ 58. To the value of these sensuous and formal elements must be
added the continual suggestion of beautiful and happy things,
which no tragedy is sombre enough to exclude. Even if we do not
go so far as to intersperse comic scenes and phrases into a pathetic
subject, -- a rude device, since the comic passages themselves need
that purifying which they are meant to effect, -- we must at least
relieve our theme with pleasing associations. For this reason we
have palaces for our scene, rank, beauty, and virtue in our heroes,
nobility in their passions and in their fate, and altogether a sort of
glorification of life without which tragedy would lose both in depth
of pathos -- since things so precious are destroyed -- and in
subtlety of charm, since things so precious are manifested.

Indeed, one of the chief charms that tragedies have is the
suggestion of what they might have been if they had not been
tragedies. The happiness which glimmers through them, the hopes,
loves, and ambitions of which it is made, these things fascinate us,
and win our sympathy; so that we are all the more willing to suffer
with our heroes, even if we are at the same time all the more
sensitive to their suffering. Too wicked a character or too
unrelieved a situation revolts us for this reason. We do not find
enough expression of good to make us endure the expression of the
evil.

A curious exception to this rule, which, however, admirably
illustrates the fundamental principle of it, is where by the diversity
of evils represented the mind is relieved from painful absorption in
any of them. There is a scene in _King Lear,_ where the horror of
the storm is made to brood over at least four miseries, that of the
king, of the fool, of Edgar in his real person, and of Edgar in his
assumed character. The vividness of each of these portrayals, with
its different note of pathos, keeps the mind detached and free,
forces it to compare and reflect, and thereby to universalize the
spectacle. Yet even here, the beautiful effect is not secured without
some touches of good. How much is not gained by the dumb
fidelity of the fool, and by the sublime humanity of Lear, when he
says, "Art cold? There is a part of me is sorry for thee yet."

Yet all these compensations would probably be unavailing but for
another which the saddest things often have, -- the compensation
of being true. Our practical and intellectual nature is deeply
interested in truth. What describes fact appeals to us for that reason;
it has an inalienable interest. However unpleasant truth may prove,
we long to know it, partly perhaps because experience has shown
us the prudence of this kind of intellectual courage, and chiefly
because the consciousness of ignorance and the dread of the
unknown is more tormenting than any possible discovery. A
primitive instinct makes us turn the eyes full on any object that
appears in the dim borderland of our field of vision -- and this all
the more quickly, the more terrible that object threatens to be.

This physical thirst for seeing has its intellectual extension. We
covet truth, and to attain it, amid all accidents, is a supreme
satisfaction. Now this satisfaction the representation of evil can
also afford. Whether we hear the account of some personal
accident, or listen to the symbolic representation of the inherent
tragedy of life, we crave the same knowledge; the desire for truth
makes us welcome eagerly whatever comes in its name. To be sure,
the relief of such instruction does not of itself constitute an
aesthetic pleasure: the other conditions of beauty remain to be
fulfilled. But the satisfaction of so imperious an intellectual instinct
insures our willing attention to the tragic object, and strengthens
the hold which any beauties it may possess will take upon us. An
intellectual value stands ready to be transmuted into an aesthetic
one, if once its discursiveness is lost, and it is left hanging about
the object as a vague sense of dignity and meaning.

To this must be added the specific pleasure of recognition, one of
the keenest we have, and the sentimental one of nursing our own
griefs and dignifying them by assimilation to a less inglorious
representation of them. Here we have truth on a small scale;
conformity in the fiction to incidents of our personal experience.
Such correspondences are the basis of much popular appreciation
of trivial and undigested works that appeal to some momentary
phase of life or feeling, and disappear with it. They have the value
of personal stimulants only; they never achieve beauty. Like the
souvenirs of last season's gayeties, or the diary of an early love,
they are often hideous in themselves in proportion as they are
redolent with personal associations. But however hopelessly mere
history or confession may fail to constitute a work of art, a work of
art that has an historical warrant, either literal or symbolical, gains
the support of that vivid interest we have in facts. And many
tragedies and farces, that to a mind without experience of this
sublunary world might seem monstrous and disgusting fictions,
may come to be forgiven and even perhaps preferred over all else,
when they are found to be a sketch from life.

Truth is thus the excuse which ugliness has for being. Many people,
in whom the pursuit of knowledge and the indulgence in sentiment
have left no room for the cultivation of the aesthetic sense, look in
art rather for this expression of fact or of passion than for the
revelation of beauty. They accordingly produce and admire works
without intrinsic value. They employ the procedure of the fine arts
without an eye to what can give pleasure in the effect. They invoke
rather the _a priori_ interest which men are expected to have in the
subject-matter, or in the theories and moral implied in the
presentation of it. Instead of using the allurements of art to inspire
wisdom, they require an appreciation of wisdom to make us endure
their lack of art.

Of course, the instruments of the arts are public property and any
one is free to turn them to new uses. It would be an interesting
development of civilization if they should now be employed only
as methods of recording scientific ideas and personal confessions.
But the experiment has not succeeded and can hardly succeed.
There are other simpler, clearer, and more satisfying ways of
expounding truth. A man who is really a student of history or
philosophy will never rest with the vague and partial oracles of
poetry, not to speak of the inarticulate suggestions of the plastic
arts. He will at once make for the principles which art cannot
express, even if it can embody them, and when those principles are
attained, the works of art, if they had no other value than that of
suggesting them, will lapse from his mind. Forms will give place
to formulas as hieroglyphics have given place to the letters of the
alphabet.

If, on the other hand, the primary interest is really in beauty, and
only the confusion of a moral revolution has obscured for a while
the vision of the ideal, then as the mind regains its mastery over the
world, and digests its new experience, the imagination will again
be liberated, and create its forms by its inward affinities, leaving
all the weary burden, archaeological, psychological, and ethical, to
those whose business is not to delight. But the sudden inundation
of science and sentiment which has made the mind of the
nineteenth century so confused, by overloading us with materials
and breaking up our habits of apperception and our ideals, has led
to an exclusive sense of the value of expressiveness, until this has
been almost identified with beauty. This exaggeration can best
prove how the expression of truth may enter into the play of
aesthetic forces, and give a value to representations which, but for
it, would be repulsive.

_The liberation of self._

§ 59. Hitherto we have been considering those elements of a
pathetic presentation which may mitigate our sympathetic emotion,
and make it on the whole agreeable. These consist in the intrinsic
beauties of the medium of presentation, and in the concomitant
manifestation of various goods, notably of truth. The mixture of
these values is perhaps all we have in mildly pathetic works, in the
presence of which we are tolerably aware of a sort of balance and
compensation of emotions. The sorrow and the beauty, the
hopelessness and the consolation, mingle and merge into a kind of
joy which has its poignancy, indeed, but which is far too passive
and penitential to contain the louder and sublimer of our tragic
moods. In these there is a wholeness, a strength, and a rapture,
which still demands an explanation.

Where this explanation is to be found may be guessed from the
following circumstance. The pathetic is a quality of the object, at
once lovable and sad, which we accept and allow to flow in upon
the soul; but the heroic is an attitude of the will, by which the
voices of the outer world are silenced, and a moral energy, flowing
from within, is made to triumph over them. If we fail, therefore, to
discover, by analysis of the object, anything which could make it
sublime, we must not be surprised at our failure. We must
remember that the object is always but a portion of our
consciousness: that portion which has enough coherence and
articulation to be recognized as permanent and projected into the
outer world. But consciousness remains one, in spite of this
diversification of its content, and the object is not really
independent, but is in constant relation to the rest of the mind, in
the midst of which it swims like a bubble on a dark surface of
water.

The aesthetic effect of objects is always due to the total emotional
value of the consciousness in which they exist. We merely attribute
this value to the object by a projection which is the ground of the
apparent objectivity of beauty. Sometimes this value may be
inherent in the process by which the object itself is perceived; then
we have sensuous and formal beauty; sometimes the value may be
due to the incipient formation of other ideas, which the perception
of this object evokes; then we have beauty of expression. But
among the ideas with which every object has relation there is one
vaguest, most comprehensive, and most powerful one, namely, the
idea of self. The impulses, memories, principles, and energies
which we designate by that word baffle enumeration; indeed, they
constantly fade and change into one another; and whether the self
is anything, everything, or nothing depends on the aspect of it
which we momentarily fix, and especially on the definite object
with which we contrast it.

Now, it is the essential privilege of beauty to so synthesize and
bring to a focus the various impulses of the self, so to suspend
them to a single image, that a great peace falls upon that perturbed
kingdom. In the experience of these momentary harmonies we
have the basis of the enjoyment of beauty, and of all its mystical
meanings. But there are always two methods of securing harmony:
one is to unify all the given elements, and another is to reject and
expunge all the elements that refuse to be unified. Unity by
inclusion gives us the beautiful; unity by exclusion, opposition,
and isolation gives us the sublime. Both are pleasures: but the
pleasure of the one is warm, passive, and pervasive; that of the
other cold, imperious, and keen. The one identifies us with the
world, the other raises us above it.

There can be no difficulty in understanding how the expression of
evil in the object may be the occasion of this heroic reaction of the
soul. In the first place, the evil may be felt; but at the same time the
sense that, great as it may be in itself, it cannot touch us, may
stimulate extraordinarily the consciousness of our own wholeness.
This is the sublimity which Lucretius calls "sweet" in the famous
lines in which he so justly analyzes it. We are not pleased because
another suffers an evil, but because, seeing it is an evil, we see at
the same time our own immunity from it. We might soften the
picture a little, and perhaps make the principle even clearer by so
doing. The shipwreck observed from the shore does not leave us
wholly unmoved; we suffer, also, and if possible, would help. So,
too, the spectacle of the erring world must sadden the philosopher
even in the Acropolis of his wisdom; he would, if it might be,
descend from his meditation and teach. But those movements of
sympathy are quickly inhibited by despair of success; impossibility
of action is a great condition of the sublime. If we could count the
stars, we should not weep before them. While we think we can
change the drama of history, and of our own lives, we are not awed
by our destiny. But when the evil is irreparable, when our life is
lived, a strong spirit has the sublime resource of standing at bay
and of surveying almost from the other world the vicissitudes of
this.

The more intimate to himself the tragedy he is able to look back
upon with calmness, the more sublime that calmness is, and the
more divine the ecstasy in which he achieves it. For the more of
the accidental vesture of life we are able to strip ourselves of, the
more naked and simple is the surviving spirit; the more complete
its superiority and unity, and, consequently, the more unqualified
its joy. There remains little in us, then, but that intellectual essence,
which several great philosophers have called eternal and identified
with the Divinity.

A single illustration may help to fix these principles in the mind.
When Othello has discovered his fatal error, and is resolved to take
his own life, he stops his groaning, and addresses the ambassadors
of Venice thus:

     Speak of me as I am: nothing extenuate,
     Nor set down aught in malice: then, must you speak
     Of one that loved, not wisely, but too well;
     Of one not easily jealous, but, being wrought,
     Perplexed in the extreme; of one whose hand,
     Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away
     Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued eyes,
     Albeit unused to the melting mood,
     Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
     Their medicinal gum. Set you down this:
     And say, besides, that in Aleppo once
     When a malignant and a turbaned Turk
     Beat a Venetian, and traduced the state,
     I took by the throat the circumcised dog,
     And smote him, thus.

There is a kind of criticism that would see in all these allusions,
figures of speech, and wandering reflections, an unnatural
rendering of suicide. The man, we might be told, should have
muttered a few broken phrases, and killed himself without this
pomp of declamation, like the jealous husbands in the daily papers.
But the conventions of the tragic stage are more favourable to
psychological truth than the conventions of real life. If we may
trust the imagination (and in imagination lies, as we have seen, the
test of propriety), this is what Othello would have felt. If he had
not expressed it, his dumbness would have been due to external
hindrances, not to the failure in his mind of just such complex and
rhetorical thoughts as the poet has put into his mouth. The height
of passion is naturally complex and rhetorical. Love makes us
poets, and the approach of death should make us philosophers.
When a man knows that his life is over, he can look back upon it
from a universal standpoint. He has nothing more to live for, but if
the energy of his mind remains unimpaired, he will still wish to
live, and, being cut off from his personal ambitions, he will impute
to himself a kind of vicarious immortality by identifying himself
with what is eternal. He speaks of himself as he is, or rather as he
was. He sums himself up, and points to his achievement. This I
have been, says he, this I have done.

This comprehensive and impartial view, this synthesis and
objectification of experience, constitutes the liberation of the soul
and the essence of sublimity. That the hero attains it at the end
consoles us, as it consoles him, for his hideous misfortunes. Our
pity and terror are indeed purged; we go away knowing that,
however tangled the net may be in which we feel ourselves caught,
there is liberation beyond, and an ultimate peace.

_The sublime independent of the expression of evil._

§ 60. So natural is the relation between the vivid conception of
great evils, and that self-assertion of the soul which gives the
emotion of the sublime, that the sublime is often thought to depend
upon the terror which these conceived evils inspire. To be sure,
that terror would have to be inhibited and subdued, otherwise we
should have a passion too acute to be incorporated in any object;
the sublime would not appear as an aesthetic quality in things, but
remain merely an emotional state in the subject. But this subdued
and objectified terror is what is commonly regarded as the essence
of the sublime, and so great an authority as Aristotle would seem
to countenance some such definition. The usual cause of the
sublime is here confused, however, with the sublime itself. The
suggestion of terror makes us withdraw into ourselves: there with
the supervening consciousness of safety or indifference comes a
rebound, and we have that emotion of detachment and liberation in
which the sublime really consists.

Thoughts and actions are properly sublime, and visible things only
by analogy and suggestion when they induce a certain moral
emotion; whereas beauty belongs properly to sensible things, and
can be predicated of moral facts only by a figure of rhetoric. What
we objectify in beauty is a sensation. What we objectify in the
sublime is an act. This act is necessarily pleasant, for if it were not
the sublime would be a bad quality and one we should rather never
encounter in the world. The glorious joy of self-assertion in the
face of an uncontrollable world is indeed so deep and entire, that it
furnishes just that transcendent element of worth for which we
were looking when we tried to understand how the expression of
pain could sometimes please. It can please, not in itself, but
because it is balanced and annulled by positive pleasures,
especially by this final and victorious one of detachment. If the
expression of evil seems necessary to the sublime, it is so only as a
condition of this moral reaction.

We are commonly too much engrossed in objects and too little
centred in ourselves and our inalienable will, to see the sublimity
of a pleasing prospect. We are then enticed and flattered,
and won over to a commerce with these external goods, and
the consummation of our happiness would lie in the perfect
comprehension and enjoyment of their nature. This is the office of
art and of love; and its partial fulfilment is seen in every perception
of beauty. But when we are checked in this sympathetic endeavour
after unity and comprehension; when we come upon a great evil or
an irreconcilable power, we are driven to seek our happiness by the
shorter and heroic road; then we recognize the hopeless
foreignness of what lies before us, and stiffen ourselves against it.
We thus for the first time reach the sense of our possible separation
from our world, and of our abstract stability; and with this comes
the sublime.

But although experience of evil is the commonest approach to this
attitude of mind, and we commonly become philosophers only
after despairing of instinctive happiness, yet there is nothing
impossible in the attainment of detachment by other channels. The
immense is sublime as well as the terrible; and mere infinity of the
object, like its hostile nature, can have the effect of making the
mind recoil upon itself. Infinity, like hostility, removes us from
things, and makes us conscious of our independence. The
simultaneous view of many things, innumerable attractions felt
together, produce equilibrium and indifference, as effectually as
the exclusion of all. If we may call the liberation of the self by the
consciousness of evil in the world, the Stoic sublime, we may
assert that there is also an Epicurean sublime, which consists in
liberation by equipoise. Any wide survey is sublime in that fashion.
Each detail may be beautiful. We may even be ready with a
passionate response to its appeal. We may think we covet every
sort of pleasure, and lean to every kind of vigorous, impulsive life.
But let an infinite panorama be suddenly unfolded; the will is
instantly paralyzed, and the heart choked. It is impossible to desire
everything at once, and when all is offered and approved, it is
impossible to choose everything. In this suspense, the mind soars
into a kind of heaven, benevolent but unmoved.

This is the attitude of all minds to which breadth of interest or
length of years has brought balance and dignity. The sacerdotal
quality of old age comes from this same sympathy in disinterestedness.
Old men full of hurry and passion appear as fools, because
we understand that their experience has not left enough
mark upon their brain to qualify with the memory of other
goods any object that may be now presented. We cannot venerate
any one in whom appreciation is not divorced from desire. And
this elevation and detachment of the heart need not follow upon
any great disappointment; it is finest and sweetest where it is the
gradual fruit of many affections now merged and mellowed into a
natural piety. Indeed, we are able to frame our idea of the Deity on
no other model.

When the pantheists try to conceive all the parts of nature as
forming a single being, which shall contain them all and yet have
absolute unity, they find themselves soon denying the existence of
the world they are trying to deify; for nature, reduced to the unity it
would assume in an omniscient mind, is no longer nature, but
something simple and impossible, the exact opposite of the real
world. Such an opposition would constitute the liberation of the
divine mind from nature, and its existence as a self-conscious
individual. The effort after comprehensiveness of view reduces
things to unity, but this unity stands out in opposition to the
manifold phenomena which it transcends, and rejects as unreal.

Now this destruction of nature, which the metaphysicians since
Parmenides have so often repeated (nature nevertheless surviving
still), is but a theoretical counterpart and hypostasis of what
happens in every man's conscience when the comprehensiveness of
his experience lifts him into thought, into abstraction. The sense of
the sublime is essentially mystical: it is the transcending of distinct
perception in favour of a feeling of unity and volume. So in the
moral sphere, we have the mutual cancelling of the passions in the
breast that includes them all, and their final subsidence beneath the
glance that comprehends them. This is the Epicurean approach to
detachment and perfection; it leads by systematic acceptance of
instinct to the same goal which the stoic and the ascetic reach by
systematic rejection of instinct. It is thus possible to be moved to
that self-enfranchisement which constitutes the sublime, even
when the object contains no expression of evil.

This conclusion supports that part of our definition of beauty
which declares that the values beauty contains are all positive; a
definition which we should have had to change if we had found
that the sublime depended upon the suggestion of evil for its effect.
But the sublime is not the ugly, as some descriptions of it might
lead us to suppose; it is the supremely, the intoxicatingly beautiful.
It is the pleasure of contemplation reaching such an intensity that it
begins to lose its objectivity, and to declare itself, what it always
fundamentally was, an inward passion of the soul. For while in the
beautiful we find the perfection of life by sinking into the object, in
the sublime we find a purer and more inalienable perfection by
defying the object altogether. The surprised enlargement of vision,
the sudden escape from our ordinary interests and the identification
of ourselves with something permanent and superhuman, something
much more abstract and inalienable than our changing personality,
all this carries us away from the blurred objects before us,
and raises us into a sort of ecstasy.

In the trite examples of the sublime, where we speak of the vast
mass, strength, and durability of objects, or of their sinister aspect,
as if we were moved by them on account of our own danger, we
seem to miss the point. For the suggestion of our own danger
would produce a touch of fear; it would be a practical passion, or if
it could by chance be objectified enough to become aesthetic, it
would merely make the object hateful and repulsive, like a
mangled corpse. The object is sublime when we forget our danger,
when we escape from ourselves altogether, and live as it were in
the object itself, energizing in imitation of its movement, and
saying, "Be thou me, impetuous one!" This passage into the object,
to live its life, is indeed a characteristic of all perfect contemplation.
But when in thus translating ourselves we rise and play a higher
personage, feeling the exhilaration of a life freer and wilder than
our own, then the experience is one of sublimity. The emotion
comes not from the situation we observe, but from the powers we
conceive; we fail to sympathize with the struggling sailors because
we sympathize too much with the wind and waves. And this
mystical cruelty can extend even to ourselves; we can so feel the
fascination of the cosmic forces that engulf us as to take a fierce
joy in the thought of our own destruction. We can identify
ourselves with the abstractest essence of reality, and, raised to that
height, despise the human accidents of our own nature. Lord, we
say, though thou slay me, yet will I trust in thee. The sense of
suffering disappears in the sense of life and the imagination
overwhelms the understanding.

_The comic._

§ 61. Something analogous takes place in the other spheres where
an aesthetic value seems to arise out of suggestions of evil, in the
comic, namely, and the grotesque. But here the translation of our
sympathies is partial, and we are carried away from ourselves only
to become smaller. The larger humanity, which cannot be absorbed,
remains ready to contradict the absurdity of our fiction. The
excellence of comedy lies in the invitation to wander along some
by-path of the fancy, among scenes not essentially impossible, but
not to be actually enacted by us on account of the fixed
circumstances of our lives. If the picture is agreeable, we allow
ourselves to dream it true. We forget its relations; we forbid the
eye to wander beyond the frame of the stage, or the conventions of
the fiction. We indulge an illusion which deepens our sense of the
essential pleasantness of things.

So far, there is nothing in comedy that is not delightful, except,
perhaps, the moment when it is over. But fiction, like all error or
abstraction, is necessarily unstable; and the awakening is not
always reserved for the disheartening moment at the end.
Everywhere, when we are dealing with pretension or mistake, we
come upon sudden and vivid contradictions; changes of view,
transformations of apperception which are extremely stimulating to
the imagination. We have spoken of one of these: when the sudden
dissolution of our common habits of thought lifts us into a mystical
contemplation, filled with the sense of the sublime; when the
transformation is back to common sense and reality, and away
from some fiction, we have a very different emotion. We feel
cheated, relieved, abashed, or amused, in proportion as our
sympathy attaches more to the point of view surrendered or to that
attained.

The disintegration of mental forms and their redintegration is the
life of the imagination. It is a spiritual process of birth and death,
nutrition and generation. The strongest emotions accompany these
changes, and vary infinitely with their variations. All the qualities
of discourse, wit, eloquence, cogency, absurdity, are feelings
incidental to this process, and involved in the juxtapositions,
tensions, and resolutions of our ideas. Doubtless the last
explanation of these things would be cerebral; but we are as yet
confined to verbal descriptions and classifications of them, which
are always more or less arbitrary.

The most conspicuous headings under which comic effects are
gathered are perhaps incongruity and degradation. But clearly it
cannot be the logical essence of incongruity or degradation that
constitutes the comic; for then contradiction and deterioration
would always amuse. Amusement is a much more directly physical
thing. We may be amused without any idea at all, as when we are
tickled, or laugh in sympathy with others by a contagious imitation
of their gestures. We may be amused by the mere repetition of a
thing at first not amusing. There must therefore be some nervous
excitement on which the feeling of amusement directly depends,
although this excitement may most often coincide with a sudden
transition to an incongruous or meaner image. Nor can we suppose
that particular ideational excitement to be entirely dissimilar to all
others; wit is often hardly distinguishable from brilliancy, as
humour from pathos. We must, therefore, be satisfied with saying
vaguely that the process of ideation involves various feelings of
movement and relation, -- feelings capable of infinite gradation
and complexity, and ranging from sublimity to tedium and from
pathos to uncontrollable merriment.

Certain crude and obvious cases of the comic seem to consist of
little more than a shock of surprise: a pun is a sort of jack-in-the-box,
popping from nowhere into our plodding thoughts. The liveliness
of the interruption, and its futility, often please; _dulce est
desipere in loco;_ and yet those who must endure the society of
inveterate jokers know how intolerable this sort of scintillation can
become. There is something inherently vulgar about it; perhaps
because our train of thought cannot be very entertaining in itself
when we are so glad to break in upon it with irrelevant nullities.
The same undertone of disgust mingles with other amusing
surprises, as when a dignified personage slips and falls, or some
disguise is thrown off, or those things are mentioned and described
which convention ignores. The novelty and the freedom please, yet
the shock often outlasts the pleasure, and we have cause to wish
we had been stimulated by something which did not involve this
degradation. So, also, the impossibility in plausibility which tickles
the fancy in Irish bulls, and in wild exaggerations, leaves an
uncomfortable impression, a certain aftertaste of foolishness.

The reason will be apparent if we stop to analyze the situation. We
have a prosaic background of common sense and every-day reality;
upon this background an unexpected idea suddenly impinges. But
the thing is a futility. The comic accident falsifies the nature before
us, starts a wrong analogy in the mind, a suggestion that cannot be
carried out. In a word, we are in the presence of an absurdity; and
man, being a rational animal, can like absurdity no better than he
can like hunger or cold. A pinch of either may not be so bad, and
he will endure it merrily enough if you repay him with abundance
of warm victuals; so, too, he will play with all kinds of nonsense
for the sake of laughter and good fellowship and the tickling of his
fancy with a sort of caricature of thought. But the qualm remains,
and the pleasure is never perfect. The same exhilaration might
have come without the falsification, just as repose follows more
swiftly after pleasant than after painful exertions.

Fun is a good thing, but only when it spoils nothing better. The
best place for absurdity is in the midst of what is already absurd --
then we have the play of fancy without the sense of ineptitude.
Things amuse us in the mouth of a fool that would not amuse us in
that of a gentleman; a fact which shows how little incongruity and
degradation have to do with our pleasure in the comic. In fact,
there is a kind of congruity and method even in fooling. The
incongruous and the degraded displease us even there, as by their
nature they must at all times. The shock which they bring may
sometimes be the occasion of a subsequent pleasure, by attracting
our attention, or by stimulating passions, such as scorn, or cruelty,
or self-satisfaction (for there is a good deal of malice in our love of
fun); but the incongruity and degradation, as such, always remain
unpleasant. The pleasure comes from the inward rationality and
movement of the fiction, not from its inconsistency with anything
else. There are a great many topsy-turvy worlds possible to our
fancy, into which we like to drop at times. We enjoy the
stimulation and the shaking up of our wits. It is like getting into a
new posture, or hearing a new song.

Nonsense is good only because common sense is so limited. For
reason, after all, is one convention picked out of a thousand. We
love expansion, not disorder, and when we attain freedom without
incongruity we have a much greater and a much purer delight. The
excellence of wit can dispense with absurdity. For on the same
prosaic background of common sense, a novelty might have
appeared that was not absurd, that stimulated the attention quite as
much as the ridiculous, without so baffling the intelligence. This
purer and more thoroughly delightful amusement comes from what
we call wit.

_Wit._

§ 62. Wit also depends upon transformation and substitution of
ideas. It has been said to consist in quick association by similarity.
The substitution must here be valid, however, and the similarity
real, though unforeseen. Unexpected justness makes wit, as sudden
incongruity makes pleasant foolishness. It is characteristic of wit to
penetrate into hidden depths of things, to pick out there some
telling circumstance or relation, by noting which the whole object
appears in a new and clearer light. Wit often seems malicious
because analysis in discovering common traits and universal
principles assimilates things at the poles of being; it can apply to
cookery the formulas of theology, and find in the human heart a
case of the fulcrum and lever. We commonly keep the departments
of experience distinct; we think that different principles hold in
each and that the dignity of spirit is inconsistent with the
explanation of it by physical analogy, and the meanness of matter
unworthy of being an illustration of moral truths. Love must not be
classed under physical cravings, nor faith under hypnotization.
When, therefore, an original mind overleaps these boundaries, and
recasts its categories, mixing up our old classifications, we feel that
the values of things are also confused. But these depended upon a
deeper relation, upon their response to human needs and
aspirations. All that can be changed by the exercise of intelligence
is our sense of the unity and homogeneity of the world. We may
come to hold an object of thought in less isolated respect, and
another in less hasty derision; but the pleasures we derive from all,
or our total happiness and wonder, will hardly be diminished. For
this reason the malicious or destructive character of intelligence
must not be regarded as fundamental. Wit belittles one thing and
dignifies another; and its comparisons are as often flattering as
ironical.

The same process of mind that we observed in wit gives rise to
those effects we call charming, brilliant, or inspired. When
Shakespeare says,

     Come and kiss me, _sweet and twenty,_
     Youth's a stuff will not endure,

the fancy of the phrase consists in a happy substitution, a merry
way of saying something both true and tender. And where could
we find a more exquisite charm? So, to take a weightier example,
when St. Augustine is made to say that pagan virtues were
_splendid vices,_ we have -- at least if we catch the full meaning --
a pungent assimilation of contrary things, by force of a powerful
principle; a triumph of theory, the boldness of which can only be
matched by its consistency. In fact, a phrase could not be more
brilliant, or better condense one theology and two civilizations.
The Latin mind is particularly capable of this sort of excellence.
Tacitus alone could furnish a hundred examples. It goes with the
power of satirical and bitter eloquence, a sort of scornful rudeness
of intelligence, that makes for the core of a passion or of a
character, and affixes to it a more or less scandalous label. For in
our analytical zeal it is often possible to condense and abstract too
much. Reality is more fluid and elusive than reason, and has, as it
were, more dimensions than are known even to the latest geometry.
Hence the understanding, when not suffused with some glow of
sympathetic emotion or some touch of mysticism, gives but a dry,
crude image of the world. The quality of wit inspires more
admiration than confidence. It is a merit we should miss little in
any one we love.

The same principle, however, can have more sentimental
embodiments. When our substitutions are brought on by the
excitement of generous emotion, we call wit inspiration. There is
the same finding of new analogies, and likening of disparate things;
there is the same transformation of our apperception. But the
brilliancy is here not only penetrating, but also exalting. For
instance:

     Peace, peace, he is not dead, he doth not sleep,
          He hath awakened from the dream of life:
     'Tis we that wrapped in stormy visions keep
          With phantoms an unprofitable strife.

There is here paradox, and paradox justified by reflection. The poet
analyzes, and analyzes without reserve. The dream, the storm, the
phantoms, and the unprofitableness could easily make a satirical
picture. But the mood is transmuted; the mind takes an upward
flight, with a sense of liberation from the convention it dissolves,
and of freer motion in the vagueness beyond. The disintegration of
our ideal here leads to mysticism, and because of this effort
towards transcendence, the brilliancy becomes sublime.

_Humour._

§ 63. A different mood can give a different direction to the same
processes. The sympathy by which we reproduce the feeling of
another, is always very much opposed to the aesthetic attitude to
which the whole world is merely a stimulus to our sensibility. In
the tragic, we have seen how the sympathetic feeling, by which
suffering is appreciated and shared, has to be overlaid by many
incidental aesthetic pleasures, if the resulting effect is to be on the
whole good. We have also seen how the only way in which the
ridiculous can be kept within the sphere of the aesthetically good is
abstracting it from its relations, and treating it as an independent
and curious stimulus; we should stop laughing and begin to be
annoyed if we tried to make sense out of our absurdity. The less
sympathy we have with men the more exquisite is our enjoyment
of their folly: satirical delight is closely akin to cruelty. Defect and
mishap stimulate our fancy, as blood and tortures excite in us the
passions of the beast of prey. The more this inhuman attitude
yields to sympathy and reason, the less are folly and error capable
of amusing us. It would therefore seem impossible that we should
be pleased by the foibles or absurdities of those we love. And in
fact we never enjoy seeing our own persons in a satirical light, or
any one else for whom we really feel affection. Even in farces, the
hero and heroine are seldom made ridiculous, because that would
jar upon the sympathy with which we are expected to regard them.
Nevertheless, the essence of what we call humour is that amusing
weaknesses should be combined with an amicable humanity.
Whether it be in the way of ingenuity, or oddity, or drollery, the
humorous person must have an absurd side, or be placed in an
absurd situation. Yet this comic aspect, at which we ought to wince,
seems to endear the character all the more. This is a parallel case to
that of tragedy, where the depth of the woe we sympathize with
seems to add to our satisfaction. And the explanation of the
paradox is the same. We do not enjoy the expression of evil, but
only the pleasant excitements that come with it; namely, the
physical stimulus and the expression of good. In tragedy, the
misfortunes help to give the impression of truth, and to bring out
the noble qualities of the hero, but are in themselves depressing, so
much so that over-sensitive people cannot enjoy the beauty of the
representation. So also in humour, the painful suggestions are felt
as such, and need to be overbalanced by agreeable elements. These
come from both directions, from the aesthetic and the sympathetic
reaction. On the one hand there is the sensuous and merely
perceptive stimulation, the novelty, the movement, the vivacity of
the spectacle. On the other hand, there is the luxury of imaginative
sympathy, the mental assimilation of another congenial experience,
the expansion into another life.

The juxtaposition of these two pleasures produces just that tension
and complication in which the humorous consists. We are satirical,
and we are friendly at the same time. The consciousness of the
friendship gives a regretful and tender touch to the satire, and the
sting of the satire makes the friendship a trifle humble and sad.
Don Quixote is mad; he is old, useless, and ridiculous, but he is the
soul of honour, and in all his laughable adventures we follow him
like the ghost of our better selves. We enjoy his discomfitures too
much to wish he had been a perfect Amadis; and we have besides a
shrewd suspicion that he is the only kind of Amadis there can ever
be in this world. At the same time it does us good to see the
courage of his idealism, the ingenuity of his wit, and the simplicity
of his goodness. But how shall we reconcile our sympathy with his
dream and our perception of its absurdity? The situation is
contradictory. We are drawn to some different point of view, from
which the comedy may no longer seem so amusing. As humour
becomes deep and really different from satire, it changes into
pathos, and passes out of the sphere of the comic altogether. The
mischances that were to amuse us as scoffers now grieve us as men,
and the value of the representation depends on the touches of
beauty and seriousness with which it is adorned.

_The grotesque._

§ 64. Something analogous to humour can appear in plastic forms,
when we call it the grotesque. This is an interesting effect
produced by such a transformation of an ideal type as exaggerates
one of its elements or combines it with other types. The real
excellence of this, like that of all fiction, consists in re-creation; in
the formation of a thing which nature has not, but might
conceivably have offered. We call these inventions comic and
grotesque when we are considering their divergence from the
natural rather than their inward possibility. But the latter
constitutes their real charm; and the more we study and develope
them, the better we understand it. The incongruity with the
conventional type than disappears, and what was impossible and
ridiculous at first takes its place among recognized ideals. The
centaur and the satyr are no longer grotesque; the type is accepted.
And the grotesqueness of an individual has essentially the same
nature. If we like the inward harmony, the characteristic balance of
his features, we are able to disengage this individual from the class
into which we were trying to force him; we can forget the
expectation which he was going to disappoint. The ugliness then
disappears, and only the reassertion of the old habit and demand
can make us regard him as in any way extravagant.

What appears as grotesque may be intrinsically inferior or superior
to the normal. That is a question of its abstract material and form.
But until the new object impresses its form on our imagination, so
that we can grasp its unity and proportion, it appears to us as a
jumble and distortion of other forms. If this confusion is absolute,
the object is simply null; it does not exist aesthetically, except by
virtue of materials. But if the confusion is not absolute, and we
have an inkling of the unity and character in the midst of the
strangeness of the form, then we have the grotesque. It is the
half-formed, the perplexed, and the suggestively monstrous.

The analogy to the comic is very close, as we can readily conceive
that it should be. In the comic we have this same juxtaposition of a
new and an old idea, and if the new is not futile and really
inconceivable, it may in time establish itself in the mind, and cease
to be ludicrous. Good wit is novel truth, as the good grotesque is
novel beauty. But there are natural conditions of organization, and
we must not mistake every mutilation for the creation of a new
form. The tendency of nature to establish well-marked species of
animals shows what various combinations are most stable in the
face of physical forces, and there is a fitness also for survival in the
mind, which is determined by the relation of any form to our fixed
method of perception. New things are therefore generally bad
because, as has been well said, they are incapable of becoming old.
A thousand originalities are produced by defect of faculty, for one
that is produced by genius. For in the pursuit of beauty, as in that
of truth, an infinite number of paths lead to failure, and only one to
success.

_The possibility of finite perfection._

§ 65. If these observations have any accuracy, they confirm this
important truth, -- that no aesthetic value is really founded on the
experience or the suggestion of evil. This conclusion will doubtless
seem the more interesting if we think of its possible extension to
the field of ethics and of the implied vindication of the ideal of
moral perfection as something essentially definable and attainable.
But without insisting on an analogy to ethics, which might be
misleading, we may hasten to state the principle which emerges
from our analysis of expression. Expressiveness may be found in
any one thing that suggests another, or draws from association with
that other any of its emotional colouring. There may, therefore, of
course, be an expressiveness of evil; but this expressiveness will
not have any aesthetic value. The description or suggestion of
suffering may have a worth as science or discipline, but can never
in itself enhance any beauty. Tragedy and comedy please in spite
of this expressiveness and not by virtue of it; and except for the
pleasures they give, they have no place among the fine arts. Nor
have they, in such a case, any place in human life at all; unless they
are instruments of some practical purpose and serve to preach a
moral, or achieve a bad notoriety. For ugly things can attract
attention, although they cannot keep it; and the scandal of a new
horror may secure a certain vulgar admiration which follows
whatever is momentarily conspicuous, and which is attained even
by crime. Such admiration, however, has nothing aesthetic about it,
and is only made possible by the bluntness of our sense of beauty.

The effect of the pathetic and comic is therefore never pure; since
the expression of some evil is mixed up with those elements by
which the whole appeals to us. These elements we have seen to be
the truth of the presentation, which involves the pleasures of
recognition and comprehension, the beauty of the medium, and the
concomitant expression of things intrinsically good. To these
sources all the aesthetic value of comic and tragic is due; and the
sympathetic emotion which arises from the spectacle of evil must
never be allowed to overpower these pleasures of contemplation,
else the entire object becomes distasteful and loses its excuse for
being. Too exclusive a relish for the comic and pathetic is
accordingly a sign of bad taste and of comparative insensibility to
beauty.

This situation has generally been appreciated in the practice of the
arts, where effect is perpetually studied; but the greatest care has
not always succeeded in avoiding the dangers of the pathetic, and
history is full of failures due to bombast, caricature, and
unmitigated horror. In all these the effort to be expressive has
transgressed the conditions of pleasing effect. For the creative and
imitative impulse is indiscriminate. It does not consider the
eventual beauty of the effect, but only the blind instinct of
self-expression. Hence an untrained and not naturally sensitive mind
cannot distinguish or produce anything good. This critical
incapacity has always been a cause of failure and a just ground for
ridicule; but it remained for some thinkers of our time -- a time of
little art and much undisciplined production -- to erect this abuse
into a principle and declare that the essence of beauty is to express
the artist and not to delight the world. But the conditions of effect,
and the possibility of pleasing, are the only criterion of what is
capable and worthy of expression. Art exists and has value by its
adaptation to these universal conditions of beauty.

Nothing but the good of life enters into the texture of the beautiful.
What charms us in the comic, what stirs us in the sublime and
touches us in the pathetic, is a glimpse of some good; imperfection
has value only as an incipient perfection. Could the labours and
sufferings of life be reduced, and a better harmony between man
and nature be established, nothing would be lost to the arts; for the
pure and ultimate value of the comic is discovery, of the pathetic,
love, of the sublime, exaltation; and these would still subsist.
Indeed, they would all be increased; and it has ever been,
accordingly, in the happiest and most prosperous moments of
humanity, when the mind and the world were knit into a brief
embrace, that natural beauty has been best perceived, and art has
won its triumphs. But it sometimes happens, in moments less
propitious, that the soul is subdued to what it works in, and loses
its power of idealization and hope. By a pathetic and superstitious
self-depreciation, we then punish ourselves for the imperfection of
nature. Awed by the magnitude of a reality that we can no longer
conceive as free from evil, we try to assert that its evil also is a
good; and we poison the very essence of the good to make its
extension universal. We confuse the causal connexion of those
things in nature which we call good or evil by an adventitious
denomination with the logical opposition between good and evil
themselves; because one generation makes room for another, we
say death is necessary to life; and because the causes of sorrow and
joy are so mingled in this world, we cannot conceive how, in a
better world, they might be disentangled.

This incapacity of the imagination to reconstruct the conditions of
life and build the frame of things nearer to the heart's desire is
dangerous to a steady loyalty to what is noble and fine. We
surrender ourselves to a kind of miscellaneous appreciation,
without standard or goal; and calling every vexatious apparition by
the name of beauty, we become incapable of discriminating its
excellence or feeling its value. We need to clarify our ideals, and
enliven our vision of perfection. No atheism is so terrible as the
absence of an ultimate ideal, nor could any failure of power be
more contrary to human nature than the failure of moral
imagination, or more incompatible with healthy life. For we have
faculties, and habits, and impulses. These are the basis of our
demands. And these demands, although variable, constitute an
ever-present intrinsic standard of value by which we feel and judge.
The ideal is immanent in them; for the ideal means that
environment in which our faculties would find their freest
employment, and their most congenial world. Perfection would be
nothing but life under those conditions. Accordingly our
consciousness of the ideal becomes distinct in proportion as we
advance in virtue and in proportion to the vigour and definiteness
with which our faculties work. When the vital harmony is
complete, when the _act_ is _pure,_ faith in perfection passes into
vision. That man is unhappy indeed, who in all his life has had no
glimpse of perfection, who in the ecstasy of love, or in the delight
of contemplation, has never been able to say: It is attained. Such
moments of inspiration are the source of the arts, which have no
higher function than to renew them.

A work of art is indeed a monument to such a moment, the
memorial to such a vision; and its charm varies with its power of
recalling us from the distractions of common life to the joy of a
more natural and perfect activity.

_The stability of the ideal._

§ 66. The perfection thus revealed is relative to our nature and
faculties; if it were not, it could have no value for us. It is revealed
to us in brief moments, but it is not for that reason an unstable or
fantastic thing. Human attention inevitably flickers; we survey
things in succession, and our acts of synthesis and our realization
of fact are only occasional. This is the tenure of all our possessions;
we are not uninterruptedly conscious of ourselves, our physical
environment, our ruling passions, or our deepest conviction. What
wonder, then, that we are not constantly conscious of that
perfection which is the implicit ideal of all our preferences and
desires? We view it only in parts, as passion or perception
successively directs our attention to its various elements. Some of
us never try to conceive it in its totality. Yet our whole life is an act
of worship to this unknown divinity; every heartfelt prayer is
offered before one or another of its images.

This ideal of perfection varies, indeed, but only with the variations
of our nature of which it is the counterpart and entelechy. There is
perhaps no more frivolous notion than that to which Schopenhauer
has given a new currency, that a good, once attained, loses all its
value. The instability of our attention, the need of rest and repair in
our organs, makes a round of objects necessary to our minds; but
we turn from a beautiful thing, as from a truth or a friend, only to
return incessantly, and with increasing appreciation. Nor do we
lose all the benefit of our achievements in the intervals between
our vivid realizations of what we have gained. The tone of the
mind is permanently raised; and we live with that general sense of
steadfastness and resource which is perhaps the kernel of
happiness. Knowledge, affection, religion, and beauty are not less
constant influences in a man's life because his consciousness of
them is intermittent. Even when absent, they fill the chambers of
the mind with a kind of fragrance. They have a continual efficacy,
as well as a perennial worth.

There are, indeed, other objects of desire that if attained leave
nothing but restlessness and dissatisfaction behind them. These are
the objects pursued by fools. That such objects ever attract us is a
proof of the disorganization of our nature, which drives us in
contrary directions and is at war with itself. If we had attained
anything like steadiness of thought or fixity of character, if we
knew ourselves, we should know also our inalienable satisfactions.
To say that all goods become worthless in possession is either a
piece of superficial satire that intentionally denies the normal in
order to make the abnormal seem more shocking, or else it is a
confession of frivolity, a confession that, as an idiot never learns to
distinguish reality amid the phantasms of his brain, so we have
never learned to distinguish true goods amid our extravagances of
whim and passion. That true goods exist is nevertheless a fact of
moral experience. "A thing of beauty is a joy for ever"; a great
affection, a clear thought, a profound and well-tried faith, are
eternal possessions. And this is not merely a fact, to be asserted
upon the authority of those who know it by experience. It is a
psychological necessity. While we retain the same senses, we must
get the same impressions from the same objects; while we keep our
instincts and passions, we must pursue the same goods; while we
hare the same powers of imagination, we must experience the same
delight in their exercise. Age brings about, of course, variation in
all these particulars, and the susceptibility of two individuals is
never exactly similar. But the eventual decay of our personal
energies does not destroy the natural value of objects, so long as
the same will embodies itself in other minds, and human nature
subsists in the world. The sun is not now unreal because each one
of us in succession, and all of us in the end, must close our eyes
upon it; and yet the sun exists for us only because we perceive it.
The ideal has the same conditions of being, but has this advantage
over the sun, that we cannot know if its light is ever destined to fail
us.

There is then a broad foundation of identity in our nature, by virtue
of which we live in a common world, and have an art and a
religion in common. That the ideal should be constant within these
limits is as inevitable as that it should vary beyond them. And so
long as we exist and recognize ourselves individually as persons or
collectively as human, we must recognize also our immanent ideal,
the realization of which would constitute perfection for us. That
ideal cannot be destroyed except in proportion as we ourselves
perish. An absolute perfection, independent of human nature and
its variations, may interest the metaphysician; but the artist and the
man will be satisfied with a perfection that is inseparable from the
consciousness of mankind, since it is at once the natural vision of
the imagination, and the rational goal of the will.

_Conclusion._

§ 67. We have now studied the sense of beauty in what seem to be
its fundamental manifestations, and in some of the more striking
complications which it undergoes. In surveying so broad a field we
stand in need of some classification and subdivision; and we have
chosen the familiar one of matter, form, and expression, as least
likely to lead us into needless artificiality. But artificiality there
must always be in the discursive description of anything given in
consciousness. Psychology attempts what is perhaps impossible,
namely, the anatomy of life. Mind is a fluid; the lights and
shadows that flicker through it have no real boundaries, and no
possibility of permanence. Our whole classification of mental facts
is borrowed from the physical conditions or expressions of them.
The very senses are distinguished because of the readiness with
which we can isolate their outer organs. Ideas can be identified
only by identifying their objects. Feelings are recognized by their
outer expression, and when we try to recall an emotion, we must
do so by recalling the circumstances in which it occurred.

In distinguishing, then, in our sense of beauty, an appreciation of
sensible material, one of abstract form, and another of associated
values, we have been merely following the established method of
psychology, the only one by which it is possible to analyze the
mind. We have distinguished the elements of the object, and
treated the feeling as if it were composed of corresponding parts.
The worlds of nature and fancy, which are the object of aesthetic
feeling, can be divided into parts in space and time.  We can then
distinguish the material of things from the various forms it may
successively assume; we can distinguish, also, the earlier and the
later impressions made by the same object; and we can ascertain
the coexistence of one impression with another, or with the
memory of others. But aesthetic feeling itself has no parts, and this
physiology of its causes is not a description of its proper nature.

Beauty as we feel it is something indescribable: what it is or what
it means can never be said.  By appealing to experiment and
memory we can show that this feeling varies as certain things vary
in the objective conditions; that it varies with the frequency, for
instance, with which a form has been presented, or with the
associates which that form has had in the past. This will justify a
description of the feeling as composed of the various contributions
of these objects. But the feeling itself knows nothing of
composition nor contributions. It is an affection of the soul, a
consciousness of joy and security, a pang, a dream, a pure pleasure.
It suffuses an object without telling why; nor has it any need to ask
the question. It justifies itself and the vision it gilds; nor is there
any meaning in seeking for a cause of it, in this inward sense.
Beauty exists for the same reason that the object which is beautiful
exists, or the world in which that object lies, or we that look upon
both. It is an experience: there is nothing more to say about it.
Indeed, if we look at things teleologically, and as they ultimately
justify themselves to the heart, beauty is of all things what least
calls for explanation. For matter and space and time and principles
of reason and of evolution, all are ultimately brute, unaccountable
data. We may describe what actually is, but it might have been
otherwise, and the mystery of its being is as baffling and dark as
ever.

But we, -- the minds that ask all questions and judge of the validity
of all answers, -- we are not ourselves independent of this world in
which we live. We sprang from it, and our relations in it determine
all our instincts and satisfactions. This final questioning and sense
of mystery is an unsatisfied craving which nature has her way of
stilling. Now we only ask for reasons when we are surprised. If we
had no expectations we should have no surprises. And what gives
us expectation is the spontaneous direction of our thought,
determined by the structure of our brain and the effects of our
experience. If our spontaneous thoughts came to run in harmony
with the course of nature, if our expectations were then continually
fulfilled, the sense of mystery would vanish. We should be
incapable of asking why the world existed or had such a nature,
just as we are now little inclined to ask why anything is right, but
mightily disinclined to give up asking why anything is wrong.

This satisfaction of our reason, due to the harmony between our
nature and our experience, is partially realized already. The sense
of beauty is its realization. When our senses and imagination find
what they crave, when the world so shapes itself or so moulds the
mind that the correspondence between them is perfect, then
perception is pleasure, and existence needs no apology. The duality
which is the condition of conflict disappears. There is no inward
standard different from the outward fact with which that outward
fact may be compared. A unification of this kind is the goal of our
intelligence and of our affection, quite as much as of our aesthetic
sense; but we have in those departments fewer examples of success.
In the heat of speculation or of love there may come moments of
equal perfection, but they are unstable. The reason and the heart
remain deeply unsatisfied. But the eye finds in nature, and in some
supreme achievements of art, constant and fuller satisfaction. For
the eye is quick, and seems to have been more docile to the
education of life than the heart or the reason of man, and able
sooner to adapt itself to the reality. Beauty therefore seems to be
the clearest manifestation of perfection, and the best evidence of its
possibility. If perfection is, as it should be, the ultimate
justification of being, we may understand the ground of the moral
dignity of beauty. Beauty is a pledge of the possible conformity
between the soul and nature, and consequently a ground of faith in
the supremacy of the good.


FOOTNOTES

1  Schopenhauer, indeed, who makes much of it, was a good critic,
but his psychology suffered much from the pessimistic generalities
of his system. It concerned him to show that the will was bad, and,
as he felt beauty to be a good if not a holy thing, he hastened to
convince himself that it came from the suppression of the will. But
even in his system this suppression is only relative. The desire of
individual objects, indeed, is absent in the perception of beauty,
but there is still present that initial love of the general type and
principles of things which is the first illusion of the absolute, and
drives it on to the fatal experiment of creation. So that, apart from
Schopenhauer's mythology, we have even in him the recognition
that beauty gives satisfaction to some dim and underlying demand
of our nature, just as particular objects give more special and
momentary pleasures to our individualized wills. His psychology
was, however, far too vague and general to undertake an analysis
of those mysterious feelings.

2  Cf. Stendhal, _De L'Amour, passim._

3  This is not the place to enter into a discussion of the
metaphysical value of the idea of space. Suffice it to point out that
in human experience serviceable knowledge of our environment is
to be had only in spatial symbols, and, for whatever reason or
accident, this is the language which the mind must speak if it is to
advance in clearness and efficiency.

4  The discussion is limited in this chapter to visible form, audible
form is probably capable of a parallel treatment, but requires
studies too technical for this place.

5  The relation to stability also makes us sensitive to certain kinds
of symmetry; but this is an adventitious consideration with which
we are not concerned.

6  Cf. Fechner, _Vorschule der Aesthetik,_ Erster Theil, S. 73, a
passage by which the following classification of forms was first
suggested.

7  See Introduction, p. 12.

8  The contention of Burke that the beautiful is small is due to an
arbitrary definition. By beautiful he means pretty and charming;
agreeable as opposed to impressive. He only exaggerates the then
usual opposition of the beautiful to the sublime.

9  When we speak of things definite in themselves, we of course
mean things made definite by some human act of definition. The
senses are instruments that define and differentiate sensation; and
the result of one operation is that definite object upon which the
next operation is performed. The memory, for example, classifies
in time what the senses may have classified in space. We are
nowhere concerned with objects other than objects of human
experience, and the epithets, definite and indefinite, refer
necessarily to their relation to our various categories of perception
and comprehension.

10  In the Aegina marbles the wounded and dying warriors still
wear this Buddha-like expression: their bodies, although
conventional, show a great progress in observation, compared with
the impossible Athena in the centre with her sacred feet in
Egyptian profile and her owl-like visage.

11  Symposium of Xenophon, V.

12  It is a superstition to suppose that a refined taste would
necessarily find the actual and useful to be the perfect; to conceal
structure is as legitimate as to emphasize it, and for the name
reason. We emphasize in the direction of abstract beauty,  in the
direction of absolute pleasure; and we conceal or eliminate in the
same direction. The most exquisite Greek taste, for instance,
preferred to drape the lower part of the female figure, as in the
Venus of Milo; also in men to shave the hair of the face and body,
in order to maintain the purity and strength of the lines. In the one
case we conceal structure, in the other we reveal it, modifying
nature into greater sympathy with our faculties of perception. For,
after all, it must be remembered that beauty, or pleasure to be
given to the eye, is not a guiding principle in the world of nature or
in that of the practical arts. The beauty is in nature a result of the
functional adaptation of our senses and imagination to the
mechanical products of our environment. This adaptation is never
complete, and there is, accordingly, room for the fine arts, in which
beauty is a result of the intentional adaptation of mechanical forms
to the functions which our senses and imagination already have
acquired. This watchful subservience to our aesthetic demands is
the essence of fine art. Nature is the basis, but man is the goal.

13  Not only are words untranslatable when the exact object has no
name in another language, as "home" or "mon ami," but even when
the object is the same, the attitude toward it, incorporated in one
word, cannot be rendered by another. Thus, to my sense, "bread" is
as inadequate a translation of the human intensity of the Spanish
"pan" as "Dios" is of the awful mystery of the English "God." This
latter word does not designate an object at all, but a sentiment, a
psychosis, not to say a whole chapter of religious history. English
is remarkable for the intensity and variety of the colour of its
words. No language, I believe, has so many words specifically
poetic.

14  Curiously enough, common speech here reverses our use of
terms, because it looks at the matter from the practical instead of
from the aesthetic point of view, regarding (very unpsychologically)
the thought as the source of the image, not the image as the
source of the thought. People call the words the expression
of the thought: whereas for the observer, the hearer (and generally
for the speaker, too), the words are the datum and the thought is
their expressiveness -- that which they suggest.


INDEX

Achilles, 179, 187.
Aesthetic feeling, its importance, 1.
     speculation, causes of its neglect, 2.
     theory, its uses, 6, 7.
Aesthetics, Use of the word, 15.
Angels, 55, 182.
Apperception, 96 _et seq._
Arabic inscriptions as ornament, 195.
Architecture, Effects of Gothic, 165, 166.
     governed by use, 161, 162.
Aristotelian forms, 156.
Aristotle, 174, 175, 288.
Associative process, 198 _et seq._
Augustine, Saint, quoted, 252.


Beauty a value, 14 _et seq._
     as felt is indescribable, 267, 268.
     a justification of things, 268, 269.
     defined, 49 _et seq._
     verbal definitions quoted, 14.
Beethoven, 43.
Breathing related to the sense of beauty, 56.
Burke, 124, note.
Byron, quoted, 136.
Byzantine architecture, 108, 109.

Calderon, 174.
Centaurs, 183, 256.
Character as an aesthetic form, 176 _et seq._
Characters, Ideal, 180 _et seq._
Charles V.'s palace at the Alhambra, 44.
Christ, the various ideas of his nature, 189.
Circle, its aesthetic quality, 89.
Classicism, French and English, 109.
Colonnades, 108.
Colour, 72 _et seq._
     its analogy to other sensations, 74, 75.
     possibility of an abstract art of colour, 75.
Comic, The, 245 _et seq._
Conscience, its representative character, 33, 34.
Cost as an element of effect, 211 _et seq._
Couplet, The, 108.
Criticism, Use of the word, 15.

Definite and indefinite, meaning of the terms, 138, note.
Degradation not what pleases in the comic, 247 _et seq._
Democracy, aesthetics of it, 109
Descartes, 16, 183.
Disinterestedness not the differentia of aesthetic pleasure,
     37 _et seq._
Don Quixote, 179, 255.

Economy and fitness, 214 _et seq._
Emerson, 144.
Epicurean esthetics, 10, 11.
     sublime, The, 241, 243.
Escurial, The, 95, 210.
Ethos, 174, 175.
Evil, life without it aesthetic, 29, 30.
     in the second term of expression, 221 _et seq._
     conventional use of the word, 223.
     an occasion of the sublime, 235 _et seq._
     excluded from the beautiful, 260, 261.
Evolution, its possible tendency to eliminate imagination, 26
Exclusiveness a sign of aesthetic vigour, 44.
Experience superior to theory in aesthetics, 11, 12.
Expression defined, 192 _et seq._
     of feeling in another, 202, 203.
     of practical values, 208 _et seq._
Expressiveness, Use of the word, 197.

Fechner, 97.
Form, There is a beauty of, 82 _et seq._
     the unity of a manifold, 95 _et seq._
Functions of the mind may all contribute to the sense of beauty,
     53 _et seq._

Geometrical figures, 88 _et seq._
God, the idea of him in tradition and in metaphysics, 188, 189.
Gods, development of their ideal characters, 185 _et seq._
Goethe, 9, 170, 179.
Grammar, its analogy to metaphysics, 169.
Gretchen, 179.
Grotesque, The, 256 _et seq._

Hamlet, 179.
Happiness and aesthetic interest, 63, 65.
Health a condition of aesthetic life, 54.
Hedonism opposed by the moral sense, 23, 24.
History an imaginative thing, 141, 142.
Home as a social and as an aesthetic idea, 64.
Homer, 171.
     his aesthetic quality, 205, 206.
     his epithets, 179.
Horace, quoted, 172.
Humour, 253 _et seq._

Ideals are modified averages, 121 _et seq._
     immanent in human nature, 262.
     stable, 263 _et seq._
Imagination has a universal creative function, 190, 191.
     and sense alternately active, 55, 56.
Impression distinguished from expression, 84, 85.
Impressionism in painting, 134, 136.
incongruity not what pleases in the comic, 247 _et seq._
Indeterminate organizational _et seq._
Infinite beauty, the idea impossible, 148 _et seq._
Inspiration, 252, 253.

Kalokagathia, 31.
Kant, 105.
Keats, quoted, 67, 105, 181, 264.
King Lear, 229.
Kipling, R., quoted, 68.

Landscape, 133 _et seq._
     with figures, 135, 136.
Liberation of self, 233 _et seq._
Love, influence of the passion, 56 _et seq._
Lowell, J. R., quoted, 148.
Lower senses, 65 _et seq._
Lucretius, quoted, 172.
     on the sublime, 236.

Maps, 209, 210.
Material beauty most easily appreciated, 78 _et seq._
     its effect the fundamental one, 78.
Materials of beauty surveyed, 76 _et seq._
Methods in aesthetics, 5.
Michael Angelo, 182.
Miser's fallacy, its parallel in morals and aesthetics, 31, 32.
Modern languages inferior to the ancient, 173, 174.
Molière, 174; quoted, 20.
Monarchy, its imaginative value, 34, 35.
Moral and aesthetic values, 23 _et seq._
     the authority of morals over aesthetics, 218 _et seq._
Morality and utility jealous of art, 216, 217.
Multiplicity in uniformity, 97 _et seq._
     its defects, 106 _et seq._
Musset, Alfred de, quoted, 170, 226.
Mysticism in aesthetics, 126 _et seq._

Naturalism, the ground of its value, 21.
Nature, its organization the source of apperceptive forms,
     152 _et seq._
     the love of it among the ancients, 137, 138.
New York, the plan of the streets, 95.
Nouns, idea of a language without them, 171.

Objectification the differentia of aesthetic pleasure, 44 _et seq._
Ornament and form, 63 _et seq._
Othello, 237.
Ovid, quoted, 149.

Pantheism, its contradictions, 242, 243.
Perception, the psychological theory of it, 45 _et seq._
Perfection, illusion of infinite, 146 _et seq._
     possibility of finite, 258 _et seq._
Physical pleasure distinguished from aesthetic, 35 _et seq._
Physiology of the perception of form, 85 _et seq._
Picturesqueness contrasted with symmetry, 92.
Platonic ideas useless in explaining types, 117, 118.
Platonic intuitions, their nature and value, 8 _et seq._
Platonists, 159.
Plot, The, 174 _et seq._
Preference ultimately irrational, 18 _et seq._
     necessary to value, 17, 18.
Principles consecrated aesthetically, 31 _et seq._
Purity, The aesthetic principle of, 70 _et seq._

Rationality, the source of its value, 19, 20.
Religious characters, their truth, 188.
     imagination, 185 _et seq._
Rhyme, 173, 174.
Romanticism, 150.

Schopenhauer, 263.
     criticised, 37,
     note, on music, 69.
Scientific attitude in criticism opposed to the aesthetic, 20, 21.
Sculpture, its development, 153, 154.
Self not a primary object of interest, 39, 40.
Sensuous beauty of fundamental importance, 80, 81.
Sex, its relation to aesthetic life, 56 _et seq._
Shakespeare, 151, 174, 175;
     quoted, 51, 114, 229, 237, 251.
Shelley quoted, 12, 244, 253.
Sight, its primacy in perception, 73, 74.
Size related to beauty, 123, 124.
Sky, The, its expressiveness, 8.
Social interests and their aesthetic influence, 62 _et seq._
Socrates, his utilitarian aesthetics, 157.
Sonnet, The, 173.
Sound, 68 _et seq._
Space, its metaphysical value, 66, note.
Stars, the effect analyzed, 100 _et seq._
Stendhal, 61.
Stoic Sublime, The, 241.
Straight lines, 89, 90.
Subjectivity of aesthetic values, 3,4.
Sublime, The, its independence of the expression of evil,
     239 _et seq._
Sublimity, 233 _et seq._
Sybaris, 216.
Symbolists, 144.
Symmetry, 91 _et seq._
     a principle of individuation, 93.
     limits of its application, 95.
Syntactical form, 171 _et seq._

Tacitus, 173, 252.
Terms, the first and second terms in expression defined, 195.
     influence of the first term in the pleasing expression of evil,
     226 _et seq._
Theory a method of apperception, 138 _et seq._
Tragedy mitigated by beauty of form and the expression of good,
     228, 229.
     mitigated by the diversity of evils, 229.
     mixed with comedy, 224, 225, 228.
     consists in treatment not in subject, 224.
Translation necessarily inadequate, 168.
Truth, grounds of its value, 22, 23.
Truth, mixture of the expression of truth with that of evil,
     228 _et seq._
Types, their origin, 116 _et seq._
     their value and that of examples, 112 _et seq._

Ugly, The, not a cause of pain, 25.
Universality not the differentia of aesthetic pleasure, 40 _et seq._
Utility the principle of organization in nature, 155 _et seq._
     its relation to beauty, 157 _et seq._
     the principle of organization in the arts, 160 _et seq._

Value, aesthetic value in the second term of expression, 205 _et
seq._
     all in one sense aesthetic, 28 _et seq._
     physical, practical, and negative transformed into aesthetic,
     201 _et seq._
Venus of Milo, 165, note.
Virgin Mary, The, 189, 190.

Whitman, 112.
Wit, 250 _et seq._
Words, 167 _et seq._
Wordsworth quoted, 105.
Work and play, 25 _et seq._

Xenophon quoted, 123.
     his _Symposium,_ 157.










