letter describing Anne’s resemblance to Laura, and acknowledging
her affectionate interest in the little stranger—had been written,
beyond all question, in perfect innocence of heart. It even seemed
doubtful, on consideration, whether Mr. Philip Fairlie himself had been
nearer than his wife to any suspicion of the truth. The disgracefully
deceitful circumstances under which Mrs. Catherick had married, the
purpose of concealment which the marriage was intended to answer, might
well keep her silent for caution’s sake, perhaps for her own pride’s
sake also, even assuming that she had the means, in his absence, of
communicating with the father of her unborn child.

As this surmise floated through my mind, there rose on my memory the
remembrance of the Scripture denunciation which we have all thought of
in our time with wonder and with awe: “The sins of the fathers shall
be visited on the children.” But for the fatal resemblance between the
two daughters of one father, the conspiracy of which Anne had been the
innocent instrument and Laura the innocent victim could never have been
planned. With what unerring and terrible directness the long chain of
circumstances led down from the thoughtless wrong committed by the
father to the heartless injury inflicted on the child!

These thoughts came to me, and others with them, which drew my mind
away to the little Cumberland churchyard where Anne Catherick now
lay buried. I thought of the bygone days when I had met her by Mrs.
Fairlie’s grave, and met her for the last time. I thought of her poor
helpless hands beating on the tombstone, and her weary, yearning words,
murmured to the dead remains of her protectress and her friend: “Oh,
if I could die, and be hidden and at rest with YOU!” Little more than
a year had passed since she breathed that wish; and how inscrutably,
how awfully, it had been fulfilled! The words she had spoken to Laura
by the shores of the lake, the very words had now come true. “Oh, if
I could only be buried with your mother! If I could only wake at her
side when the angel’s trumpet sounds and the graves give up their dead
at the resurrection!” Through what mortal crime and horror, through
what darkest windings of the way down to death—the lost creature
had wandered in God’s leading to the last home that, living, she
never hoped to reach! In that sacred rest I leave her—in that dread
companionship let her remain undisturbed.


So the ghostly figure which has haunted these pages, as it haunted my
life, goes down into the impenetrable gloom. Like a shadow she first
came to me in the loneliness of the night. Like a shadow she passes
away in the loneliness of the dead.




III

Four months elapsed. April came—the month of spring—the month of change.

The course of time had flowed through the interval since the winter
peacefully and happily in our new home. I had turned my long leisure
to good account, had largely increased my sources of employment, and
had placed our means of subsistence on surer grounds. Freed from the
suspense and the anxiety which had tried her so sorely and hung over
her so long, Marian’s spirits rallied, and her natural energy of
character began to assert itself again, with something, if not all, of
the freedom and the vigour of former times.

More pliable under change than her sister, Laura showed more plainly
the progress made by the healing influences of her new life. The worn
and wasted look which had prematurely aged her face was fast leaving
it, and the expression which had been the first of its charms in past
days was the first of its beauties that now returned. My closest
observations of her detected but one serious result of the conspiracy
which had once threatened her reason and her life. Her memory of
events, from the period of her leaving Blackwater Park to the period
of our meeting in the burial-ground of Limmeridge Church, was lost
beyond all hope of recovery. At the slightest reference to that time
she changed and trembled still, her words became confused, her memory
wandered and lost itself as helplessly as ever. Here, and here only,
the traces of the past lay deep—too deep to be effaced.

In all else she was now so far on the way to recovery that, on her
best and brightest days, she sometimes looked and spoke like the Laura
of old times. The happy change wrought its natural result in us both.
From their long slumber, on her side and on mine, those imperishable
memories of our past life in Cumberland now awoke, which were one and
all alike, the memories of our love.

Gradually and insensibly our daily relations towards each other became
constrained. The fond words which I had spoken to her so naturally,
in the days of her sorrow and her suffering, faltered strangely on my
lips. In the time when my dread of losing her was most present to my
mind, I had always kissed her when she left me at night and when she
met me in the morning. The kiss seemed now to have dropped between
us—to be lost out of our lives. Our hands began to tremble again when
they met. We hardly ever looked long at one another out of Marian’s
presence. The talk often flagged between us when we were alone. When
I touched her by accident I felt my heart beating fast, as it used to
beat at Limmeridge House—I saw the lovely answering flush glowing again
in her cheeks, as if we were back among the Cumberland Hills in our
past characters of master and pupil once more. She had long intervals
of silence and thoughtfulness, and denied she had been thinking when
Marian asked her the question. I surprised myself one day neglecting my
work to dream over the little water-colour portrait of her which I had
taken in the summer-house where we first met—just as I used to neglect
Mr. Fairlie’s drawings to dream over the same likeness when it was
newly finished in the bygone time. Changed as all the circumstances now
were, our position towards each other in the golden days of our first
companionship seemed to be revived with the revival of our love. It was
as if Time had drifted us back on the wreck of our early hopes to the
old familiar shore!

To any other woman I could have spoken the decisive words which I still
hesitated to speak to HER. The utter helplessness of her position—her
friendless dependence on all the forbearing gentleness that I could
show her—my fear of touching too soon some secret sensitiveness
in her which my instinct as a man might not have been fine enough
to discover—these considerations, and others like them, kept me
self-distrustfully silent. And yet I knew that the restraint on both
sides must be ended, that the relations in which we stood towards one
another must be altered in some settled manner for the future, and that
it rested with me, in the first instance, to recognise the necessity
for a change.

The more I thought of our position, the harder the attempt to alter
it appeared, while the domestic conditions on which we three had been
living together since the winter remained undisturbed. I cannot account
for the capricious state of mind in which this feeling originated, but
the idea nevertheless possessed me that some previous change of place
and circumstances, some sudden break in the quiet monotony of our
lives, so managed as to vary the home aspect under which we had been
accustomed to see each other, might prepare the way for me to speak,
and might make it easier and less embarrassing for Laura and Marian to
hear.

With this purpose in view, I said, one morning, that I thought we
had all earned a little holiday and a change of scene. After some
consideration, it was decided that we should go for a fortnight to the
sea-side.

On the next day we left Fulham for a quiet town on the south coast. At
that early season of the year we were the only visitors in the place.
The cliffs, the beach, and the walks inland were all in the solitary
condition which was most welcome to us. The air was mild—the prospects
over hill and wood and down were beautifully varied by the shifting
April light and shade, and the restless sea leapt under our windows, as
if it felt, like the land, the glow and freshness of spring.

I owed it to Marian to consult her before I spoke to Laura, and to be
guided afterwards by her advice.

On the third day from our arrival I found a fit opportunity of speaking
to her alone. The moment we looked at one another, her quick instinct
detected the thought in my mind before I could give it expression. With
her customary energy and directness she spoke at once, and spoke first.

“You are thinking of that subject which was mentioned between us on
the evening of your return from Hampshire,” she said. “I have been
expecting you to allude to it for some time past. There must be a
change in our little household, Walter, we cannot go on much longer as
we are now. I see it as plainly as you do—as plainly as Laura sees it,
though she says nothing. How strangely the old times in Cumberland seem
to have come back! You and I are together again, and the one subject of
interest between us is Laura once more. I could almost fancy that this
room is the summer-house at Limmeridge, and that those waves beyond us
are beating on our sea-shore.”

“I was guided by your advice in those past days,” I said, “and now,
Marian, with reliance tenfold greater I will be guided by it again.”

She answered by pressing my hand. I saw that she was deeply touched by
my reference to the past. We sat together near the window, and while I
spoke and she listened, we looked at the glory of the sunlight shining
on the majesty of the sea.

“Whatever comes of this confidence between us,” I said, “whether it
ends happily or sorrowfully for ME, Laura’s interests will still be
the interests of my life. When we leave this place, on whatever terms
we leave it, my determination to wrest from Count Fosco the confession
which I failed to obtain from his accomplice, goes back with me to
London, as certainly as I go back myself. Neither you nor I can tell
how that man may turn on me, if I bring him to bay; we only know, by
his own words and actions, that he is capable of striking at me through
Laura, without a moment’s hesitation, or a moment’s remorse. In our
present position I have no claim on her which society sanctions, which
the law allows, to strengthen me in resisting him, and in protecting
HER. This places me at a serious disadvantage. If I am to fight our
cause with the Count, strong in the consciousness of Laura’s safety, I
must fight it for my Wife. Do you agree to that, Marian, so far?”

“To every word of it,” she answered.

“I will not plead out of my own heart,” I went on; “I will not appeal
to the love which has survived all changes and all shocks—I will rest
my only vindication of myself for thinking of her, and speaking of
her as my wife, on what I have just said. If the chance of forcing a
confession from the Count is, as I believe it to be, the last chance
left of publicly establishing the fact of Laura’s existence, the least
selfish reason that I can advance for our marriage is recognised by
us both. But I may be wrong in my conviction—other means of achieving
our purpose may be in our power, which are less uncertain and less
dangerous. I have searched anxiously, in my own mind, for those means,
and I have not found them. Have you?”

“No. I have thought about it too, and thought in vain.”

“In all likelihood,” I continued, “the same questions have occurred
to you, in considering this difficult subject, which have occurred to
me. Ought we to return with her to Limmeridge, now that she is like
herself again, and trust to the recognition of her by the people of
the village, or by the children at the school? Ought we to appeal to
the practical test of her handwriting? Suppose we did so. Suppose
the recognition of her obtained, and the identity of the handwriting
established. Would success in both those cases do more than supply
an excellent foundation for a trial in a court of law? Would the
recognition and the handwriting prove her identity to Mr. Fairlie and
take her back to Limmeridge House, against the evidence of her aunt,
against the evidence of the medical certificate, against the fact of
the funeral and the fact of the inscription on the tomb? No! We could
only hope to succeed in throwing a serious doubt on the assertion of
her death, a doubt which nothing short of a legal inquiry can settle.
I will assume that we possess (what we have certainly not got) money
enough to carry this inquiry on through all its stages. I will assume
that Mr. Fairlie’s prejudices might be reasoned away—that the false
testimony of the Count and his wife, and all the rest of the false
testimony, might be confuted—that the recognition could not possibly
be ascribed to a mistake between Laura and Anne Catherick, or the
handwriting be declared by our enemies to be a clever fraud—all these
are assumptions which, more or less, set plain probabilities at
defiance; but let them pass—and let us ask ourselves what would be the
first consequence or the first questions put to Laura herself on the
subject of the conspiracy. We know only too well what the consequence
would be, for we know that she has never recovered her memory of what
happened to her in London. Examine her privately, or examine her
publicly, she is utterly incapable of assisting the assertion of her
own case. If you don’t see this, Marian, as plainly as I see it, we
will go to Limmeridge and try the experiment to-morrow.”

“I DO see it, Walter. Even if we had the means of paying all the
law expenses, even if we succeeded in the end, the delays would be
unendurable, the perpetual suspense, after what we have suffered
already, would be heartbreaking. You are right about the hopelessness
of going to Limmeridge. I wish I could feel sure that you are right
also in determining to try that last chance with the Count. IS it a
chance at all?”

“Beyond a doubt, Yes. It is the chance of recovering the lost date of
Laura’s journey to London. Without returning to the reasons I gave
you some time since, I am still as firmly persuaded as ever that
there is a discrepancy between the date of that journey and the date
on the certificate of death. There lies the weak point of the whole
conspiracy—it crumbles to pieces if we attack it in that way, and the
means of attacking it are in possession of the Count. If I succeed in
wresting them from him, the object of your life and mine is fulfilled.
If I fail, the wrong that Laura has suffered will, in this world, never
be redressed.”

“Do you fear failure yourself, Walter?”

“I dare not anticipate success, and for that very reason, Marian, I
speak openly and plainly as I have spoken now. In my heart and my
conscience I can say it, Laura’s hopes for the future are at their
lowest ebb. I know that her fortune is gone—I know that the last chance
of restoring her to her place in the world lies at the mercy of her
worst enemy, of a man who is now absolutely unassailable, and who may
remain unassailable to the end. With every worldly advantage gone from
her, with all prospect of recovering her rank and station more than
doubtful, with no clearer future before her than the future which her
husband can provide, the poor drawing-master may harmlessly open his
heart at last. In the days of her prosperity, Marian, I was only the
teacher who guided her hand—I ask for it, in her adversity, as the hand
of my wife!”

Marian’s eyes met mine affectionately—I could say no more. My heart was
full, my lips were trembling. In spite of myself I was in danger of
appealing to her pity. I got up to leave the room. She rose at the same
moment, laid her hand gently on my shoulder, and stopped me.

“Walter!” she said, “I once parted you both, for your good and for
hers. Wait here, my brother!—wait, my dearest, best friend, till Laura
comes, and tells you what I have done now!”

For the first time since the farewell morning at Limmeridge she touched
my forehead with her lips. A tear dropped on my face as she kissed me.
She turned quickly, pointed to the chair from which I had risen, and
left the room.

I sat down alone at the window to wait through the crisis of my
life. My mind in that breathless interval felt like a total blank.
I was conscious of nothing but a painful intensity of all familiar
perceptions. The sun grew blinding bright, the white sea birds chasing
each other far beyond me seemed to be flitting before my face, the
mellow murmur of the waves on the beach was like thunder in my ears.

The door opened, and Laura came in alone. So she had entered the
breakfast-room at Limmeridge House on the morning when we parted.
Slowly and falteringly, in sorrow and in hesitation, she had once
approached me. Now she came with the haste of happiness in her feet,
with the light of happiness radiant in her face. Of their own accord
those dear arms clasped themselves round me, of their own accord the
sweet lips came to meet mine. “My darling!” she whispered, “we may own
we love each other now?” Her head nestled with a tender contentedness
on my bosom. “Oh,” she said innocently, “I am so happy at last!”


Ten days later we were happier still. We were married.




IV

The course of this narrative, steadily flowing on, bears me away from
the morning-time of our married life, and carries me forward to the end.

In a fortnight more we three were back in London, and the shadow was
stealing over us of the struggle to come.

Marian and I were careful to keep Laura in ignorance of the cause that
had hurried us back—the necessity of making sure of the Count. It was
now the beginning of May, and his term of occupation at the house in
Forest Road expired in June. If he renewed it (and I had reasons,
shortly to be mentioned, for anticipating that he would), I might be
certain of his not escaping me. But if by any chance he disappointed my
expectations and left the country, then I had no time to lose in arming
myself to meet him as I best might.

In the first fulness of my new happiness, there had been moments
when my resolution faltered—moments when I was tempted to be safely
content, now that the dearest aspiration of my life was fulfilled
in the possession of Laura’s love. For the first time I thought
faint-heartedly of the greatness of the risk, of the adverse chances
arrayed against me, of the fair promise of our new life, and of the
peril in which I might place the happiness which we had so hardly
earned. Yes! let me own it honestly. For a brief time I wandered, in
the sweet guiding of love, far from the purpose to which I had been
true under sterner discipline and in darker days. Innocently Laura had
tempted me aside from the hard path—innocently she was destined to lead
me back again.

At times, dreams of the terrible past still disconnectedly recalled to
her, in the mystery of sleep, the events of which her waking memory
had lost all trace. One night (barely two weeks after our marriage),
when I was watching her at rest, I saw the tears come slowly through
her closed eyelids, I heard the faint murmuring words escape her which
told me that her spirit was back again on the fatal journey from
Blackwater Park. That unconscious appeal, so touching and so awful in
the sacredness of her sleep, ran through me like fire. The next day was
the day we came back to London—the day when my resolution returned to
me with tenfold strength.

The first necessity was to know something of the man. Thus far, the
true story of his life was an impenetrable mystery to me.

I began with such scanty sources of information as were at my own
disposal. The important narrative written by Mr. Frederick Fairlie
(which Marian had obtained by following the directions I had given to
her in the winter) proved to be of no service to the special object
with which I now looked at it. While reading it I reconsidered the
disclosure revealed to me by Mrs. Clements of the series of deceptions
which had brought Anne Catherick to London, and which had there devoted
her to the interests of the conspiracy. Here, again, the Count had not
openly committed himself—here, again, he was, to all practical purpose,
out of my reach.

I next returned to Marian’s journal at Blackwater Park. At my request
she read to me again a passage which referred to her past curiosity
about the Count, and to the few particulars which she had discovered
relating to him.

The passage to which I allude occurs in that part of her journal which
delineates his character and his personal appearance. She describes him
as “not having crossed the frontiers of his native country for years
past”—as “anxious to know if any Italian gentlemen were settled in the
nearest town to Blackwater Park”—as “receiving letters with all sorts
of odd stamps on them, and one with a large official-looking seal on
it.” She is inclined to consider that his long absence from his native
country may be accounted for by assuming that he is a political exile.
But she is, on the other hand, unable to reconcile this idea with the
reception of the letter from abroad bearing “the large official-looking
seal”—letters from the Continent addressed to political exiles being
usually the last to court attention from foreign post-offices in that
way.

The considerations thus presented to me in the diary, joined to certain
surmises of my own that grew out of them, suggested a conclusion which
I wondered I had not arrived at before. I now said to myself—what Laura
had once said to Marian at Blackwater Park, what Madame Fosco had
overheard by listening at the door—the Count is a spy!

Laura had applied the word to him at hazard, in natural anger at his
proceedings towards herself. I applied it to him with the deliberate
conviction that his vocation in life was the vocation of a spy. On this
assumption, the reason for his extraordinary stay in England so long
after the objects of the conspiracy had been gained, became, to my
mind, quite intelligible.

The year of which I am now writing was the year of the famous Crystal
Palace Exhibition in Hyde Park. Foreigners in unusually large numbers
had arrived already, and were still arriving in England. Men were among
us by hundreds whom the ceaseless distrustfulness of their governments
had followed privately, by means of appointed agents, to our shores.
My surmises did not for a moment class a man of the Count’s abilities
and social position with the ordinary rank and file of foreign spies.
I suspected him of holding a position of authority, of being entrusted
by the government which he secretly served with the organisation and
management of agents specially employed in this country, both men and
women, and I believed Mrs. Rubelle, who had been so opportunely found
to act as nurse at Blackwater Park, to be, in all probability, one of
the number.

Assuming that this idea of mine had a foundation in truth, the position
of the Count might prove to be more assailable than I had hitherto
ventured to hope. To whom could I apply to know something more of the
man’s history and of the man himself than I knew now?

In this emergency it naturally occurred to my mind that a countryman
of his own, on whom I could rely, might be the fittest person to help
me. The first man whom I thought of under these circumstances was also
the only Italian with whom I was intimately acquainted—my quaint little
friend, Professor Pesca.


The professor has been so long absent from these pages that he has run
some risk of being forgotten altogether.

It is the necessary law of such a story as mine that the persons
concerned in it only appear when the course of events takes them
up—they come and go, not by favour of my personal partiality, but by
right of their direct connection with the circumstances to be detailed.
For this reason, not Pesca alone, but my mother and sister as well,
have been left far in the background of the narrative. My visits to the
Hampstead cottage, my mother’s belief in the denial of Laura’s identity
which the conspiracy had accomplished, my vain efforts to overcome the
prejudice on her part and on my sister’s to which, in their jealous
affection for me, they both continued to adhere, the painful necessity
which that prejudice imposed on me of concealing my marriage from them
till they had learnt to do justice to my wife—all these little domestic
occurrences have been left unrecorded because they were not essential
to the main interest of the story. It is nothing that they added to my
anxieties and embittered my disappointments—the steady march of events
has inexorably passed them by.

For the same reason I have said nothing here of the consolation that I
found in Pesca’s brotherly affection for me, when I saw him again after
the sudden cessation of my residence at Limmeridge House. I have not
recorded the fidelity with which my warm-hearted little friend followed
me to the place of embarkation when I sailed for Central America, or
the noisy transport of joy with which he received me when we next met
in London. If I had felt justified in accepting the offers of service
which he made to me on my return, he would have appeared again long
ere this. But, though I knew that his honour and his courage were to
be implicitly relied on, I was not so sure that his discretion was to
be trusted, and, for that reason only, I followed the course of all my
inquiries alone. It will now be sufficiently understood that Pesca was
not separated from all connection with me and my interests, although he
has hitherto been separated from all connection with the progress of
this narrative. He was as true and as ready a friend of mine still as
ever he had been in his life.


Before I summoned Pesca to my assistance it was necessary to see for
myself what sort of man I had to deal with. Up to this time I had never
once set eyes on Count Fosco.

Three days after my return with Laura and Marian to London, I set
forth alone for Forest Road, St. John’s Wood, between ten and eleven
o’clock in the morning. It was a fine day—I had some hours to spare—and
I thought it likely, if I waited a little for him, that the Count
might be tempted out. I had no great reason to fear the chance of his
recognising me in the daytime, for the only occasion when I had been
seen by him was the occasion on which he had followed me home at night.

No one appeared at the windows in the front of the house. I walked
down a turning which ran past the side of it, and looked over the low
garden wall. One of the back windows on the lower floor was thrown up
and a net was stretched across the opening. I saw nobody, but I heard,
in the room, first a shrill whistling and singing of birds, then the
deep ringing voice which Marian’s description had made familiar to me.
“Come out on my little finger, my pret-pret-pretties!” cried the voice.
“Come out and hop upstairs! One, two, three—and up! Three, two, one—and
down! One, two, three—twit-twit-twit-tweet!” The Count was exercising
his canaries as he used to exercise them in Marian’s time at Blackwater
Park.

I waited a little while, and the singing and the whistling ceased.
“Come, kiss me, my pretties!” said the deep voice. There was a
responsive twittering and chirping—a low, oily laugh—a silence of
a minute or so, and then I heard the opening of the house door. I
turned and retraced my steps. The magnificent melody of the Prayer in
Rossini’s Moses, sung in a sonorous bass voice, rose grandly through
the suburban silence of the place. The front garden gate opened and
closed. The Count had come out.

He crossed the road and walked towards the western boundary of the
Regent’s Park. I kept on my own side of the way, a little behind him,
and walked in that direction also.

Marian had prepared me for his high stature, his monstrous corpulence,
and his ostentatious mourning garments, but not for the horrible
freshness and cheerfulness and vitality of the man. He carried his
sixty years as if they had been fewer than forty. He sauntered
along, wearing his hat a little on one side, with a light jaunty
step, swinging his big stick, humming to himself, looking up from
time to time at the houses and gardens on either side of him with
superb, smiling patronage. If a stranger had been told that the
whole neighbourhood belonged to him, that stranger would not have
been surprised to hear it. He never looked back, he paid no apparent
attention to me, no apparent attention to any one who passed him on
his own side of the road, except now and then, when he smiled and
smirked, with an easy paternal good humour, at the nursery-maids and
the children whom he met. In this way he led me on, till we reached a
colony of shops outside the western terraces of the Park.

Here he stopped at a pastrycook’s, went in (probably to give an order),
and came out again immediately with a tart in his hand. An Italian was
grinding an organ before the shop, and a miserable little shrivelled
monkey was sitting on the instrument. The Count stopped, bit a piece
for himself out of the tart, and gravely handed the rest to the monkey.
“My poor little man!” he said, with grotesque tenderness, “you look
hungry. In the sacred name of humanity, I offer you some lunch!” The
organ-grinder piteously put in his claim to a penny from the benevolent
stranger. The Count shrugged his shoulders contemptuously, and passed
on.

We reached the streets and the better class of shops between the
New Road and Oxford Street. The Count stopped again and entered a
small optician’s shop, with an inscription in the window announcing
that repairs were neatly executed inside. He came out again with an
opera-glass in his hand, walked a few paces on, and stopped to look at
a bill of the opera placed outside a music-seller’s shop. He read the
bill attentively, considered a moment, and then hailed an empty cab as
it passed him. “Opera Box-office,” he said to the man, and was driven
away.

I crossed the road, and looked at the bill in my turn. The performance
announced was Lucrezia Borgia, and it was to take place that evening.
The opera-glass in the Count’s hand, his careful reading of the bill,
and his direction to the cabman, all suggested that he proposed making
one of the audience. I had the means of getting an admission for myself
and a friend to the pit by applying to one of the scene-painters
attached to the theatre, with whom I had been well acquainted in past
times. There was a chance at least that the Count might be easily
visible among the audience to me and to any one with me, and in this
case I had the means of ascertaining whether Pesca knew his countryman
or not that very night.

This consideration at once decided the disposal of my evening. I
procured the tickets, leaving a note at the Professor’s lodgings on the
way. At a quarter to eight I called to take him with me to the theatre.
My little friend was in a state of the highest excitement, with a
festive flower in his button-hole, and the largest opera-glass I ever
saw hugged up under his arm.

“Are you ready?” I asked.

“Right-all-right,” said Pesca.

We started for the theatre.




V

The last notes of the introduction to the opera were being played, and
the seats in the pit were all filled, when Pesca and I reached the
theatre.

There was plenty of room, however, in the passage that ran round the
pit—precisely the position best calculated to answer the purpose for
which I was attending the performance. I went first to the barrier
separating us from the stalls, and looked for the Count in that part
of the theatre. He was not there. Returning along the passage, on the
left-hand side from the stage, and looking about me attentively, I
discovered him in the pit. He occupied an excellent place, some twelve
or fourteen seats from the end of a bench, within three rows of the
stalls. I placed myself exactly on a line with him; Pesca standing by
my side. The Professor was not yet aware of the purpose for which I had
brought him to the theatre, and he was rather surprised that we did not
move nearer to the stage.

The curtain rose, and the opera began.

Throughout the whole of the first act we remained in our position—the
Count, absorbed by the orchestra and the stage, never casting so much
as a chance glance at us. Not a note of Donizetti’s delicious music
was lost on him. There he sat, high above his neighbours, smiling, and
nodding his great head enjoyingly from time to time. When the people
near him applauded the close of an air (as an English audience in such
circumstances always WILL applaud), without the least consideration
for the orchestral movement which immediately followed it, he looked
round at them with an expression of compassionate remonstrance, and
held up one hand with a gesture of polite entreaty. At the more
refined passages of the singing, at the more delicate phases of the
music, which passed unapplauded by others, his fat hands, adorned
with perfectly-fitting black kid gloves, softly patted each other, in
token of the cultivated appreciation of a musical man. At such times,
his oily murmur of approval, “Bravo! Bra-a-a-a!” hummed through the
silence, like the purring of a great cat. His immediate neighbours
on either side—hearty, ruddy-faced people from the country, basking
amazedly in the sunshine of fashionable London—seeing and hearing him,
began to follow his lead. Many a burst of applause from the pit that
night started from the soft, comfortable patting of the black-gloved
hands. The man’s voracious vanity devoured this implied tribute to
his local and critical supremacy with an appearance of the highest
relish. Smiles rippled continuously over his fat face. He looked about
him, at the pauses in the music, serenely satisfied with himself and
his fellow-creatures. “Yes! yes! these barbarous English people are
learning something from ME. Here, there, and everywhere, I—Fosco—am an
influence that is felt, a man who sits supreme!” If ever face spoke,
his face spoke then, and that was its language.

The curtain fell on the first act, and the audience rose to look about
them. This was the time I had waited for—the time to try if Pesca knew
him.

He rose with the rest, and surveyed the occupants of the boxes grandly
with his opera-glass. At first his back was towards us, but he turned
round in time, to our side of the theatre, and looked at the boxes
above us, using his glass for a few minutes—then removing it, but still
continuing to look up. This was the moment I chose, when his full face
was in view, for directing Pesca’s attention to him.

“Do you know that man?” I asked.

“Which man, my friend?”

“The tall, fat man, standing there, with his face towards us.”

Pesca raised himself on tiptoe, and looked at the Count.

“No,” said the Professor. “The big fat man is a stranger to me. Is he
famous? Why do you point him out?”

“Because I have particular reasons for wishing to know something of
him. He is a countryman of yours—his name is Count Fosco. Do you know
that name?”

“Not I, Walter. Neither the name nor the man is known to me.”

“Are you quite sure you don’t recognise him? Look again—look carefully.
I will tell you why I am so anxious about it when we leave the theatre.
Stop! let me help you up here, where you can see him better.”

I helped the little man to perch himself on the edge of the raised
dais upon which the pit-seats were all placed. His small stature was
no hindrance to him—here he could see over the heads of the ladies who
were seated near the outermost part of the bench.

A slim, light-haired man standing by us, whom I had not noticed
before—a man with a scar on his left cheek—looked attentively at Pesca
as I helped him up, and then looked still more attentively, following
the direction of Pesca’s eyes, at the Count. Our conversation might
have reached his ears, and might, as it struck me, have roused his
curiosity.

Meanwhile, Pesca fixed his eyes earnestly on the broad, full, smiling
face turned a little upward, exactly opposite to him.

“No,” he said, “I have never set my two eyes on that big fat man before
in all my life.”

As he spoke the Count looked downwards towards the boxes behind us on
the pit tier.

The eyes of the two Italians met.

The instant before I had been perfectly satisfied, from his own
reiterated assertion, that Pesca did not know the Count. The instant
afterwards I was equally certain that the Count knew Pesca!

Knew him, and—more surprising still—FEARED him as well! There was no
mistaking the change that passed over the villain’s face. The leaden
hue that altered his yellow complexion in a moment, the sudden rigidity
of all his features, the furtive scrutiny of his cold grey eyes, the
motionless stillness of him from head to foot told their own tale. A
mortal dread had mastered him body and soul—and his own recognition of
Pesca was the cause of it!

The slim man with the scar on his cheek was still close by us. He had
apparently drawn his inference from the effect produced on the Count by
the sight of Pesca as I had drawn mine. He was a mild, gentlemanlike
man, looking like a foreigner, and his interest in our proceedings was
not expressed in anything approaching to an offensive manner.

For my own part I was so startled by the change in the Count’s face, so
astounded at the entirely unexpected turn which events had taken, that
I knew neither what to say or do next. Pesca roused me by stepping back
to his former place at my side and speaking first.

“How the fat man stares!” he exclaimed. “Is it at ME? Am I famous? How
can he know me when I don’t know him?”

I kept my eye still on the Count. I saw him move for the first time
when Pesca moved, so as not to lose sight of the little man in the
lower position in which he now stood. I was curious to see what would
happen if Pesca’s attention under these circumstances was withdrawn
from him, and I accordingly asked the Professor if he recognised
any of his pupils that evening among the ladies in the boxes. Pesca
immediately raised the large opera-glass to his eyes, and moved it
slowly all round the upper part of the theatre, searching for his
pupils with the most conscientious scrutiny.

The moment he showed himself to be thus engaged the Count turned round,
slipped past the persons who occupied seats on the farther side of him
from where we stood, and disappeared in the middle passage down the
centre of the pit. I caught Pesca by the arm, and to his inexpressible
astonishment, hurried him round with me to the back of the pit to
intercept the Count before he could get to the door. Somewhat to my
surprise, the slim man hastened out before us, avoiding a stoppage
caused by some people on our side of the pit leaving their places, by
which Pesca and myself were delayed. When we reached the lobby the
Count had disappeared, and the foreigner with the scar was gone too.

“Come home,” I said; “come home, Pesca, to your lodgings. I must speak
to you in private—I must speak directly.”

“My-soul-bless-my-soul!” cried the Professor, in a state of the
extremest bewilderment. “What on earth is the matter?”

I walked on rapidly without answering. The circumstances under which
the Count had left the theatre suggested to me that his extraordinary
anxiety to escape Pesca might carry him to further extremities still.
He might escape me, too, by leaving London. I doubted the future if
I allowed him so much as a day’s freedom to act as he pleased. And I
doubted that foreign stranger, who had got the start of us, and whom I
suspected of intentionally following him out.

With this double distrust in my mind, I was not long in making Pesca
understand what I wanted. As soon as we two were alone in his room, I
increased his confusion and amazement a hundredfold by telling him what
my purpose was as plainly and unreservedly as I have acknowledged it
here.

“My friend, what can I do?” cried the Professor, piteously appealing to
me with both hands. “Deuce-what-the-deuce! how can I help you, Walter,
when I don’t know the man?”

“HE knows YOU—he is afraid of you—he has left the theatre to escape
you. Pesca! there must be a reason for this. Look back into your own
life before you came to England. You left Italy, as you have told me
yourself, for political reasons. You have never mentioned those reasons
to me, and I don’t inquire into them now. I only ask you to consult
your own recollections, and to say if they suggest no past cause for
the terror which the first sight of you produced in that man.”

To my unutterable surprise, these words, harmless as they appeared to
ME, produced the same astounding effect on Pesca which the sight of
Pesca had produced on the Count. The rosy face of my little friend
whitened in an instant, and he drew back from me slowly, trembling from
head to foot.

“Walter!” he said. “You don’t know what you ask.”

He spoke in a whisper—he looked at me as if I had suddenly revealed to
him some hidden danger to both of us. In less than one minute of time
he was so altered from the easy, lively, quaint little man of all my
past experience, that if I had met him in the street, changed as I saw
him now, I should most certainly not have known him again.

“Forgive me, if I have unintentionally pained and shocked you,” I
replied. “Remember the cruel wrong my wife has suffered at Count
Fosco’s hands. Remember that the wrong can never be redressed, unless
the means are in my power of forcing him to do her justice. I spoke in
HER interests, Pesca—I ask you again to forgive me—I can say no more.”

I rose to go. He stopped me before I reached the door.

“Wait,” he said. “You have shaken me from head to foot. You don’t
know how I left my country, and why I left my country. Let me compose
myself, let me think, if I can.”

I returned to my chair. He walked up and down the room, talking to
himself incoherently in his own language. After several turns backwards
and forwards, he suddenly came up to me, and laid his little hands with
a strange tenderness and solemnity on my breast.

“On your heart and soul, Walter,” he said, “is there no other way to
get to that man but the chance-way through ME?”

“There is no other way,” I answered.

He left me again, opened the door of the room and looked out cautiously
into the passage, closed it once more, and came back.

“You won your right over me, Walter,” he said, “on the day when you
saved my life. It was yours from that moment, when you pleased to take
it. Take it now. Yes! I mean what I say. My next words, as true as the
good God is above us, will put my life into your hands.”

The trembling earnestness with which he uttered this extraordinary
warning, carried with it, to my mind, the conviction that he spoke the
truth.

“Mind this!” he went on, shaking his hands at me in the vehemence of
his agitation. “I hold no thread, in my own mind, between that man
Fosco, and the past time which I call back to me for your sake. If you
find the thread, keep it to yourself—tell me nothing—on my knees I beg
and pray, let me be ignorant, let me be innocent, let me be blind to
all the future as I am now!”

He said a few words more, hesitatingly and disconnectedly, then stopped
again.

I saw that the effort of expressing himself in English, on an occasion
too serious to permit him the use of the quaint turns and phrases of
his ordinary vocabulary, was painfully increasing the difficulty he
had felt from the first in speaking to me at all. Having learnt to
read and understand his native language (though not to speak it), in
the earlier days of our intimate companionship, I now suggested to him
that he should express himself in Italian, while I used English in
putting any questions which might be necessary to my enlightenment.
He accepted the proposal. In his smooth-flowing language, spoken with
a vehement agitation which betrayed itself in the perpetual working
of his features, in the wildness and the suddenness of his foreign
gesticulations, but never in the raising of his voice, I now heard the
words which armed me to meet the last struggle, that is left for this
story to record.[3]

[3] It is only right to mention here, that I repeat Pesco’s statement
to me with the careful suppressions and alterations which the serious
nature of the subject and my own sense of duty to my friend demand. My
first and last concealments from the reader are those which caution
renders absolutely necessary in this portion of the narrative.

“You know nothing of my motive for leaving Italy,” he began, “except
that it was for political reasons. If I had been driven to this
country by the persecution of my government, I should not have kept
those reasons a secret from you or from any one. I have concealed
them because no government authority has pronounced the sentence of
my exile. You have heard, Walter, of the political societies that
are hidden in every great city on the continent of Europe? To one of
those societies I belonged in Italy—and belong still in England. When
I came to this country, I came by the direction of my chief. I was
over-zealous in my younger time—I ran the risk of compromising myself
and others. For those reasons I was ordered to emigrate to England
and to wait. I emigrated—I have waited—I wait still. To-morrow I may
be called away—ten years hence I may be called away. It is all one to
me—I am here, I support myself by teaching, and I wait. I violate no
oath (you shall hear why presently) in making my confidence complete by
telling you the name of the society to which I belong. All I do is to
put my life in your hands. If what I say to you now is ever known by
others to have passed my lips, as certainly as we two sit here, I am a
dead man.”

He whispered the next words in my ear. I keep the secret which he thus
communicated. The society to which he belonged will be sufficiently
individualised for the purpose of these pages, if I call it “The
Brotherhood,” on the few occasions when any reference to the subject
will be needed in this place.

“The object of the Brotherhood,” Pesca went on, “is, briefly, the
object of other political societies of the same sort—the destruction of
tyranny and the assertion of the rights of the people. The principles
of the Brotherhood are two. So long as a man’s life is useful, or
even harmless only, he has the right to enjoy it. But, if his life
inflicts injury on the well-being of his fellow-men, from that moment
he forfeits the right, and it is not only no crime, but a positive
merit, to deprive him of it. It is not for me to say in what frightful
circumstances of oppression and suffering this society took its rise.
It is not for you to say—you Englishmen, who have conquered your
freedom so long ago, that you have conveniently forgotten what blood
you shed, and what extremities you proceeded to in the conquering—it is
not for you to say how far the worst of all exasperations may, or may
not, carry the maddened men of an enslaved nation. The iron that has
entered into our souls has gone too deep for you to find it. Leave the
refugee alone! Laugh at him, distrust him, open your eyes in wonder at
that secret self which smoulders in him, sometimes under the everyday
respectability and tranquillity of a man like me—sometimes under the
grinding poverty, the fierce squalor, of men less lucky, less pliable,
less patient than I am—but judge us not! In the time of your first
Charles you might have done us justice—the long luxury of your own
freedom has made you incapable of doing us justice now.”

All the deepest feelings of his nature seemed to force themselves to
the surface in those words—all his heart was poured out to me for the
first time in our lives—but still his voice never rose, still his dread
of the terrible revelation he was making to me never left him.

“So far,” he resumed, “you think the society like other societies. Its
object (in your English opinion) is anarchy and revolution. It takes
the life of a bad king or a bad minister, as if the one and the other
were dangerous wild beasts to be shot at the first opportunity. I grant
you this. But the laws of the Brotherhood are the laws of no other
political society on the face of the earth. The members are not known
to one another. There is a president in Italy; there are presidents
abroad. Each of these has his secretary. The presidents and the
secretaries know the members, but the members, among themselves, are
all strangers, until their chiefs see fit, in the political necessity
of the time, or in the private necessity of the society, to make them
known to each other. With such a safeguard as this there is no oath
among us on admittance. We are identified with the Brotherhood by a
secret mark, which we all bear, which lasts while our lives last. We
are told to go about our ordinary business, and to report ourselves to
the president, or the secretary, four times a year, in the event of our
services being required. We are warned, if we betray the Brotherhood,
or if we injure it by serving other interests, that we die by the
principles of the Brotherhood—die by the hand of a stranger who may
be sent from the other end of the world to strike the blow—or by the
hand of our own bosom-friend, who may have been a member unknown to
us through all the years of our intimacy. Sometimes the death is
delayed—sometimes it follows close on the treachery. It is our first
business to know how to wait—our second business to know how to obey
when the word is spoken. Some of us may wait our lives through, and
may not be wanted. Some of us may be called to the work, or to the
preparation for the work, the very day of our admission. I myself—the
little, easy, cheerful man you know, who, of his own accord, would
hardly lift up his handkerchief to strike down the fly that buzzes
about his face—I, in my younger time, under provocation so dreadful
that I will not tell you of it, entered the Brotherhood by an impulse,
as I might have killed myself by an impulse. I must remain in it now—it
has got me, whatever I may think of it in my better circumstances and
my cooler manhood, to my dying day. While I was still in Italy I was
chosen secretary, and all the members of that time, who were brought
face to face with my president, were brought face to face also with me.”

I began to understand him—I saw the end towards which his extraordinary
disclosure was now tending. He waited a moment, watching me
earnestly—watching till he had evidently guessed what was passing in my
mind before he resumed.

“You have drawn your own conclusion already,” he said. “I see it in
your face. Tell me nothing—keep me out of the secret of your thoughts.
Let me make my one last sacrifice of myself, for your sake, and then
have done with this subject, never to return to it again.”

He signed to me not to answer him—rose—removed his coat—and rolled up
the shirt-sleeve on his left arm.

“I promised you that this confidence should be complete,” he whispered,
speaking close at my ear, with his eyes looking watchfully at the door.
“Whatever comes of it you shall not reproach me with having hidden
anything from you which it was necessary to your interests to know. I
have said that the Brotherhood identifies its members by a mark that
lasts for life. See the place, and the mark on it for yourself.”

He raised his bare arm, and showed me, high on the upper part of it and
in the inner side, a brand deeply burnt in the flesh and stained of a
bright blood-red colour. I abstain from describing the device which the
brand represented. It will be sufficient to say that it was circular
in form, and so small that it would have been completely covered by a
shilling coin.

“A man who has this mark, branded in this place,” he said, covering his
arm again, “is a member of the Brotherhood. A man who has been false to
the Brotherhood is discovered sooner or later by the chiefs who know
him—presidents or secretaries, as the case may be. And a man discovered
by the chiefs is dead. NO HUMAN LAWS CAN PROTECT HIM. Remember what you
have seen and heard—draw what conclusions YOU like—act as you please.
But, in the name of God, whatever you discover, whatever you do, tell
me nothing! Let me remain free from a responsibility which it horrifies
me to think of—which I know, in my conscience, is not my responsibility
now. For the last time I say it—on my honour as a gentleman, on my oath
as a Christian, if the man you pointed out at the Opera knows ME, he
is so altered, or so disguised, that I do not know him. I am ignorant
of his proceedings or his purposes in England. I never saw him, I
never heard the name he goes by, to my knowledge, before to-night. I
say no more. Leave me a little, Walter. I am overpowered by what has
happened—I am shaken by what I have said. Let me try to be like myself
again when we meet next.”

He dropped into a chair, and turning away from me, hid his face in his
hands. I gently opened the door so as not to disturb him, and spoke
my few parting words in low tones, which he might hear or not, as he
pleased.

“I will keep the memory of to-night in my heart of hearts,” I said.
“You shall never repent the trust you have reposed in me. May I come to
you to-morrow? May I come as early as nine o’clock?”

“Yes, Walter,” he replied, looking up at me kindly, and speaking
in English once more, as if his one anxiety now was to get back to
our former relations towards each other. “Come to my little bit of
breakfast before I go my ways among the pupils that I teach.”

“Good-night, Pesca.”

“Good-night, my friend.”




VI

My first conviction as soon as I found myself outside the house, was
that no alternative was left me but to act at once on the information I
had received—to make sure of the Count that night, or to risk the loss,
if I only delayed till the morning, of Laura’s last chance. I looked at
my watch—it was ten o’clock.

Not the shadow of a doubt crossed my mind of the purpose for which
the Count had left the theatre. His escape from us, that evening, was
beyond all question the preliminary only to his escape from London. The
mark of the Brotherhood was on his arm—I felt as certain of it as if he
had shown me the brand; and the betrayal of the Brotherhood was on his
conscience—I had seen it in his recognition of Pesca.

It was easy to understand why that recognition had not been mutual. A
man of the Count’s character would never risk the terrible consequences
of turning spy without looking to his personal security quite as
carefully as he looked to his golden reward. The shaven face, which I
had pointed out at the Opera, might have been covered by a beard in
Pesca’s time—his dark brown hair might be a wig—his name was evidently
a false one. The accident of time might have helped him as well—his
immense corpulence might have come with his later years. There was
every reason why Pesca should not have known him again—every reason
also why he should have known Pesca, whose singular personal appearance
made a marked man of him, go where he might.

I have said that I felt certain of the purpose in the Count’s mind
when he escaped us at the theatre. How could I doubt it, when I saw,
with my own eyes, that he believed himself, in spite of the change in
his appearance, to have been recognised by Pesca, and to be therefore
in danger of his life? If I could get speech of him that night, if I
could show him that I, too knew of the mortal peril in which he stood,
what result would follow? Plainly this. One of us must be master of the
situation—one of us must inevitably be at the mercy of the other.

I owed it to myself to consider the chances against me before I
confronted them. I owed it to my wife to do all that lay in my power to
lessen the risk.

The chances against me wanted no reckoning up—they were all merged in
one. If the Count discovered, by my own avowal, that the direct way
to his safety lay through my life, he was probably the last man in
existence who would shrink from throwing me off my guard and taking
that way, when he had me alone within his reach. The only means of
defence against him on which I could at all rely to lessen the risk,
presented themselves, after a little careful thinking, clearly enough.
Before I made any personal acknowledgment of my discovery in his
presence, I must place the discovery itself where it would be ready
for instant use against him, and safe from any attempt at suppression
on his part. If I laid the mine under his feet before I approached
him, and if I left instructions with a third person to fire it on the
expiration of a certain time, unless directions to the contrary were
previously received under my own hand, or from my own lips—in that
event the Count’s security was absolutely dependent upon mine, and I
might hold the vantage ground over him securely, even in his own house.

This idea occurred to me when I was close to the new lodgings which we
had taken on returning from the sea-side. I went in without disturbing
any one, by the help of my key. A light was in the hall, and I stole
up with it to my workroom to make my preparations, and absolutely to
commit myself to an interview with the Count, before either Laura or
Marian could have the slightest suspicion of what I intended to do.

A letter addressed to Pesca represented the surest measure of
precaution which it was now possible for me to take. I wrote as follows—

“The man whom I pointed out to you at the Opera is a member of the
Brotherhood, and has been false to his trust. Put both these assertions
to the test instantly. You know the name he goes by in England. His
address is No. 5 Forest Road, St. John’s Wood. On the love you once
bore me, use the power entrusted to you without mercy and without delay
against that man. I have risked all and lost all—and the forfeit of my
failure has been paid with my life.”

I signed and dated these lines, enclosed them in an envelope, and
sealed it up. On the outside I wrote this direction: “Keep the
enclosure unopened until nine o’clock to-morrow morning. If you do
not hear from me, or see me, before that time, break the seal when
the clock strikes, and read the contents.” I added my initials, and
protected the whole by enclosing it in a second sealed envelope,
addressed to Pesca at his lodgings.

Nothing remained to be done after this but to find the means of
sending my letter to its destination immediately. I should then have
accomplished all that lay in my power. If anything happened to me in
the Count’s house, I had now provided for his answering it with his
life.

That the means of preventing his escape, under any circumstances
whatever, were at Pesca’s disposal, if he chose to exert them, I did
not for an instant doubt. The extraordinary anxiety which he had
expressed to remain unenlightened as to the Count’s identity—or, in
other words, to be left uncertain enough about facts to justify him
to his own conscience in remaining passive—betrayed plainly that the
means of exercising the terrible justice of the Brotherhood were
ready to his hand, although, as a naturally humane man, he had shrunk
from plainly saying as much in my presence. The deadly certainty with
which the vengeance of foreign political societies can hunt down a
traitor to the cause, hide himself where he may, had been too often
exemplified, even in my superficial experience, to allow of any doubt.
Considering the subject only as a reader of newspapers, cases recurred
to my memory, both in London and in Paris, of foreigners found stabbed
in the streets, whose assassins could never be traced—of bodies and
parts of bodies thrown into the Thames and the Seine, by hands that
could never be discovered—of deaths by secret violence which could
only be accounted for in one way. I have disguised nothing relating to
myself in these pages, and I do not disguise here that I believed I had
written Count Fosco’s death-warrant, if the fatal emergency happened
which authorised Pesca to open my enclosure.

I left my room to go down to the ground floor of the house, and
speak to the landlord about finding me a messenger. He happened to
be ascending the stairs at the time, and we met on the landing. His
son, a quick lad, was the messenger he proposed to me on hearing what
I wanted. We had the boy upstairs, and I gave him his directions. He
was to take the letter in a cab, to put it into Professor Pesca’s
own hands, and to bring me back a line of acknowledgment from that
gentleman—returning in the cab, and keeping it at the door for my use.
It was then nearly half-past ten. I calculated that the boy might be
back in twenty minutes, and that I might drive to St. John’s Wood, on
his return, in twenty minutes more.

When the lad had departed on his errand I returned to my own room for
a little while, to put certain papers in order, so that they might be
easily found in case of the worst. The key of the old-fashioned bureau
in which the papers were kept I sealed up, and left it on my table,
with Marian’s name written on the outside of the little packet. This
done, I went downstairs to the sitting-room, in which I expected to
find Laura and Marian awaiting my return from the Opera. I felt my hand
trembling for the first time when I laid it on the lock of the door.

No one was in the room but Marian. She was reading, and she looked at
her watch, in surprise, when I came in.

“How early you are back!” she said. “You must have come away before the
Opera was over.”

“Yes,” I replied, “neither Pesca nor I waited for the end. Where is
Laura?”

“She had one of her bad headaches this evening, and I advised her to go
to bed when we had done tea.”

I left the room again on the pretext of wishing to see whether Laura
was asleep. Marian’s quick eyes were beginning to look inquiringly at
my face—Marian’s quick instinct was beginning to discover that I had
something weighing on my mind.

When I entered the bedchamber, and softly approached the bedside by the
dim flicker of the night-lamp, my wife was asleep.

We had not been married quite a month yet. If my heart was heavy,
if my resolution for a moment faltered again, when I looked at her
face turned faithfully to my pillow in her sleep—when I saw her hand
resting open on the coverlid, as if it was waiting unconsciously for
mine—surely there was some excuse for me? I only allowed myself a few
minutes to kneel down at the bedside, and to look close at her—so close
that her breath, as it came and went, fluttered on my face. I only
touched her hand and her cheek with my lips at parting. She stirred in
her sleep and murmured my name, but without waking. I lingered for an
instant at the door to look at her again. “God bless and keep you, my
darling!” I whispered, and left her.

Marian was at the stairhead waiting for me. She had a folded slip of
paper in her hand.

“The landlord’s son has brought this for you,” she said. “He has got a
cab at the door—he says you ordered him to keep it at your disposal.”

“Quite right, Marian. I want the cab—I am going out again.”

I descended the stairs as I spoke, and looked into the sitting-room to
read the slip of paper by the light on the table. It contained these
two sentences in Pesca’s handwriting—

“Your letter is received. If I don’t see you before the time you
mention, I will break the seal when the clock strikes.”

I placed the paper in my pocket-book, and made for the door. Marian
met me on the threshold, and pushed me back into the room, where the
candle-light fell full on my face. She held me by both hands, and her
eyes fastened searchingly on mine.

“I see!” she said, in a low eager whisper. “You are trying the last
chance to-night.”

“Yes, the last chance and the best,” I whispered back.

“Not alone! Oh, Walter, for God’s sake, not alone! Let me go with you.
Don’t refuse me because I’m only a woman. I must go! I will go! I’ll
wait outside in the cab!”

It was my turn now to hold HER. She tried to break away from me and get
down first to the door.

“If you want to help me,” I said, “stop here and sleep in my wife’s
room to-night. Only let me go away with my mind easy about Laura, and I
answer for everything else. Come, Marian, give me a kiss, and show that
you have the courage to wait till I come back.”

I dared not allow her time to say a word more. She tried to hold me
again. I unclasped her hands, and was out of the room in a moment. The
boy below heard me on the stairs, and opened the hall-door. I jumped
into the cab before the driver could get off the box. “Forest Road, St.
John’s Wood,” I called to him through the front window. “Double fare if
you get there in a quarter of an hour.” “I’ll do it, sir.” I looked at
my watch. Eleven o’clock. Not a minute to lose.

The rapid motion of the cab, the sense that every instant now was
bringing me nearer to the Count, the conviction that I was embarked at
last, without let or hindrance, on my hazardous enterprise, heated me
into such a fever of excitement that I shouted to the man to go faster
and faster. As we left the streets, and crossed St. John’s Wood Road,
my impatience so completely overpowered me that I stood up in the cab
and stretched my head out of the window, to see the end of the journey
before we reached it. Just as a church clock in the distance struck the
quarter past, we turned into the Forest Road. I stopped the driver a
little away from the Count’s house, paid and dismissed him, and walked
on to the door.

As I approached the garden gate, I saw another person advancing towards
it also from the direction opposite to mine. We met under the gas lamp
in the road, and looked at each other. I instantly recognised the
light-haired foreigner with the scar on his cheek, and I thought he
recognised me. He said nothing, and instead of stopping at the house,
as I did, he slowly walked on. Was he in the Forest Road by accident?
Or had he followed the Count home from the Opera?

I did not pursue those questions. After waiting a little till the
foreigner had slowly passed out of sight, I rang the gate bell. It was
then twenty minutes past eleven—late enough to make it quite easy for
the Count to get rid of me by the excuse that he was in bed.

The only way of providing against this contingency was to send in my
name without asking any preliminary questions, and to let him know,
at the same time, that I had a serious motive for wishing to see him
at that late hour. Accordingly, while I was waiting, I took out my
card and wrote under my name “On important business.” The maid-servant
answered the door while I was writing the last word in pencil, and
asked me distrustfully what I “pleased to want.”

“Be so good as to take that to your master,” I replied, giving her the
card.

I saw, by the girl’s hesitation of manner, that if I had asked for
the Count in the first instance she would only have followed her
instructions by telling me he was not at home. She was staggered by
the confidence with which I gave her the card. After staring at me,
in great perturbation, she went back into the house with my message,
closing the door, and leaving me to wait in the garden.

In a minute or so she reappeared. “Her master’s compliments, and would
I be so obliging as to say what my business was?” “Take my compliments
back,” I replied, “and say that the business cannot be mentioned to any
one but your master.” She left me again, again returned, and this time
asked me to walk in.

I followed her at once. In another moment I was inside the Count’s
house.




VII

There was no lamp in the hall, but by the dim light of the kitchen
candle, which the girl had brought upstairs with her, I saw an elderly
lady steal noiselessly out of a back room on the ground floor. She
cast one viperish look at me as I entered the hall, but said nothing,
and went slowly upstairs without returning my bow. My familiarity with
Marian’s journal sufficiently assured me that the elderly lady was
Madame Fosco.

The servant led me to the room which the Countess had just left. I
entered it, and found myself face to face with the Count.

He was still in his evening dress, except his coat, which he had
thrown across a chair. His shirt-sleeves were turned up at the wrists,
but no higher. A carpet-bag was on one side of him, and a box on the
other. Books, papers, and articles of wearing apparel were scattered
about the room. On a table, at one side of the door, stood the cage,
so well known to me by description, which contained his white mice.
The canaries and the cockatoo were probably in some other room. He was
seated before the box, packing it, when I went in, and rose with some
papers in his hand to receive me. His face still betrayed plain traces
of the shock that had overwhelmed him at the Opera. His fat cheeks hung
loose, his cold grey eyes were furtively vigilant, his voice, look, and
manner were all sharply suspicious alike, as he advanced a step to meet
me, and requested, with distant civility, that I would take a chair.

“You come here on business, sir?” he said. “I am at a loss to know what
that business can possibly be.”

The unconcealed curiosity, with which he looked hard in my face while
he spoke, convinced me that I had passed unnoticed by him at the Opera.
He had seen Pesca first, and from that moment till he left the theatre
he had evidently seen nothing else. My name would necessarily suggest
to him that I had not come into his house with other than a hostile
purpose towards himself, but he appeared to be utterly ignorant thus
far of the real nature of my errand.

“I am fortunate in finding you here to-night,” I said. “You seem to be
on the point of taking a journey?”

“Is your business connected with my journey?”

“In some degree.”

“In what degree? Do you know where I am going to?”

“No. I only know why you are leaving London.”

He slipped by me with the quickness of thought, locked the door, and
put the key in his pocket.

“You and I, Mr. Hartright, are excellently well acquainted with one
another by reputation,” he said. “Did it, by any chance, occur to you
when you came to this house that I was not the sort of man you could
trifle with?”

“It did occur to me,” I replied. “And I have not come to trifle with
you. I am here on a matter of life and death, and if that door which
you have locked was open at this moment, nothing you could say or do
would induce me to pass through it.”

I walked farther into the room, and stood opposite to him on the rug
before the fireplace. He drew a chair in front of the door, and sat
down on it, with his left arm resting on the table. The cage with the
white mice was close to him, and the little creatures scampered out of
their sleeping-place as his heavy arm shook the table, and peered at
him through the gaps in the smartly painted wires.

“On a matter of life and death,” he repeated to himself. “Those words
are more serious, perhaps, than you think. What do you mean?”

“What I say.”

The perspiration broke out thickly on his broad forehead. His left hand
stole over the edge of the table. There was a drawer in it, with a
lock, and the key was in the lock. His finger and thumb closed over the
key, but did not turn it.

“So you know why I am leaving London?” he went on. “Tell me the reason,
if you please.” He turned the key, and unlocked the drawer as he spoke.

“I can do better than that,” I replied. “I can SHOW you the reason, if
you like.”

“How can you show it?”

“You have got your coat off,” I said. “Roll up the shirt-sleeve on your
left arm, and you will see it there.”

The same livid leaden change passed over his face which I had seen pass
over it at the theatre. The deadly glitter in his eyes shone steady
and straight into mine. He said nothing. But his left hand slowly
opened the table-drawer, and softly slipped into it. The harsh grating
noise of something heavy that he was moving unseen to me sounded for a
moment, then ceased. The silence that followed was so intense that the
faint ticking nibble of the white mice at their wires was distinctly
audible where I stood.

My life hung by a thread, and I knew it. At that final moment I thought
with HIS mind, I felt with HIS fingers—I was as certain as if I had
seen it of what he kept hidden from me in the drawer.

“Wait a little,” I said. “You have got the door locked—you see I don’t
move—you see my hands are empty. Wait a little. I have something more
to say.”

“You have said enough,” he replied, with a sudden composure so
unnatural and so ghastly that it tried my nerves as no outbreak of
violence could have tried them. “I want one moment for my own thoughts,
if you please. Do you guess what I am thinking about?”

“Perhaps I do.”

“I am thinking,” he remarked quietly, “whether I shall add to the
disorder in this room by scattering your brains about the fireplace.”

If I had moved at that moment, I saw in his face that he would have
done it.

“I advise you to read two lines of writing which I have about me,” I
rejoined, “before you finally decide that question.”

The proposal appeared to excite his curiosity. He nodded his head.
I took Pesca’s acknowledgment of the receipt of my letter out of my
pocket-book, handed it to him at arm’s length, and returned to my
former position in front of the fireplace.

He read the lines aloud: “Your letter is received. If I don’t hear from
you before the time you mention, I will break the seal when the clock
strikes.”

Another man in his position would have needed some explanation of
those words—the Count felt no such necessity. One reading of the note
showed him the precaution that I had taken as plainly as if he had
been present at the time when I adopted it. The expression of his face
changed on the instant, and his hand came out of the drawer empty.

“I don’t lock up my drawer, Mr. Hartright,” he said, “and I don’t say
that I may not scatter your brains about the fireplace yet. But I am a
just man even to my enemy, and I will acknowledge beforehand that they
are cleverer brains than I thought them. Come to the point, sir! You
want something of me?”

“I do, and I mean to have it.”

“On conditions?”

“On no conditions.”

His hand dropped into the drawer again.

“Bah! we are travelling in a circle,” he said, “and those clever brains
of yours are in danger again. Your tone is deplorably imprudent,
sir—moderate it on the spot! The risk of shooting you on the place
where you stand is less to me than the risk of letting you out of
this house, except on conditions that I dictate and approve. You have
not got my lamented friend to deal with now—you are face to face with
Fosco! If the lives of twenty Mr. Hartrights were the stepping-stones
to my safety, over all those stones I would go, sustained by my sublime
indifference, self-balanced by my impenetrable calm. Respect me, if you
love your own life! I summon you to answer three questions before you
open your lips again. Hear them—they are necessary to this interview.
Answer them—they are necessary to ME.” He held up one finger of his
right hand. “First question!” he said. “You come here possessed of
information which may be true or may be false—where did you get it?”

“I decline to tell you.”

“No matter—I shall find out. If that information is true—mind I say,
with the whole force of my resolution, if—you are making your market
of it here by treachery of your own or by treachery of some other man.
I note that circumstance for future use in my memory, which forgets
nothing, and proceed.” He held up another finger. “Second question!
Those lines you invited me to read are without signature. Who wrote
them?”

“A man whom I have every reason to depend on, and whom you have every
reason to fear.”

My answer reached him to some purpose. His left hand trembled audibly
in the drawer.

“How long do you give me,” he asked, putting his third question in a
quieter tone, “before the clock strikes and the seal is broken?”

“Time enough for you to come to my terms,” I replied.

“Give me a plainer answer, Mr. Hartright. What hour is the clock to
strike?”

“Nine, to-morrow morning.”

“Nine, to-morrow morning? Yes, yes—your trap is laid for me before I
can get my passport regulated and leave London. It is not earlier, I
suppose? We will see about that presently—I can keep you hostage here,
and bargain with you to send for your letter before I let you go. In
the meantime, be so good next as to mention your terms.”

“You shall hear them. They are simple, and soon stated. You know whose
interests I represent in coming here?”

He smiled with the most supreme composure, and carelessly waved his
right hand.

“I consent to hazard a guess,” he said jeeringly. “A lady’s interests,
of course!”

“My Wife’s interests.”

He looked at me with the first honest expression that had crossed his
face in my presence—an expression of blank amazement. I could see that
I sank in his estimation as a dangerous man from that moment. He shut
up the drawer at once, folded his arms over his breast, and listened to
me with a smile of satirical attention.

“You are well enough aware,” I went on, “of the course which my
inquiries have taken for many months past, to know that any attempted
denial of plain facts will be quite useless in my presence. You are
guilty of an infamous conspiracy! And the gain of a fortune of ten
thousand pounds was your motive for it.”

He said nothing. But his face became overclouded suddenly by a lowering
anxiety.

“Keep your gain,” I said. (His face lightened again immediately, and
his eyes opened on me in wider and wider astonishment.) “I am not here
to disgrace myself by bargaining for money which has passed through
your hands, and which has been the price of a vile crime——”

“Gently, Mr. Hartright. Your moral clap-traps have an excellent effect
in England—keep them for yourself and your own countrymen, if you
please. The ten thousand pounds was a legacy left to my excellent wife
by the late Mr. Fairlie. Place the affair on those grounds, and I will
discuss it if you like. To a man of my sentiments, however, the subject
is deplorably sordid. I prefer to pass it over. I invite you to resume
the discussion of your terms. What do you demand?”

“In the first place, I demand a full confession of the conspiracy,
written and signed in my presence by yourself.”

He raised his finger again. “One!” he said, checking me off with the
steady attention of a practical man.

“In the second place, I demand a plain proof, which does not depend
on your personal asseveration, of the date at which my wife left
Blackwater Park and travelled to London.”

“So! so! you can lay your finger, I see, on the weak place,” he
remarked composedly. “Any more?”

“At present, no more.”

“Good! you have mentioned your terms, now listen to mine. The
responsibility to myself of admitting what you are pleased to call the
‘conspiracy’ is less, perhaps, upon the whole, than the responsibility
of laying you dead on that hearthrug. Let us say that I meet your
proposal—on my own conditions. The statement you demand of me shall
be written, and the plain proof shall be produced. You call a letter
from my late lamented friend informing me of the day and hour of his
wife’s arrival in London, written, signed, and dated by himself, a
proof, I suppose? I can give you this. I can also send you to the man
of whom I hired the carriage to fetch my visitor from the railway, on
the day when she arrived—his order-book may help you to your date,
even if his coachman who drove me proves to be of no use. These things
I can do, and will do, on conditions. I recite them. First condition!
Madame Fosco and I leave this house when and how we please, without
interference of any kind on your part. Second condition! You wait
here, in company with me, to see my agent, who is coming at seven
o’clock in the morning to regulate my affairs. You give my agent a
written order to the man who has got your sealed letter to resign
his possession of it. You wait here till my agent places that letter
unopened in my hands, and you then allow me one clear half-hour to
leave the house—after which you resume your own freedom of action and
go where you please. Third condition! You give me the satisfaction of
a gentleman for your intrusion into my private affairs, and for the
language you have allowed yourself to use to me at this conference. The
time and place, abroad, to be fixed in a letter from my hand when I
am safe on the Continent, and that letter to contain a strip of paper
measuring accurately the length of my sword. Those are my terms. Inform
me if you accept them—Yes or No.”


The extraordinary mixture of prompt decision, far-sighted cunning, and
mountebank bravado in this speech, staggered me for a moment—and only
for a moment. The one question to consider was, whether I was justified
or not in possessing myself of the means of establishing Laura’s
identity at the cost of allowing the scoundrel who had robbed her of
it to escape me with impunity. I knew that the motive of securing the
just recognition of my wife in the birthplace from which she had been
driven out as an impostor, and of publicly erasing the lie that still
profaned her mother’s tombstone, was far purer, in its freedom from all
taint of evil passion, than the vindictive motive which had mingled
itself with my purpose from the first. And yet I cannot honestly
say that my own moral convictions were strong enough to decide the
struggle in me by themselves. They were helped by my remembrance of Sir
Percival’s death. How awfully, at the last moment, had the working of
the retribution THERE been snatched from my feeble hands! What right
had I to decide, in my poor mortal ignorance of the future, that this
man, too, must escape with impunity because he escaped ME? I thought
of these things—perhaps with the superstition inherent in my nature,
perhaps with a sense worthier of me than superstition. It was hard,
when I had fastened my hold on him at last, to loosen it again of
my own accord—but I forced myself to make the sacrifice. In plainer
words, I determined to be guided by the one higher motive of which I
was certain, the motive of serving the cause of Laura and the cause of
Truth.


“I accept your conditions,” I said. “With one reservation on my part.”

“What reservation may that be?” he asked.

“It refers to the sealed letter,” I answered. “I require you to destroy
it unopened in my presence as soon as it is placed in your hands.”

My object in making this stipulation was simply to prevent him from
carrying away written evidence of the nature of my communication with
Pesca. The fact of my communication he would necessarily discover,
when I gave the address to his agent in the morning. But he could
make no use of it on his own unsupported testimony—even if he really
ventured to try the experiment—which need excite in me the slightest
apprehension on Pesca’s account.

“I grant your reservation,” he replied, after considering the question
gravely for a minute or two. “It is not worth dispute—the letter shall
be destroyed when it comes into my hands.”

He rose, as he spoke, from the chair in which he had been sitting
opposite to me up to this time. With one effort he appeared to free his
mind from the whole pressure on it of the interview between us thus
far. “Ouf!” he cried, stretching his arms luxuriously, “the skirmish
was hot while it lasted. Take a seat, Mr. Hartright. We meet as mortal
enemies hereafter—let us, like gallant gentlemen, exchange polite
attentions in the meantime. Permit me to take the liberty of calling
for my wife.”

He unlocked and opened the door. “Eleanor!” he called out in his
deep voice. The lady of the viperish face came in. “Madame Fosco—Mr.
Hartright,” said the Count, introducing us with easy dignity. “My
angel,” he went on, addressing his wife, “will your labours of packing
up allow you time to make me some nice strong coffee? I have writing
business to transact with Mr. Hartright—and I require the full
possession of my intelligence to do justice to myself.”

Madame Fosco bowed her head twice—once sternly to me, once submissively
to her husband, and glided out of the room.

The Count walked to a writing-table near the window, opened his desk,
and took from it several quires of paper and a bundle of quill pens.
He scattered the pens about the table, so that they might lie ready
in all directions to be taken up when wanted, and then cut the paper
into a heap of narrow slips, of the form used by professional writers
for the press. “I shall make this a remarkable document,” he said,
looking at me over his shoulder. “Habits of literary composition are
perfectly familiar to me. One of the rarest of all the intellectual
accomplishments that a man can possess is the grand faculty of
arranging his ideas. Immense privilege! I possess it. Do you?”

He marched backwards and forwards in the room, until the coffee
appeared, humming to himself, and marking the places at which obstacles
occurred in the arrangement of his ideas, by striking his forehead from
time to time with the palm of his hand. The enormous audacity with
which he seized on the situation in which I placed him, and made it the
pedestal on which his vanity mounted for the one cherished purpose of
self-display, mastered my astonishment by main force. Sincerely as I
loathed the man, the prodigious strength of his character, even in its
most trivial aspects, impressed me in spite of myself.

The coffee was brought in by Madame Fosco. He kissed her hand in
grateful acknowledgment, and escorted her to the door; returned, poured
out a cup of coffee for himself, and took it to the writing-table.

“May I offer you some coffee, Mr. Hartright?” he said, before he sat
down.

I declined.

“What! you think I shall poison you?” he said gaily. “The English
intellect is sound, so far as it goes,” he continued, seating himself
at the table; “but it has one grave defect—it is always cautious in the
wrong place.”

He dipped his pen in the ink, placed the first slip of paper before him
with a thump of his hand on the desk, cleared his throat, and began. He
wrote with great noise and rapidity, in so large and bold a hand, and
with such wide spaces between the lines, that he reached the bottom of
the slip in not more than two minutes certainly from the time when he
started at the top. Each slip as he finished it was paged, and tossed
over his shoulder out of his way on the floor. When his first pen was
worn out, THAT went over his shoulder too, and he pounced on a second
from the supply scattered about the table. Slip after slip, by dozens,
by fifties, by hundreds, flew over his shoulders on either side of him
till he had snowed himself up in paper all round his chair. Hour after
hour passed—and there I sat watching, there he sat writing. He never
stopped, except to sip his coffee, and when that was exhausted, to
smack his forehead from time to time. One o’clock struck, two, three,
four—and still the slips flew about all round him; still the untiring
pen scraped its way ceaselessly from top to bottom of the page, still
the white chaos of paper rose higher and higher all round his chair. At
four o’clock I heard a sudden splutter of the pen, indicative of the
flourish with which he signed his name. “Bravo!” he cried, springing to
his feet with the activity of a young man, and looking me straight in
the face with a smile of superb triumph.

“Done, Mr. Hartright!” he announced with a self-renovating thump of his
fist on his broad breast. “Done, to my own profound satisfaction—to
YOUR profound astonishment, when you read what I have written.
The subject is exhausted: the man—Fosco—is not. I proceed to the
arrangement of my slips—to the revision of my slips—to the reading
of my slips—addressed emphatically to your private ear. Four o’clock
has just struck. Good! Arrangement, revision, reading, from four to
five. Short snooze of restoration for myself from five to six. Final
preparations from six to seven. Affair of agent and sealed letter from
seven to eight. At eight, en route. Behold the programme!”

He sat down cross-legged on the floor among his papers, strung them
together with a bodkin and a piece of string—revised them, wrote all
the titles and honours by which he was personally distinguished at the
head of the first page, and then read the manuscript to me with loud
theatrical emphasis and profuse theatrical gesticulation. The reader
will have an opportunity, ere long, of forming his own opinion of the
document. It will be sufficient to mention here that it answered my
purpose.

He next wrote me the address of the person from whom he had hired the
fly, and handed me Sir Percival’s letter. It was dated from Hampshire
on the 25th of July, and it announced the journey of “Lady Glyde” to
London on the 26th. Thus, on the very day (the 25th) when the doctor’s
certificate declared that she had died in St. John’s Wood, she was
alive, by Sir Percival’s own showing, at Blackwater—and, on the day
after, she was to take a journey! When the proof of that journey was
obtained from the flyman, the evidence would be complete.

“A quarter-past five,” said the Count, looking at his watch. “Time for
my restorative snooze. I personally resemble Napoleon the Great, as
you may have remarked, Mr. Hartright—I also resemble that immortal man
in my power of commanding sleep at will. Excuse me one moment. I will
summon Madame Fosco, to keep you from feeling dull.”

Knowing as well as he did, that he was summoning Madame Fosco to
ensure my not leaving the house while he was asleep, I made no reply,
and occupied myself in tying up the papers which he had placed in my
possession.

The lady came in, cool, pale, and venomous as ever. “Amuse Mr.
Hartright, my angel,” said the Count. He placed a chair for her,
kissed her hand for the second time, withdrew to a sofa, and, in three
minutes, was as peacefully and happily asleep as the most virtuous man
in existence.

Madame Fosco took a book from the table, sat down, and looked at me,
with the steady vindictive malice of a woman who never forgot and never
forgave.

“I have been listening to your conversation with my husband,” she
said. “If I had been in HIS place—I would have laid you dead on the
hearthrug.”

With those words she opened her book, and never looked at me or spoke
to me from that time till the time when her husband woke.

He opened his eyes and rose from the sofa, accurately to an hour from
the time when he had gone to sleep.

“I feel infinitely refreshed,” he remarked. “Eleanor, my good wife,
are you all ready upstairs? That is well. My little packing here
can be completed in ten minutes—my travelling-dress assumed in ten
minutes more. What remains before the agent comes?” He looked about
the room, and noticed the cage with his white mice in it. “Ah!” he
cried piteously, “a last laceration of my sympathies still remains.
My innocent pets! my little cherished children! what am I to do with
them? For the present we are settled nowhere; for the present we travel
incessantly—the less baggage we carry the better for ourselves. My
cockatoo, my canaries, and my little mice—who will cherish them when
their good Papa is gone?”

He walked about the room deep in thought. He had not been at all
troubled about writing his confession, but he was visibly perplexed and
distressed about the far more important question of the disposal of
his pets. After long consideration he suddenly sat down again at the
writing-table.

“An idea!” he exclaimed. “I will offer my canaries and my cockatoo to
this vast Metropolis—my agent shall present them in my name to the
Zoological Gardens of London. The Document that describes them shall be
drawn out on the spot.”

He began to write, repeating the words as they flowed from his pen.

“Number one. Cockatoo of transcendent plumage: attraction, of himself,
to all visitors of taste. Number two. Canaries of unrivalled vivacity
and intelligence: worthy of the garden of Eden, worthy also of the
garden in the Regent’s Park. Homage to British Zoology. Offered by
Fosco.”

The pen spluttered again, and the flourish was attached to his
signature.

“Count! you have not included the mice,” said Madame Fosco.

He left the table, took her hand, and placed it on his heart.

“All human resolution, Eleanor,” he said solemnly, “has its limits.
MY limits are inscribed on that Document. I cannot part with my white
mice. Bear with me, my angel, and remove them to their travelling cage
upstairs.”

“Admirable tenderness!” said Madame Fosco, admiring her husband, with a
last viperish look in my direction. She took up the cage carefully, and
left the room.

The Count looked at his watch. In spite of his resolute assumption of
composure, he was getting anxious for the agent’s arrival. The candles
had long since been extinguished, and the sunlight of the new morning
poured into the room. It was not till five minutes past seven that the
gate bell rang, and the agent made his appearance. He was a foreigner
with a dark beard.

“Mr. Hartright—Monsieur Rubelle,” said the Count, introducing us. He
took the agent (a foreign spy, in every line of his face, if ever there
was one yet) into a corner of the room, whispered some directions to
him, and then left us together. “Monsieur Rubelle,” as soon as we
were alone, suggested with great politeness that I should favour him
with his instructions. I wrote two lines to Pesca, authorising him to
deliver my sealed letter “to the bearer,” directed the note, and handed
it to Monsieur Rubelle.

The agent waited with me till his employer returned, equipped in
travelling costume. The Count examined the address of my letter before
he dismissed the agent. “I thought so!” he said, turning on me with a
dark look, and altering again in his manner from that moment.

He completed his packing, and then sat consulting a travelling map,
making entries in his pocket-book, and looking every now and then
impatiently at his watch. Not another word, addressed to myself, passed
his lips. The near approach of the hour for his departure, and the
proof he had seen of the communication established between Pesca and
myself, had plainly recalled his whole attention to the measures that
were necessary for securing his escape.

A little before eight o’clock, Monsieur Rubelle came back with my
unopened letter in his hand. The Count looked carefully at the
superscription and the seal, lit a candle, and burnt the letter. “I
perform my promise,” he said, “but this matter, Mr. Hartright, shall
not end here.”

The agent had kept at the door the cab in which he had returned. He and
the maid-servant now busied themselves in removing the luggage. Madame
Fosco came downstairs, thickly veiled, with the travelling cage of the
white mice in her hand. She neither spoke to me nor looked towards me.
Her husband escorted her to the cab. “Follow me as far as the passage,”
he whispered in my ear; “I may want to speak to you at the last moment.”

I went out to the door, the agent standing below me in the front
garden. The Count came back alone, and drew me a few steps inside the
passage.

“Remember the Third condition!” he whispered. “You shall hear from me,
Mr. Hartright—I may claim from you the satisfaction of a gentleman
sooner than you think for.” He caught my hand before I was aware of
him, and wrung it hard—then turned to the door, stopped, and came back
to me again.

“One word more,” he said confidentially. “When I last saw Miss
Halcombe, she looked thin and ill. I am anxious about that admirable
woman. Take care of her, sir! With my hand on my heart, I solemnly
implore you, take care of Miss Halcombe!”

Those were the last words he said to me before he squeezed his huge
body into the cab and drove off.

The agent and I waited at the door a few moments looking after him.
While we were standing together, a second cab appeared from a turning a
little way down the road. It followed the direction previously taken by
the Count’s cab, and as it passed the house and the open garden gate, a
person inside looked at us out of the window. The stranger at the Opera
again!—the foreigner with a scar on his left cheek.


“You wait here with me, sir, for half an hour more!” said Monsieur
Rubelle.

“I do.”

We returned to the sitting-room. I was in no humour to speak to the
agent, or to allow him to speak to me. I took out the papers which
the Count had placed in my hands, and read the terrible story of the
conspiracy told by the man who had planned and perpetrated it.




THE STORY CONTINUED BY ISIDOR, OTTAVIO, BALDASSARE FOSCO

(Count of the Holy Roman Empire, Knight Grand Cross of the Order of
the Brazen Crown, Perpetual Arch-Master of the Rosicrucian Masons of
Mesopotamia; Attached (in Honorary Capacities) to Societies Musical,
Societies Medical, Societies Philosophical, and Societies General
Benevolent, throughout Europe; etc. etc. etc.)




THE COUNT’S NARRATIVE

In the summer of eighteen hundred and fifty I arrived in England,
charged with a delicate political mission from abroad. Confidential
persons were semi-officially connected with me, whose exertions I was
authorised to direct, Monsieur and Madame Rubelle being among the
number. Some weeks of spare time were at my disposal, before I entered
on my functions by establishing myself in the suburbs of London.
Curiosity may stop here to ask for some explanation of those functions
on my part. I entirely sympathise with the request. I also regret that
diplomatic reserve forbids me to comply with it.

I arranged to pass the preliminary period of repose, to which I have
just referred, in the superb mansion of my late lamented friend,
Sir Percival Glyde. HE arrived from the Continent with his wife. I
arrived from the Continent with MINE. England is the land of domestic
happiness—how appropriately we entered it under these domestic
circumstances!

The bond of friendship which united Percival and myself was
strengthened, on this occasion, by a touching similarity in the
pecuniary position on his side and on mine. We both wanted money.
Immense necessity! Universal want! Is there a civilised human being who
does not feel for us? How insensible must that man be! Or how rich!

I enter into no sordid particulars, in discussing this part of the
subject. My mind recoils from them. With a Roman austerity, I show my
empty purse and Percival’s to the shrinking public gaze. Let us allow
the deplorable fact to assert itself, once for all, in that manner, and
pass on.

We were received at the mansion by the magnificent creature who
is inscribed on my heart as “Marian,” who is known in the colder
atmosphere of society as “Miss Halcombe.”

Just Heaven! with what inconceivable rapidity I learnt to adore that
woman. At sixty, I worshipped her with the volcanic ardour of eighteen.
All the gold of my rich nature was poured hopelessly at her feet. My
wife—poor angel!—my wife, who adores me, got nothing but the shillings
and the pennies. Such is the World, such Man, such Love. What are we
(I ask) but puppets in a show-box? Oh, omnipotent Destiny, pull our
strings gently! Dance us mercifully off our miserable little stage!

The preceding lines, rightly understood, express an entire system of
philosophy. It is mine.

I resume.


The domestic position at the commencement of our residence at
Blackwater Park has been drawn with amazing accuracy, with profound
mental insight, by the hand of Marian herself. (Pass me the
intoxicating familiarity of mentioning this sublime creature by her
Christian name.) Accurate knowledge of the contents of her journal—to
which I obtained access by clandestine means, unspeakably precious
to me in the remembrance—warns my eager pen from topics which this
essentially exhaustive woman has already made her own.

The interests—interests, breathless and immense!—with which I am here
concerned, begin with the deplorable calamity of Marian’s illness.

The situation at this period was emphatically a serious one. Large
sums of money, due at a certain time, were wanted by Percival (I say
nothing of the modicum equally necessary to myself), and the one source
to look to for supplying them was the fortune of his wife, of which
not one farthing was at his disposal until her death. Bad so far, and
worse still farther on. My lamented friend had private troubles of
his own, into which the delicacy of my disinterested attachment to
him forbade me from inquiring too curiously. I knew nothing but that
a woman, named Anne Catherick, was hidden in the neighbourhood, that
she was in communication with Lady Glyde, and that the disclosure of
a secret, which would be the certain ruin of Percival, might be the
result. He had told me himself that he was a lost man, unless his wife
was silenced, and unless Anne Catherick was found. If he was a lost
man, what would become of our pecuniary interests? Courageous as I am
by nature, I absolutely trembled at the idea!

The whole force of my intelligence was now directed to the finding of
Anne Catherick. Our money affairs, important as they were, admitted of
delay—but the necessity of discovering the woman admitted of none. I
only knew her by description, as presenting an extraordinary personal
resemblance to Lady Glyde. The statement of this curious fact—intended
merely to assist me in identifying the person of whom we were in
search—when coupled with the additional information that Anne Catherick
had escaped from a mad-house, started the first immense conception
in my mind, which subsequently led to such amazing results. That
conception involved nothing less than the complete transformation of
two separate identities. Lady Glyde and Anne Catherick were to change
names, places, and destinies, the one with the other—the prodigious
consequences contemplated by the change being the gain of thirty
thousand pounds, and the eternal preservation of Sir Percival’s secret.

My instincts (which seldom err) suggested to me, on reviewing the
circumstances, that our invisible Anne would, sooner or later, return
to the boat-house at the Blackwater lake. There I posted myself,
previously mentioning to Mrs. Michelson, the housekeeper, that I might
be found when wanted, immersed in study, in that solitary place. It is
my rule never to make unnecessary mysteries, and never to set people
suspecting me for want of a little seasonable candour on my part. Mrs.
Michelson believed in me from first to last. This ladylike person
(widow of a Protestant priest) overflowed with faith. Touched by such
superfluity of simple confidence in a woman of her mature years, I
opened the ample reservoirs of my nature and absorbed it all.

I was rewarded for posting myself sentinel at the lake by the
appearance—not of Anne Catherick herself, but of the person in charge
of her. This individual also overflowed with simple faith, which I
absorbed in myself, as in the case already mentioned. I leave her to
describe the circumstances (if she has not done so already) under which
she introduced me to the object of her maternal care. When I first
saw Anne Catherick she was asleep. I was electrified by the likeness
between this unhappy woman and Lady Glyde. The details of the grand
scheme which had suggested themselves in outline only, up to that
period, occurred to me, in all their masterly combination, at the sight
of the sleeping face. At the same time, my heart, always accessible to
tender influences, dissolved in tears at the spectacle of suffering
before me. I instantly set myself to impart relief. In other words, I
provided the necessary stimulant for strengthening Anne Catherick to
perform the journey to London.


The best years of my life have been passed in the ardent study of
medical and chemical science. Chemistry especially has always had
irresistible attractions for me from the enormous, the illimitable
power which the knowledge of it confers. Chemists—I assert it
emphatically—might sway, if they pleased, the destinies of humanity.
Let me explain this before I go further.

Mind, they say, rules the world. But what rules the mind? The body
(follow me closely here) lies at the mercy of the most omnipotent
of all potentates—the Chemist. Give me—Fosco—chemistry; and when
Shakespeare has conceived Hamlet, and sits down to execute the
conception—with a few grains of powder dropped into his daily food, I
will reduce his mind, by the action of his body, till his pen pours
out the most abject drivel that has ever degraded paper. Under similar
circumstances, revive me the illustrious Newton. I guarantee that
when he sees the apple fall he shall EAT IT, instead of discovering
the principle of gravitation. Nero’s dinner shall transform Nero
into the mildest of men before he has done digesting it, and the
morning draught of Alexander the Great shall make Alexander run for
his life at the first sight of the enemy the same afternoon. On my
sacred word of honour it is lucky for Society that modern chemists
are, by incomprehensible good fortune, the most harmless of mankind.
The mass are worthy fathers of families, who keep shops. The few are
philosophers besotted with admiration for the sound of their own
lecturing voices, visionaries who waste their lives on fantastic
impossibilities, or quacks whose ambition soars no higher than our
corns. Thus Society escapes, and the illimitable power of Chemistry
remains the slave of the most superficial and the most insignificant
ends.

Why this outburst? Why this withering eloquence?

Because my conduct has been misrepresented, because my motives have
been misunderstood. It has been assumed that I used my vast chemical
resources against Anne Catherick, and that I would have used them if
I could against the magnificent Marian herself. Odious insinuations
both! All my interests were concerned (as will be seen presently)
in the preservation of Anne Catherick’s life. All my anxieties were
concentrated on Marian’s rescue from the hands of the licensed
imbecile who attended her, and who found my advice confirmed from
first to last by the physician from London. On two occasions only—both
equally harmless to the individual on whom I practised—did I summon
to myself the assistance of chemical knowledge. On the first of the
two, after following Marian to the inn at Blackwater (studying, behind
a convenient waggon which hid me from her, the poetry of motion,
as embodied in her walk), I availed myself of the services of my
invaluable wife, to copy one and to intercept the other of two letters
which my adored enemy had entrusted to a discarded maid. In this case,
the letters being in the bosom of the girl’s dress, Madame Fosco
could only open them, read them, perform her instructions, seal them,
and put them back again by scientific assistance—which assistance I
rendered in a half-ounce bottle. The second occasion, when the same
means were employed, was the occasion (to which I shall soon refer) of
Lady Glyde’s arrival in London. Never at any other time was I indebted
to my Art as distinguished from myself. To all other emergencies
and complications my natural capacity for grappling, single-handed,
with circumstances, was invariably equal. I affirm the all-pervading
intelligence of that capacity. At the expense of the Chemist I
vindicate the Man.

Respect this outburst of generous indignation. It has inexpressibly
relieved me. En route! Let us proceed.


Having suggested to Mrs. Clement (or Clements, I am not sure which)
that the best method of keeping Anne out of Percival’s reach was
to remove her to London—having found that my proposal was eagerly
received, and having appointed a day to meet the travellers at the
station and to see them leave it, I was at liberty to return to the
house and to confront the difficulties which still remained to be met.

My first proceeding was to avail myself of the sublime devotion of my
wife. I had arranged with Mrs. Clements that she should communicate
her London address, in Anne’s interests, to Lady Glyde. But this was
not enough. Designing persons in my absence might shake the simple
confidence of Mrs. Clements, and she might not write after all. Who
could I find capable of travelling to London by the train she travelled
by, and of privately seeing her home? I asked myself this question. The
conjugal part of me immediately answered—Madame Fosco.

After deciding on my wife’s mission to London, I arranged that the
journey should serve a double purpose. A nurse for the suffering
Marian, equally devoted to the patient and to myself, was a necessity
of my position. One of the most eminently confidential and capable
women in existence was by good fortune at my disposal. I refer to that
respectable matron, Madame Rubelle, to whom I addressed a letter, at
her residence in London, by the hands of my wife.

On the appointed day Mrs. Clements and Anne Catherick met me at the
station. I politely saw them off, I politely saw Madame Fosco off by
the same train. The last thing at night my wife returned to Blackwater,
having followed her instructions with the most unimpeachable accuracy.
She was accompanied by Madame Rubelle, and she brought me the London
address of Mrs. Clements. After-events proved this last precaution to
have been unnecessary. Mrs. Clements punctually informed Lady Glyde of
her place of abode. With a wary eye on future emergencies, I kept the
letter.

The same day I had a brief interview with the doctor, at which I
protested, in the sacred interests of humanity, against his treatment
of Marian’s case. He was insolent, as all ignorant people are. I showed
no resentment, I deferred quarrelling with him till it was necessary
to quarrel to some purpose. My next proceeding was to leave Blackwater
myself. I had my London residence to take in anticipation of coming
events. I had also a little business of the domestic sort to transact
with Mr. Frederick Fairlie. I found the house I wanted in St. John’s
Wood. I found Mr. Fairlie at Limmeridge, Cumberland.

My own private familiarity with the nature of Marian’s correspondence
had previously informed me that she had written to Mr. Fairlie,
proposing, as a relief to Lady Glyde’s matrimonial embarrassments,
to take her on a visit to her uncle in Cumberland. This letter I had
wisely allowed to reach its destination, feeling at the time that it
could do no harm, and might do good. I now presented myself before Mr.
Fairlie to support Marian’s own proposal—with certain modifications
which, happily for the success of my plans, were rendered really
inevitable by her illness. It was necessary that Lady Glyde should
leave Blackwater alone, by her uncle’s invitation, and that she should
rest a night on the journey at her aunt’s house (the house I had in St.
John’s Wood) by her uncle’s express advice. To achieve these results,
and to secure a note of invitation which could be shown to Lady Glyde,
were the objects of my visit to Mr. Fairlie. When I have mentioned that
this gentleman was equally feeble in mind and body, and that I let
loose the whole force of my character on him, I have said enough. I
came, saw, and conquered Fairlie.

On my return to Blackwater Park (with the letter of invitation) I found
that the doctor’s imbecile treatment of Marian’s case had led to the
most alarming results. The fever had turned to typhus. Lady Glyde, on
the day of my return, tried to force herself into the room to nurse her
sister. She and I had no affinities of sympathy—she had committed the
unpardonable outrage on my sensibilities of calling me a spy—she was
a stumbling-block in my way and in Percival’s—but, for all that, my
magnanimity forbade me to put her in danger of infection with my own
hand. At the same time I offered no hindrance to her putting herself
in danger. If she had succeeded in doing so, the intricate knot which
I was slowly and patiently operating on might perhaps have been cut by
circumstances. As it was, the doctor interfered and she was kept out of
the room.

I had myself previously recommended sending for advice to London. This
course had been now taken. The physician, on his arrival, confirmed
my view of the case. The crisis was serious. But we had hope of our
charming patient on the fifth day from the appearance of the typhus. I
was only once absent from Blackwater at this time—when I went to London
by the morning train to make the final arrangements at my house in St.
John’s Wood, to assure myself by private inquiry that Mrs. Clements
had not moved, and to settle one or two little preliminary matters
with the husband of Madame Rubelle. I returned at night. Five days
afterwards the physician pronounced our interesting Marian to be out of
all danger, and to be in need of nothing but careful nursing. This was
the time I had waited for. Now that medical attendance was no longer
indispensable, I played the first move in the game by asserting myself
against the doctor. He was one among many witnesses in my way whom it
was necessary to remove. A lively altercation between us (in which
Percival, previously instructed by me, refused to interfere) served the
purpose in view. I descended on the miserable man in an irresistible
avalanche of indignation, and swept him from the house.

The servants were the next encumbrances to get rid of. Again
I instructed Percival (whose moral courage required perpetual
stimulants), and Mrs. Michelson was amazed, one day, by hearing from
her master that the establishment was to be broken up. We cleared the
house of all the servants but one, who was kept for domestic purposes,
and whose lumpish stupidity we could trust to make no embarrassing
discoveries. When they were gone, nothing remained but to relieve
ourselves of Mrs. Michelson—a result which was easily achieved by
sending this amiable lady to find lodgings for her mistress at the
sea-side.

The circumstances were now exactly what they were required to be. Lady
Glyde was confined to her room by nervous illness, and the lumpish
housemaid (I forget her name) was shut up there at night in attendance
on her mistress. Marian, though fast recovering, still kept her bed,
with Mrs. Rubelle for nurse. No other living creatures but my wife,
myself, and Percival were in the house. With all the chances thus in
our favour I confronted the next emergency, and played the second move
in the game.

The object of the second move was to induce Lady Glyde to leave
Blackwater unaccompanied by her sister. Unless we could persuade her
that Marian had gone on to Cumberland first, there was no chance of
removing her, of her own free will, from the house. To produce this
necessary operation in her mind, we concealed our interesting invalid
in one of the uninhabited bedrooms at Blackwater. At the dead of
night Madame Fosco, Madame Rubelle, and myself (Percival not being
cool enough to be trusted) accomplished the concealment. The scene
was picturesque, mysterious, dramatic in the highest degree. By my
directions the bed had been made, in the morning, on a strong movable
framework of wood. We had only to lift the framework gently at the
head and foot, and to transport our patient where we pleased, without
disturbing herself or her bed. No chemical assistance was needed or
used in this case. Our interesting Marian lay in the deep repose of
convalescence. We placed the candles and opened the doors beforehand.
I, in right of my great personal strength, took the head of the
framework—my wife and Madame Rubelle took the foot. I bore my share
of that inestimably precious burden with a manly tenderness, with a
fatherly care. Where is the modern Rembrandt who could depict our
midnight procession? Alas for the Arts! alas for this most pictorial of
subjects! The modern Rembrandt is nowhere to be found.

The next morning my wife and I started for London, leaving Marian
secluded, in the uninhabited middle of the house, under care of Madame
Rubelle, who kindly consented to imprison herself with her patient for
two or three days. Before taking our departure I gave Percival Mr.
Fairlie’s letter of invitation to his niece (instructing her to sleep
on the journey to Cumberland at her aunt’s house), with directions to
show it to Lady Glyde on hearing from me. I also obtained from him the
address of the Asylum in which Anne Catherick had been confined, and a
letter to the proprietor, announcing to that gentleman the return of
his runaway patient to medical care.

I had arranged, at my last visit to the metropolis, to have our modest
domestic establishment ready to receive us when we arrived in London
by the early train. In consequence of this wise precaution, we were
enabled that same day to play the third move in the game—the getting
possession of Anne Catherick.

Dates are of importance here. I combine in myself the opposite
characteristics of a Man of Sentiment and a Man of Business. I have all
the dates at my fingers’ ends.

On Wednesday, the 24th of July 1850, I sent my wife in a cab to clear
Mrs. Clements out of the way, in the first place. A supposed message
from Lady Glyde in London was sufficient to obtain this result. Mrs.
Clements was taken away in the cab, and was left in the cab, while my
wife (on pretence of purchasing something at a shop) gave her the slip,
and returned to receive her expected visitor at our house in St. John’s
Wood. It is hardly necessary to add that the visitor had been described
to the servants as “Lady Glyde.”

In the meanwhile I had followed in another cab, with a note for Anne
Catherick, merely mentioning that Lady Glyde intended to keep Mrs.
Clements to spend the day with her, and that she was to join them under
care of the good gentleman waiting outside, who had already saved her
from discovery in Hampshire by Sir Percival. The “good gentleman”
sent in this note by a street boy, and paused for results a door or
two farther on. At the moment when Anne appeared at the house door
and closed it this excellent man had the cab door open ready for her,
absorbed her into the vehicle, and drove off.

(Pass me, here, one exclamation in parenthesis. How interesting this
is!)

On the way to Forest Road my companion showed no fear. I can be
paternal—no man more so—when I please, and I was intensely paternal on
this occasion. What titles I had to her confidence! I had compounded
the medicine which had done her good—I had warned her of her danger
from Sir Percival. Perhaps I trusted too implicitly to these
titles—perhaps I underrated the keenness of the lower instincts in
persons of weak intellect—it is certain that I neglected to prepare her
sufficiently for a disappointment on entering my house. When I took her
into the drawing-room—when she saw no one present but Madame Fosco,
who was a stranger to her—she exhibited the most violent agitation;
if she had scented danger in the air, as a dog scents the presence
of some creature unseen, her alarm could not have displayed itself
more suddenly and more causelessly. I interposed in vain. The fear
from which she was suffering I might have soothed, but the serious
heart-disease, under which she laboured, was beyond the reach of
all moral palliatives. To my unspeakable horror she was seized with
convulsions—a shock to the system, in her condition, which might have
laid her dead at any moment at our feet.

The nearest doctor was sent for, and was told that “Lady Glyde”
required his immediate services. To my infinite relief, he was a
capable man. I represented my visitor to him as a person of weak
intellect, and subject to delusions, and I arranged that no nurse but
my wife should watch in the sick-room. The unhappy woman was too ill,
however, to cause any anxiety about what she might say. The one dread
which now oppressed me was the dread that the false Lady Glyde might
die before the true Lady Glyde arrived in London.

I had written a note in the morning to Madame Rubelle, telling her to
join me at her husband’s house on the evening of Friday the 26th, with
another note to Percival, warning him to show his wife her uncle’s
letter of invitation, to assert that Marian had gone on before her,
and to despatch her to town by the midday train, on the 26th, also.
On reflection I had felt the necessity, in Anne Catherick’s state
of health, of precipitating events, and of having Lady Glyde at my
disposal earlier than I had originally contemplated. What fresh
directions, in the terrible uncertainty of my position, could I now
issue? I could do nothing but trust to chance and the doctor. My
emotions expressed themselves in pathetic apostrophes, which I was
just self-possessed enough to couple, in the hearing of other people,
with the name of “Lady Glyde.” In all other respects Fosco, on that
memorable day, was Fosco shrouded in total eclipse.

She passed a bad night, she awoke worn out, but later in the day she
revived amazingly. My elastic spirits revived with her. I could receive
no answers from Percival and Madame Rubelle till the morning of the
next day, the 26th. In anticipation of their following my directions,
which, accident apart, I knew they would do, I went to secure a fly to
fetch Lady Glyde from the railway, directing it to be at my house on
the 26th, at two o’clock. After seeing the order entered in the book,
I went on to arrange matters with Monsieur Rubelle. I also procured
the services of two gentlemen who could furnish me with the necessary
certificates of lunacy. One of them I knew personally—the other was
known to Monsieur Rubelle. Both were men whose vigorous minds soared
superior to narrow scruples—both were labouring under temporary
embarrassments—both believed in ME.

It was past five o’clock in the afternoon before I returned from the
performance of these duties. When I got back Anne Catherick was dead.
Dead on the 25th, and Lady Glyde was not to arrive in London till the
26th!

I was stunned. Meditate on that. Fosco stunned!

It was too late to retrace our steps. Before my return the doctor
had officiously undertaken to save me all trouble by registering the
death, on the date when it happened, with his own hand. My grand
scheme, unassailable hitherto, had its weak place now—no efforts on
my part could alter the fatal event of the 25th. I turned manfully
to the future. Percival’s interests and mine being still at stake,
nothing was left but to play the game through to the end. I recalled my
impenetrable calm—and played it.

On the morning of the 26th Percival’s letter reached me, announcing
his wife’s arrival by the midday train. Madame Rubelle also wrote to
say she would follow in the evening. I started in the fly, leaving the
false Lady Glyde dead in the house, to receive the true Lady Glyde on
her arrival by the railway at three o’clock. Hidden under the seat of
the carriage, I carried with me all the clothes Anne Catherick had worn
on coming into my house—they were destined to assist the resurrection
of the woman who was dead in the person of the woman who was living.
What a situation! I suggest it to the rising romance writers of
England. I offer it, as totally new, to the worn-out dramatists of
France.

Lady Glyde was at the station. There was great crowding and confusion,
and more delay than I liked (in case any of her friends had happened
to be on the spot), in reclaiming her luggage. Her first questions, as
we drove off, implored me to tell her news of her sister. I invented
news of the most pacifying kind, assuring her that she was about to
see her sister at my house. My house, on this occasion only, was in
the neighbourhood of Leicester Square, and was in the occupation of
Monsieur Rubelle, who received us in the hall.

I took my visitor upstairs into a back room, the two medical gentlemen
being there in waiting on the floor beneath to see the patient, and to
give me their certificates. After quieting Lady Glyde by the necessary
assurances about her sister, I introduced my friends separately to
her presence. They performed the formalities of the occasion briefly,
intelligently, conscientiously. I entered the room again as soon as
they had left it, and at once precipitated events by a reference of the
alarming kind to “Miss Halcombe’s” state of health.

Results followed as I had anticipated. Lady Glyde became frightened,
and turned faint. For the second time, and the last, I called Science
to my assistance. A medicated glass of water and a medicated bottle
of smelling-salts relieved her of all further embarrassment and
alarm. Additional applications later in the evening procured her the
inestimable blessing of a good night’s rest. Madame Rubelle arrived
in time to preside at Lady Glyde’s toilet. Her own clothes were taken
away from her at night, and Anne Catherick’s were put on her in the—
morning, with the strictest regard to propriety, by the matronly hands
of the good Rubelle. Throughout the day I kept our patient in a state
of partially-suspended consciousness, until the dexterous assistance
of my medical friends enabled me to procure the necessary order rather
earlier than I had ventured to hope. That evening (the evening of the
27th) Madame Rubelle and I took our revived “Anne Catherick” to the
Asylum. She was received with great surprise, but without suspicion,
thanks to the order and certificates, to Percival’s letter, to the
likeness, to the clothes, and to the patient’s own confused mental
condition at the time. I returned at once to assist Madame Fosco in
the preparations for the burial of the False “Lady Glyde,” having the
clothes and luggage of the true “Lady Glyde” in my possession. They
were afterwards sent to Cumberland by the conveyance which was used for
the funeral. I attended the funeral, with becoming dignity, attired in
the deepest mourning.


My narrative of these remarkable events, written under equally
remarkable circumstances, closes here. The minor precautions which I
observed in communicating with Limmeridge House are already known—so
is the magnificent success of my enterprise—so are the solid pecuniary
results which followed it. I have to assert, with the whole force
of my conviction, that the one weak place in my scheme would never
have been found out if the one weak place in my heart had not been
discovered first. Nothing but my fatal admiration for Marian restrained
me from stepping in to my own rescue when she effected her sister’s
escape. I ran the risk, and trusted in the complete destruction of
Lady Glyde’s identity. If either Marian or Mr. Hartright attempted to
assert that identity, they would publicly expose themselves to the
imputation of sustaining a rank deception, they would be distrusted
and discredited accordingly, and they would therefore be powerless to
place my interests or Percival’s secret in jeopardy. I committed one
error in trusting myself to such a blindfold calculation of chances as
this. I committed another when Percival had paid the penalty of his
own obstinacy and violence, by granting Lady Glyde a second reprieve
from the mad-house, and allowing Mr. Hartright a second chance of
escaping me. In brief, Fosco, at this serious crisis, was untrue to
himself. Deplorable and uncharacteristic fault! Behold the cause, in
my heart—behold, in the image of Marian Halcombe, the first and last
weakness of Fosco’s life!

At the ripe age of sixty, I make this unparalleled confession. Youths!
I invoke your sympathy. Maidens! I claim your tears.

A word more, and the attention of the reader (concentrated breathlessly
on myself) shall be released.

My own mental insight informs me that three inevitable questions will
be asked here by persons of inquiring minds. They shall be stated—they
shall be answered.

First question. What is the secret of Madame Fosco’s unhesitating
devotion of herself to the fulfilment of my boldest wishes, to the
furtherance of my deepest plans? I might answer this by simply
referring to my own character, and by asking, in my turn, Where, in the
history of the world, has a man of my order ever been found without a
woman in the background self-immolated on the altar of his life? But I
remember that I am writing in England, I remember that I was married in
England, and I ask if a woman’s marriage obligations in this country
provide for her private opinion of her husband’s principles? No! They
charge her unreservedly to love, honour, and obey him. That is exactly
what my wife has done. I stand here on a supreme moral elevation, and
I loftily assert her accurate performance of her conjugal duties.
Silence, Calumny! Your sympathy, Wives of England, for Madame Fosco!

Second question. If Anne Catherick had not died when she did, what
should I have done? I should, in that case, have assisted worn-out
Nature in finding permanent repose. I should have opened the doors
of the Prison of Life, and have extended to the captive (incurably
afflicted in mind and body both) a happy release.

Third question. On a calm revision of all the circumstances—Is my
conduct worthy of any serious blame? Most emphatically, No! Have I
not carefully avoided exposing myself to the odium of committing
unnecessary crime? With my vast resources in chemistry, I might have
taken Lady Glyde’s life. At immense personal sacrifice I followed the
dictates of my own ingenuity, my own humanity, my own caution, and
took her identity instead. Judge me by what I might have done. How
comparatively innocent! how indirectly virtuous I appear in what I
really did!

I announced on beginning it that this narrative would be a remarkable
document. It has entirely answered my expectations. Receive these
fervid lines—my last legacy to the country I leave for ever. They are
worthy of the occasion, and worthy of
                                      FOSCO.




THE STORY CONCLUDED BY WALTER HARTRIGHT




I

When I closed the last leaf of the Count’s manuscript the half-hour
during which I had engaged to remain at Forest Road had expired.
Monsieur Rubelle looked at his watch and bowed. I rose immediately,
and left the agent in possession of the empty house. I never saw him
again—I never heard more of him or of his wife. Out of the dark byways
of villainy and deceit they had crawled across our path—into the same
byways they crawled back secretly and were lost.

In a quarter of an hour after leaving Forest Road I was at home again.

But few words sufficed to tell Laura and Marian how my desperate
venture had ended, and what the next event in our lives was likely to
be. I left all details to be described later in the day, and hastened
back to St. John’s Wood, to see the person of whom Count Fosco had
ordered the fly, when he went to meet Laura at the station.

The address in my possession led me to some “livery stables,” about a
quarter of a mile distant from Forest Road. The proprietor proved to be
a civil and respectable man. When I explained that an important family
matter obliged me to ask him to refer to his books for the purpose of
ascertaining a date with which the record of his business transactions
might supply me, he offered no objection to granting my request. The
book was produced, and there, under the date of “July 26th, 1850,” the
order was entered in these words—

“Brougham to Count Fosco, 5 Forest Road. Two o’clock. (John Owen).”

I found on inquiry that the name of “John Owen,” attached to the entry,
referred to the man who had been employed to drive the fly. He was then
at work in the stable-yard, and was sent for to see me at my request.

“Do you remember driving a gentleman, in the month of July last, from
Number Five Forest Road to the Waterloo Bridge station?” I asked.

“Well, sir,” said the man, “I can’t exactly say I do.”

“Perhaps you remember the gentleman himself? Can you call to mind
driving a foreigner last summer—a tall gentleman and remarkably fat?”

The man’s face brightened directly. “I remember him, sir! The fattest
gentleman as ever I see, and the heaviest customer as ever I drove.
Yes, yes—I call him to mind, sir! We DID go to the station, and it WAS
from Forest Road. There was a parrot, or summat like it, screeching
in the window. The gentleman was in a mortal hurry about the lady’s
luggage, and he gave me a handsome present for looking sharp and
getting the boxes.”

Getting the boxes! I recollected immediately that Laura’s own account
of herself on her arrival in London described her luggage as being
collected for her by some person whom Count Fosco brought with him to
the station. This was the man.

“Did you see the lady?” I asked. “What did she look like? Was she young
or old?”

“Well, sir, what with the hurry and the crowd of people pushing about,
I can’t rightly say what the lady looked like. I can’t call nothing to
mind about her that I know of excepting her name.”

“You remember her name?”

“Yes, sir. Her name was Lady Glyde.”

“How do you come to remember that, when you have forgotten what she
looked like?”

The man smiled, and shifted his feet in some little embarrassment.

“Why, to tell you the truth, sir,” he said, “I hadn’t been long married
at that time, and my wife’s name, before she changed it for mine,
was the same as the lady’s—meaning the name of Glyde, sir. The lady
mentioned it herself. ‘Is your name on your boxes, ma’am?’ says I.
‘Yes,’ says she, ‘my name is on my luggage—it is Lady Glyde.’ ‘Come!’ I
says to myself, ‘I’ve a bad head for gentlefolks’ names in general—but
THIS one comes like an old friend, at any rate.’ I can’t say nothing
about the time, sir, it might be nigh on a year ago, or it mightn’t.
But I can swear to the stout gentleman, and swear to the lady’s name.”

There was no need that he should remember the time—the date was
positively established by his master’s order-book. I felt at once that
the means were now in my power of striking down the whole conspiracy at
a blow with the irresistible weapon of plain fact. Without a moment’s
hesitation, I took the proprietor of the livery stables aside and told
him what the real importance was of the evidence of his order-book and
the evidence of his driver. An arrangement to compensate him for the
temporary loss of the man’s services was easily made, and a copy of the
entry in the book was taken by myself, and certified as true by the
master’s own signature. I left the livery stables, having settled that
John Owen was to hold himself at my disposal for the next three days,
or for a longer period if necessity required it.

I now had in my possession all the papers that I wanted—the district
registrar’s own copy of the certificate of death, and Sir Percival’s
dated letter to the Count, being safe in my pocket-book.

With this written evidence about me, and with the coachman’s answers
fresh in my memory, I next turned my steps, for the first time since
the beginning of all my inquiries, in the direction of Mr. Kyrle’s
office. One of my objects in paying him this second visit was,
necessarily, to tell him what I had done. The other was to warn him
of my resolution to take my wife to Limmeridge the next morning, and
to have her publicly received and recognised in her uncle’s house. I
left it to Mr. Kyrle to decide under these circumstances, and in Mr.
Gilmore’s absence, whether he was or was not bound, as the family
solicitor, to be present on that occasion in the family interests.

I will say nothing of Mr. Kyrle’s amazement, or of the terms in which
he expressed his opinion of my conduct from the first stage of the
investigation to the last. It is only necessary to mention that he at
once decided on accompanying us to Cumberland.

We started the next morning by the early train. Laura, Marian, Mr.
Kyrle, and myself in one carriage, and John Owen, with a clerk from Mr.
Kyrle’s office, occupying places in another. On reaching the Limmeridge
station we went first to the farmhouse at Todd’s Corner. It was my
firm determination that Laura should not enter her uncle’s house till
she appeared there publicly recognised as his niece. I left Marian to
settle the question of accommodation with Mrs. Todd, as soon as the
good woman had recovered from the bewilderment of hearing what our
errand was in Cumberland, and I arranged with her husband that John
Owen was to be committed to the ready hospitality of the farm-servants.
These preliminaries completed, Mr. Kyrle and I set forth together for
Limmeridge House.

I cannot write at any length of our interview with Mr. Fairlie, for I
cannot recall it to mind without feelings of impatience and contempt,
which make the scene, even in remembrance only, utterly repulsive to
me. I prefer to record simply that I carried my point. Mr. Fairlie
attempted to treat us on his customary plan. We passed without notice
his polite insolence at the outset of the interview. We heard without
sympathy the protestations with which he tried next to persuade us that
the disclosure of the conspiracy had overwhelmed him. He absolutely
whined and whimpered at last like a fretful child. “How was he to know
that his niece was alive when he was told that she was dead? He would
welcome dear Laura with pleasure, if we would only allow him time to
recover. Did we think he looked as if he wanted hurrying into his
grave? No. Then, why hurry him?” He reiterated these remonstrances at
every available opportunity, until I checked them once for all, by
placing him firmly between two inevitable alternatives. I gave him
his choice between doing his niece justice on my terms, or facing the
consequence of a public assertion of her existence in a court of law.
Mr. Kyrle, to whom he turned for help, told him plainly that he must
decide the question then and there. Characteristically choosing the
alternative which promised soonest to release him from all personal
anxiety, he announced with a sudden outburst of energy, that he was not
strong enough to bear any more bullying, and that we might do as we
pleased.

Mr. Kyrle and I at once went downstairs, and agreed upon a form of
letter which was to be sent round to the tenants who had attended the
false funeral, summoning them, in Mr. Fairlie’s name, to assemble
in Limmeridge House on the next day but one. An order referring to
the same date was also written, directing a statuary in Carlisle
to send a man to Limmeridge churchyard for the purpose of erasing
an inscription—Mr. Kyrle, who had arranged to sleep in the house,
undertaking that Mr. Fairlie should hear these letters read to him, and
should sign them with his own hand.

I occupied the interval day at the farm in writing a plain narrative
of the conspiracy, and in adding to it a statement of the practical
contradiction which facts offered to the assertion of Laura’s death.
This I submitted to Mr. Kyrle before I read it the next day to the
assembled tenants. We also arranged the form in which the evidence
should be presented at the close of the reading. After these matters
were settled, Mr. Kyrle endeavoured to turn the conversation next
to Laura’s affairs. Knowing, and desiring to know nothing of those
affairs, and doubting whether he would approve, as a man of business,
of my conduct in relation to my wife’s life-interest in the legacy left
to Madame Fosco, I begged Mr. Kyrle to excuse me if I abstained from
discussing the subject. It was connected, as I could truly tell him,
with those sorrows and troubles of the past which we never referred to
among ourselves, and which we instinctively shrank from discussing with
others.

My last labour, as the evening approached, was to obtain “The Narrative
of the Tombstone,” by taking a copy of the false inscription on the
grave before it was erased.


The day came—the day when Laura once more entered the familiar
breakfast-room at Limmeridge House. All the persons assembled rose
from their seats as Marian and I led her in. A perceptible shock of
surprise, an audible murmur of interest ran through them, at the sight
of her face. Mr. Fairlie was present (by my express stipulation),
with Mr. Kyrle by his side. His valet stood behind him with a
smelling-bottle ready in one hand, and a white handkerchief, saturated
with eau-de-Cologne, in the other.

I opened the proceedings by publicly appealing to Mr. Fairlie to say
whether I appeared there with his authority and under his express
sanction. He extended an arm, on either side, to Mr. Kyrle and to his
valet—was by them assisted to stand on his legs, and then expressed
himself in these terms: “Allow me to present Mr. Hartright. I am as
great an invalid as ever, and he is so very obliging as to speak for
me. The subject is dreadfully embarrassing. Please hear him, and don’t
make a noise!” With those words he slowly sank back again into the
chair, and took refuge in his scented pocket-handkerchief.

The disclosure of the conspiracy followed, after I had offered my
preliminary explanation, first of all, in the fewest and the plainest
words. I was there present (I informed my hearers) to declare, first,
that my wife, then sitting by me, was the daughter of the late Mr.
Philip Fairlie; secondly, to prove by positive facts, that the funeral
which they had attended in Limmeridge churchyard was the funeral of
another woman; thirdly, to give them a plain account of how it had all
happened. Without further preface, I at once read the narrative of the
conspiracy, describing it in clear outline, and dwelling only upon the
pecuniary motive for it, in order to avoid complicating my statement by
unnecessary reference to Sir Percival’s secret. This done, I reminded
my audience of the date on the inscription in the churchyard (the
25th), and confirmed its correctness by producing the certificate of
death. I then read them Sir Percival’s letter of the 25th, announcing
his wife’s intended journey from Hampshire to London on the 26th. I
next showed that she had taken that journey, by the personal testimony
of the driver of the fly, and I proved that she had performed it on
the appointed day, by the order-book at the livery stables. Marian
then added her own statement of the meeting between Laura and herself
at the mad-house, and of her sister’s escape. After which I closed the
proceedings by informing the persons present of Sir Percival’s death
and of my marriage.

Mr. Kyrle rose when I resumed my seat, and declared, as the legal
adviser of the family, that my case was proved by the plainest evidence
he had ever heard in his life. As he spoke those words, I put my arm
round Laura, and raised her so that she was plainly visible to every
one in the room. “Are you all of the same opinion?” I asked, advancing
towards them a few steps, and pointing to my wife.

The effect of the question was electrical. Far down at the lower end of
the room one of the oldest tenants on the estate started to his feet,
and led the rest with him in an instant. I see the man now, with his
honest brown face and his iron-grey hair, mounted on the window-seat,
waving his heavy riding-whip over his head, and leading the cheers.
“There she is, alive and hearty—God bless her! Gi’ it tongue, lads! Gi’
it tongue!” The shout that answered him, reiterated again and again,
was the sweetest music I ever heard. The labourers in the village and
the boys from the school, assembled on the lawn, caught up the cheering
and echoed it back on us. The farmers’ wives clustered round Laura, and
struggled which should be first to shake hands with her, and to implore
her, with the tears pouring over their own cheeks, to bear up bravely
and not to cry. She was so completely overwhelmed, that I was obliged
to take her from them, and carry her to the door. There I gave her into
Marian’s care—Marian, who had never failed us yet, whose courageous
self-control did not fail us now. Left by myself at the door, I invited
all the persons present (after thanking them in Laura’s name and mine)
to follow me to the churchyard, and see the false inscription struck
off the tombstone with their own eyes.

They all left the house, and all joined the throng of villagers
collected round the grave, where the statuary’s man was waiting for us.
In a breathless silence, the first sharp stroke of the steel sounded
on the marble. Not a voice was heard—not a soul moved, till those
three words, “Laura, Lady Glyde,” had vanished from sight. Then there
was a great heave of relief among the crowd, as if they felt that the
last fetters of the conspiracy had been struck off Laura herself, and
the assembly slowly withdrew. It was late in the day before the whole
inscription was erased. One line only was afterwards engraved in its
place: “Anne Catherick, July 25th, 1850.”

I returned to Limmeridge House early enough in the evening to take
leave of Mr. Kyrle. He and his clerk, and the driver of the fly, went
back to London by the night train. On their departure an insolent
message was delivered to me from Mr. Fairlie—who had been carried from
the room in a shattered condition, when the first outbreak of cheering
answered my appeal to the tenantry. The message conveyed to us “Mr.
Fairlie’s best congratulations,” and requested to know whether “we
contemplated stopping in the house.” I sent back word that the only
object for which we had entered his doors was accomplished—that I
contemplated stopping in no man’s house but my own—and that Mr. Fairlie
need not entertain the slightest apprehension of ever seeing us or
hearing from us again. We went back to our friends at the farm to rest
that night, and the next morning—escorted to the station, with the
heartiest enthusiasm and good will, by the whole village and by all the
farmers in the neighbourhood—we returned to London.

As our view of the Cumberland hills faded in the distance, I thought
of the first disheartening circumstances under which the long struggle
that was now past and over had been pursued. It was strange to look
back and to see, now, that the poverty which had denied us all hope of
assistance had been the indirect means of our success, by forcing me
to act for myself. If we had been rich enough to find legal help, what
would have been the result? The gain (on Mr. Kyrle’s own showing) would
have been more than doubtful—the loss, judging by the plain test of
events as they had really happened, certain. The law would never have
obtained me my interview with Mrs. Catherick. The law would never have
made Pesca the means of forcing a confession from the Count.




II


Two more events remain to be added to the chain before it reaches
fairly from the outset of the story to the close.

While our new sense of freedom from the long oppression of the past
was still strange to us, I was sent for by the friend who had given
me my first employment in wood engraving, to receive from him a fresh
testimony of his regard for my welfare. He had been commissioned by his
employers to go to Paris, and to examine for them a fresh discovery in
the practical application of his Art, the merits of which they were
anxious to ascertain. His own engagements had not allowed him leisure
time to undertake the errand, and he had most kindly suggested that it
should be transferred to me. I could have no hesitation in thankfully
accepting the offer, for if I acquitted myself of my commission as
I hoped I should, the result would be a permanent engagement on the
illustrated newspaper, to which I was now only occasionally attached.

I received my instructions and packed up for the journey the next day.
On leaving Laura once more (under what changed circumstances!) in her
sister’s care, a serious consideration recurred to me, which had more
than once crossed my wife’s mind, as well as my own, already—I mean the
consideration of Marian’s future. Had we any right to let our selfish
affection accept the devotion of all that generous life? Was it not our
duty, our best expression of gratitude, to forget ourselves, and to
think only of HER? I tried to say this when we were alone for a moment,
before I went away. She took my hand, and silenced me at the first
words.

“After all that we three have suffered together,” she said, “there can
be no parting between us till the last parting of all. My heart and my
happiness, Walter, are with Laura and you. Wait a little till there are
children’s voices at your fireside. I will teach them to speak for me
in THEIR language, and the first lesson they say to their father and
mother shall be—We can’t spare our aunt!”

My journey to Paris was not undertaken alone. At the eleventh hour
Pesca decided that he would accompany me. He had not recovered his
customary cheerfulness since the night at the Opera, and he determined
to try what a week’s holiday would do to raise his spirits.

I performed the errand entrusted to me, and drew out the necessary
report, on the fourth day from our arrival in Paris. The fifth day I
arranged to devote to sight-seeing and amusements in Pesca’s company.

Our hotel had been too full to accommodate us both on the same floor.
My room was on the second story, and Pesca’s was above me, on the
third. On the morning of the fifth day I went upstairs to see if the
Professor was ready to go out. Just before I reached the landing I saw
his door opened from the inside—a long, delicate, nervous hand (not my
friend’s hand certainly) held it ajar. At the same time I heard Pesca’s
voice saying eagerly, in low tones, and in his own language—“I remember
the name, but I don’t know the man. You saw at the Opera he was so
changed that I could not recognise him. I will forward the report—I
can do no more.” “No more need be done,” answered the second voice.
The door opened wide, and the light-haired man with the scar on his
cheek—the man I had seen following Count Fosco’s cab a week before—came
out. He bowed as I drew aside to let him pass—his face was fearfully
pale—and he held fast by the banisters as he descended the stairs.

I pushed open the door and entered Pesca’s room. He was crouched up, in
the strangest manner, in a corner of the sofa. He seemed to shrink from
me when I approached him.

“Am I disturbing you?” I asked. “I did not know you had a friend with
you till I saw him come out.”

“No friend,” said Pesca eagerly. “I see him to-day for the first time
and the last.”

“I am afraid he has brought you bad news?”

“Horrible news, Walter! Let us go back to London—I don’t want to stop
here—I am sorry I ever came. The misfortunes of my youth are very hard
upon me,” he said, turning his face to the wall, “very hard upon me in
my later time. I try to forget them—and they will not forget ME!”

“We can’t return, I am afraid, before the afternoon,” I replied. “Would
you like to come out with me in the meantime?”

“No, my friend, I will wait here. But let us go back to-day—pray let us
go back.”

I left him with the assurance that he should leave Paris that
afternoon. We had arranged the evening before to ascend the Cathedral
of Notre Dame, with Victor Hugo’s noble romance for our guide. There
was nothing in the French capital that I was more anxious to see, and I
departed by myself for the church.

Approaching Notre Dame by the river-side, I passed on my way the
terrible dead-house of Paris—the Morgue. A great crowd clamoured and
heaved round the door. There was evidently something inside which
excited the popular curiosity, and fed the popular appetite for horror.

I should have walked on to the church if the conversation of two men
and a woman on the outskirts of the crowd had not caught my ear. They
had just come out from seeing the sight in the Morgue, and the account
they were giving of the dead body to their neighbours described it as
the corpse of a man—a man of immense size, with a strange mark on his
left arm.

The moment those words reached me I stopped and took my place with the
crowd going in. Some dim foreshadowing of the truth had crossed my
mind when I heard Pesca’s voice through the open door, and when I saw
the stranger’s face as he passed me on the stairs of the hotel. Now
the truth itself was revealed to me—revealed in the chance words that
had just reached my ears. Other vengeance than mine had followed that
fated man from the theatre to his own door—from his own door to his
refuge in Paris. Other vengeance than mine had called him to the day of
reckoning, and had exacted from him the penalty of his life. The moment
when I had pointed him out to Pesca at the theatre in the hearing of
that stranger by our side, who was looking for him too—was the moment
that sealed his doom. I remembered the struggle in my own heart, when
he and I stood face to face—the struggle before I could let him escape
me—and shuddered as I recalled it.

Slowly, inch by inch, I pressed in with the crowd, moving nearer and
nearer to the great glass screen that parts the dead from the living at
the Morgue—nearer and nearer, till I was close behind the front row of
spectators, and could look in.

There he lay, unowned, unknown, exposed to the flippant curiosity of a
French mob! There was the dreadful end of that long life of degraded
ability and heartless crime! Hushed in the sublime repose of death,
the broad, firm, massive face and head fronted us so grandly that the
chattering Frenchwomen about me lifted their hands in admiration, and
cried in shrill chorus, “Ah, what a handsome man!” The wound that had
killed him had been struck with a knife or dagger exactly over his
heart. No other traces of violence appeared about the body except on
the left arm, and there, exactly in the place where I had seen the
brand on Pesca’s arm, were two deep cuts in the shape of the letter T,
which entirely obliterated the mark of the Brotherhood. His clothes,
hung above him, showed that he had been himself conscious of his
danger—they were clothes that had disguised him as a French artisan.
For a few moments, but not for longer, I forced myself to see these
things through the glass screen. I can write of them at no greater
length, for I saw no more.

The few facts in connection with his death which I subsequently
ascertained (partly from Pesca and partly from other sources), may be
stated here before the subject is dismissed from these pages.

His body was taken out of the Seine in the disguise which I have
described, nothing being found on him which revealed his name, his
rank, or his place of abode. The hand that struck him was never traced,
and the circumstances under which he was killed were never discovered.
I leave others to draw their own conclusions in reference to the secret
of the assassination as I have drawn mine. When I have intimated that
the foreigner with the scar was a member of the Brotherhood (admitted
in Italy after Pesca’s departure from his native country), and when I
have further added that the two cuts, in the form of a T, on the left
arm of the dead man, signified the Italian word “Traditore,” and showed
that justice had been done by the Brotherhood on a traitor, I have
contributed all that I know towards elucidating the mystery of Count
Fosco’s death.

The body was identified the day after I had seen it by means of an
anonymous letter addressed to his wife. He was buried by Madame Fosco
in the cemetery of Père la Chaise. Fresh funeral wreaths continue to
this day to be hung on the ornamental bronze railings round the tomb
by the Countess’s own hand. She lives in the strictest retirement at
Versailles. Not long since she published a biography of her deceased
husband. The work throws no light whatever on the name that was really
his own or on the secret history of his life—it is almost entirely
devoted to the praise of his domestic virtues, the assertion of his
rare abilities, and the enumeration of the honours conferred on him.
The circumstances attending his death are very briefly noticed, and
are summed up on the last page in this sentence—“His life was one long
assertion of the rights of the aristocracy and the sacred principles of
Order, and he died a martyr to his cause.”




III


The summer and autumn passed after my return from Paris, and brought no
changes with them which need be noticed here. We lived so simply and
quietly that the income which I was now steadily earning sufficed for
all our wants.

In the February of the new year our first child was born—a son.
My mother and sister and Mrs. Vesey were our guests at the little
christening party, and Mrs. Clements was present to assist my wife on
the same occasion. Marian was our boy’s godmother, and Pesca and Mr.
Gilmore (the latter acting by proxy) were his godfathers. I may add
here that when Mr. Gilmore returned to us a year later he assisted the
design of these pages, at my request, by writing the Narrative which
appears early in the story under his name, and which, though first
in order of precedence, was thus, in order of time, the last that I
received.

The only event in our lives which now remains to be recorded, occurred
when our little Walter was six months old.

At that time I was sent to Ireland to make sketches for certain
forthcoming illustrations in the newspaper to which I was attached.
I was away for nearly a fortnight, corresponding regularly with my
wife and Marian, except during the last three days of my absence,
when my movements were too uncertain to enable me to receive letters.
I performed the latter part of my journey back at night, and when I
reached home in the morning, to my utter astonishment there was no one
to receive me. Laura and Marian and the child had left the house on the
day before my return.

A note from my wife, which was given to me by the servant, only
increased my surprise, by informing me that they had gone to Limmeridge
House. Marian had prohibited any attempt at written explanations—I was
entreated to follow them the moment I came back—complete enlightenment
awaited me on my arrival in Cumberland—and I was forbidden to feel the
slightest anxiety in the meantime. There the note ended. It was still
early enough to catch the morning train. I reached Limmeridge House the
same afternoon.

My wife and Marian were both upstairs. They had established themselves
(by way of completing my amazement) in the little room which had been
once assigned to me for a studio, when I was employed on Mr. Fairlie’s
drawings. On the very chair which I used to occupy when I was at work
Marian was sitting now, with the child industriously sucking his
coral upon her lap—while Laura was standing by the well-remembered
drawing-table which I had so often used, with the little album that I
had filled for her in past times open under her hand.

“What in the name of heaven has brought you here?” I asked. “Does Mr.
Fairlie know——?”

Marian suspended the question on my lips by telling me that Mr. Fairlie
was dead. He had been struck by paralysis, and had never rallied after
the shock. Mr. Kyrle had informed them of his death, and had advised
them to proceed immediately to Limmeridge House.

Some dim perception of a great change dawned on my mind. Laura spoke
before I had quite realised it. She stole close to me to enjoy the
surprise which was still expressed in my face.

“My darling Walter,” she said, “must we really account for our boldness
in coming here? I am afraid, love, I can only explain it by breaking
through our rule, and referring to the past.”

“There is not the least necessity for doing anything of the kind,” said
Marian. “We can be just as explicit, and much more interesting, by
referring to the future.” She rose and held up the child kicking and
crowing in her arms. “Do you know who this is, Walter?” she asked, with
bright tears of happiness gathering in her eyes.

“Even MY bewilderment has its limits,” I replied. “I think I can still
answer for knowing my own child.”

“Child!” she exclaimed, with all her easy gaiety of old times. “Do you
talk in that familiar manner of one of the landed gentry of England?
Are you aware, when I present this illustrious baby to your notice,
in whose presence you stand? Evidently not! Let me make two eminent
personages known to one another: Mr. Walter Hartright—THE HEIR OF
LIMMERIDGE.”


So she spoke. In writing those last words, I have written all. The pen
falters in my hand. The long, happy labour of many months is over.
Marian was the good angel of our lives—let Marian end our Story.


