letter into my hands as she was told. This was the plain truth, and
though she could not blame herself for any intentional neglect, she
was sadly troubled in her mind, and sadly in want of a word of advice.
At this point Louis thinks the secretions appeared again. Perhaps they
did, but it is of infinitely greater importance to mention that at this
point also I lost my patience, opened my eyes, and interfered.

“What is the purport of all this?” I inquired.

My niece’s irrelevant maid stared, and stood speechless.

“Endeavour to explain,” I said to my servant. “Translate me, Louis.”

Louis endeavoured and translated. In other words, he descended
immediately into a bottomless pit of confusion, and the Young Person
followed him down. I really don’t know when I have been so amused. I
left them at the bottom of the pit as long as they diverted me. When
they ceased to divert me, I exerted my intelligence, and pulled them up
again.

It is unnecessary to say that my interference enabled me, in due course
of time, to ascertain the purport of the Young Person’s remarks.

I discovered that she was uneasy in her mind, because the train of
events that she had just described to me had prevented her from
receiving those supplementary messages which Miss Halcombe had
intrusted to the Countess to deliver. She was afraid the messages might
have been of great importance to her mistress’s interests. Her dread
of Sir Percival had deterred her from going to Blackwater Park late
at night to inquire about them, and Miss Halcombe’s own directions to
her, on no account to miss the train in the morning, had prevented her
from waiting at the inn the next day. She was most anxious that the
misfortune of her fainting-fit should not lead to the second misfortune
of making her mistress think her neglectful, and she would humbly
beg to ask me whether I would advise her to write her explanations
and excuses to Miss Halcombe, requesting to receive the messages by
letter, if it was not too late. I make no apologies for this extremely
prosy paragraph. I have been ordered to write it. There are people,
unaccountable as it may appear, who actually take more interest in what
my niece’s maid said to me on this occasion than in what I said to my
niece’s maid. Amusing perversity!

“I should feel very much obliged to you, sir, if you would kindly tell
me what I had better do,” remarked the Young Person.

“Let things stop as they are,” I said, adapting my language to my
listener. “I invariably let things stop as they are. Yes. Is that all?”

“If you think it would be a liberty in me, sir, to write, of course I
wouldn’t venture to do so. But I am so very anxious to do all I can to
serve my mistress faithfully——”

People in the lower class of life never know when or how to go out of
a room. They invariably require to be helped out by their betters. I
thought it high time to help the Young Person out. I did it with two
judicious words—

“Good-morning.”

Something outside or inside this singular girl suddenly creaked. Louis,
who was looking at her (which I was not), says she creaked when she
curtseyed. Curious. Was it her shoes, her stays, or her bones? Louis
thinks it was her stays. Most extraordinary!



As soon as I was left by myself I had a little nap—I really wanted it.
When I awoke again I noticed dear Marian’s letter. If I had had the
least idea of what it contained I should certainly not have attempted
to open it. Being, unfortunately for myself, quite innocent of all
suspicion, I read the letter. It immediately upset me for the day.

I am, by nature, one of the most easy-tempered creatures that ever
lived—I make allowances for everybody, and I take offence at nothing.
But as I have before remarked, there are limits to my endurance. I laid
down Marian’s letter, and felt myself—justly felt myself—an injured man.

I am about to make a remark. It is, of course, applicable to the very
serious matter now under notice, or I should not allow it to appear in
this place.

Nothing, in my opinion, sets the odious selfishness of mankind in such
a repulsively vivid light as the treatment, in all classes of society,
which the Single people receive at the hands of the Married people.
When you have once shown yourself too considerate and self-denying to
add a family of your own to an already overcrowded population, you are
vindictively marked out by your married friends, who have no similar
consideration and no similar self-denial, as the recipient of half
their conjugal troubles, and the born friend of all their children.
Husbands and wives TALK of the cares of matrimony, and bachelors and
spinsters BEAR them. Take my own case. I considerately remain single,
and my poor dear brother Philip inconsiderately marries. What does he
do when he dies? He leaves his daughter to ME. She is a sweet girl—she
is also a dreadful responsibility. Why lay her on my shoulders? Because
I am bound, in the harmless character of a single man, to relieve my
married connections of all their own troubles. I do my best with my
brother’s responsibility—I marry my niece, with infinite fuss and
difficulty, to the man her father wanted her to marry. She and her
husband disagree, and unpleasant consequences follow. What does she do
with those consequences? She transfers them to ME. Why transfer them to
ME? Because I am bound, in the harmless character of a single man, to
relieve my married connections of all their own troubles. Poor single
people! Poor human nature!

It is quite unnecessary to say that Marian’s letter threatened me.
Everybody threatens me. All sorts of horrors were to fall on my devoted
head if I hesitated to turn Limmeridge House into an asylum for my
niece and her misfortunes. I did hesitate, nevertheless.

I have mentioned that my usual course, hitherto, had been to submit to
dear Marian, and save noise. But on this occasion, the consequences
involved in her extremely inconsiderate proposal were of a nature to
make me pause. If I opened Limmeridge House as an asylum to Lady Glyde,
what security had I against Sir Percival Glyde’s following her here in
a state of violent resentment against ME for harbouring his wife? I
saw such a perfect labyrinth of troubles involved in this proceeding
that I determined to feel my ground, as it were. I wrote, therefore, to
dear Marian to beg (as she had no husband to lay claim to her) that she
would come here by herself, first, and talk the matter over with me.
If she could answer my objections to my own perfect satisfaction, then
I assured her that I would receive our sweet Laura with the greatest
pleasure, but not otherwise.

I felt, of course, at the time, that this temporising on my part
would probably end in bringing Marian here in a state of virtuous
indignation, banging doors. But then, the other course of proceeding
might end in bringing Sir Percival here in a state of virtuous
indignation, banging doors also, and of the two indignations and
bangings I preferred Marian’s, because I was used to her. Accordingly
I despatched the letter by return of post. It gained me time, at all
events—and, oh dear me! what a point that was to begin with.

When I am totally prostrated (did I mention that I was totally
prostrated by Marian’s letter?) it always takes me three days to get
up again. I was very unreasonable—I expected three days of quiet. Of
course I didn’t get them.

The third day’s post brought me a most impertinent letter from a
person with whom I was totally unacquainted. He described himself as
the acting partner of our man of business—our dear, pig-headed old
Gilmore—and he informed me that he had lately received, by the post, a
letter addressed to him in Miss Halcombe’s handwriting. On opening the
envelope, he had discovered, to his astonishment, that it contained
nothing but a blank sheet of note-paper. This circumstance appeared
to him so suspicious (as suggesting to his restless legal mind that
the letter had been tampered with) that he had at once written to
Miss Halcombe, and had received no answer by return of post. In this
difficulty, instead of acting like a sensible man and letting things
take their proper course, his next absurd proceeding, on his own
showing, was to pester me by writing to inquire if I knew anything
about it. What the deuce should I know about it? Why alarm me as well
as himself? I wrote back to that effect. It was one of my keenest
letters. I have produced nothing with a sharper epistolary edge to it
since I tendered his dismissal in writing to that extremely troublesome
person, Mr. Walter Hartright.

My letter produced its effect. I heard nothing more from the lawyer.

This perhaps was not altogether surprising. But it was certainly a
remarkable circumstance that no second letter reached me from Marian,
and that no warning signs appeared of her arrival. Her unexpected
absence did me amazing good. It was so very soothing and pleasant to
infer (as I did of course) that my married connections had made it
up again. Five days of undisturbed tranquillity, of delicious single
blessedness, quite restored me. On the sixth day I felt strong enough
to send for my photographer, and to set him at work again on the
presentation copies of my art-treasures, with a view, as I have already
mentioned, to the improvement of taste in this barbarous neighbourhood.
I had just dismissed him to his workshop, and had just begun coquetting
with my coins, when Louis suddenly made his appearance with a card in
his hand.

“Another Young Person?” I said. “I won’t see her. In my state of health
Young Persons disagree with me. Not at home.”

“It is a gentleman this time, sir.”

A gentleman of course made a difference. I looked at the card.

Gracious Heaven! my tiresome sister’s foreign husband, Count Fosco.


Is it necessary to say what my first impression was when I looked at my
visitor’s card? Surely not! My sister having married a foreigner, there
was but one impression that any man in his senses could possibly feel.
Of course the Count had come to borrow money of me.

“Louis,” I said, “do you think he would go away if you gave him five
shillings?”

Louis looked quite shocked. He surprised me inexpressibly by declaring
that my sister’s foreign husband was dressed superbly, and looked the
picture of prosperity. Under these circumstances my first impression
altered to a certain extent. I now took it for granted that the Count
had matrimonial difficulties of his own to contend with, and that he
had come, like the rest of the family, to cast them all on my shoulders.

“Did he mention his business?” I asked.

“Count Fosco said he had come here, sir, because Miss Halcombe was
unable to leave Blackwater Park.”

Fresh troubles, apparently. Not exactly his own, as I had supposed, but
dear Marian’s. Troubles, anyway. Oh dear!

“Show him in,” I said resignedly.

The Count’s first appearance really startled me. He was such an
alarmingly large person that I quite trembled. I felt certain that
he would shake the floor and knock down my art-treasures. He did
neither the one nor the other. He was refreshingly dressed in summer
costume—his manner was delightfully self-possessed and quiet—he had
a charming smile. My first impression of him was highly favourable.
It is not creditable to my penetration—as the sequel will show—to
acknowledge this, but I am a naturally candid man, and I DO acknowledge
it notwithstanding.

“Allow me to present myself, Mr. Fairlie,” he said. “I come from
Blackwater Park, and I have the honour and the happiness of being
Madame Fosco’s husband. Let me take my first and last advantage of that
circumstance by entreating you not to make a stranger of me. I beg you
will not disturb yourself—I beg you will not move.”

“You are very good,” I replied. “I wish I was strong enough to get up.
Charmed to see you at Limmeridge. Please take a chair.”

“I am afraid you are suffering to-day,” said the Count.

“As usual,” I said. “I am nothing but a bundle of nerves dressed up to
look like a man.”

“I have studied many subjects in my time,” remarked this sympathetic
person. “Among others the inexhaustible subject of nerves. May I make a
suggestion, at once the simplest and the most profound? Will you let me
alter the light in your room?”

“Certainly—if you will be so very kind as not to let any of it in on
me.”

He walked to the window. Such a contrast to dear Marian! so extremely
considerate in all his movements!

“Light,” he said, in that delightfully confidential tone which is so
soothing to an invalid, “is the first essential. Light stimulates,
nourishes, preserves. You can no more do without it, Mr. Fairlie,
than if you were a flower. Observe. Here, where you sit, I close the
shutters to compose you. There, where you do NOT sit, I draw up the
blind and let in the invigorating sun. Admit the light into your room
if you cannot bear it on yourself. Light, sir, is the grand decree of
Providence. You accept Providence with your own restrictions. Accept
light on the same terms.”

I thought this very convincing and attentive. He had taken me in up to
that point about the light, he had certainly taken me in.

“You see me confused,” he said, returning to his place—“on my word of
honour, Mr. Fairlie, you see me confused in your presence.”

“Shocked to hear it, I am sure. May I inquire why?”

“Sir, can I enter this room (where you sit a sufferer), and see you
surrounded by these admirable objects of Art, without discovering
that you are a man whose feelings are acutely impressionable, whose
sympathies are perpetually alive? Tell me, can I do this?”

If I had been strong enough to sit up in my chair I should, of course,
have bowed. Not being strong enough, I smiled my acknowledgments
instead. It did just as well, we both understood one another.

“Pray follow my train of thought,” continued the Count. “I sit here,
a man of refined sympathies myself, in the presence of another man of
refined sympathies also. I am conscious of a terrible necessity for
lacerating those sympathies by referring to domestic events of a very
melancholy kind. What is the inevitable consequence? I have done myself
the honour of pointing it out to you already. I sit confused.”

Was it at this point that I began to suspect he was going to bore me? I
rather think it was.

“Is it absolutely necessary to refer to these unpleasant matters?” I
inquired. “In our homely English phrase, Count Fosco, won’t they keep?”

The Count, with the most alarming solemnity, sighed and shook his head.

“Must I really hear them?”

He shrugged his shoulders (it was the first foreign thing he had done
since he had been in the room), and looked at me in an unpleasantly
penetrating manner. My instincts told me that I had better close my
eyes. I obeyed my instincts.

“Please break it gently,” I pleaded. “Anybody dead?”

“Dead!” cried the Count, with unnecessary foreign fierceness. “Mr.
Fairlie, your national composure terrifies me. In the name of Heaven,
what have I said or done to make you think me the messenger of death?”

“Pray accept my apologies,” I answered. “You have said and done
nothing. I make it a rule in these distressing cases always to
anticipate the worst. It breaks the blow by meeting it half-way, and
so on. Inexpressibly relieved, I am sure, to hear that nobody is dead.
Anybody ill?”

I opened my eyes and looked at him. Was he very yellow when he came in,
or had he turned very yellow in the last minute or two? I really can’t
say, and I can’t ask Louis, because he was not in the room at the time.

“Anybody ill?” I repeated, observing that my national composure still
appeared to affect him.

“That is part of my bad news, Mr. Fairlie. Yes. Somebody is ill.”

“Grieved, I am sure. Which of them is it?”

“To my profound sorrow, Miss Halcombe. Perhaps you were in some degree
prepared to hear this? Perhaps when you found that Miss Halcombe did
not come here by herself, as you proposed, and did not write a second
time, your affectionate anxiety may have made you fear that she was
ill?”

I have no doubt my affectionate anxiety had led to that melancholy
apprehension at some time or other, but at the moment my wretched
memory entirely failed to remind me of the circumstance. However, I
said yes, in justice to myself. I was much shocked. It was so very
uncharacteristic of such a robust person as dear Marian to be ill, that
I could only suppose she had met with an accident. A horse, or a false
step on the stairs, or something of that sort.

“Is it serious?” I asked.

“Serious—beyond a doubt,” he replied. “Dangerous—I hope and trust not.
Miss Halcombe unhappily exposed herself to be wetted through by a heavy
rain. The cold that followed was of an aggravated kind, and it has now
brought with it the worst consequence—fever.”

When I heard the word fever, and when I remembered at the same moment
that the unscrupulous person who was now addressing me had just come
from Blackwater Park, I thought I should have fainted on the spot.

“Good God!” I said. “Is it infectious?”

“Not at present,” he answered, with detestable composure. “It may turn
to infection—but no such deplorable complication had taken place when I
left Blackwater Park. I have felt the deepest interest in the case, Mr.
Fairlie—I have endeavoured to assist the regular medical attendant in
watching it—accept my personal assurances of the uninfectious nature of
the fever when I last saw it.”

Accept his assurances! I never was farther from accepting anything in
my life. I would not have believed him on his oath. He was too yellow
to be believed. He looked like a walking-West-Indian-epidemic. He was
big enough to carry typhus by the ton, and to dye the very carpet
he walked on with scarlet fever. In certain emergencies my mind is
remarkably soon made up. I instantly determined to get rid of him.

“You will kindly excuse an invalid,” I said—“but long conferences of
any kind invariably upset me. May I beg to know exactly what the object
is to which I am indebted for the honour of your visit?”

I fervently hoped that this remarkably broad hint would throw him off
his balance—confuse him—reduce him to polite apologies—in short, get
him out of the room. On the contrary, it only settled him in his chair.
He became additionally solemn, and dignified, and confidential. He held
up two of his horrid fingers and gave me another of his unpleasantly
penetrating looks. What was I to do? I was not strong enough to quarrel
with him. Conceive my situation, if you please. Is language adequate to
describe it? I think not.

“The objects of my visit,” he went on, quite irrepressibly, “are
numbered on my fingers. They are two. First, I come to bear my
testimony, with profound sorrow, to the lamentable disagreements
between Sir Percival and Lady Glyde. I am Sir Percival’s oldest
friend—I am related to Lady Glyde by marriage—I am an eye-witness of
all that has happened at Blackwater Park. In those three capacities I
speak with authority, with confidence, with honourable regret. Sir,
I inform you, as the head of Lady Glyde’s family, that Miss Halcombe
has exaggerated nothing in the letter which she wrote to your address.
I affirm that the remedy which that admirable lady has proposed is
the only remedy that will spare you the horrors of public scandal. A
temporary separation between husband and wife is the one peaceable
solution of this difficulty. Part them for the present, and when
all causes of irritation are removed, I, who have now the honour of
addressing you—I will undertake to bring Sir Percival to reason.
Lady Glyde is innocent, Lady Glyde is injured, but—follow my thought
here!—she is, on that very account (I say it with shame), the cause of
irritation while she remains under her husband’s roof. No other house
can receive her with propriety but yours. I invite you to open it.”

Cool. Here was a matrimonial hailstorm pouring in the South of England,
and I was invited, by a man with fever in every fold of his coat, to
come out from the North of England and take my share of the pelting. I
tried to put the point forcibly, just as I have put it here. The Count
deliberately lowered one of his horrid fingers, kept the other up, and
went on—rode over me, as it were, without even the common coachmanlike
attention of crying “Hi!” before he knocked me down.

“Follow my thought once more, if you please,” he resumed. “My first
object you have heard. My second object in coming to this house is
to do what Miss Halcombe’s illness has prevented her from doing for
herself. My large experience is consulted on all difficult matters
at Blackwater Park, and my friendly advice was requested on the
interesting subject of your letter to Miss Halcombe. I understood at
once—for my sympathies are your sympathies—why you wished to see her
here before you pledged yourself to inviting Lady Glyde. You are most
right, sir, in hesitating to receive the wife until you are quite
certain that the husband will not exert his authority to reclaim her.
I agree to that. I also agree that such delicate explanations as this
difficulty involves are not explanations which can be properly disposed
of by writing only. My presence here (to my own great inconvenience) is
the proof that I speak sincerely. As for the explanations themselves,
I—Fosco—I, who know Sir Percival much better than Miss Halcombe knows
him, affirm to you, on my honour and my word, that he will not come
near this house, or attempt to communicate with this house, while
his wife is living in it. His affairs are embarrassed. Offer him his
freedom by means of the absence of Lady Glyde. I promise you he will
take his freedom, and go back to the Continent at the earliest moment
when he can get away. Is this clear to you as crystal? Yes, it is. Have
you questions to address to me? Be it so, I am here to answer. Ask, Mr.
Fairlie—oblige me by asking to your heart’s content.”

He had said so much already in spite of me, and he looked so dreadfully
capable of saying a great deal more also in spite of me, that I
declined his amiable invitation in pure self-defence.

“Many thanks,” I replied. “I am sinking fast. In my state of health
I must take things for granted. Allow me to do so on this occasion.
We quite understand each other. Yes. Much obliged, I am sure, for
your kind interference. If I ever get better, and ever have a second
opportunity of improving our acquaintance—”

He got up. I thought he was going. No. More talk, more time for the
development of infectious influences—in my room, too—remember that, in
my room!

“One moment yet,” he said, “one moment before I take my leave. I ask
permission at parting to impress on you an urgent necessity. It is
this, sir. You must not think of waiting till Miss Halcombe recovers
before you receive Lady Glyde. Miss Halcombe has the attendance of the
doctor, of the housekeeper at Blackwater Park, and of an experienced
nurse as well—three persons for whose capacity and devotion I answer
with my life. I tell you that. I tell you, also, that the anxiety
and alarm of her sister’s illness has already affected the health
and spirits of Lady Glyde, and has made her totally unfit to be of
use in the sick-room. Her position with her husband grows more and
more deplorable and dangerous every day. If you leave her any longer
at Blackwater Park, you do nothing whatever to hasten her sister’s
recovery, and at the same time, you risk the public scandal, which
you and I, and all of us, are bound in the sacred interests of the
family to avoid. With all my soul, I advise you to remove the serious
responsibility of delay from your own shoulders by writing to Lady
Glyde to come here at once. Do your affectionate, your honourable, your
inevitable duty, and whatever happens in the future, no one can lay
the blame on you. I speak from my large experience—I offer my friendly
advice. Is it accepted—Yes, or No?”

I looked at him—merely looked at him—with my sense of his amazing
assurance, and my dawning resolution to ring for Louis and have him
shown out of the room expressed in every line of my face. It is
perfectly incredible, but quite true, that my face did not appear to
produce the slightest impression on him. Born without nerves—evidently
born without nerves.

“You hesitate?” he said. “Mr. Fairlie! I understand that hesitation.
You object—see, sir, how my sympathies look straight down into your
thoughts!—you object that Lady Glyde is not in health and not in
spirits to take the long journey, from Hampshire to this place, by
herself. Her own maid is removed from her, as you know, and of other
servants fit to travel with her, from one end of England to another,
there are none at Blackwater Park. You object, again, that she cannot
comfortably stop and rest in London, on her way here, because she
cannot comfortably go alone to a public hotel where she is a total
stranger. In one breath, I grant both objections—in another breath, I
remove them. Follow me, if you please, for the last time. It was my
intention, when I returned to England with Sir Percival, to settle
myself in the neighbourhood of London. That purpose has just been
happily accomplished. I have taken, for six months, a little furnished
house in the quarter called St. John’s Wood. Be so obliging as to
keep this fact in your mind, and observe the programme I now propose.
Lady Glyde travels to London (a short journey)—I myself meet her
at the station—I take her to rest and sleep at my house, which is
also the house of her aunt—when she is restored I escort her to the
station again—she travels to this place, and her own maid (who is now
under your roof) receives her at the carriage-door. Here is comfort
consulted—here are the interests of propriety consulted—here is your
own duty—duty of hospitality, sympathy, protection, to an unhappy lady
in need of all three—smoothed and made easy, from the beginning to the
end. I cordially invite you, sir, to second my efforts in the sacred
interests of the family. I seriously advise you to write, by my hands,
offering the hospitality of your house (and heart), and the hospitality
of my house (and heart), to that injured and unfortunate lady whose
cause I plead to-day.”

He waved his horrid hand at me—he struck his infectious breast—he
addressed me oratorically, as if I was laid up in the House of Commons.
It was high time to take a desperate course of some sort. It was also
high time to send for Louis, and adopt the precaution of fumigating the
room.

In this trying emergency an idea occurred to me—an inestimable idea
which, so to speak, killed two intrusive birds with one stone. I
determined to get rid of the Count’s tiresome eloquence, and of Lady
Glyde’s tiresome troubles, by complying with this odious foreigner’s
request, and writing the letter at once. There was not the least danger
of the invitation being accepted, for there was not the least chance
that Laura would consent to leave Blackwater Park while Marian was
lying there ill. How this charmingly convenient obstacle could have
escaped the officious penetration of the Count, it was impossible to
conceive—but it HAD escaped him. My dread that he might yet discover
it, if I allowed him any more time to think, stimulated me to such an
amazing degree, that I struggled into a sitting position—seized, really
seized, the writing materials by my side, and produced the letter as
rapidly as if I had been a common clerk in an office. “Dearest Laura,
Please come, whenever you like. Break the journey by sleeping in
London at your aunt’s house. Grieved to hear of dear Marian’s illness.
Ever affectionately yours.” I handed these lines, at arm’s length, to
the Count—I sank back in my chair—I said, “Excuse me—I am entirely
prostrated—I can do no more. Will you rest and lunch downstairs? Love
to all, and sympathy, and so on. Good-morning.”

He made another speech—the man was absolutely inexhaustible. I closed
my eyes—I endeavoured to hear as little as possible. In spite of my
endeavours I was obliged to hear a great deal. My sister’s endless
husband congratulated himself, and congratulated me, on the result
of our interview—he mentioned a great deal more about his sympathies
and mine—he deplored my miserable health—he offered to write me a
prescription—he impressed on me the necessity of not forgetting what
he had said about the importance of light—he accepted my obliging
invitation to rest and lunch—he recommended me to expect Lady Glyde
in two or three days’ time—he begged my permission to look forward
to our next meeting, instead of paining himself and paining me, by
saying farewell—he added a great deal more, which, I rejoice to think,
I did not attend to at the time, and do not remember now. I heard his
sympathetic voice travelling away from me by degrees—but, large as he
was, I never heard him. He had the negative merit of being absolutely
noiseless. I don’t know when he opened the door, or when he shut it. I
ventured to make use of my eyes again, after an interval of silence—and
he was gone.

I rang for Louis, and retired to my bathroom. Tepid water, strengthened
with aromatic vinegar, for myself, and copious fumigation for my study,
were the obvious precautions to take, and of course I adopted them. I
rejoice to say they proved successful. I enjoyed my customary siesta. I
awoke moist and cool.

My first inquiries were for the Count. Had we really got rid of him?
Yes—he had gone away by the afternoon train. Had he lunched, and if
so, upon what? Entirely upon fruit-tart and cream. What a man! What a
digestion!



Am I expected to say anything more? I believe not. I believe I have
reached the limits assigned to me. The shocking circumstances which
happened at a later period did not, I am thankful to say, happen in my
presence. I do beg and entreat that nobody will be so very unfeeling
as to lay any part of the blame of those circumstances on me. I did
everything for the best. I am not answerable for a deplorable calamity,
which it was quite impossible to foresee. I am shattered by it—I have
suffered under it, as nobody else has suffered. My servant, Louis
(who is really attached to me in his unintelligent way), thinks I
shall never get over it. He sees me dictating at this moment, with my
handkerchief to my eyes. I wish to mention, in justice to myself, that
it was not my fault, and that I am quite exhausted and heartbroken.
Need I say more?




THE STORY CONTINUED BY ELIZA MICHELSON

(Housekeeper at Blackwater Park)




I


I am asked to state plainly what I know of the progress of Miss
Halcombe’s illness and of the circumstances under which Lady Glyde left
Blackwater Park for London.

The reason given for making this demand on me is, that my testimony is
wanted in the interests of truth. As the widow of a clergyman of the
Church of England (reduced by misfortune to the necessity of accepting
a situation), I have been taught to place the claims of truth above all
other considerations. I therefore comply with a request which I might
otherwise, through reluctance to connect myself with distressing family
affairs, have hesitated to grant.

I made no memorandum at the time, and I cannot therefore be sure to
a day of the date, but I believe I am correct in stating that Miss
Halcombe’s serious illness began during the last fortnight or ten days
in June. The breakfast hour was late at Blackwater Park—sometimes as
late as ten, never earlier than half-past nine. On the morning to which
I am now referring, Miss Halcombe (who was usually the first to come
down) did not make her appearance at the table. After the family had
waited a quarter of an hour, the upper housemaid was sent to see after
her, and came running out of the room dreadfully frightened. I met the
servant on the stairs, and went at once to Miss Halcombe to see what
was the matter. The poor lady was incapable of telling me. She was
walking about her room with a pen in her hand, quite light-headed, in a
state of burning fever.

Lady Glyde (being no longer in Sir Percival’s service, I may, without
impropriety, mention my former mistress by her name, instead of calling
her my lady) was the first to come in from her own bedroom. She was
so dreadfully alarmed and distressed that she was quite useless. The
Count Fosco, and his lady, who came upstairs immediately afterwards,
were both most serviceable and kind. Her ladyship assisted me to get
Miss Halcombe to her bed. His lordship the Count remained in the
sitting-room, and having sent for my medicine-chest, made a mixture for
Miss Halcombe, and a cooling lotion to be applied to her head, so as
to lose no time before the doctor came. We applied the lotion, but we
could not get her to take the mixture. Sir Percival undertook to send
for the doctor. He despatched a groom, on horseback, for the nearest
medical man, Mr. Dawson, of Oak Lodge.

Mr. Dawson arrived in less than an hour’s time. He was a respectable
elderly man, well known all round the country, and we were much alarmed
when we found that he considered the case to be a very serious one.

His lordship the Count affably entered into conversation with Mr.
Dawson, and gave his opinions with a judicious freedom. Mr. Dawson,
not over-courteously, inquired if his lordship’s advice was the advice
of a doctor, and being informed that it was the advice of one who had
studied medicine unprofessionally, replied that he was not accustomed
to consult with amateur physicians. The Count, with truly Christian
meekness of temper, smiled and left the room. Before he went out he
told me that he might be found, in case he was wanted in the course of
the day, at the boat-house on the banks of the lake. Why he should have
gone there, I cannot say. But he did go, remaining away the whole day
till seven o’clock, which was dinner-time. Perhaps he wished to set the
example of keeping the house as quiet as possible. It was entirely in
his character to do so. He was a most considerate nobleman.

Miss Halcombe passed a very bad night, the fever coming and going,
and getting worse towards the morning instead of better. No nurse fit
to wait on her being at hand in the neighbourhood, her ladyship the
Countess and myself undertook the duty, relieving each other. Lady
Glyde, most unwisely, insisted on sitting up with us. She was much
too nervous and too delicate in health to bear the anxiety of Miss
Halcombe’s illness calmly. She only did herself harm, without being of
the least real assistance. A more gentle and affectionate lady never
lived—but she cried, and she was frightened, two weaknesses which made
her entirely unfit to be present in a sick-room.

Sir Percival and the Count came in the morning to make their inquiries.

Sir Percival (from distress, I presume, at his lady’s affliction and at
Miss Halcombe’s illness) appeared much confused and unsettled in his
mind. His lordship testified, on the contrary, a becoming composure
and interest. He had his straw hat in one hand, and his book in the
other, and he mentioned to Sir Percival in my hearing that he would
go out again and study at the lake. “Let us keep the house quiet,” he
said. “Let us not smoke indoors, my friend, now Miss Halcombe is ill.
You go your way, and I will go mine. When I study I like to be alone.
Good-morning, Mrs. Michelson.”

Sir Percival was not civil enough—perhaps I ought in justice to say,
not composed enough—to take leave of me with the same polite attention.
The only person in the house, indeed, who treated me, at that time or
at any other, on the footing of a lady in distressed circumstances, was
the Count. He had the manners of a true nobleman—he was considerate
towards every one. Even the young person (Fanny by name) who attended
on Lady Glyde was not beneath his notice. When she was sent away by
Sir Percival, his lordship (showing me his sweet little birds at the
time) was most kindly anxious to know what had become of her, where
she was to go the day she left Blackwater Park, and so on. It is in
such little delicate attentions that the advantages of aristocratic
birth always show themselves. I make no apology for introducing these
particulars—they are brought forward in justice to his lordship,
whose character, I have reason to know, is viewed rather harshly in
certain quarters. A nobleman who can respect a lady in distressed
circumstances, and can take a fatherly interest in the fortunes of an
humble servant girl, shows principles and feelings of too high an order
to be lightly called in question. I advance no opinions—I offer facts
only. My endeavour through life is to judge not that I be not judged.
One of my beloved husband’s finest sermons was on that text. I read it
constantly—in my own copy of the edition printed by subscription, in
the first days of my widowhood—and at every fresh perusal I derive an
increase of spiritual benefit and edification.

There was no improvement in Miss Halcombe, and the second night was
even worse than the first. Mr. Dawson was constant in his attendance.
The practical duties of nursing were still divided between the Countess
and myself, Lady Glyde persisting in sitting up with us, though we both
entreated her to take some rest. “My place is by Marian’s bedside,” was
her only answer. “Whether I am ill, or well, nothing will induce me to
lose sight of her.”

Towards midday I went downstairs to attend to some of my regular
duties. An hour afterwards, on my way back to the sick-room, I saw the
Count (who had gone out again early, for the third time) entering the
hall, to all appearance in the highest good spirits. Sir Percival, at
the same moment, put his head out of the library door, and addressed
his noble friend, with extreme eagerness, in these words—

“Have you found her?”

His lordship’s large face became dimpled all over with placid smiles,
but he made no reply in words. At the same time Sir Percival turned his
head, observed that I was approaching the stairs, and looked at me in
the most rudely angry manner possible.

“Come in here and tell me about it,” he said to the Count. “Whenever
there are women in a house they’re always sure to be going up or down
stairs.”

“My dear Percival,” observed his lordship kindly, “Mrs. Michelson has
duties. Pray recognise her admirable performance of them as sincerely
as I do! How is the sufferer, Mrs. Michelson?”

“No better, my lord, I regret to say.”

“Sad—most sad!” remarked the Count. “You look fatigued, Mrs. Michelson.
It is certainly time you and my wife had some help in nursing. I think
I may be the means of offering you that help. Circumstances have
happened which will oblige Madame Fosco to travel to London either
to-morrow or the day after. She will go away in the morning and return
at night, and she will bring back with her, to relieve you, a nurse of
excellent conduct and capacity, who is now disengaged. The woman is
known to my wife as a person to be trusted. Before she comes here say
nothing about her, if you please, to the doctor, because he will look
with an evil eye on any nurse of my providing. When she appears in this
house she will speak for herself, and Mr. Dawson will be obliged to
acknowledge that there is no excuse for not employing her. Lady Glyde
will say the same. Pray present my best respects and sympathies to Lady
Glyde.”

I expressed my grateful acknowledgments for his lordship’s kind
consideration. Sir Percival cut them short by calling to his noble
friend (using, I regret to say, a profane expression) to come into the
library, and not to keep him waiting there any longer.

I proceeded upstairs. We are poor erring creatures, and however well
established a woman’s principles may be she cannot always keep on
her guard against the temptation to exercise an idle curiosity. I am
ashamed to say that an idle curiosity, on this occasion, got the better
of my principles, and made me unduly inquisitive about the question
which Sir Percival had addressed to his noble friend at the library
door. Who was the Count expected to find in the course of his studious
morning rambles at Blackwater Park? A woman, it was to be presumed,
from the terms of Sir Percival’s inquiry. I did not suspect the Count
of any impropriety—I knew his moral character too well. The only
question I asked myself was—Had he found her?

To resume. The night passed as usual without producing any change
for the better in Miss Halcombe. The next day she seemed to improve
a little. The day after that her ladyship the Countess, without
mentioning the object of her journey to any one in my hearing,
proceeded by the morning train to London—her noble husband, with his
customary attention, accompanying her to the station.

I was now left in sole charge of Miss Halcombe, with every apparent
chance, in consequence of her sister’s resolution not to leave the
bedside, of having Lady Glyde herself to nurse next.

The only circumstance of any importance that happened in the course of
the day was the occurrence of another unpleasant meeting between the
doctor and the Count.

His lordship, on returning from the station, stepped up into Miss
Halcombe’s sitting-room to make his inquiries. I went out from the
bedroom to speak to him, Mr. Dawson and Lady Glyde being both with
the patient at the time. The Count asked me many questions about the
treatment and the symptoms. I informed him that the treatment was of
the kind described as “saline,” and that the symptoms, between the
attacks of fever, were certainly those of increasing weakness and
exhaustion. Just as I was mentioning these last particulars, Mr. Dawson
came out from the bedroom.

“Good-morning, sir,” said his lordship, stepping forward in the most
urbane manner, and stopping the doctor, with a high-bred resolution
impossible to resist, “I greatly fear you find no improvement in the
symptoms to-day?”

“I find decided improvement,” answered Mr. Dawson.

“You still persist in your lowering treatment of this case of fever?”
continued his lordship.

“I persist in the treatment which is justified by my own professional
experience,” said Mr. Dawson.

“Permit me to put one question to you on the vast subject of
professional experience,” observed the Count. “I presume to offer
no more advice—I only presume to make an inquiry. You live at some
distance, sir, from the gigantic centres of scientific activity—London
and Paris. Have you ever heard of the wasting effects of fever being
reasonably and intelligibly repaired by fortifying the exhausted
patient with brandy, wine, ammonia, and quinine? Has that new heresy of
the highest medical authorities ever reached your ears—Yes or No?”

“When a professional man puts that question to me I shall be glad to
answer him,” said the doctor, opening the door to go out. “You are not
a professional man, and I beg to decline answering you.”

Buffeted in this inexcusably uncivil way on one cheek, the Count, like
a practical Christian, immediately turned the other, and said, in the
sweetest manner, “Good-morning, Mr. Dawson.”

If my late beloved husband had been so fortunate as to know his
lordship, how highly he and the Count would have esteemed each other!

Her ladyship the Countess returned by the last train that night, and
brought with her the nurse from London. I was instructed that this
person’s name was Mrs. Rubelle. Her personal appearance, and her
imperfect English when she spoke, informed me that she was a foreigner.

I have always cultivated a feeling of humane indulgence for foreigners.
They do not possess our blessings and advantages, and they are, for
the most part, brought up in the blind errors of Popery. It has also
always been my precept and practice, as it was my dear husband’s
precept and practice before me (see Sermon XXIX. in the Collection by
the late Rev. Samuel Michelson, M.A.), to do as I would be done by.
On both these accounts I will not say that Mrs. Rubelle struck me as
being a small, wiry, sly person, of fifty or thereabouts, with a dark
brown or Creole complexion and watchful light grey eyes. Nor will I
mention, for the reasons just alleged, that I thought her dress, though
it was of the plainest black silk, inappropriately costly in texture
and unnecessarily refined in trimming and finish, for a person in her
position in life. I should not like these things to be said of me, and
therefore it is my duty not to say them of Mrs. Rubelle. I will merely
mention that her manners were, not perhaps unpleasantly reserved, but
only remarkably quiet and retiring—that she looked about her a great
deal, and said very little, which might have arisen quite as much from
her own modesty as from distrust of her position at Blackwater Park;
and that she declined to partake of supper (which was curious perhaps,
but surely not suspicious?), although I myself politely invited her to
that meal in my own room.

At the Count’s particular suggestion (so like his lordship’s forgiving
kindness!), it was arranged that Mrs. Rubelle should not enter on her
duties until she had been seen and approved by the doctor the next
morning. I sat up that night. Lady Glyde appeared to be very unwilling
that the new nurse should be employed to attend on Miss Halcombe.
Such want of liberality towards a foreigner on the part of a lady of
her education and refinement surprised me. I ventured to say, “My
lady, we must all remember not to be hasty in our judgments on our
inferiors—especially when they come from foreign parts.” Lady Glyde did
not appear to attend to me. She only sighed, and kissed Miss Halcombe’s
hand as it lay on the counterpane. Scarcely a judicious proceeding in a
sick-room, with a patient whom it was highly desirable not to excite.
But poor Lady Glyde knew nothing of nursing—nothing whatever, I am
sorry to say.

The next morning Mrs. Rubelle was sent to the sitting-room, to be
approved by the doctor on his way through to the bedroom.

I left Lady Glyde with Miss Halcombe, who was slumbering at the time,
and joined Mrs. Rubelle, with the object of kindly preventing her from
feeling strange and nervous in consequence of the uncertainty of her
situation. She did not appear to see it in that light. She seemed to be
quite satisfied, beforehand, that Mr. Dawson would approve of her, and
she sat calmly looking out of window, with every appearance of enjoying
the country air. Some people might have thought such conduct suggestive
of brazen assurance. I beg to say that I more liberally set it down to
extraordinary strength of mind.

Instead of the doctor coming up to us, I was sent for to see the
doctor. I thought this change of affairs rather odd, but Mrs. Rubelle
did not appear to be affected by it in any way. I left her still calmly
looking out of the window, and still silently enjoying the country air.

Mr. Dawson was waiting for me by himself in the breakfast-room.

“About this new nurse, Mrs. Michelson,” said the doctor.

“Yes, sir?”

“I find that she has been brought here from London by the wife of that
fat old foreigner, who is always trying to interfere with me. Mrs.
Michelson, the fat old foreigner is a quack.”

This was very rude. I was naturally shocked at it.

“Are you aware, sir,” I said, “that you are talking of a nobleman?”

“Pooh! He isn’t the first quack with a handle to his name. They’re all
Counts—hang ’em!”

“He would not be a friend of Sir Percival Glyde’s, sir, if he was not a
member of the highest aristocracy—excepting the English aristocracy, of
course.”

“Very well, Mrs. Michelson, call him what you like, and let us get back
to the nurse. I have been objecting to her already.”

“Without having seen her, sir?”

“Yes, without having seen her. She may be the best nurse in existence,
but she is not a nurse of my providing. I have put that objection to
Sir Percival, as the master of the house. He doesn’t support me. He
says a nurse of my providing would have been a stranger from London
also, and he thinks the woman ought to have a trial, after his wife’s
aunt has taken the trouble to fetch her from London. There is some
justice in that, and I can’t decently say No. But I have made it a
condition that she is to go at once, if I find reason to complain
of her. This proposal being one which I have some right to make,
as medical attendant, Sir Percival has consented to it. Now, Mrs.
Michelson, I know I can depend on you, and I want you to keep a sharp
eye on the nurse for the first day or two, and to see that she gives
Miss Halcombe no medicines but mine. This foreign nobleman of yours is
dying to try his quack remedies (mesmerism included) on my patient, and
a nurse who is brought here by his wife may be a little too willing to
help him. You understand? Very well, then, we may go upstairs. Is the
nurse there? I’ll say a word to her before she goes into the sick-room.”

We found Mrs. Rubelle still enjoying herself at the window. When I
introduced her to Mr. Dawson, neither the doctor’s doubtful looks nor
the doctor’s searching questions appeared to confuse her in the least.
She answered him quietly in her broken English, and though he tried
hard to puzzle her, she never betrayed the least ignorance, so far,
about any part of her duties. This was doubtless the result of strength
of mind, as I said before, and not of brazen assurance, by any means.

We all went into the bedroom.

Mrs. Rubelle looked very attentively at the patient, curtseyed to
Lady Glyde, set one or two little things right in the room, and sat
down quietly in a corner to wait until she was wanted. Her ladyship
seemed startled and annoyed by the appearance of the strange nurse. No
one said anything, for fear of rousing Miss Halcombe, who was still
slumbering, except the doctor, who whispered a question about the
night. I softly answered, “Much as usual,” and then Mr. Dawson went
out. Lady Glyde followed him, I suppose to speak about Mrs. Rubelle.
For my own part, I had made up my mind already that this quiet foreign
person would keep her situation. She had all her wits about her, and
she certainly understood her business. So far, I could hardly have done
much better by the bedside myself.

Remembering Mr. Dawson’s caution to me, I subjected Mrs. Rubelle to a
severe scrutiny at certain intervals for the next three or four days. I
over and over again entered the room softly and suddenly, but I never
found her out in any suspicious action. Lady Glyde, who watched her
as attentively as I did, discovered nothing either. I never detected
a sign of the medicine bottles being tampered with, I never saw Mrs.
Rubelle say a word to the Count, or the Count to her. She managed Miss
Halcombe with unquestionable care and discretion. The poor lady wavered
backwards and forwards between a sort of sleepy exhaustion, which
was half faintness and half slumbering, and attacks of fever which
brought with them more or less of wandering in her mind. Mrs. Rubelle
never disturbed her in the first case, and never startled her in the
second, by appearing too suddenly at the bedside in the character of a
stranger. Honour to whom honour is due (whether foreign or English)—and
I give her privilege impartially to Mrs. Rubelle. She was remarkably
uncommunicative about herself, and she was too quietly independent
of all advice from experienced persons who understood the duties of
a sick-room—but with these drawbacks, she was a good nurse, and she
never gave either Lady Glyde or Mr. Dawson the shadow of a reason for
complaining of her.

The next circumstance of importance that occurred in the house was the
temporary absence of the Count, occasioned by business which took him
to London. He went away (I think) on the morning of the fourth day
after the arrival of Mrs. Rubelle, and at parting he spoke to Lady
Glyde very seriously, in my presence, on the subject of Miss Halcombe.

“Trust Mr. Dawson,” he said, “for a few days more, if you please. But
if there is not some change for the better in that time, send for
advice from London, which this mule of a doctor must accept in spite
of himself. Offend Mr. Dawson, and save Miss Halcombe. I say this
seriously, on my word of honour and from the bottom of my heart.”

His lordship spoke with extreme feeling and kindness. But poor Lady
Glyde’s nerves were so completely broken down that she seemed quite
frightened at him. She trembled from head to foot, and allowed him to
take his leave without uttering a word on her side. She turned to me
when he had gone, and said, “Oh, Mrs. Michelson, I am heartbroken about
my sister, and I have no friend to advise me! Do you think Mr. Dawson
is wrong? He told me himself this morning that there was no fear, and
no need to send for another doctor.”

“With all respect to Mr. Dawson,” I answered, “in your ladyship’s place
I should remember the Count’s advice.”

Lady Glyde turned away from me suddenly, with an appearance of despair,
for which I was quite unable to account.

“HIS advice!” she said to herself. “God help us—HIS advice!”


The Count was away from Blackwater Park, as nearly as I remember, a
week.

Sir Percival seemed to feel the loss of his lordship in various ways,
and appeared also, I thought, much depressed and altered by the
sickness and sorrow in the house. Occasionally he was so very restless
that I could not help noticing it, coming and going, and wandering
here and there and everywhere in the grounds. His inquiries about Miss
Halcombe, and about his lady (whose failing health seemed to cause
him sincere anxiety), were most attentive. I think his heart was much
softened. If some kind clerical friend—some such friend as he might
have found in my late excellent husband—had been near him at this
time, cheering moral progress might have been made with Sir Percival.
I seldom find myself mistaken on a point of this sort, having had
experience to guide me in my happy married days.

Her ladyship the Countess, who was now the only company for Sir
Percival downstairs, rather neglected him, as I considered—or, perhaps,
it might have been that he neglected her. A stranger might almost
have supposed that they were bent, now they were left together alone,
on actually avoiding one another. This, of course, could not be. But
it did so happen, nevertheless, that the Countess made her dinner at
luncheon-time, and that she always came upstairs towards evening,
although Mrs. Rubelle had taken the nursing duties entirely off her
hands. Sir Percival dined by himself, and William (the man out of
livery) made the remark, in my hearing, that his master had put himself
on half rations of food and on a double allowance of drink. I attach
no importance to such an insolent observation as this on the part of a
servant. I reprobated it at the time, and I wish to be understood as
reprobating it once more on this occasion.

In the course of the next few days Miss Halcombe did certainly seem
to all of us to be mending a little. Our faith in Mr. Dawson revived.
He appeared to be very confident about the case, and he assured Lady
Glyde, when she spoke to him on the subject, that he would himself
propose to send for a physician the moment he felt so much as the
shadow of a doubt crossing his own mind.

The only person among us who did not appear to be relieved by these
words was the Countess. She said to me privately, that she could not
feel easy about Miss Halcombe on Mr. Dawson’s authority, and that she
should wait anxiously for her husband’s opinion on his return. That
return, his letters informed her, would take place in three days’ time.
The Count and Countess corresponded regularly every morning during his
lordship’s absence. They were in that respect, as in all others, a
pattern to married people.

On the evening of the third day I noticed a change in Miss Halcombe,
which caused me serious apprehension. Mrs. Rubelle noticed it too. We
said nothing on the subject to Lady Glyde, who was then lying asleep,
completely overpowered by exhaustion, on the sofa in the sitting-room.

Mr. Dawson did not pay his evening visit till later than usual. As soon
as he set eyes on his patient I saw his face alter. He tried to hide
it, but he looked both confused and alarmed. A messenger was sent to
his residence for his medicine-chest, disinfecting preparations were
used in the room, and a bed was made up for him in the house by his
own directions. “Has the fever turned to infection?” I whispered to
him. “I am afraid it has,” he answered; “we shall know better to-morrow
morning.”

By Mr. Dawson’s own directions Lady Glyde was kept in ignorance of
this change for the worse. He himself absolutely forbade her, on
account of her health, to join us in the bedroom that night. She tried
to resist—there was a sad scene—but he had his medical authority to
support him, and he carried his point.

The next morning one of the men-servants was sent to London at eleven
o’clock, with a letter to a physician in town, and with orders to bring
the new doctor back with him by the earliest possible train. Half an
hour after the messenger had gone the Count returned to Blackwater Park.

The Countess, on her own responsibility, immediately brought him in to
see the patient. There was no impropriety that I could discover in her
taking this course. His lordship was a married man, he was old enough
to be Miss Halcombe’s father, and he saw her in the presence of a
female relative, Lady Glyde’s aunt. Mr. Dawson nevertheless protested
against his presence in the room, but I could plainly remark the doctor
was too much alarmed to make any serious resistance on this occasion.

The poor suffering lady was past knowing any one about her. She seemed
to take her friends for enemies. When the Count approached her bedside
her eyes, which had been wandering incessantly round and round the room
before, settled on his face with a dreadful stare of terror, which I
shall remember to my dying day. The Count sat down by her, felt her
pulse and her temples, looked at her very attentively, and then turned
round upon the doctor with such an expression of indignation and
contempt in his face, that the words failed on Mr. Dawson’s lips, and
he stood for a moment, pale with anger and alarm—pale and perfectly
speechless.

His lordship looked next at me.

“When did the change happen?” he asked.

I told him the time.

“Has Lady Glyde been in the room since?”

I replied that she had not. The doctor had absolutely forbidden her to
come into the room on the evening before, and had repeated the order
again in the morning.

“Have you and Mrs. Rubelle been made aware of the full extent of the
mischief?” was his next question.

We were aware, I answered, that the malady was considered infectious.
He stopped me before I could add anything more.

“It is typhus fever,” he said.

In the minute that passed, while these questions and answers were going
on, Mr. Dawson recovered himself, and addressed the Count with his
customary firmness.

“It is NOT typhus fever,” he remarked sharply. “I protest against this
intrusion, sir. No one has a right to put questions here but me. I have
done my duty to the best of my ability—”

The Count interrupted him—not by words, but only by pointing to the
bed. Mr. Dawson seemed to feel that silent contradiction to his
assertion of his own ability, and to grow only the more angry under it.

“I say I have done my duty,” he reiterated. “A physician has been sent
for from London. I will consult on the nature of the fever with him,
and with no one else. I insist on your leaving the room.”

“I entered this room, sir, in the sacred interests of humanity,” said
the Count. “And in the same interests, if the coming of the physician
is delayed, I will enter it again. I warn you once more that the fever
has turned to typhus, and that your treatment is responsible for this
lamentable change. If that unhappy lady dies, I will give my testimony
in a court of justice that your ignorance and obstinacy have been the
cause of her death.”

Before Mr. Dawson could answer, before the Count could leave us, the
door was opened from the sitting-room, and we saw Lady Glyde on the
threshold.

“I MUST and WILL come in,” she said, with extraordinary firmness.

Instead of stopping her, the Count moved into the sitting-room, and
made way for her to go in. On all other occasions he was the last man
in the world to forget anything, but in the surprise of the moment he
apparently forgot the danger of infection from typhus, and the urgent
necessity of forcing Lady Glyde to take proper care of herself.

To my astonishment Mr. Dawson showed more presence of mind. He stopped
her ladyship at the first step she took towards the bedside. “I am
sincerely sorry, I am sincerely grieved,” he said. “The fever may, I
fear, be infectious. Until I am certain that it is not, I entreat you
to keep out of the room.”

She struggled for a moment, then suddenly dropped her arms and sank
forward. She had fainted. The Countess and I took her from the doctor
and carried her into her own room. The Count preceded us, and waited in
the passage till I came out and told him that we had recovered her from
the swoon.

I went back to the doctor to tell him, by Lady Glyde’s desire, that she
insisted on speaking to him immediately. He withdrew at once to quiet
her ladyship’s agitation, and to assure her of the physician’s arrival
in the course of a few hours. Those hours passed very slowly. Sir
Percival and the Count were together downstairs, and sent up from time
to time to make their inquiries. At last, between five and six o’clock,
to our great relief, the physician came.

He was a younger man than Mr. Dawson, very serious and very decided.
What he thought of the previous treatment I cannot say, but it struck
me as curious that he put many more questions to myself and to Mrs.
Rubelle than he put to the doctor, and that he did not appear to listen
with much interest to what Mr. Dawson said, while he was examining Mr.
Dawson’s patient. I began to suspect, from what I observed in this way,
that the Count had been right about the illness all the way through,
and I was naturally confirmed in that idea when Mr. Dawson, after some
little delay, asked the one important question which the London doctor
had been sent for to set at rest.

“What is your opinion of the fever?” he inquired.

“Typhus,” replied the physician. “Typhus fever beyond all doubt.”

That quiet foreign person, Mrs. Rubelle, crossed her thin brown hands
in front of her, and looked at me with a very significant smile. The
Count himself could hardly have appeared more gratified if he had been
present in the room and had heard the confirmation of his own opinion.

After giving us some useful directions about the management of the
patient, and mentioning that he would come again in five days’ time,
the physician withdrew to consult in private with Mr. Dawson. He would
offer no opinion on Miss Halcombe’s chances of recovery—he said it was
impossible at that stage of the illness to pronounce one way or the
other.


The five days passed anxiously.

Countess Fosco and myself took it by turns to relieve Mrs. Rubelle,
Miss Halcombe’s condition growing worse and worse, and requiring our
utmost care and attention. It was a terribly trying time. Lady Glyde
(supported, as Mr. Dawson said, by the constant strain of her suspense
on her sister’s account) rallied in the most extraordinary manner, and
showed a firmness and determination for which I should myself never
have given her credit. She insisted on coming into the sick-room two
or three times every day, to look at Miss Halcombe with her own eyes,
promising not to go too close to the bed, if the doctor would consent
to her wishes so far. Mr. Dawson very unwillingly made the concession
required of him—I think he saw that it was hopeless to dispute with
her. She came in every day, and she self-denyingly kept her promise. I
felt it personally so distressing (as reminding me of my own affliction
during my husband’s last illness) to see how she suffered under these
circumstances, that I must beg not to dwell on this part of the subject
any longer. It is more agreeable to me to mention that no fresh
disputes took place between Mr. Dawson and the Count. His lordship made
all his inquiries by deputy, and remained continually in company with
Sir Percival downstairs.

On the fifth day the physician came again and gave us a little hope.
He said the tenth day from the first appearance of the typhus would
probably decide the result of the illness, and he arranged for his
third visit to take place on that date. The interval passed as
before—except that the Count went to London again one morning and
returned at night.

On the tenth day it pleased a merciful Providence to relieve our
household from all further anxiety and alarm. The physician positively
assured us that Miss Halcombe was out of danger. “She wants no doctor
now—all she requires is careful watching and nursing for some time to
come, and that I see she has.” Those were his own words. That evening
I read my husband’s touching sermon on Recovery from Sickness, with
more happiness and advantage (in a spiritual point of view) than I ever
remember to have derived from it before.

The effect of the good news on poor Lady Glyde was, I grieve to say,
quite overpowering. She was too weak to bear the violent reaction, and
in another day or two she sank into a state of debility and depression
which obliged her to keep her room. Rest and quiet, and change of air
afterwards, were the best remedies which Mr. Dawson could suggest for
her benefit. It was fortunate that matters were no worse, for, on the
very day after she took to her room, the Count and the doctor had
another disagreement—and this time the dispute between them was of so
serious a nature that Mr. Dawson left the house.

I was not present at the time, but I understood that the subject of
dispute was the amount of nourishment which it was necessary to give to
assist Miss Halcombe’s convalescence after the exhaustion of the fever.
Mr. Dawson, now that his patient was safe, was less inclined than ever
to submit to unprofessional interference, and the Count (I cannot
imagine why) lost all the self-control which he had so judiciously
preserved on former occasions, and taunted the doctor, over and over
again, with his mistake about the fever when it changed to typhus. The
unfortunate affair ended in Mr. Dawson’s appealing to Sir Percival, and
threatening (now that he could leave without absolute danger to Miss
Halcombe) to withdraw from his attendance at Blackwater Park if the
Count’s interference was not peremptorily suppressed from that moment.
Sir Percival’s reply (though not designedly uncivil) had only resulted
in making matters worse, and Mr. Dawson had thereupon withdrawn from
the house in a state of extreme indignation at Count Fosco’s usage of
him, and had sent in his bill the next morning.

We were now, therefore, left without the attendance of a medical man.
Although there was no actual necessity for another doctor—nursing and
watching being, as the physician had observed, all that Miss Halcombe
required—I should still, if my authority had been consulted, have
obtained professional assistance from some other quarter, for form’s
sake.

The matter did not seem to strike Sir Percival in that light. He said
it would be time enough to send for another doctor if Miss Halcombe
showed any signs of a relapse. In the meanwhile we had the Count to
consult in any minor difficulty, and we need not unnecessarily disturb
our patient in her present weak and nervous condition by the presence
of a stranger at her bedside. There was much that was reasonable, no
doubt, in these considerations, but they left me a little anxious
nevertheless. Nor was I quite satisfied in my own mind of the propriety
of our concealing the doctor’s absence as we did from Lady Glyde. It
was a merciful deception, I admit—for she was in no state to bear any
fresh anxieties. But still it was a deception, and, as such, to a
person of my principles, at best a doubtful proceeding.



A second perplexing circumstance which happened on the same day, and
which took me completely by surprise, added greatly to the sense of
uneasiness that was now weighing on my mind.

I was sent for to see Sir Percival in the library. The Count, who was
with him when I went in, immediately rose and left us alone together.
Sir Percival civilly asked me to take a seat, and then, to my great
astonishment, addressed me in these terms—

“I want to speak to you, Mrs. Michelson, about a matter which I decided
on some time ago, and which I should have mentioned before, but for the
sickness and trouble in the house. In plain words, I have reasons for
wishing to break up my establishment immediately at this place—leaving
you in charge, of course, as usual. As soon as Lady Glyde and Miss
Halcombe can travel they must both have change of air. My friends,
Count Fosco and the Countess, will leave us before that time to live
in the neighbourhood of London, and I have reasons for not opening the
house to any more company, with a view to economising as carefully
as I can. I don’t blame you, but my expenses here are a great deal
too heavy. In short, I shall sell the horses, and get rid of all the
servants at once. I never do things by halves, as you know, and I
mean to have the house clear of a pack of useless people by this time
to-morrow.”

I listened to him, perfectly aghast with astonishment.

“Do you mean, Sir Percival, that I am to dismiss the indoor servants
under my charge without the usual month’s warning?” I asked.

“Certainly I do. We may all be out of the house before another month,
and I am not going to leave the servants here in idleness, with no
master to wait on.”

“Who is to do the cooking, Sir Percival, while you are still staying
here?”

“Margaret Porcher can roast and boil—keep her. What do I want with a
cook if I don’t mean to give any dinner-parties?”

“The servant you have mentioned is the most unintelligent servant in
the house, Sir Percival.”

“Keep her, I tell you, and have a woman in from the village to do
the cleaning and go away again. My weekly expenses must and shall be
lowered immediately. I don’t send for you to make objections, Mrs.
Michelson—I send for you to carry out my plans of economy. Dismiss the
whole lazy pack of indoor servants to-morrow, except Porcher. She is as
strong as a horse—and we’ll make her work like a horse.”

“You will excuse me for reminding you, Sir Percival, that if the
servants go to-morrow they must have a month’s wages in lieu of a
month’s warning.”

“Let them! A month’s wages saves a month’s waste and gluttony in the
servants’ hall.”

This last remark conveyed an aspersion of the most offensive kind on
my management. I had too much self-respect to defend myself under so
gross an imputation. Christian consideration for the helpless position
of Miss Halcombe and Lady Glyde, and for the serious inconvenience
which my sudden absence might inflict on them, alone prevented me from
resigning my situation on the spot. I rose immediately. It would have
lowered me in my own estimation to have permitted the interview to
continue a moment longer.

“After that last remark, Sir Percival, I have nothing more to say. Your
directions shall be attended to.” Pronouncing those words, I bowed my
head with the most distant respect, and went out of the room.

The next day the servants left in a body. Sir Percival himself
dismissed the grooms and stablemen, sending them, with all the horses
but one, to London. Of the whole domestic establishment, indoors
and out, there now remained only myself, Margaret Porcher, and the
gardener—this last living in his own cottage, and being wanted to take
care of the one horse that remained in the stables.

With the house left in this strange and lonely condition—with the
mistress of it ill in her room—with Miss Halcombe still as helpless
as a child—and with the doctor’s attendance withdrawn from us in
enmity—it was surely not unnatural that my spirits should sink, and my
customary composure be very hard to maintain. My mind was ill at ease.
I wished the poor ladies both well again, and I wished myself away from
Blackwater Park.




II


The next event that occurred was of so singular a nature that it might
have caused me a feeling of superstitious surprise, if my mind had not
been fortified by principle against any pagan weakness of that sort.
The uneasy sense of something wrong in the family which had made me
wish myself away from Blackwater Park, was actually followed, strange
to say, by my departure from the house. It is true that my absence was
for a temporary period only, but the coincidence was, in my opinion,
not the less remarkable on that account.

My departure took place under the following circumstances—

A day or two after the servants all left I was again sent for to see
Sir Percival. The undeserved slur which he had cast on my management
of the household did not, I am happy to say, prevent me from returning
good for evil to the best of my ability, by complying with his request
as readily and respectfully as ever. It cost me a struggle with that
fallen nature, which we all share in common, before I could suppress
my feelings. Being accustomed to self-discipline, I accomplished the
sacrifice.

I found Sir Percival and Count Fosco sitting together again. On this
occasion his lordship remained present at the interview, and assisted
in the development of Sir Percival’s views.

The subject to which they now requested my attention related to the
healthy change of air by which we all hoped that Miss Halcombe and Lady
Glyde might soon be enabled to profit. Sir Percival mentioned that both
the ladies would probably pass the autumn (by invitation of Frederick
Fairlie, Esquire) at Limmeridge House, Cumberland. But before they went
there, it was his opinion, confirmed by Count Fosco (who here took up
the conversation and continued it to the end), that they would benefit
by a short residence first in the genial climate of Torquay. The great
object, therefore, was to engage lodgings at that place, affording
all the comforts and advantages of which they stood in need, and the
great difficulty was to find an experienced person capable of choosing
the sort of residence which they wanted. In this emergency the Count
begged to inquire, on Sir Percival’s behalf, whether I would object to
give the ladies the benefit of my assistance, by proceeding myself to
Torquay in their interests.

It was impossible for a person in my situation to meet any proposal,
made in these terms, with a positive objection.

I could only venture to represent the serious inconvenience of my
leaving Blackwater Park in the extraordinary absence of all the indoor
servants, with the one exception of Margaret Porcher. But Sir Percival
and his lordship declared that they were both willing to put up with
inconvenience for the sake of the invalids. I next respectfully
suggested writing to an agent at Torquay, but I was met here by being
reminded of the imprudence of taking lodgings without first seeing
them. I was also informed that the Countess (who would otherwise
have gone to Devonshire herself) could not, in Lady Glyde’s present
condition, leave her niece, and that Sir Percival and the Count had
business to transact together which would oblige them to remain at
Blackwater Park. In short, it was clearly shown me that if I did not
undertake the errand, no one else could be trusted with it. Under these
circumstances, I could only inform Sir Percival that my services were
at the disposal of Miss Halcombe and Lady Glyde.

It was thereupon arranged that I should leave the next morning, that
I should occupy one or two days in examining all the most convenient
houses in Torquay, and that I should return with my report as soon as
I conveniently could. A memorandum was written for me by his lordship,
stating the requisites which the place I was sent to take must be found
to possess, and a note of the pecuniary limit assigned to me was added
by Sir Percival.

My own idea on reading over these instructions was, that no such
residence as I saw described could be found at any watering-place
in England, and that, even if it could by chance be discovered, it
would certainly not be parted with for any period on such terms as I
was permitted to offer. I hinted at these difficulties to both the
gentlemen, but Sir Percival (who undertook to answer me) did not appear
to feel them. It was not for me to dispute the question. I said no
more, but I felt a very strong conviction that the business on which I
was sent away was so beset by difficulties that my errand was almost
hopeless at starting.

Before I left I took care to satisfy myself that Miss Halcombe was
going on favourably.

There was a painful expression of anxiety in her face which made me
fear that her mind, on first recovering itself, was not at ease. But
she was certainly strengthening more rapidly than I could have ventured
to anticipate, and she was able to send kind messages to Lady Glyde,
saying that she was fast getting well, and entreating her ladyship not
to exert herself again too soon. I left her in charge of Mrs. Rubelle,
who was still as quietly independent of every one else in the house as
ever. When I knocked at Lady Glyde’s door before going away, I was told
that she was still sadly weak and depressed, my informant being the
Countess, who was then keeping her company in her room. Sir Percival
and the Count were walking on the road to the lodge as I was driven by
in the chaise. I bowed to them and quitted the house, with not a living
soul left in the servants’ offices but Margaret Porcher.

Every one must feel what I have felt myself since that time, that these
circumstances were more than unusual—they were almost suspicious. Let
me, however, say again that it was impossible for me, in my dependent
position, to act otherwise than I did.

The result of my errand at Torquay was exactly what I had foreseen.
No such lodgings as I was instructed to take could be found in the
whole place, and the terms I was permitted to give were much too low
for the purpose, even if I had been able to discover what I wanted. I
accordingly returned to Blackwater Park, and informed Sir Percival, who
met me at the door, that my journey had been taken in vain. He seemed
too much occupied with some other subject to care about the failure of
my errand, and his first words informed me that even in the short time
of my absence another remarkable change had taken place in the house.

The Count and Countess Fosco had left Blackwater Park for their new
residence in St. John’s Wood.

I was not made aware of the motive for this sudden departure—I was
only told that the Count had been very particular in leaving his kind
compliments to me. When I ventured on asking Sir Percival whether Lady
Glyde had any one to attend to her comforts in the absence of the
Countess, he replied that she had Margaret Porcher to wait on her, and
he added that a woman from the village had been sent for to do the work
downstairs.

The answer really shocked me—there was such a glaring impropriety
in permitting an under-housemaid to fill the place of confidential
attendant on Lady Glyde. I went upstairs at once, and met Margaret on
the bedroom landing. Her services had not been required (naturally
enough), her mistress having sufficiently recovered that morning to
be able to leave her bed. I asked next after Miss Halcombe, but I was
answered in a slouching, sulky way, which left me no wiser than I was
before.

I did not choose to repeat the question, and perhaps provoke an
impertinent reply. It was in every respect more becoming to a person in
my position to present myself immediately in Lady Glyde’s room.

I found that her ladyship had certainly gained in health during the
last few days. Although still sadly weak and nervous, she was able to
get up without assistance, and to walk slowly about her room, feeling
no worse effect from the exertion than a slight sensation of fatigue.
She had been made a little anxious that morning about Miss Halcombe,
through having received no news of her from any one. I thought this
seemed to imply a blamable want of attention on the part of Mrs.
Rubelle, but I said nothing, and remained with Lady Glyde to assist her
to dress. When she was ready we both left the room together to go to
Miss Halcombe.

We were stopped in the passage by the appearance of Sir Percival. He
looked as if he had been purposely waiting there to see us.

“Where are you going?” he said to Lady Glyde.

“To Marian’s room,” she answered.

“It may spare you a disappointment,” remarked Sir Percival, “if I tell
you at once that you will not find her there.”

“Not find her there!”

“No. She left the house yesterday morning with Fosco and his wife.”

Lady Glyde was not strong enough to bear the surprise of this
extraordinary statement. She turned fearfully pale, and leaned back
against the wall, looking at her husband in dead silence.

I was so astonished myself that I hardly knew what to say. I asked Sir
Percival if he really meant that Miss Halcombe had left Blackwater Park.

“I certainly mean it,” he answered.

“In her state, Sir Percival! Without mentioning her intentions to Lady
Glyde!”

Before he could reply her ladyship recovered herself a little and spoke.

“Impossible!” she cried out in a loud, frightened manner, taking a step
or two forward from the wall. “Where was the doctor? where was Mr.
Dawson when Marian went away?”

“Mr. Dawson wasn’t wanted, and wasn’t here,” said Sir Percival. “He
left of his own accord, which is enough of itself to show that she was
strong enough to travel. How you stare! If you don’t believe she has
gone, look for yourself. Open her room door, and all the other room
doors if you like.”

She took him at his word, and I followed her. There was no one in
Miss Halcombe’s room but Margaret Porcher, who was busy setting it to
rights. There was no one in the spare rooms or the dressing-rooms when
we looked into them afterwards. Sir Percival still waited for us in the
passage. As we were leaving the last room that we had examined Lady
Glyde whispered, “Don’t go, Mrs. Michelson! don’t leave me, for God’s
sake!” Before I could say anything in return she was out again in the
passage, speaking to her husband.

“What does it mean, Sir Percival? I insist—I beg and pray you will tell
me what it means.”

“It means,” he answered, “that Miss Halcombe was strong enough
yesterday morning to sit up and be dressed, and that she insisted on
taking advantage of Fosco’s going to London to go there too.”

“To London!”

“Yes—on her way to Limmeridge.”

Lady Glyde turned and appealed to me.

“You saw Miss Halcombe last,” she said. “Tell me plainly, Mrs.
Michelson, did you think she looked fit to travel?”

“Not in MY opinion, your ladyship.”

Sir Percival, on his side, instantly turned and appealed to me also.

“Before you went away,” he said, “did you, or did you not, tell the
nurse that Miss Halcombe looked much stronger and better?”

“I certainly made the remark, Sir Percival.”

He addressed her ladyship again the moment I offered that reply.

“Set one of Mrs. Michelson’s opinions fairly against the other,” he
said, “and try to be reasonable about a perfectly plain matter. If she
had not been well enough to be moved do you think we should any of us
have risked letting her go? She has got three competent people to look
after her—Fosco and your aunt, and Mrs. Rubelle, who went away with
them expressly for that purpose. They took a whole carriage yesterday,
and made a bed for her on the seat in case she felt tired. To-day,
Fosco and Mrs. Rubelle go on with her themselves to Cumberland.”

“Why does Marian go to Limmeridge and leave me here by myself?” said
her ladyship, interrupting Sir Percival.

“Because your uncle won’t receive you till he has seen your sister
first,” he replied. “Have you forgotten the letter he wrote to her
at the beginning of her illness? It was shown to you, you read it
yourself, and you ought to remember it.”

“I do remember it.”

“If you do, why should you be surprised at her leaving you? You want to
be back at Limmeridge, and she has gone there to get your uncle’s leave
for you on his own terms.”

Poor Lady Glyde’s eyes filled with tears.

“Marian never left me before,” she said, “without bidding me good-bye.”

“She would have bid you good-bye this time,” returned Sir Percival, “if
she had not been afraid of herself and of you. She knew you would try
to stop her, she knew you would distress her by crying. Do you want to
make any more objections? If you do, you must come downstairs and ask
questions in the dining-room. These worries upset me. I want a glass of
wine.”

He left us suddenly.

His manner all through this strange conversation had been very unlike
what it usually was. He seemed to be almost as nervous and fluttered,
every now and then, as his lady herself. I should never have supposed
that his health had been so delicate, or his composure so easy to upset.

I tried to prevail on Lady Glyde to go back to her room, but it was
useless. She stopped in the passage, with the look of a woman whose
mind was panic-stricken.

“Something has happened to my sister!” she said.

“Remember, my lady, what surprising energy there is in Miss Halcombe,”
I suggested. “She might well make an effort which other ladies in her
situation would be unfit for. I hope and believe there is nothing
wrong—I do indeed.”

“I must follow Marian,” said her ladyship, with the same panic-stricken
look. “I must go where she has gone, I must see that she is alive and
well with my own eyes. Come! come down with me to Sir Percival.”

I hesitated, fearing that my presence might be considered an intrusion.
I attempted to represent this to her ladyship, but she was deaf to me.
She held my arm fast enough to force me to go downstairs with her,
and she still clung to me with all the little strength she had at the
moment when I opened the dining-room door.

Sir Percival was sitting at the table with a decanter of wine before
him. He raised the glass to his lips as we went in and drained it at a
draught. Seeing that he looked at me angrily when he put it down again,
I attempted to make some apology for my accidental presence in the room.

“Do you suppose there are any secrets going on here?” he broke out
suddenly; “there are none—there is nothing underhand, nothing kept from
you or from any one.” After speaking those strange words loudly and
sternly, he filled himself another glass of wine and asked Lady Glyde
what she wanted of him.

“If my sister is fit to travel I am fit to travel” said her ladyship,
with more firmness than she had yet shown. “I come to beg you will make
allowances for my anxiety about Marian, and let me follow her at once
by the afternoon train.”

“You must wait till to-morrow,” replied Sir Percival, “and then if you
don’t hear to the contrary you can go. I don’t suppose you are at all
likely to hear to the contrary, so I shall write to Fosco by to-night’s
post.”

He said those last words holding his glass up to the light, and looking
at the wine in it instead of at Lady Glyde. Indeed he never once looked
at her throughout the conversation. Such a singular want of good
breeding in a gentleman of his rank impressed me, I own, very painfully.

“Why should you write to Count Fosco?” she asked, in extreme surprise.

“To tell him to expect you by the midday train,” said Sir Percival. “He
will meet you at the station when you get to London, and take you on to
sleep at your aunt’s in St. John’s Wood.”

Lady Glyde’s hand began to tremble violently round my arm—why I could
not imagine.

“There is no necessity for Count Fosco to meet me,” she said. “I would
rather not stay in London to sleep.”

“You must. You can’t take the whole journey to Cumberland in one
day. You must rest a night in London—and I don’t choose you to go by
yourself to an hotel. Fosco made the offer to your uncle to give you
house-room on the way down, and your uncle has accepted it. Here! here
is a letter from him addressed to yourself. I ought to have sent it up
this morning, but I forgot. Read it and see what Mr. Fairlie himself
says to you.”

Lady Glyde looked at the letter for a moment and then placed it in my
hands.

“Read it,” she said faintly. “I don’t know what is the matter with me.
I can’t read it myself.”

It was a note of only four lines—so short and so careless that it quite
struck me. If I remember correctly it contained no more than these
words—

“Dearest Laura, Please come whenever you like. Break the journey
by sleeping at your aunt’s house. Grieved to hear of dear Marian’s
illness. Affectionately yours, Frederick Fairlie.”

“I would rather not go there—I would rather not stay a night in
London,” said her ladyship, breaking out eagerly with those words
before I had quite done reading the note, short as it was. “Don’t write
to Count Fosco! Pray, pray don’t write to him!”

Sir Percival filled another glass from the decanter so awkwardly that
he upset it and spilt all the wine over the table. “My sight seems to
be failing me,” he muttered to himself, in an odd, muffled voice. He
slowly set the glass up again, refilled it, and drained it once more at
a draught. I began to fear, from his look and manner, that the wine was
getting into his head.

“Pray don’t write to Count Fosco,” persisted Lady Glyde, more earnestly
than ever.

“Why not, I should like to know?” cried Sir Percival, with a sudden
burst of anger that startled us both. “Where can you stay more properly
in London than at the place your uncle himself chooses for you—at your
aunt’s house? Ask Mrs. Michelson.”

The arrangement proposed was so unquestionably the right and the
proper one, that I could make no possible objection to it. Much as I
sympathised with Lady Glyde in other respects, I could not sympathise
with her in her unjust prejudices against Count Fosco. I never before
met with any lady of her rank and station who was so lamentably
narrow-minded on the subject of foreigners. Neither her uncle’s note
nor Sir Percival’s increasing impatience seemed to have the least
effect on her. She still objected to staying a night in London, she
still implored her husband not to write to the Count.

“Drop it!” said Sir Percival, rudely turning his back on us. “If you
haven’t sense enough to know what is best for yourself other people
must know it for you. The arrangement is made and there is an end of
it. You are only wanted to do what Miss Halcombe has done before you—-”

“Marian?” repeated her Ladyship, in a bewildered manner; “Marian
sleeping in Count Fosco’s house!”

“Yes, in Count Fosco’s house. She slept there last night to break the
journey, and you are to follow her example, and do what your uncle
tells you. You are to sleep at Fosco’s to-morrow night, as your sister
did, to break the journey. Don’t throw too many obstacles in my way!
don’t make me repent of letting you go at all!”

He started to his feet, and suddenly walked out into the verandah
through the open glass doors.

“Will your ladyship excuse me,” I whispered, “if I suggest that we
had better not wait here till Sir Percival comes back? I am very much
afraid he is over-excited with wine.”

She consented to leave the room in a weary, absent manner.

As soon as we were safe upstairs again, I did all I could to compose
her ladyship’s spirits. I reminded her that Mr. Fairlie’s letters to
Miss Halcombe and to herself did certainly sanction, and even render
necessary, sooner or later, the course that had been taken. She agreed
to this, and even admitted, of her own accord, that both letters were
strictly in character with her uncle’s peculiar disposition—but her
fears about Miss Halcombe, and her unaccountable dread of sleeping
at the Count’s house in London, still remained unshaken in spite of
every consideration that I could urge. I thought it my duty to protest
against Lady Glyde’s unfavourable opinion of his lordship, and I did
so, with becoming forbearance and respect.

“Your ladyship will pardon my freedom,” I remarked, in conclusion, “but
it is said, ‘by their fruits ye shall know them.’ I am sure the Count’s
constant kindness and constant attention, from the very beginning of
Miss Halcombe’s illness, merit our best confidence and esteem. Even
his lordship’s serious misunderstanding with Mr. Dawson was entirely
attributable to his anxiety on Miss Halcombe’s account.”

“What misunderstanding?” inquired her ladyship, with a look of sudden
interest.

I related the unhappy circumstances under which Mr. Dawson had
withdrawn his attendance—mentioning them all the more readily because I
disapproved of Sir Percival’s continuing to conceal what had happened
(as he had done in my presence) from the knowledge of Lady Glyde.

Her ladyship started up, with every appearance of being additionally
agitated and alarmed by what I had told her.

“Worse! worse than I thought!” she said, walking about the room, in a
bewildered manner. “The Count knew Mr. Dawson would never consent to
Marian’s taking a journey—he purposely insulted the doctor to get him
out of the house.”

“Oh, my lady! my lady!” I remonstrated.

“Mrs. Michelson!” she went on vehemently, “no words that ever were
spoken will persuade me that my sister is in that man’s power and in
that man’s house with her own consent. My horror of him is such, that
nothing Sir Percival could say and no letters my uncle could write,
would induce me, if I had only my own feelings to consult, to eat,
drink, or sleep under his roof. But my misery of suspense about Marian
gives me the courage to follow her anywhere, to follow her even into
Count Fosco’s house.”

I thought it right, at this point, to mention that Miss Halcombe had
already gone on to Cumberland, according to Sir Percival’s account of
the matter.

“I am afraid to believe it!” answered her ladyship. “I am afraid she is
still in that man’s house. If I am wrong, if she has really gone on to
Limmeridge, I am resolved I will not sleep to-morrow night under Count
Fosco’s roof. My dearest friend in the world, next to my sister, lives
near London. You have heard me, you have heard Miss Halcombe, speak
of Mrs. Vesey? I mean to write, and propose to sleep at her house. I
don’t know how I shall get there—I don’t know how I shall avoid the
Count—but to that refuge I will escape in some way, if my sister has
gone to Cumberland. All I ask of you to do, is to see yourself that
my letter to Mrs. Vesey goes to London to-night, as certainly as Sir
Percival’s letter goes to Count Fosco. I have reasons for not trusting
the post-bag downstairs. Will you keep my secret, and help me in this?
it is the last favour, perhaps, that I shall ever ask of you.”

I hesitated, I thought it all very strange, I almost feared that her
ladyship’s mind had been a little affected by recent anxiety and
suffering. At my own risk, however, I ended by giving my consent. If
the letter had been addressed to a stranger, or to any one but a lady
so well known to me by report as Mrs. Vesey, I might have refused.
I thank God—looking to what happened afterwards—I thank God I never
thwarted that wish, or any other, which Lady Glyde expressed to me, on
the last day of her residence at Blackwater Park.

The letter was written and given into my hands. I myself put it into
the post-box in the village that evening.

We saw nothing more of Sir Percival for the rest of the day.

I slept, by Lady Glyde’s own desire, in the next room to hers, with the
door open between us. There was something so strange and dreadful in
the loneliness and emptiness of the house, that I was glad, on my side,
to have a companion near me. Her ladyship sat up late, reading letters
and burning them, and emptying her drawers and cabinets of little
things she prized, as if she never expected to return to Blackwater
Park. Her sleep was sadly disturbed when she at last went to bed—she
cried out in it several times, once so loud that she woke herself.
Whatever her dreams were, she did not think fit to communicate them
to me. Perhaps, in my situation, I had no right to expect that she
should do so. It matters little now. I was sorry for her, I was indeed
heartily sorry for her all the same.

The next day was fine and sunny. Sir Percival came up, after breakfast,
to tell us that the chaise would be at the door at a quarter to
twelve—the train to London stopping at our station at twenty minutes
after. He informed Lady Glyde that he was obliged to go out, but added
that he hoped to be back before she left. If any unforeseen accident
delayed him, I was to accompany her to the station, and to take special
care that she was in time for the train. Sir Percival communicated
these directions very hastily—walking here and there about the room all
the time. Her ladyship looked attentively after him wherever he went.
He never once looked at her in return.

She only spoke when he had done, and then she stopped him as he
approached the door, by holding out her hand.

“I shall see you no more,” she said, in a very marked manner. “This is
our parting—our parting, it may be for ever. Will you try to forgive
me, Percival, as heartily as I forgive YOU?”

His face turned of an awful whiteness all over, and great beads of
perspiration broke out on his bald forehead. “I shall come back,” he
said, and made for the door, as hastily as if his wife’s farewell words
had frightened him out of the room.

I had never liked Sir Percival, but the manner in which he left Lady
Glyde made me feel ashamed of having eaten his bread and lived in his
service. I thought of saying a few comforting and Christian words to
the poor lady, but there was something in her face, as she looked after
her husband when the door closed on him, that made me alter my mind and
keep silence.

At the time named the chaise drew up at the gates. Her ladyship was
right—Sir Percival never came back. I waited for him till the last
moment, and waited in vain.

No positive responsibility lay on my shoulders, and yet I did not feel
easy in my mind. “It is of your own free will,” I said, as the chaise
drove through the lodge-gates, “that your ladyship goes to London?”

“I will go anywhere,” she answered, “to end the dreadful suspense that
I am suffering at this moment.”

She had made me feel almost as anxious and as uncertain about Miss
Halcombe as she felt herself. I presumed to ask her to write me a
line, if all went well in London. She answered, “Most willingly, Mrs.
Michelson.”

“We all have our crosses to bear, my lady,” I said, seeing her silent
and thoughtful, after she had promised to write.

She made no reply—she seemed to be too much wrapped up in her own
thoughts to attend to me.

“I fear your ladyship rested badly last night,” I remarked, after
waiting a little.

“Yes,” she said, “I was terribly disturbed by dreams.”

“Indeed, my lady?” I thought she was going to tell me her dreams, but
no, when she spoke next it was only to ask a question.

“You posted the letter to Mrs. Vesey with your own hands?”

“Yes, my lady.”

“Did Sir Percival say, yesterday, that Count Fosco was to meet me at
the terminus in London?”

“He did, my lady.”

She sighed heavily when I answered that last question, and said no more.

We arrived at the station, with hardly two minutes to spare. The
gardener (who had driven us) managed about the luggage, while I took
the ticket. The whistle of the train was sounding when I joined her
ladyship on the platform. She looked very strangely, and pressed her
hand over her heart, as if some sudden pain or fright had overcome her
at that moment.

“I wish you were going with me!” she said, catching eagerly at my arm
when I gave her the ticket.

If there had been time, if I had felt the day before as I felt then,
I would have made my arrangements to accompany her, even though the
doing so had obliged me to give Sir Percival warning on the spot. As it
was, her wishes, expressed at the last moment only, were expressed too
late for me to comply with them. She seemed to understand this herself
before I could explain it, and did not repeat her desire to have me for
a travelling companion. The train drew up at the platform. She gave the
gardener a present for his children, and took my hand, in her simple
hearty manner, before she got into the carriage.

“You have been very kind to me and to my sister,” she said—“kind when
we were both friendless. I shall remember you gratefully, as long as I
live to remember any one. Good-bye—and God bless you!”

She spoke those words with a tone and a look which brought the tears
into my eyes—she spoke them as if she was bidding me farewell for ever.

“Good-bye, my lady,” I said, putting her into the carriage, and trying
to cheer her; “good-bye, for the present only; good-bye, with my best
and kindest wishes for happier times.”

She shook her head, and shuddered as she settled herself in the
carriage. The guard closed the door. “Do you believe in dreams?” she
whispered to me at the window. “My dreams, last night, were dreams I
have never had before. The terror of them is hanging over me still.”
The whistle sounded before I could answer, and the train moved. Her
pale quiet face looked at me for the last time—looked sorrowfully and
solemnly from the window. She waved her hand, and I saw her no more.


Towards five o’clock on the afternoon of that same day, having a little
time to myself in the midst of the household duties which now pressed
upon me, I sat down alone in my own room, to try and compose my mind
with the volume of my husband’s Sermons. For the first time in my life
I found my attention wandering over those pious and cheering words.
Concluding that Lady Glyde’s departure must have disturbed me far more
seriously than I had myself supposed, I put the book aside, and went
out to take a turn in the garden. Sir Percival had not yet returned, to
my knowledge, so I could feel no hesitation about showing myself in the
grounds.

On turning the corner of the house, and gaining a view of the garden,
I was startled by seeing a stranger walking in it. The stranger was
a woman—she was lounging along the path with her back to me, and was
gathering the flowers.

As I approached she heard me, and turned round.

My blood curdled in my veins. The strange woman in the garden was Mrs.
Rubelle!

I could neither move nor speak. She came up to me, as composedly as
ever, with her flowers in her hand.

“What is the matter, ma’am?” she said quietly.

“You here!” I gasped out. “Not gone to London! Not gone to Cumberland!”

Mrs. Rubelle smelt at her flowers with a smile of malicious pity.

“Certainly not,” she said. “I have never left Blackwater Park.”

I summoned breath enough and courage enough for another question.

“Where is Miss Halcombe?”

Mrs. Rubelle fairly laughed at me this time, and replied in these words—

“Miss Halcombe, ma’am, has not left Blackwater Park either.”

When I heard that astounding answer, all my thoughts were startled
back on the instant to my parting with Lady Glyde. I can hardly say I
reproached myself, but at that moment I think I would have given many a
year’s hard savings to have known four hours earlier what I knew now.

Mrs. Rubelle waited, quietly arranging her nosegay, as if she expected
me to say something.

I could say nothing. I thought of Lady Glyde’s worn-out energies and
weakly health, and I trembled for the time when the shock of the
discovery that I had made would fall on her. For a minute or more my
fears for the poor ladies silenced me. At the end of that time Mrs.
Rubelle looked up sideways from her flowers, and said, “Here is Sir
Percival, ma’am, returned from his ride.”

I saw him as soon as she did. He came towards us, slashing viciously
at the flowers with his riding-whip. When he was near enough to see
my face he stopped, struck at his boot with the whip, and burst out
laughing, so harshly and so violently that the birds flew away,
startled, from the tree by which he stood.

“Well, Mrs. Michelson,” he said, “you have found it out at last, have
you?”

I made no reply. He turned to Mrs. Rubelle.

“When did you show yourself in the garden?”

“I showed myself about half an hour ago, sir. You said I might take my
liberty again as soon as Lady Glyde had gone away to London.”

“Quite right. I don’t blame you—I only asked the question.” He waited
a moment, and then addressed himself once more to me. “You can’t
believe it, can you?” he said mockingly. “Here! come along and see for
yourself.”

He led the way round to the front of the house. I followed him, and
Mrs. Rubelle followed me. After passing through the iron gates he
stopped, and pointed with his whip to the disused middle wing of the
building.

“There!” he said. “Look up at the first floor. You know the old
Elizabethan bedrooms? Miss Halcombe is snug and safe in one of the best
of them at this moment. Take her in, Mrs. Rubelle (you have got your
key?); take Mrs. Michelson in, and let her own eyes satisfy her that
there is no deception this time.”

The tone in which he spoke to me, and the minute or two that had passed
since we left the garden, helped me to recover my spirits a little.
What I might have done at this critical moment, if all my life had been
passed in service, I cannot say. As it was, possessing the feelings,
the principles, and the bringing up of a lady, I could not hesitate
about the right course to pursue. My duty to myself, and my duty to
Lady Glyde, alike forbade me to remain in the employment of a man who
had shamefully deceived us both by a series of atrocious falsehoods.

“I must beg permission, Sir Percival, to speak a few words to you in
private,” I said. “Having done so, I shall be ready to proceed with
this person to Miss Halcombe’s room.”

Mrs. Rubelle, whom I had indicated by a slight turn of my head,
insolently sniffed at her nosegay and walked away, with great
deliberation, towards the house door.

“Well,” said Sir Percival sharply, “what is it now?”

“I wish to mention, sir, that I am desirous of resigning the situation
I now hold at Blackwater Park.” That was literally how I put it. I was
resolved that the first words spoken in his presence should be words
which expressed my intention to leave his service.

He eyed me with one of his blackest looks, and thrust his hands
savagely into the pockets of his riding-coat.

“Why?” he said; “why, I should like to know?”

“It is not for me, Sir Percival, to express an opinion on what has
taken place in this house. I desire to give no offence. I merely wish
to say that I do not feel it consistent with my duty to Lady Glyde and
to myself to remain any longer in your service.”

“Is it consistent with your duty to me to stand there, casting
suspicion on me to my face?” he broke out in his most violent manner.
“I see what you’re driving at. You have taken your own mean, underhand
view of an innocent deception practised on Lady Glyde for her own
good. It was essential to her health that she should have a change of
air immediately, and you know as well as I do she would never have
gone away if she had been told Miss Halcombe was still left here. She
has been deceived in her own interests—and I don’t care who knows it.
Go, if you like—there are plenty of housekeepers as good as you to be
had for the asking. Go when you please—but take care how you spread
scandals about me and my affairs when you’re out of my service. Tell
the truth, and nothing but the truth, or it will be the worse for you!
See Miss Halcombe for yourself—see if she hasn’t been as well taken
care of in one part of the house as in the other. Remember the doctor’s
own orders that Lady Glyde was to have a change of air at the earliest
possible opportunity. Bear all that well in mind, and then say anything
against me and my proceedings if you dare!”

He poured out these words fiercely, all in a breath, walking backwards
and forwards, and striking about him in the air with his whip.

Nothing that he said or did shook my opinion of the disgraceful series
of falsehoods that he had told in my presence the day before, or of the
cruel deception by which he had separated Lady Glyde from her sister,
and had sent her uselessly to London, when she was half distracted with
anxiety on Miss Halcombe’s account. I naturally kept these thoughts to
myself, and said nothing more to irritate him; but I was not the less
resolved to persist in my purpose. A soft answer turneth away wrath,
and I suppressed my own feelings accordingly when it was my turn to
reply.

“While I am in your service, Sir Percival,” I said, “I hope I know my
duty well enough not to inquire into your motives. When I am out of
your service, I hope I know my own place well enough not to speak of
matters which don’t concern me—”

“When do you want to go?” he asked, interrupting me without ceremony.
“Don’t suppose I am anxious to keep you—don’t suppose I care about your
leaving the house. I am perfectly fair and open in this matter, from
first to last. When do you want to go?”

“I should wish to leave at your earliest convenience, Sir Percival.”

“My convenience has nothing to do with it. I shall be out of the house
for good and all to-morrow morning, and I can settle your accounts
to-night. If you want to study anybody’s convenience, it had better be
Miss Halcombe’s. Mrs. Rubelle’s time is up to-day, and she has reasons
for wishing to be in London to-night. If you go at once, Miss Halcombe
won’t have a soul left here to look after her.”

I hope it is unnecessary for me to say that I was quite incapable
of deserting Miss Halcombe in such an emergency as had now befallen
Lady Glyde and herself. After first distinctly ascertaining from Sir
Percival that Mrs. Rubelle was certain to leave at once if I took her
place, and after also obtaining permission to arrange for Mr. Dawson’s
resuming his attendance on his patient, I willingly consented to remain
at Blackwater Park until Miss Halcombe no longer required my services.
It was settled that I should give Sir Percival’s solicitor a week’s
notice before I left, and that he was to undertake the necessary
arrangements for appointing my successor. The matter was discussed in
very few words. At its conclusion Sir Percival abruptly turned on his
heel, and left me free to join Mrs. Rubelle. That singular foreign
person had been sitting composedly on the door-step all this time,
waiting till I could follow her to Miss Halcombe’s room.

I had hardly walked half-way towards the house when Sir Percival, who
had withdrawn in the opposite direction, suddenly stopped and called me
back.

“Why are you leaving my service?” he asked.

The question was so extraordinary, after what had just passed between
us, that I hardly knew what to say in answer to it.

“Mind! I don’t know why you are going,” he went on. “You must give a
reason for leaving me, I suppose, when you get another situation. What
reason? The breaking up of the family? Is that it?”

“There can be no positive objection, Sir Percival, to that reason——”

“Very well! That’s all I want to know. If people apply for your
character, that’s your reason, stated by yourself. You go in
consequence of the breaking up of the family.”

He turned away again before I could say another word, and walked out
rapidly into the grounds. His manner was as strange as his language. I
acknowledge he alarmed me.

Even the patience of Mrs. Rubelle was getting exhausted, when I joined
her at the house door.

“At last!” she said, with a shrug of her lean foreign shoulders. She
led the way into the inhabited side of the house, ascended the stairs,
and opened with her key the door at the end of the passage, which
communicated with the old Elizabethan rooms—a door never previously
used, in my time, at Blackwater Park. The rooms themselves I knew
well, having entered them myself on various occasions from the other
side of the house. Mrs. Rubelle stopped at the third door along the
old gallery, handed me the key of it, with the key of the door of
communication, and told me I should find Miss Halcombe in that room.
Before I went in I thought it desirable to make her understand that her
attendance had ceased. Accordingly, I told her in plain words that the
charge of the sick lady henceforth devolved entirely on myself.

“I am glad to hear it, ma’am,” said Mrs. Rubelle. “I want to go very
much.”

“Do you leave to-day?” I asked, to make sure of her.

“Now that you have taken charge, ma’am, I leave in half an hour’s time.
Sir Percival has kindly placed at my disposition the gardener, and the
chaise, whenever I want them. I shall want them in half an hour’s time
to go to the station. I am packed up in anticipation already. I wish
you good-day, ma’am.”

She dropped a brisk curtsey, and walked back along the gallery, humming
a little tune, and keeping time to it cheerfully with the nosegay in
her hand. I am sincerely thankful to say that was the last I saw of
Mrs. Rubelle.

When I went into the room Miss Halcombe was asleep. I looked at her
anxiously, as she lay in the dismal, high, old-fashioned bed. She was
certainly not in any respect altered for the worse since I had seen her
last. She had not been neglected, I am bound to admit, in any way that
I could perceive. The room was dreary, and dusty, and dark, but the
window (looking on a solitary court-yard at the back of the house) was
opened to let in the fresh air, and all that could be done to make the
place comfortable had been done. The whole cruelty of Sir Percival’s
deception had fallen on poor Lady Glyde. The only ill-usage which
either he or Mrs. Rubelle had inflicted on Miss Halcombe consisted, so
far as I could see, in the first offence of hiding her away.

I stole back, leaving the sick lady still peacefully asleep, to give
the gardener instructions about bringing the doctor. I begged the man,
after he had taken Mrs. Rubelle to the station, to drive round by Mr.
Dawson’s, and leave a message in my name, asking him to call and see
me. I knew he would come on my account, and I knew he would remain when
he found Count Fosco had left the house.

In due course of time the gardener returned, and said that he had
driven round by Mr. Dawson’s residence, after leaving Mrs. Rubelle
at the station. The doctor sent me word that he was poorly in health
himself, but that he would call, if possible, the next morning.

Having delivered his message the gardener was about to withdraw, but I
stopped him to request that he would come back before dark, and sit up
that night, in one of the empty bedrooms, so as to be within call in
case I wanted him. He understood readily enough my unwillingness to be
left alone all night in the most desolate part of that desolate house,
and we arranged that he should come in between eight and nine.

He came punctually, and I found cause to be thankful that I had adopted
the precaution of calling him in. Before midnight Sir Percival’s
strange temper broke out in the most violent and most alarming manner,
and if the gardener had not been on the spot to pacify him on the
instant, I am afraid to think what might have happened.

Almost all the afternoon and evening he had been walking about the
house and grounds in an unsettled, excitable manner, having, in all
probability, as I thought, taken an excessive quantity of wine at
his solitary dinner. However that may be, I heard his voice calling
loudly and angrily in the new wing of the house, as I was taking a
turn backwards and forwards along the gallery the last thing at night.
The gardener immediately ran down to him, and I closed the door of
communication, to keep the alarm, if possible, from reaching Miss
Halcombe’s ears. It was full half an hour before the gardener came
back. He declared that his master was quite out of his senses—not
through the excitement of drink, as I had supposed, but through a kind
of panic or frenzy of mind, for which it was impossible to account. He
had found Sir Percival walking backwards and forwards by himself in
the hall, swearing, with every appearance of the most violent passion,
that he would not stop another minute alone in such a dungeon as his
own house, and that he would take the first stage of his journey
immediately in the middle of the night. The gardener, on approaching
him, had been hunted out, with oaths and threats, to get the horse and
chaise ready instantly. In a quarter of an hour Sir Percival had joined
him in the yard, had jumped into the chaise, and, lashing the horse
into a gallop, had driven himself away, with his face as pale as ashes
in the moonlight. The gardener had heard him shouting and cursing at
the lodge-keeper to get up and open the gate—had heard the wheels roll
furiously on again in the still night, when the gate was unlocked—and
knew no more.

The next day, or a day or two after, I forget which, the chaise was
brought back from Knowlesbury, our nearest town, by the ostler at the
old inn. Sir Percival had stopped there, and had afterwards left by the
train—for what destination the man could not tell. I never received
any further information, either from himself or from any one else, of
Sir Percival’s proceedings, and I am not even aware, at this moment,
whether he is in England or out of it. He and I have not met since he
drove away like an escaped criminal from his own house, and it is my
fervent hope and prayer that we may never meet again.


My own part of this sad family story is now drawing to an end.

I have been informed that the particulars of Miss Halcombe’s waking,
and of what passed between us when she found me sitting by her bedside,
are not material to the purpose which is to be answered by the present
narrative. It will be sufficient for me to say in this place, that she
was not herself conscious of the means adopted to remove her from the
inhabited to the uninhabited part of the house. She was in a deep sleep
at the time, whether naturally or artificially produced she could not
say. In my absence at Torquay, and in the absence of all the resident
servants except Margaret Porcher (who was perpetually eating, drinking,
or sleeping, when she was not at work), the secret transfer of Miss
Halcombe from one part of the house to the other was no doubt easily
performed. Mrs. Rubelle (as I discovered for myself, in looking about
the room) had provisions, and all other necessaries, together with the
means of heating water, broth, and so on, without kindling a fire,
placed at her disposal during the few days of her imprisonment with
the sick lady. She had declined to answer the questions which Miss
Halcombe naturally put, but had not, in other respects, treated her
with unkindness or neglect. The disgrace of lending herself to a vile
deception is the only disgrace with which I can conscientiously charge
Mrs. Rubelle.

I need write no particulars (and I am relieved to know it) of the
effect produced on Miss Halcombe by the news of Lady Glyde’s departure,
or by the far more melancholy tidings which reached us only too soon
afterwards at Blackwater Park. In both cases I prepared her mind
beforehand as gently and as carefully as possible, having the doctor’s
advice to guide me, in the last case only, through Mr. Dawson’s being
too unwell to come to the house for some days after I had sent for
him. It was a sad time, a time which it afflicts me to think of or to
write of now. The precious blessings of religious consolation which
I endeavoured to convey were long in reaching Miss Halcombe’s heart,
but I hope and believe they came home to her at last. I never left her
till her strength was restored. The train which took me away from that
miserable house was the train which took her away also. We parted very
mournfully in London. I remained with a relative at Islington, and she
went on to Mr. Fairlie’s house in Cumberland.

I have only a few lines more to write before I close this painful
statement. They are dictated by a sense of duty.

In the first place, I wish to record my own personal conviction that no
blame whatever, in connection with the events which I have now related,
attaches to Count Fosco. I am informed that a dreadful suspicion has
been raised, and that some very serious constructions are placed upon
his lordship’s conduct. My persuasion of the Count’s innocence remains,
however, quite unshaken. If he assisted Sir Percival in sending me to
Torquay, he assisted under a delusion, for which, as a foreigner and
a stranger, he was not to blame. If he was concerned in bringing Mrs.
Rubelle to Blackwater Park, it was his misfortune and not his fault,
when that foreign person was base enough to assist a deception planned
and carried out by the master of the house. I protest, in the interests
of morality, against blame being gratuitously and wantonly attached to
the proceedings of the Count.

In the second place, I desire to express my regret at my own inability
to remember the precise day on which Lady Glyde left Blackwater Park
for London. I am told that it is of the last importance to ascertain
the exact date of that lamentable journey, and I have anxiously taxed
my memory to recall it. The effort has been in vain. I can only
remember now that it was towards the latter part of July. We all know
the difficulty, after a lapse of time, of fixing precisely on a past
date unless it has been previously written down. That difficulty is
greatly increased in my case by the alarming and confusing events which
took place about the period of Lady Glyde’s departure. I heartily wish
I had made a memorandum at the time. I heartily wish my memory of the
date was as vivid as my memory of that poor lady’s face, when it looked
at me sorrowfully for the last time from the carriage window.




THE STORY CONTINUED IN SEVERAL NARRATIVES

1. THE NARRATIVE OF HESTER PINHORN, COOK IN THE SERVICE OF COUNT FOSCO

[Taken down from her own statement]


I am sorry to say that I have never learnt to read or write. I have
been a hard-working woman all my life, and have kept a good character.
I know that it is a sin and wickedness to say the thing which is not,
and I will truly beware of doing so on this occasion. All that I know
I will tell, and I humbly beg the gentleman who takes this down to put
my language right as he goes on, and to make allowances for my being no
scholar.

In this last summer I happened to be out of place (through no fault
of my own), and I heard of a situation as plain cook, at Number Five,
Forest Road, St. John’s Wood. I took the place on trial. My master’s
name was Fosco. My mistress was an English lady. He was Count and she
was Countess. There was a girl to do housemaid’s work when I got there.
She was not over-clean or tidy, but there was no harm in her. I and she
were the only servants in the house.

Our master and mistress came after we got in; and as soon as they did
come we were told, downstairs, that company was expected from the
country.

The company was my mistress’s niece, and the back bedroom on the
first floor was got ready for her. My mistress mentioned to me that
Lady Glyde (that was her name) was in poor health, and that I must
be particular in my cooking accordingly. She was to come that day,
as well as I can remember—but whatever you do, don’t trust my memory
in the matter. I am sorry to say it’s no use asking me about days of
the month, and such-like. Except Sundays, half my time I take no heed
of them, being a hard-working woman and no scholar. All I know is
Lady Glyde came, and when she did come, a fine fright she gave us all
surely. I don’t know how master brought her to the house, being hard
at work at the time. But he did bring her in the afternoon, I think,
and the housemaid opened the door to them, and showed them into the
parlour. Before she had been long down in the kitchen again with me, we
heard a hurry-skurry upstairs, and the parlour bell ringing like mad,
and my mistress’s voice calling out for help.

We both ran up, and there we saw the lady laid on the sofa, with her
face ghastly white, and her hands fast clenched, and her head drawn
down to one side. She had been taken with a sudden fright, my mistress
said, and master he told us she was in a fit of convulsions. I ran out,
knowing the neighbourhood a little better than the rest of them, to
fetch the nearest doctor’s help. The nearest help was at Goodricke’s
and Garth’s, who worked together as partners, and had a good name and
connection, as I have heard, all round St. John’s Wood. Mr. Goodricke
was in, and he came back with me directly.

It was some time before he could make himself of much use. The poor
unfortunate lady fell out of one fit into another, and went on so till
she was quite wearied out, and as helpless as a new-born babe. We then
got her to bed. Mr. Goodricke went away to his house for medicine, and
came back again in a quarter of an hour or less. Besides the medicine
he brought a bit of hollow mahogany wood with him, shaped like a kind
of trumpet, and after waiting a little while, he put one end over the
lady’s heart and the other to his ear, and listened carefully.

When he had done he says to my mistress, who was in the room, “This
is a very serious case,” he says, “I recommend you to write to
Lady Glyde’s friends directly.” My mistress says to him, “Is it
heart-disease?” And he says, “Yes, heart-disease of a most dangerous
kind.” He told her exactly what he thought was the matter, which I was
not clever enough to understand. But I know this, he ended by saying
that he was afraid neither his help nor any other doctor’s help was
likely to be of much service.

My mistress took this ill news more quietly than my master. He was a
big, fat, odd sort of elderly man, who kept birds and white mice, and
spoke to them as if they were so many Christian children. He seemed
terribly cut up by what had happened. “Ah! poor Lady Glyde! poor dear
Lady Glyde!” he says, and went stalking about, wringing his fat hands
more like a play-actor than a gentleman. For one question my mistress
asked the doctor about the lady’s chances of getting round, he asked
a good fifty at least. I declare he quite tormented us all, and when
he was quiet at last, out he went into the bit of back garden, picking
trumpery little nosegays, and asking me to take them upstairs and make
the sick-room look pretty with them. As if THAT did any good. I think
he must have been, at times, a little soft in his head. But he was not
a bad master—he had a monstrous civil tongue of his own, and a jolly,
easy, coaxing way with him. I liked him a deal better than my mistress.
She was a hard one, if ever there was a hard one yet.

Towards night-time the lady roused up a little. She had been so wearied
out, before that, by the convulsions, that she never stirred hand or
foot, or spoke a word to anybody. She moved in the bed now, and stared
about her at the room and us in it. She must have been a nice-looking
lady when well, with light hair, and blue eyes and all that. Her rest
was troubled at night—at least so I heard from my mistress, who sat up
alone with her. I only went in once before going to bed to see if I
could be of any use, and then she was talking to herself in a confused,
rambling manner. She seemed to want sadly to speak to somebody who
was absent from her somewhere. I couldn’t catch the name the first
time, and the second time master knocked at the door, with his regular
mouthful of questions, and another of his trumpery nosegays.

When I went in early the next morning, the lady was clean worn out
again, and lay in a kind of faint sleep. Mr. Goodricke brought his
partner, Mr. Garth, with him to advise. They said she must not be
disturbed out of her rest on any account. They asked my mistress many
questions, at the other end of the room, about what the lady’s health
had been in past times, and who had attended her, and whether she had
ever suffered much and long together under distress of mind. I remember
my mistress said “Yes” to that last question. And Mr. Goodricke
looked at Mr. Garth, and shook his head; and Mr. Garth looked at Mr.
Goodricke, and shook his head. They seemed to think that the distress
might have something to do with the mischief at the lady’s heart. She
was but a frail thing to look at, poor creature! Very little strength
at any time, I should say—very little strength.

Later on the same morning, when she woke, the lady took a sudden turn,
and got seemingly a great deal better. I was not let in again to see
her, no more was the housemaid, for the reason that she was not to be
disturbed by strangers. What I heard of her being better was through
my master. He was in wonderful good spirits about the change, and
looked in at the kitchen window from the garden, with his great big
curly-brimmed white hat on, to go out.

“Good Mrs. Cook,” says he, “Lady Glyde is better. My mind is more easy
than it was, and I am going out to stretch my big legs with a sunny
little summer walk. Shall I order for you, shall I market for you, Mrs.
Cook? What are you making there? A nice tart for dinner? Much crust, if
you please—much crisp crust, my dear, that melts and crumbles delicious
in the mouth.” That was his way. He was past sixty, and fond of pastry.
Just think of that!

The doctor came again in the forenoon, and saw for himself that Lady
Glyde had woke up better. He forbid us to talk to her, or to let her
talk to us, in case she was that way disposed, saying she must be kept
quiet before all things, and encouraged to sleep as much as possible.
She did not seem to want to talk whenever I saw her, except overnight,
when I couldn’t make out what she was saying—she seemed too much worn
down. Mr. Goodricke was not nearly in such good spirits about her as
master. He said nothing when he came downstairs, except that he would
call again at five o’clock.

About that time (which was before master came home again) the bell
rang hard from the bedroom, and my mistress ran out into the landing,
and called to me to go for Mr. Goodricke, and tell him the lady had
fainted. I got on my bonnet and shawl, when, as good luck would have
it, the doctor himself came to the house for his promised visit.

I let him in, and went upstairs along with him. “Lady Glyde was just
as usual,” says my mistress to him at the door; “she was awake, and
looking about her in a strange, forlorn manner, when I heard her give a
sort of half cry, and she fainted in a moment.” The doctor went up to
the bed, and stooped down over the sick lady. He looked very serious,
all on a sudden, at the sight of her, and put his hand on her heart.

My mistress stared hard in Mr. Goodricke’s face. “Not dead!” says she,
whispering, and turning all of a tremble from head to foot.

“Yes,” says the doctor, very quiet and grave. “Dead. I was afraid it
would happen suddenly when I examined her heart yesterday.” My mistress
stepped back from the bedside while he was speaking, and trembled and
trembled again. “Dead!” she whispers to herself; “dead so suddenly!
dead so soon! What will the Count say?” Mr. Goodricke advised her to go
downstairs, and quiet herself a little. “You have been sitting up all
night,” says he, “and your nerves are shaken. This person,” says he,
meaning me, “this person will stay in the room till I can send for the
necessary assistance.” My mistress did as he told her. “I must prepare
the Count,” she says. “I must carefully prepare the Count.” And so she
left us, shaking from head to foot, and went out.

“Your master is a foreigner,” says Mr. Goodricke, when my mistress
had left us. “Does he understand about registering the death?” “I
can’t rightly tell, sir,” says I, “but I should think not.” The doctor
considered a minute, and then says he, “I don’t usually do such
things,” says he, “but it may save the family trouble in this case if
I register the death myself. I shall pass the district office in half
an hour’s time, and I can easily look in. Mention, if you please, that
I will do so.” “Yes, sir,” says I, “with thanks, I’m sure, for your
kindness in thinking of it.” “You don’t mind staying here till I can
send you the proper person?” says he. “No, sir,” says I; “I’ll stay
with the poor lady till then. I suppose nothing more could be done,
sir, than was done?” says I. “No,” says he, “nothing; she must have
suffered sadly before ever I saw her—the case was hopeless when I was
called in.” “Ah, dear me! we all come to it, sooner or later, don’t we,
sir?” says I. He gave no answer to that—he didn’t seem to care about
talking. He said, “Good-day,” and went out.

I stopped by the bedside from that time till the time when Mr.
Goodricke sent the person in, as he had promised. She was, by name,
Jane Gould. I considered her to be a respectable-looking woman. She
made no remark, except to say that she understood what was wanted of
her, and that she had winded a many of them in her time.

How master bore the news, when he first heard it, is more than I can
tell, not having been present. When I did see him he looked awfully
overcome by it, to be sure. He sat quiet in a corner, with his fat
hands hanging over his thick knees, and his head down, and his eyes
looking at nothing. He seemed not so much sorry, as scared and dazed
like, by what had happened. My mistress managed all that was to be done
about the funeral. It must have cost a sight of money—the coffin, in
particular, being most beautiful. The dead lady’s husband was away, as
we heard, in foreign parts. But my mistress (being her aunt) settled it
with her friends in the country (Cumberland, I think) that she should
be buried there, in the same grave along with her mother. Everything
was done handsomely, in respect of the funeral, I say again, and master
went down to attend the burying in the country himself. He looked grand
in his deep mourning, with his big solemn face, and his slow walk, and
his broad hatband—that he did!

In conclusion. I have to say, in answer to questions put to me—

(1) That neither I nor my fellow-servant ever saw my master give Lady
Glyde any medicine himself.

(2) That he was never, to my knowledge and belief, left alone in the
room with Lady Glyde.

(3) That I am not able to say what caused the sudden fright, which
my mistress informed me had seized the lady on her first coming into
the house. The cause was never explained, either to me or to my
fellow-servant.

The above statement has been read over in my presence. I have nothing
to add to it, or to take away from it. I say, on my oath as a Christian
woman, this is the truth.

(Signed) HESTER PINHORN, Her + Mark.


2. THE NARRATIVE OF THE DOCTOR

To the Registrar of the Sub-District in which the undermentioned
death took place.—I hereby certify that I attended Lady Glyde, aged
Twenty-One last Birthday; that I last saw her on Thursday the 25th July
1850; that she died on the same day at No. 5 Forest Road, St. John’s
Wood, and that the cause of her death was Aneurism. Duration of disease
not known.

                      (Signed) Alfred Goodricke.

Prof. Title.  M.R.C.S. Eng., L.S.A.
  Address,  12 Croydon Gardens
     St. John's Wood.


3. THE NARRATIVE OF JANE GOULD

I was the person sent in by Mr. Goodricke to do what was right and
needful by the remains of a lady who had died at the house named in
the certificate which precedes this. I found the body in charge of the
servant, Hester Pinhorn. I remained with it, and prepared it at the
proper time for the grave. It was laid in the coffin in my presence,
and I afterwards saw the coffin screwed down previous to its removal.
When that had been done, and not before, I received what was due to
me and left the house. I refer persons who may wish to investigate my
character to Mr. Goodricke. He will bear witness that I can be trusted
to tell the truth.

(Signed) JANE GOULD


4. THE NARRATIVE OF THE TOMBSTONE

Sacred to the Memory of Laura, Lady Glyde, wife of Sir Percival Glyde,
Bart., of Blackwater Park, Hampshire, and daughter of the late Philip
Fairlie, Esq., of Limmeridge House, in this parish. Born March 27th,
1829; married December 22nd, 1849; died July 25th, 1850.


5. THE NARRATIVE OF WALTER HARTRIGHT

Early in the summer of 1850 I and my surviving companions left the
wilds and forests of Central America for home. Arrived at the coast,
we took ship there for England. The vessel was wrecked in the Gulf of
Mexico—I was among the few saved from the sea. It was my third escape
from peril of death. Death by disease, death by the Indians, death by
drowning—all three had approached me; all three had passed me by.

The survivors of the wreck were rescued by an American vessel bound for
Liverpool. The ship reached her port on the thirteenth day of October
1850. We landed late in the afternoon, and I arrived in London the same
night.

These pages are not the record of my wanderings and my dangers away
from home. The motives which led me from my country and my friends to
a new world of adventure and peril are known. From that self-imposed
exile I came back, as I had hoped, prayed, believed I should come
back—a changed man. In the waters of a new life I had tempered my
nature afresh. In the stern school of extremity and danger my will
had learnt to be strong, my heart to be resolute, my mind to rely on
itself. I had gone out to fly from my own future. I came back to face
it, as a man should.

To face it with that inevitable suppression of myself which I knew
it would demand from me. I had parted with the worst bitterness of
the past, but not with my heart’s remembrance of the sorrow and the
tenderness of that memorable time. I had not ceased to feel the one
irreparable disappointment of my life—I had only learnt to bear it.
Laura Fairlie was in all my thoughts when the ship bore me away, and I
looked my last at England. Laura Fairlie was in all my thoughts when
the ship brought me back, and the morning light showed the friendly
shore in view.

My pen traces the old letters as my heart goes back to the old love. I
write of her as Laura Fairlie still. It is hard to think of her, it is
hard to speak of her, by her husband’s name.

There are no more words of explanation to add on my appearance for the
second time in these pages. This narrative, if I have the strength and
the courage to write it, may now go on.


My first anxieties and first hopes when the morning came centred in my
mother and my sister. I felt the necessity of preparing them for the
joy and surprise of my return, after an absence during which it had
been impossible for them to receive any tidings of me for months past.
Early in the morning I sent a letter to the Hampstead Cottage, and
followed it myself in an hour’s time.

When the first meeting was over, when our quiet and composure of other
days began gradually to return to us, I saw something in my mother’s
face which told me that a secret oppression lay heavy on her heart.
There was more than love—there was sorrow in the anxious eyes that
looked on me so tenderly—there was pity in the kind hand that slowly
and fondly strengthened its hold on mine. We had no concealments from
each other. She knew how the hope of my life had been wrecked—she knew
why I had left her. It was on my lips to ask as composedly as I could
if any letter had come for me from Miss Halcombe, if there was any news
of her sister that I might hear. But when I looked in my mother’s face
I lost courage to put the question even in that guarded form. I could
only say, doubtingly and restrainedly—

“You have something to tell me.”

My sister, who had been sitting opposite to us, rose suddenly without a
word of explanation—rose and left the room.

My mother moved closer to me on the sofa and put her arms round my
neck. Those fond arms trembled—the tears flowed fast over the faithful
loving face.

“Walter!” she whispered, “my own darling! my heart is heavy for you.
Oh, my son! my son! try to remember that I am still left!”

My head sank on her bosom. She had said all in saying those words.

*    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

It was the morning of the third day since my return—the morning of the
sixteenth of October.

I had remained with them at the cottage—I had tried hard not to
embitter the happiness of my return to THEM as it was embittered to ME.
I had done all man could to rise after the shock, and accept my life
resignedly—to let my great sorrow come in tenderness to my heart, and
not in despair. It was useless and hopeless. No tears soothed my aching
eyes, no relief came to me from my sister’s sympathy or my mother’s
love.

On that third morning I opened my heart to them. At last the words
passed my lips which I had longed to speak on the day when my mother
told me of her death.

“Let me go away alone for a little while,” I said. “I shall bear it
better when I have looked once more at the place where I first saw
her—when I have knelt and prayed by the grave where they have laid her
to rest.”

I departed on my journey—my journey to the grave of Laura Fairlie.

It was a quiet autumn afternoon when I stopped at the solitary station,
and set forth alone on foot by the well-remembered road. The waning
sun was shining faintly through thin white clouds—the air was warm
and still—the peacefulness of the lonely country was overshadowed and
saddened by the influence of the falling year.

I reached the moor—I stood again on the brow of the hill—I looked
on along the path—and there were the familiar garden trees in the
distance, the clear sweeping semicircle of the drive, the high white
walls of Limmeridge House. The chances and changes, the wanderings and
dangers of months and months past, all shrank and shrivelled to nothing
in my mind. It was like yesterday since my feet had last trodden the
fragrant heathy ground. I thought I should see her coming to meet me,
with her little straw hat shading her face, her simple dress fluttering
in the air, and her well-filled sketch-book ready in her hand.

Oh death, thou hast thy sting! oh, grave, thou hast thy victory!

I turned aside, and there below me in the glen was the lonesome grey
church, the porch where I had waited for the coming of the woman in
white, the hills encircling the quiet burial-ground, the brook bubbling
cold over its stony bed. There was the marble cross, fair and white, at
the head of the tomb—the tomb that now rose over mother and daughter
alike.

I approached the grave. I crossed once more the low stone stile, and
bared my head as I touched the sacred ground. Sacred to gentleness and
goodness, sacred to reverence and grief.

I stopped before the pedestal from which the cross rose. On one side
of it, on the side nearest to me, the newly-cut inscription met my
eyes—the hard, clear, cruel black letters which told the story of her
life and death. I tried to read them. I did read as far as the name.
“Sacred to the Memory of Laura——” The kind blue eyes dim with tears—the
fair head drooping wearily—the innocent parting words which implored me
to leave her—oh, for a happier last memory of her than this; the memory
I took away with me, the memory I bring back with me to her grave!

A second time I tried to read the inscription. I saw at the end the
date of her death, and above it——

Above it there were lines on the marble—there was a name among them
which disturbed my thoughts of her. I went round to the other side of
the grave, where there was nothing to read, nothing of earthly vileness
to force its way between her spirit and mine.

I knelt down by the tomb. I laid my hands, I laid my head on the broad
white stone, and closed my weary eyes on the earth around, on the light
above. I let her come back to me. Oh, my love! my love! my heart may
speak to you NOW! It is yesterday again since we parted—yesterday,
since your dear hand lay in mine—yesterday, since my eyes looked their
last on you. My love! my love!

*    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

Time had flowed on, and silence had fallen like thick night over its
course.

The first sound that came after the heavenly peace rustled faintly like
a passing breath of air over the grass of the burial-ground. I heard it
nearing me slowly, until it came changed to my ear—came like footsteps
moving onward—then stopped.

I looked up.

The sunset was near at hand. The clouds had parted—the slanting light
fell mellow over the hills. The last of the day was cold and clear and
still in the quiet valley of the dead.

Beyond me, in the burial-ground, standing together in the cold
clearness of the lower light, I saw two women. They were looking
towards the tomb, looking towards me.

Two.

They came a little on, and stopped again. Their veils were down, and
hid their faces from me. When they stopped, one of them raised her
veil. In the still evening light I saw the face of Marian Halcombe.

Changed, changed as if years had passed over it! The eyes large and
wild, and looking at me with a strange terror in them. The face worn
and wasted piteously. Pain and fear and grief written on her as with a
brand.

I took one step towards her from the grave. She never moved—she never
spoke. The veiled woman with her cried out faintly. I stopped. The
springs of my life fell low, and the shuddering of an unutterable dread
crept over me from head to foot.

The woman with the veiled face moved away from her companion, and
came towards me slowly. Left by herself, standing by herself, Marian
Halcombe spoke. It was the voice that I remembered—the voice not
changed, like the frightened eyes and the wasted face.

“My dream! my dream!” I heard her say those words softly in the awful
silence. She sank on her knees, and raised her clasped hands to heaven.
“Father! strengthen him. Father! help him in his hour of need.”

The woman came on, slowly and silently came on. I looked at her—at her,
and at none other, from that moment.

The voice that was praying for me faltered and sank low—then rose on a
sudden, and called affrightedly, called despairingly to me to come away.

But the veiled woman had possession of me, body and soul. She stopped
on one side of the grave. We stood face to face with the tombstone
between us. She was close to the inscription on the side of the
pedestal. Her gown touched the black letters.

The voice came nearer, and rose and rose more passionately still. “Hide
your face! don’t look at her! Oh, for God’s sake, spare him——”

The woman lifted her veil.


“Sacred to the Memory of Laura, Lady Glyde——”


Laura, Lady Glyde, was standing by the inscription, and was looking at
me over the grave.


[The Second Epoch of the Story closes here.]




THE THIRD EPOCH


THE STORY CONTINUED BY WALTER HARTRIGHT.




I


I open a new page. I advance my narrative by one week.

The history of the interval which I thus pass over must remain
unrecorded. My heart turns faint, my mind sinks in darkness and
confusion when I think of it. This must not be, if I who write am to
guide, as I ought, you who read. This must not be, if the clue that
leads through the windings of the story is to remain from end to end
untangled in my hands.

A life suddenly changed—its whole purpose created afresh, its hopes and
fears, its struggles, its interests, and its sacrifices all turned at
once and for ever into a new direction—this is the prospect which now
opens before me, like the burst of view from a mountain’s top. I left
my narrative in the quiet shadow of Limmeridge church—I resume it, one
week later, in the stir and turmoil of a London street.


The street is in a populous and a poor neighbourhood. The ground floor
of one of the houses in it is occupied by a small newsvendor’s shop,
and the first floor and the second are let as furnished lodgings of the
humblest kind.

I have taken those two floors in an assumed name. On the upper floor I
live, with a room to work in, a room to sleep in. On the lower floor,
under the same assumed name, two women live, who are described as my
sisters. I get my bread by drawing and engraving on wood for the cheap
periodicals. My sisters are supposed to help me by taking in a little
needle-work. Our poor place of abode, our humble calling, our assumed
relationship, and our assumed name, are all used alike as a means of
hiding us in the house-forest of London. We are numbered no longer with
the people whose lives are open and known. I am an obscure, unnoticed
man, without patron or friend to help me. Marian Halcombe is nothing
now but my eldest sister, who provides for our household wants by the
toil of her own hands. We two, in the estimation of others, are at once
the dupes and the agents of a daring imposture. We are supposed to be
the accomplices of mad Anne Catherick, who claims the name, the place,
and the living personality of dead Lady Glyde.

That is our situation. That is the changed aspect in which we three
must appear, henceforth, in this narrative, for many and many a page to
come.

In the eye of reason and of law, in the estimation of relatives and
friends, according to every received formality of civilised society,
“Laura, Lady Glyde,” lay buried with her mother in Limmeridge
churchyard. Torn in her own lifetime from the list of the living, the
daughter of Philip Fairlie and the wife of Percival Glyde might still
exist for her sister, might still exist for me, but to all the world
besides she was dead. Dead to her uncle, who had renounced her; dead
to the servants of the house, who had failed to recognise her; dead
to the persons in authority, who had transmitted her fortune to her
husband and her aunt; dead to my mother and my sister, who believed me
to be the dupe of an adventuress and the victim of a fraud; socially,
morally, legally—dead.

And yet alive! Alive in poverty and in hiding. Alive, with the poor
drawing-master to fight her battle, and to win the way back for her to
her place in the world of living beings.

Did no suspicion, excited by my own knowledge of Anne Catherick’s
resemblance to her, cross my mind, when her face was first revealed to
me? Not the shadow of a suspicion, from the moment when she lifted her
veil by the side of the inscription which recorded her death.

Before the sun of that day had set, before the last glimpse of the home
which was closed against her had passed from our view, the farewell
words I spoke, when we parted at Limmeridge House, had been recalled
by both of us—repeated by me, recognised by her. “If ever the time
comes, when the devotion of my whole heart and soul and strength will
give you a moment’s happiness, or spare you a moment’s sorrow, will
you try to remember the poor drawing-master who has taught you?” She,
who now remembered so little of the trouble and terror of a later
time, remembered those words, and laid her poor head innocently and
trustingly on the bosom of the man who had spoken them. In that moment,
when she called me by my name, when she said, “They have tried to make
me forget everything, Walter; but I remember Marian, and I remember
YOU”—in that moment, I, who had long since given her my love, gave her
my life, and thanked God that it was mine to bestow on her. Yes! the
time had come. From thousands on thousands of miles away—through forest
and wilderness, where companions stronger than I had fallen by my side,
through peril of death thrice renewed, and thrice escaped, the Hand
that leads men on the dark road to the future had led me to meet that
time. Forlorn and disowned, sorely tried and sadly changed—her beauty
faded, her mind clouded—robbed of her station in the world, of her
place among living creatures—the devotion I had promised, the devotion
of my whole heart and soul and strength, might be laid blamelessly now
at those dear feet. In the right of her calamity, in the right of her
friendlessness, she was mine at last! Mine to support, to protect, to
cherish, to restore. Mine to love and honour as father and brother
both. Mine to vindicate through all risks and all sacrifices—through
the hopeless struggle against Rank and Power, through the long fight
with armed deceit and fortified Success, through the waste of my
reputation, through the loss of my friends, through the hazard of my
life.




II


My position is defined—my motives are acknowledged. The story of Marian
and the story of Laura must come next.

I shall relate both narratives, not in the words (often interrupted,
often inevitably confused) of the speakers themselves, but in the words
of the brief, plain, studiously simple abstract which I committed to
writing for my own guidance, and for the guidance of my legal adviser.
So the tangled web will be most speedily and most intelligibly unrolled.

The story of Marian begins where the narrative of the housekeeper at
Blackwater Park left off.


On Lady Glyde’s departure from her husband’s house, the fact of that
departure, and the necessary statement of the circumstances under
which it had taken place, were communicated to Miss Halcombe by the
housekeeper. It was not till some days afterwards (how many days
exactly, Mrs. Michelson, in the absence of any written memorandum on
the subject, could not undertake to say) that a letter arrived from
Madame Fosco announcing Lady Glyde’s sudden death in Count Fosco’s
house. The letter avoided mentioning dates, and left it to Mrs.
Michelson’s discretion to break the news at once to Miss Halcombe,
or to defer doing so until that lady’s health should be more firmly
established.

Having consulted Mr. Dawson (who had been himself delayed, by ill
health, in resuming his attendance at Blackwater Park), Mrs. Michelson,
by the doctor’s advice, and in the doctor’s presence, communicated the
news, either on the day when the letter was received, or on the day
after. It is not necessary to dwell here upon the effect which the
intelligence of Lady Glyde’s sudden death produced on her sister. It
is only useful to the present purpose to say that she was not able to
travel for more than three weeks afterwards. At the end of that time
she proceeded to London accompanied by the housekeeper. They parted
there—Mrs. Michelson previously informing Miss Halcombe of her address,
in case they might wish to communicate at a future period.

On parting with the housekeeper Miss Halcombe went at once to the
office of Messrs. Gilmore & Kyrle to consult with the latter gentleman
in Mr. Gilmore’s absence. She mentioned to Mr. Kyrle what she had
thought it desirable to conceal from every one else (Mrs. Michelson
included)—her suspicion of the circumstances under which Lady Glyde
was said to have met her death. Mr. Kyrle, who had previously given
friendly proof of his anxiety to serve Miss Halcombe, at once undertook
to make such inquiries as the delicate and dangerous nature of the
investigation proposed to him would permit.

To exhaust this part of the subject before going farther, it may be
mentioned that Count Fosco offered every facility to Mr. Kyrle, on
that gentleman’s stating that he was sent by Miss Halcombe to collect
such particulars as had not yet reached her of Lady Glyde’s decease.
Mr. Kyrle was placed in communication with the medical man, Mr.
Goodricke, and with the two servants. In the absence of any means of
ascertaining the exact date of Lady Glyde’s departure from Blackwater
Park, the result of the doctor’s and the servants’ evidence, and of
the volunteered statements of Count Fosco and his wife, was conclusive
to the mind of Mr. Kyrle. He could only assume that the intensity of
Miss Halcombe’s suffering, under the loss of her sister, had misled her
judgment in a most deplorable manner, and he wrote her word that the
shocking suspicion to which she had alluded in his presence was, in his
opinion, destitute of the smallest fragment of foundation in truth.
Thus the investigation by Mr. Gilmore’s partner began and ended.

Meanwhile, Miss Halcombe had returned to Limmeridge House, and had
there collected all the additional information which she was able to
obtain.

Mr. Fairlie had received his first intimation of his niece’s death
from his sister, Madame Fosco, this letter also not containing any
exact reference to dates. He had sanctioned his sister’s proposal that
the deceased lady should be laid in her mother’s grave in Limmeridge
churchyard. Count Fosco had accompanied the remains to Cumberland, and
had attended the funeral at Limmeridge, which took place on the 30th
of July. It was followed, as a mark of respect, by all the inhabitants
of the village and the neighbourhood. On the next day the inscription
(originally drawn out, it was said, by the aunt of the deceased lady,
and submitted for approval to her brother, Mr. Fairlie) was engraved on
one side of the monument over the tomb.

On the day of the funeral, and for one day after it, Count Fosco had
been received as a guest at Limmeridge House, but no interview had
taken place between Mr. Fairlie and himself, by the former gentleman’s
desire. They had communicated by writing, and through this medium Count
Fosco had made Mr. Fairlie acquainted with the details of his niece’s
last illness and death. The letter presenting this information added no
new facts to the facts already known, but one very remarkable paragraph
was contained in the postscript. It referred to Anne Catherick.

The substance of the paragraph in question was as follows—

It first informed Mr. Fairlie that Anne Catherick (of whom he might
hear full particulars from Miss Halcombe when she reached Limmeridge)
had been traced and recovered in the neighbourhood of Blackwater Park,
and had been for the second time placed under the charge of the medical
man from whose custody she had once escaped.

This was the first part of the postscript. The second part warned Mr.
Fairlie that Anne Catherick’s mental malady had been aggravated by her
long freedom from control, and that the insane hatred and distrust of
Sir Percival Glyde, which had been one of her most marked delusions
in former times, still existed under a newly-acquired form. The
unfortunate woman’s last idea in connection with Sir Percival was the
idea of annoying and distressing him, and of elevating herself, as she
supposed, in the estimation of the patients and nurses, by assuming
the character of his deceased wife, the scheme of this personation
having evidently occurred to her after a stolen interview which she had
succeeded in obtaining with Lady Glyde, and at which she had observed
the extraordinary accidental likeness between the deceased lady and
herself. It was to the last degree improbable that she would succeed
a second time in escaping from the Asylum, but it was just possible
she might find some means of annoying the late Lady Glyde’s relatives
with letters, and in that case Mr. Fairlie was warned beforehand how to
receive them.

The postscript, expressed in these terms, was shown to Miss Halcombe
when she arrived at Limmeridge. There were also placed in her
possession the clothes Lady Glyde had worn, and the other effects she
had brought with her to her aunt’s house. They had been carefully
collected and sent to Cumberland by Madame Fosco.

Such was the posture of affairs when Miss Halcombe reached Limmeridge
in the early part of September.

Shortly afterwards she was confined to her room by a relapse, her
weakened physical energies giving way under the severe mental
affliction from which she was now suffering. On getting stronger again,
in a month’s time, her suspicion of the circumstances described as
attending her sister’s death still remained unshaken. She had heard
nothing in the interim of Sir Percival Glyde, but letters had reached
her from Madame Fosco, making the most affectionate inquiries on the
part of her husband and herself. Instead of answering these letters,
Miss Halcombe caused the house in St. John’s Wood, and the proceedings
of its inmates, to be privately watched.

Nothing doubtful was discovered. The same result attended the next
investigations, which were secretly instituted on the subject of Mrs.
Rubelle. She had arrived in London about six months before with her
husband. They had come from Lyons, and they had taken a house in the
neighbourhood of Leicester Square, to be fitted up as a boarding-house
for foreigners, who were expected to visit England in large numbers to
see the Exhibition of 1851. Nothing was known against husband or wife
in the neighbourhood. They were quiet people, and they had paid their
way honestly up to the present time. The final inquiries related to Sir
Percival Glyde. He was settled in Paris, and living there quietly in a
small circle of English and French friends.

Foiled at all points, but still not able to rest, Miss Halcombe
next determined to visit the Asylum in which she then supposed
Anne Catherick to be for the second time confined. She had felt a
strong curiosity about the woman in former days, and she was now
doubly interested—first, in ascertaining whether the report of Anne
Catherick’s attempted personation of Lady Glyde was true, and secondly
(if it proved to be true), in discovering for herself what the poor
creature’s real motives were for attempting the deceit.

Although Count Fosco’s letter to Mr. Fairlie did not mention the
address of the Asylum, that important omission cast no difficulties
in Miss Halcombe’s way. When Mr. Hartright had met Anne Catherick at
Limmeridge, she had informed him of the locality in which the house
was situated, and Miss Halcombe had noted down the direction in her
diary, with all the other particulars of the interview exactly as she
heard them from Mr. Hartright’s own lips. Accordingly she looked back
at the entry and extracted the address—furnished herself with the
Count’s letter to Mr. Fairlie as a species of credential which might be
useful to her, and started by herself for the Asylum on the eleventh of
October.

She passed the night of the eleventh in London. It had been her
intention to sleep at the house inhabited by Lady Glyde’s old
governess, but Mrs. Vesey’s agitation at the sight of her lost pupil’s
nearest and dearest friend was so distressing that Miss Halcombe
considerately refrained from remaining in her presence, and removed to
a respectable boarding-house in the neighbourhood, recommended by Mrs.
Vesey’s married sister. The next day she proceeded to the Asylum, which
was situated not far from London on the northern side of the metropolis.

She was immediately admitted to see the proprietor.

At first he appeared to be decidedly unwilling to let her communicate
with his patient. But on her showing him the postscript to Count
Fosco’s letter—on her reminding him that she was the “Miss Halcombe”
there referred to—that she was a near relative of the deceased Lady
Glyde—and that she was therefore naturally interested, for family
reasons, in observing for herself the extent of Anne Catherick’s
delusion in relation to her late sister—the tone and manner of the
owner of the Asylum altered, and he withdrew his objections. He
probably felt that a continued refusal, under these circumstances,
would not only be an act of discourtesy in itself, but would also imply
that the proceedings in his establishment were not of a nature to bear
investigation by respectable strangers.

Miss Halcombe’s own impression was that the owner of the Asylum had
not been received into the confidence of Sir Percival and the Count.
His consenting at all to let her visit his patient seemed to afford
one proof of this, and his readiness in making admissions which could
scarcely have escaped the lips of an accomplice, certainly appeared to
furnish another.

For example, in the course of the introductory conversation which
took place, he informed Miss Halcombe that Anne Catherick had been
brought back to him with the necessary order and certificates by Count
Fosco on the twenty-seventh of July—the Count also producing a letter
of explanations and instructions signed by Sir Percival Glyde. On
receiving his inmate again, the proprietor of the Asylum acknowledged
that he had observed some curious personal changes in her. Such changes
no doubt were not without precedent in his experience of persons
mentally afflicted. Insane people were often at one time, outwardly
as well as inwardly, unlike what they were at another—the change from
better to worse, or from worse to better, in the madness having a
necessary tendency to produce alterations of appearance externally.
He allowed for these, and he allowed also for the modification in the
form of Anne Catherick’s delusion, which was reflected no doubt in her
manner and expression. But he was still perplexed at times by certain
differences between his patient before she had escaped and his patient
since she had been brought back. Those differences were too minute
to be described. He could not say of course that she was absolutely
altered in height or shape or complexion, or in the colour of her hair
and eyes, or in the general form of her face—the change was something
that he felt more than something that he saw. In short, the case had
been a puzzle from the first, and one more perplexity was added to it
now.

It cannot be said that this conversation led to the result of even
partially preparing Miss Halcombe’s mind for what was to come. But it
produced, nevertheless, a very serious effect upon her. She was so
completely unnerved by it, that some little time elapsed before she
could summon composure enough to follow the proprietor of the Asylum to
that part of the house in which the inmates were confined.

On inquiry, it turned out that the supposed Anne Catherick was then
taking exercise in the grounds attached to the establishment. One of
the nurses volunteered to conduct Miss Halcombe to the place, the
proprietor of the Asylum remaining in the house for a few minutes to
attend to a case which required his services, and then engaging to join
his visitor in the grounds.

The nurse led Miss Halcombe to a distant part of the property, which
was prettily laid out, and after looking about her a little, turned
into a turf walk, shaded by a shrubbery on either side. About half-way
down this walk two women were slowly approaching. The nurse pointed to
them and said, “There is Anne Catherick, ma’am, with the attendant who
waits on her. The attendant will answer any questions you wish to put.”
With those words the nurse left her to return to the duties of the
house.

Miss Halcombe advanced on her side, and the women advanced on theirs.
When they were within a dozen paces of each other, one of the women
stopped for an instant, looked eagerly at the strange lady, shook
off the nurse’s grasp on her, and the next moment rushed into
Miss Halcombe’s arms. In that moment Miss Halcombe recognised her
sister—recognised the dead-alive.

Fortunately for the success of the measures taken subsequently, no
one was present at that moment but the nurse. She was a young woman,
and she was so startled that she was at first quite incapable of
interfering. When she was able to do so her whole services were
required by Miss Halcombe, who had for the moment sunk altogether in
the effort to keep her own senses under the shock of the discovery.
After waiting a few minutes in the fresh air and the cool shade,
her natural energy and courage helped her a little, and she became
sufficiently mistress of herself to feel the necessity of recalling her
presence of mind for her unfortunate sister’s sake.

She obtained permission to speak alone with the patient, on condition
that they both remained well within the nurse’s view. There was no time
for questions—there was only time for Miss Halcombe to impress on the
unhappy lady the necessity of controlling herself, and to assure her of
immediate help and rescue if she did so. The prospect of escaping from
the Asylum by obedience to her sister’s directions was sufficient to
quiet Lady Glyde, and to make her understand what was required of her.
Miss Halcombe next returned to the nurse, placed all the gold she then
had in her pocket (three sovereigns) in the nurse’s hands, and asked
when and where she could speak to her alone.

The woman was at first surprised and distrustful. But on Miss
Halcombe’s declaring that she only wanted to put some questions which
she was too much agitated to ask at that moment, and that she had no
intention of misleading the nurse into any dereliction of duty, the
woman took the money, and proposed three o’clock on the next day as the
time for the interview. She might then slip out for half an hour, after
the patients had dined, and she would meet the lady in a retired place,
outside the high north wall which screened the grounds of the house.
Miss Halcombe had only time to assent, and to whisper to her sister
that she should hear from her on the next day, when the proprietor of
the Asylum joined them. He noticed his visitor’s agitation, which Miss
Halcombe accounted for by saying that her interview with Anne Catherick
had a little startled her at first. She took her leave as soon after as
possible—that is to say, as soon as she could summon courage to force
herself from the presence of her unfortunate sister.

A very little reflection, when the capacity to reflect returned,
convinced her that any attempt to identify Lady Glyde and to rescue her
by legal means, would, even if successful, involve a delay that might
be fatal to her sister’s intellects, which were shaken already by the
horror of the situation to which she had been consigned. By the time
Miss Halcombe had got back to London, she had determined to effect Lady
Glyde’s escape privately, by means of the nurse.

She went at once to her stockbroker, and sold out of the funds all the
little property she possessed, amounting to rather less than seven
hundred pounds. Determined, if necessary, to pay the price of her
sister’s liberty with every farthing she had in the world, she repaired
the next day, having the whole sum about her in bank-notes, to her
appointment outside the Asylum wall.

The nurse was there. Miss Halcombe approached the subject cautiously by
many preliminary questions. She discovered, among other particulars,
that the nurse who had in former times attended on the true Anne
Catherick had been held responsible (although she was not to blame for
it) for the patient’s escape, and had lost her place in consequence.
The same penalty, it was added, would attach to the person then
speaking to her, if the supposed Anne Catherick was missing a second
time; and, moreover, the nurse in this case had an especial interest
in keeping her place. She was engaged to be married, and she and her
future husband were waiting till they could save, together, between two
and three hundred pounds to start in business. The nurse’s wages were
good, and she might succeed, by strict economy, in contributing her
small share towards the sum required in two years’ time.

On this hint Miss Halcombe spoke. She declared that the supposed Anne
Catherick was nearly related to her, that she had been placed in
the Asylum under a fatal mistake, and that the nurse would be doing
a good and a Christian action in being the means of restoring them
to one another. Before there was time to start a single objection,
Miss Halcombe took four bank-notes of a hundred pounds each from her
pocket-book, and offered them to the woman, as a compensation for the
risk she was to run, and for the loss of her place.

The nurse hesitated, through sheer incredulity and surprise. Miss
Halcombe pressed the point on her firmly.

“You will be doing a good action,” she repeated; “you will be helping
the most injured and unhappy woman alive. There is your marriage
portion for a reward. Bring her safely to me here, and I will put these
four bank-notes into your hand before I claim her.”

“Will you give me a letter saying those words, which I can show to my
sweetheart when he asks how I got the money?” inquired the woman.

“I will bring the letter with me, ready written and signed,” answered
Miss Halcombe.

“Then I’ll risk it,” said the nurse.

“When?”

“To-morrow.”

It was hastily agreed between them that Miss Halcombe should return
early the next morning and wait out of sight among the trees—always,
however, keeping near the quiet spot of ground under the north wall.
The nurse could fix no time for her appearance, caution requiring that
she should wait and be guided by circumstances. On that understanding
they separated.

Miss Halcombe was at her place, with the promised letter and the
promised bank-notes, before ten the next morning. She waited more than
an hour and a half. At the end of that time the nurse came quickly
round the corner of the wall holding Lady Glyde by the arm. The moment
they met Miss Halcombe put the bank-notes and the letter into her hand,
and the sisters were united again.

The nurse had dressed Lady Glyde, with excellent forethought, in a
bonnet, veil, and shawl of her own. Miss Halcombe only detained her to
suggest a means of turning the pursuit in a false direction, when the
escape was discovered at the Asylum. She was to go back to the house,
to mention in the hearing of the other nurses that Anne Catherick had
been inquiring latterly about the distance from London to Hampshire, to
wait till the last moment, before discovery was inevitable, and then
to give the alarm that Anne was missing. The supposed inquiries about
Hampshire, when communicated to the owner of the Asylum, would lead him
to imagine that his patient had returned to Blackwater Park, under the
influence of the delusion which made her persist in asserting herself
to be Lady Glyde, and the first pursuit would, in all probability, be
turned in that direction.

The nurse consented to follow these suggestions, the more readily
as they offered her the means of securing herself against any worse
consequences than the loss of her place, by remaining in the Asylum,
and so maintaining the appearance of innocence, at least. She at
once returned to the house, and Miss Halcombe lost no time in taking
her sister back with her to London. They caught the afternoon train
to Carlisle the same afternoon, and arrived at Limmeridge, without
accident or difficulty of any kind, that night.

During the latter part of their journey they were alone in the
carriage, and Miss Halcombe was able to collect such remembrances of
the past as her sister’s confused and weakened memory was able to
recall. The terrible story of the conspiracy so obtained was presented
in fragments, sadly incoherent in themselves, and widely detached from
each other. Imperfect as the revelation was, it must nevertheless be
recorded here before this explanatory narrative closes with the events
of the next day at Limmeridge House.


Lady Glyde’s recollection of the events which followed her departure
from Blackwater Park began with her arrival at the London terminus
of the South Western Railway. She had omitted to make a memorandum
beforehand of the day on which she took the journey. All hope of fixing
that important date by any evidence of hers, or of Mrs. Michelson’s,
must be given up for lost.

On the arrival of the train at the platform Lady Glyde found Count
Fosco waiting for her. He was at the carriage door as soon as the
porter could open it. The train was unusually crowded, and there was
great confusion in getting the luggage. Some person whom Count Fosco
brought with him procured the luggage which belonged to Lady Glyde.
It was marked with her name. She drove away alone with the Count in a
vehicle which she did not particularly notice at the time.

Her first question, on leaving the terminus, referred to Miss Halcombe.
The Count informed her that Miss Halcombe had not yet gone to
Cumberland, after-consideration having caused him to doubt the prudence
of her taking so long a journey without some days’ previous rest.

Lady Glyde next inquired whether her sister was then staying in the
Count’s house. Her recollection of the answer was confused, her only
distinct impression in relation to it being that the Count declared he
was then taking her to see Miss Halcombe. Lady Glyde’s experience of
London was so limited that she could not tell, at the time, through
what streets they were driving. But they never left the streets, and
they never passed any gardens or trees. When the carriage stopped, it
stopped in a small street behind a square—a square in which there were
shops, and public buildings, and many people. From these recollections
(of which Lady Glyde was certain) it seems quite clear that Count Fosco
did not take her to his own residence in the suburb of St. John’s Wood.

They entered the house, and went upstairs to a back room, either on
the first or second floor. The luggage was carefully brought in. A
female servant opened the door, and a man with a dark beard, apparently
a foreigner, met them in the hall, and with great politeness showed
them the way upstairs. In answer to Lady Glyde’s inquiries, the Count
assured her that Miss Halcombe was in the house, and that she should be
immediately informed of her sister’s arrival. He and the foreigner then
went away and left her by herself in the room. It was poorly furnished
as a sitting-room, and it looked out on the backs of houses.

The place was remarkably quiet—no footsteps went up or down the
stairs—she only heard in the room beneath her a dull, rumbling sound
of men’s voices talking. Before she had been long left alone the Count
returned, to explain that Miss Halcombe was then taking rest, and could
not be disturbed for a little while. He was accompanied into the room
by a gentleman (an Englishman), whom he begged to present as a friend
of his.

After this singular introduction—in the course of which no names, to
the best of Lady Glyde’s recollection, had been mentioned—she was left
alone with the stranger. He was perfectly civil, but he startled and
confused her by some odd questions about herself, and by looking at
her, while he asked them, in a strange manner. After remaining a short
time he went out, and a minute or two afterwards a second stranger—also
an Englishman—came in. This person introduced himself as another friend
of Count Fosco’s, and he, in his turn, looked at her very oddly, and
asked some curious questions—never, as well as she could remember,
addressing her by name, and going out again, after a little while, like
the first man. By this time she was so frightened about herself, and so
uneasy about her sister, that she had thoughts of venturing downstairs
again, and claiming the protection and assistance of the only woman she
had seen in the house—the servant who answered the door.

Just as she had risen from her chair, the Count came back into the room.

The moment he appeared she asked anxiously how long the meeting between
her sister and herself was to be still delayed. At first he returned
an evasive answer, but on being pressed, he acknowledged, with great
apparent reluctance, that Miss Halcombe was by no means so well as he
had hitherto represented her to be. His tone and manner, in making this
reply, so alarmed Lady Glyde, or rather so painfully increased the
uneasiness which she had felt in the company of the two strangers, that
a sudden faintness overcame her, and she was obliged to ask for a glass
of water. The Count called from the door for water, and for a bottle of
smelling-salts. Both were brought in by the foreign-looking man with
the beard. The water, when Lady Glyde attempted to drink it, had so
strange a taste that it increased her faintness, and she hastily took
the bottle of salts from Count Fosco, and smelt at it. Her head became
giddy on the instant. The Count caught the bottle as it dropped out of
her hand, and the last impression of which she was conscious was that
he held it to her nostrils again.

From this point her recollections were found to be confused,
fragmentary, and difficult to reconcile with any reasonable probability.

Her own impression was that she recovered her senses later in the
evening, that she then left the house, that she went (as she had
previously arranged to go, at Blackwater Park) to Mrs. Vesey’s—that she
drank tea there, and that she passed the night under Mrs. Vesey’s roof.
She was totally unable to say how, or when, or in what company she
left the house to which Count Fosco had brought her. But she persisted
in asserting that she had been to Mrs. Vesey’s, and still more
extraordinary, that she had been helped to undress and get to bed by
Mrs. Rubelle! She could not remember what the conversation was at Mrs.
Vesey’s or whom she saw there besides that lady, or why Mrs. Rubelle
should have been present in the house to help her.

Her recollection of what happened to her the next morning was still
more vague and unreliable.

She had some dim idea of driving out (at what hour she could not say)
with Count Fosco, and with Mrs. Rubelle again for a female attendant.
But when, and why, she left Mrs. Vesey she could not tell; neither
did she know what direction the carriage drove in, or where it set
her down, or whether the Count and Mrs. Rubelle did or did not remain
with her all the time she was out. At this point in her sad story
there was a total blank. She had no impressions of the faintest
kind to communicate—no idea whether one day, or more than one day,
had passed—until she came to herself suddenly in a strange place,
surrounded by women who were all unknown to her.

This was the Asylum. Here she first heard herself called by Anne
Catherick’s name, and here, as a last remarkable circumstance in the
story of the conspiracy, her own eyes informed her that she had Anne
Catherick’s clothes on. The nurse, on the first night in the Asylum,
had shown her the marks on each article of her underclothing as it
was taken off, and had said, not at all irritably or unkindly, “Look
at your own name on your own clothes, and don’t worry us all any more
about being Lady Glyde. She’s dead and buried, and you’re alive and
hearty. Do look at your clothes now! There it is, in good marking ink,
and there you will find it on all your old things, which we have kept
in the house—Anne Catherick, as plain as print!” And there it was, when
Miss Halcombe examined the linen her sister wore, on the night of their
arrival at Limmeridge House.


These were the only recollections—all of them uncertain, and some of
them contradictory—which could be extracted from Lady Glyde by careful
questioning on the journey to Cumberland. Miss Halcombe abstained from
pressing her with any inquiries relating to events in the Asylum—her
mind being but too evidently unfit to bear the trial of reverting
to them. It was known, by the voluntary admission of the owner of
the mad-house, that she was received there on the twenty-seventh
of July. From that date until the fifteenth of October (the day of
her rescue) she had been under restraint, her identity with Anne
Catherick systematically asserted, and her sanity, from first to last,
practically denied. Faculties less delicately balanced, constitutions
less tenderly organised, must have suffered under such an ordeal as
this. No man could have gone through it and come out of it unchanged.

Arriving at Limmeridge late on the evening of the fifteenth, Miss
Halcombe wisely resolved not to attempt the assertion of Lady Glyde’s
identity until the next day.

The first thing in the morning she went to Mr. Fairlie’s room, and
using all possible cautions and preparations beforehand, at last
told him in so many words what had happened. As soon as his first
astonishment and alarm had subsided, he angrily declared that Miss
Halcombe had allowed herself to be duped by Anne Catherick. He referred
her to Count Fosco’s letter, and to what she had herself told him of
the personal resemblance between Anne and his deceased niece, and he
positively declined to admit to his presence, even for one minute only,
a madwoman, whom it was an insult and an outrage to have brought into
his house at all.

Miss Halcombe left the room—waited till the first heat of her
indignation had passed away—decided on reflection that Mr. Fairlie
should see his niece in the interests of common humanity before he
closed his doors on her as a stranger—and thereupon, without a word of
previous warning, took Lady Glyde with her to his room. The servant
was posted at the door to prevent their entrance, but Miss Halcombe
insisted on passing him, and made her way into Mr. Fairlie’s presence,
leading her sister by the hand.

The scene that followed, though it only lasted for a few minutes,
was too painful to be described—Miss Halcombe herself shrank from
referring to it. Let it be enough to say that Mr. Fairlie declared, in
the most positive terms, that he did not recognise the woman who had
been brought into his room—that he saw nothing in her face and manner
to make him doubt for a moment that his niece lay buried in Limmeridge
churchyard, and that he would call on the law to protect him if before
the day was over she was not removed from the house.

Taking the very worst view of Mr. Fairlie’s selfishness, indolence,
and habitual want of feeling, it was manifestly impossible to suppose
that he was capable of such infamy as secretly recognising and openly
disowning his brother’s child. Miss Halcombe humanely and sensibly
allowed all due force to the influence of prejudice and alarm in
preventing him from fairly exercising his perceptions, and accounted
for what had happened in that way. But when she next put the servants
to the test, and found that they too were, in every case, uncertain,
to say the least of it, whether the lady presented to them was their
young mistress or Anne Catherick, of whose resemblance to her they had
all heard, the sad conclusion was inevitable that the change produced
in Lady Glyde’s face and manner by her imprisonment in the Asylum was
far more serious than Miss Halcombe had at first supposed. The vile
deception which had asserted her death defied exposure even in the
house where she was born, and among the people with whom she had lived.

In a less critical situation the effort need not have been given up as
hopeless even yet.

For example, the maid, Fanny, who happened to be then absent from
Limmeridge, was expected back in two days, and there would be a chance
of gaining her recognition to start with, seeing that she had been in
much more constant communication with her mistress, and had been much
more heartily attached to her than the other servants. Again, Lady
Glyde might have been privately kept in the house or in the village to
wait until her health was a little recovered and her mind was a little
steadied again. When her memory could be once more trusted to serve
her, she would naturally refer to persons and events in the past with
a certainty and a familiarity which no impostor could simulate, and
so the fact of her identity, which her own appearance had failed to
establish, might subsequently be proved, with time to help her, by the
surer test of her own words.

But the circumstances under which she had regained her freedom rendered
all recourse to such means as these simply impracticable. The pursuit
from the Asylum, diverted to Hampshire for the time only, would
infallibly next take the direction of Cumberland. The persons appointed
to seek the fugitive might arrive at Limmeridge House at a few hours’
notice, and in Mr. Fairlie’s present temper of mind they might count
on the immediate exertion of his local influence and authority to
assist them. The commonest consideration for Lady Glyde’s safety forced
on Miss Halcombe the necessity of resigning the struggle to do her
justice, and of removing her at once from the place of all others that
was now most dangerous to her—the neighbourhood of her own home.

An immediate return to London was the first and wisest measure of
security which suggested itself. In the great city all traces of
them might be most speedily and most surely effaced. There were no
preparations to make—no farewell words of kindness to exchange with
any one. On the afternoon of that memorable day of the sixteenth Miss
Halcombe roused her sister to a last exertion of courage, and without a
living soul to wish them well at parting, the two took their way into
the world alone, and turned their backs for ever on Limmeridge House.

They had passed the hill above the churchyard, when Lady Glyde
insisted on turning back to look her last at her mother’s grave. Miss
Halcombe tried to shake her resolution, but, in this one instance,
tried in vain. She was immovable. Her dim eyes lit with a sudden fire,
and flashed through the veil that hung over them—her wasted fingers
strengthened moment by moment round the friendly arm by which they had
held so listlessly till this time. I believe in my soul that the hand
of God was pointing their way back to them, and that the most innocent
and the most afflicted of His creatures was chosen in that dread moment
to see it.

They retraced their steps to the burial-ground, and by that act sealed
the future of our three lives.




III


This was the story of the past—the story so far as we knew it then.

Two obvious conclusions presented themselves to my mind after hearing
it. In the first place, I saw darkly what the nature of the conspiracy
had been, how chances had been watched, and how circumstances had been
handled to ensure impunity to a daring and an intricate crime. While
all details were still a mystery to me, the vile manner in which the
personal resemblance between the woman in white and Lady Glyde had
been turned to account was clear beyond a doubt. It was plain that
Anne Catherick had been introduced into Count Fosco’s house as Lady
Glyde—it was plain that Lady Glyde had taken the dead woman’s place in
the Asylum—the substitution having been so managed as to make innocent
people (the doctor and the two servants certainly, and the owner of the
mad-house in all probability) accomplices in the crime.

The second conclusion came as the necessary consequence of the first.
We three had no mercy to expect from Count Fosco and Sir Percival
Glyde. The success of the conspiracy had brought with it a clear gain
to those two men of thirty thousand pounds—twenty thousand to one, ten
thousand to the other through his wife. They had that interest, as well
as other interests, in ensuring their impunity from exposure, and they
would leave no stone unturned, no sacrifice unattempted, no treachery
untried, to discover the place in which their victim was concealed, and
to part her from the only friends she had in the world—Marian Halcombe
and myself.

The sense of this serious peril—a peril which every day and every
hour might bring nearer and nearer to us—was the one influence that
guided me in fixing the place of our retreat. I chose it in the far
east of London, where there were fewest idle people to lounge and
look about them in the streets. I chose it in a poor and a populous
neighbourhood—because the harder the struggle for existence among the
men and women about us, the less the risk of their having the time or
taking the pains to notice chance strangers who came among them. These
were the great advantages I looked to, but our locality was a gain to
us also in another and a hardly less important respect. We could live
cheaply by the daily work of my hands, and could save every farthing we
possessed to forward the purpose, the righteous purpose, of redressing
an infamous wrong—which, from first to last, I now kept steadily in
view.

In a week’s time Marian Halcombe and I had settled how the course of
our new lives should be directed.

There were no other lodgers in the house, and we had the means of
going in and out without passing through the shop. I arranged, for the
present at least, that neither Marian nor Laura should stir outside the
door without my being with them, and that in my absence from home they
should let no one into their rooms on any pretence whatever. This rule
established, I went to a friend whom I had known in former days—a wood
engraver in large practice—to seek for employment, telling him, at the
same time, that I had reasons for wishing to remain unknown.

He at once concluded that I was in debt, expressed his regret in the
usual forms, and then promised to do what he could to assist me. I
left his false impression undisturbed, and accepted the work he had to
give. He knew that he could trust my experience and my industry. I had
what he wanted, steadiness and facility, and though my earnings were
but small, they sufficed for our necessities. As soon as we could feel
certain of this, Marian Halcombe and I put together what we possessed.
She had between two and three hundred pounds left of her own property,
and I had nearly as much remaining from the purchase-money obtained
by the sale of my drawing-master’s practice before I left England.
Together we made up between us more than four hundred pounds. I
deposited this little fortune in a bank, to be kept for the expense of
those secret inquiries and investigations which I was determined to set
on foot, and to carry on by myself if I could find no one to help me.
We calculated our weekly expenditure to the last farthing, and we never
touched our little fund except in Laura’s interests and for Laura’s
sake.

The house-work, which, if we had dared trust a stranger near us, would
have been done by a servant, was taken on the first day, taken as her
own right, by Marian Halcombe. “What a woman’s hands ARE fit for,” she
said, “early and late, these hands of mine shall do.” They trembled as
she held them out. The wasted arms told their sad story of the past,
as she turned up the sleeves of the poor plain dress that she wore for
safety’s sake; but the unquenchable spirit of the woman burnt bright
in her even yet. I saw the big tears rise thick in her eyes, and fall
slowly over her cheeks as she looked at me. She dashed them away with
a touch of her old energy, and smiled with a faint reflection of her
old good spirits. “Don’t doubt my courage, Walter,” she pleaded, “it’s
my weakness that cries, not ME. The house-work shall conquer it if I
can’t.” And she kept her word—the victory was won when we met in the
evening, and she sat down to rest. Her large steady black eyes looked
at me with a flash of their bright firmness of bygone days. “I am not
quite broken down yet,” she said. “I am worth trusting with my share of
the work.” Before I could answer, she added in a whisper, “And worth
trusting with my share in the risk and the danger too. Remember that,
if the time comes!”

I did remember it when the time came.


As early as the end of October the daily course of our lives had
assumed its settled direction, and we three were as completely isolated
in our place of concealment as if the house we lived in had been a
desert island, and the great network of streets and the thousands of
our fellow-creatures all round us the waters of an illimitable sea. I
could now reckon on some leisure time for considering what my future
plan of action should be, and how I might arm myself most securely at
the outset for the coming struggle with Sir Percival and the Count.

I gave up all hope of appealing to my recognition of Laura, or to
Marian’s recognition of her, in proof of her identity. If we had loved
her less dearly, if the instinct implanted in us by that love had not
been far more certain than any exercise of reasoning, far keener than
any process of observation, even we might have hesitated on first
seeing her.

The outward changes wrought by the suffering and the terror of the past
had fearfully, almost hopelessly, strengthened the fatal resemblance
between Anne Catherick and herself. In my narrative of events at the
time of my residence in Limmeridge House, I have recorded, from my
own observation of the two, how the likeness, striking as it was when
viewed generally, failed in many important points of similarity when
tested in detail. In those former days, if they had both been seen
together side by side, no person could for a moment have mistaken them
one for the other—as has happened often in the instances of twins.
I could not say this now. The sorrow and suffering which I had once
blamed myself for associating even by a passing thought with the
future of Laura Fairlie, HAD set their profaning marks on the youth
and beauty of her face; and the fatal resemblance which I had once
seen and shuddered at seeing, in idea only, was now a real and living
resemblance which asserted itself before my own eyes. Strangers,
acquaintances, friends even who could not look at her as we looked, if
she had been shown to them in the first days of her rescue from the
Asylum, might have doubted if she were the Laura Fairlie they had once
seen, and doubted without blame.

The one remaining chance, which I had at first thought might be trusted
to serve us—the chance of appealing to her recollection of persons and
events with which no impostor could be familiar, was proved, by the
sad test of our later experience, to be hopeless. Every little caution
that Marian and I practised towards her—every little remedy we tried,
to strengthen and steady slowly the weakened, shaken faculties, was a
fresh protest in itself against the risk of turning her mind back on
the troubled and the terrible past.

The only events of former days which we ventured on encouraging her
to recall were the little trivial domestic events of that happy time
at Limmeridge, when I first went there and taught her to draw. The
day when I roused those remembrances by showing her the sketch of the
summer-house which she had given me on the morning of our farewell,
and which had never been separated from me since, was the birthday of
our first hope. Tenderly and gradually, the memory of the old walks
and drives dawned upon her, and the poor weary pining eyes looked at
Marian and at me with a new interest, with a faltering thoughtfulness
in them, which from that moment we cherished and kept alive. I bought
her a little box of colours, and a sketch-book like the old sketch-book
which I had seen in her hands on the morning that we first met. Once
again—oh me, once again!—at spare hours saved from my work, in the
dull London light, in the poor London room, I sat by her side to guide
the faltering touch, to help the feeble hand. Day by day I raised and
raised the new interest till its place in the blank of her existence
was at last assured—till she could think of her drawing and talk of it,
and patiently practise it by herself, with some faint reflection of the
innocent pleasure in my encouragement, the growing enjoyment in her own
progress, which belonged to the lost life and the lost happiness of
past days.

We helped her mind slowly by this simple means, we took her out
between us to walk on fine days, in a quiet old City square near at
hand, where there was nothing to confuse or alarm her—we spared a few
pounds from the fund at the banker’s to get her wine, and the delicate
strengthening food that she required—we amused her in the evenings
with children’s games at cards, with scrap-books full of prints which
I borrowed from the engraver who employed me—by these, and other
trifling attentions like them, we composed her and steadied her, and
hoped all things, as cheerfully as we could from time and care, and
love that never neglected and never despaired of her. But to take her
mercilessly from seclusion and repose—to confront her with strangers,
or with acquaintances who were little better than strangers—to rouse
the painful impressions of her past life which we had so carefully
hushed to rest—this, even in her own interests, we dared not do.
Whatever sacrifices it cost, whatever long, weary, heartbreaking delays
it involved, the wrong that had been inflicted on her, if mortal means
could grapple it, must be redressed without her knowledge and without
her help.

This resolution settled, it was next necessary to decide how the first
risk should be ventured, and what the first proceedings should be.

After consulting with Marian, I resolved to begin by gathering together
as many facts as could be collected—then to ask the advice of Mr. Kyrle
(whom we knew we could trust), and to ascertain from him, in the first
instance, if the legal remedy lay fairly within our reach. I owed it
to Laura’s interests not to stake her whole future on my own unaided
exertions, so long as there was the faintest prospect of strengthening
our position by obtaining reliable assistance of any kind.

The first source of information to which I applied was the journal kept
at Blackwater Park by Marian Halcombe. There were passages in this
diary relating to myself which she thought it best that I should not
see. Accordingly, she read to me from the manuscript, and I took the
notes I wanted as she went on. We could only find time to pursue this
occupation by sitting up late at night. Three nights were devoted to
the purpose, and were enough to put me in possession of all that Marian
could tell.

My next proceeding was to gain as much additional evidence as I could
procure from other people without exciting suspicion. I went myself to
Mrs. Vesey to ascertain if Laura’s impression of having slept there
was correct or not. In this case, from consideration for Mrs. Vesey’s
age and infirmity, and in all subsequent cases of the same kind from
considerations of caution, I kept our real position a secret, and was
always careful to speak of Laura as “the late Lady Glyde.”

Mrs. Vesey’s answer to my inquiries only confirmed the apprehensions
which I had previously felt. Laura had certainly written to say she
would pass the night under the roof of her old friend—but she had never
been near the house.

Her mind in this instance, and, as I feared, in other instances
besides, confusedly presented to her something which she had only
intended to do in the false light of something which she had really
done. The unconscious contradiction of herself was easy to account
for in this way—but it was likely to lead to serious results. It was
a stumble on the threshold at starting—it was a flaw in the evidence
which told fatally against us.

When I next asked for the letter which Laura had written to Mrs. Vesey
from Blackwater Park, it was given to me without the envelope, which
had been thrown into the wastepaper basket, and long since destroyed.
In the letter itself no date was mentioned—not even the day of the
week. It only contained these lines:—“Dearest Mrs. Vesey, I am in sad
distress and anxiety, and I may come to your house to-morrow night, and
ask for a bed. I can’t tell you what is the matter in this letter—I
write it in such fear of being found out that I can fix my mind on
nothing. Pray be at home to see me. I will give you a thousand kisses,
and tell you everything. Your affectionate Laura.” What help was there
in those lines? None.

On returning from Mrs. Vesey’s, I instructed Marian to write (observing
the same caution which I practised myself) to Mrs. Michelson. She was
to express, if she pleased, some general suspicion of Count Fosco’s
conduct, and she was to ask the housekeeper to supply us with a plain
statement of events, in the interests of truth. While we were waiting
for the answer, which reached us in a week’s time, I went to the doctor
in St. John’s Wood, introducing myself as sent by Miss Halcombe to
collect, if possible, more particulars of her sister’s last illness
than Mr. Kyrle had found the time to procure. By Mr. Goodricke’s
assistance, I obtained a copy of the certificate of death, and an
interview with the woman (Jane Gould) who had been employed to prepare
the body for the grave. Through this person I also discovered a means
of communicating with the servant, Hester Pinhorn. She had recently
left her place in consequence of a disagreement with her mistress,
and she was lodging with some people in the neighbourhood whom Mrs.
Gould knew. In the manner here indicated I obtained the Narratives of
the housekeeper, of the doctor, of Jane Gould, and of Hester Pinhorn,
exactly as they are presented in these pages.

Furnished with such additional evidence as these documents afforded, I
considered myself to be sufficiently prepared for a consultation with
Mr. Kyrle, and Marian wrote accordingly to mention my name to him, and
to specify the day and hour at which I requested to see him on private
business.

There was time enough in the morning for me to take Laura out for
her walk as usual, and to see her quietly settled at her drawing
afterwards. She looked up at me with a new anxiety in her face as I
rose to leave the room, and her fingers began to toy doubtfully, in the
old way, with the brushes and pencils on the table.

“You are not tired of me yet?” she said. “You are not going away
because you are tired of me? I will try to do better—I will try to get
well. Are you as fond of me, Walter, as you used to be, now I am so
pale and thin, and so slow in learning to draw?”

She spoke as a child might have spoken, she showed me her thoughts as
a child might have shown them. I waited a few minutes longer—waited to
tell her that she was dearer to me now than she had ever been in the
past times. “Try to get well again,” I said, encouraging the new hope
in the future which I saw dawning in her mind, “try to get well again,
for Marian’s sake and for mine.”

“Yes,” she said to herself, returning to her drawing. “I must try,
because they are both so fond of me.” She suddenly looked up again.
“Don’t be gone long! I can’t get on with my drawing, Walter, when you
are not here to help me.”

“I shall soon be back, my darling—soon be back to see how you are
getting on.”

My voice faltered a little in spite of me. I forced myself from the
room. It was no time, then, for parting with the self-control which
might yet serve me in my need before the day was out.

As I opened the door, I beckoned to Marian to follow me to the stairs.
It was necessary to prepare her for a result which I felt might sooner
or later follow my showing myself openly in the streets.

“I shall, in all probability, be back in a few hours,” I said, “and you
will take care, as usual, to let no one inside the doors in my absence.
But if anything happens——”

“What can happen?” she interposed quickly. “Tell me plainly, Walter, if
there is any danger, and I shall know how to meet it.”

“The only danger,” I replied, “is that Sir Percival Glyde may have been
recalled to London by the news of Laura’s escape. You are aware that he
had me watched before I left England, and that he probably knows me by
sight, although I don’t know him?”

She laid her hand on my shoulder and looked at me in anxious silence. I
saw she understood the serious risk that threatened us.

“It is not likely,” I said, “that I shall be seen in London again so
soon, either by Sir Percival himself or by the persons in his employ.
But it is barely possible that an accident may happen. In that case,
you will not be alarmed if I fail to return to-night, and you will
satisfy any inquiry of Laura’s with the best excuse that you can make
for me? If I find the least reason to suspect that I am watched, I will
take good care that no spy follows me back to this house. Don’t doubt
my return, Marian, however it may be delayed—and fear nothing.”

“Nothing!” she answered firmly. “You shall not regret, Walter, that
you have only a woman to help you.” She paused, and detained me for a
moment longer. “Take care!” she said, pressing my hand anxiously—“take
care!”

I left her, and set forth to pave the way for discovery—the dark and
doubtful way, which began at the lawyer’s door.




IV


No circumstance of the slightest importance happened on my way to the
offices of Messrs. Gilmore & Kyrle, in Chancery Lane.

While my card was being taken in to Mr. Kyrle, a consideration occurred
to me which I deeply regretted not having thought of before. The
information derived from Marian’s diary made it a matter of certainty
that Count Fosco had opened her first letter from Blackwater Park to
Mr. Kyrle, and had, by means of his wife, intercepted the second. He
was therefore well aware of the address of the office, and he would
naturally infer that if Marian wanted advice and assistance, after
Laura’s escape from the Asylum, she would apply once more to the
experience of Mr. Kyrle. In this case the office in Chancery Lane
was the very first place which he and Sir Percival would cause to be
watched, and if the same persons were chosen for the purpose who had
been employed to follow me, before my departure from England, the fact
of my return would in all probability be ascertained on that very day.
I had thought, generally, of the chances of my being recognised in
the streets, but the special risk connected with the office had never
occurred to me until the present moment. It was too late now to repair
this unfortunate error in judgment—too late to wish that I had made
arrangements for meeting the lawyer in some place privately appointed
beforehand. I could only resolve to be cautious on leaving Chancery
Lane, and not to go straight home again under any circumstances
whatever.

After waiting a few minutes I was shown into Mr. Kyrle’s private room.
He was a pale, thin, quiet, self-possessed man, with a very attentive
eye, a very low voice, and a very undemonstrative manner—not (as I
judged) ready with his sympathy where strangers were concerned, and not
at all easy to disturb in his professional composure. A better man for
my purpose could hardly have been found. If he committed himself to a
decision at all, and if the decision was favourable, the strength of
our case was as good as proved from that moment.

“Before I enter on the business which brings me here,” I said, “I ought
to warn you, Mr. Kyrle, that the shortest statement I can make of it
may occupy some little time.”

“My time is at Miss Halcombe’s disposal,” he replied. “Where any
interests of hers are concerned, I represent my partner personally, as
well as professionally. It was his request that I should do so, when he
ceased to take an active part in business.”

“May I inquire whether Mr. Gilmore is in England?”

“He is not, he is living with his relatives in Germany. His health has
improved, but the period of his return is still uncertain.”

While we were exchanging these few preliminary words, he had been
searching among the papers before him, and he now produced from them a
sealed letter. I thought he was about to hand the letter to me, but,
apparently changing his mind, he placed it by itself on the table,
settled himself in his chair, and silently waited to hear what I had to
say.

Without wasting a moment in prefatory words of any sort, I entered on
my narrative, and put him in full possession of the events which have
already been related in these pages.

Lawyer as he was to the very marrow of his bones, I startled him out of
his professional composure. Expressions of incredulity and surprise,
which he could not repress, interrupted me several times before I had
done. I persevered, however, to the end, and as soon as I reached it,
boldly asked the one important question—

“What is your opinion, Mr. Kyrle?”

He was too cautious to commit himself to an answer without taking time
to recover his self-possession first.

“Before I give my opinion,” he said, “I must beg permission to clear
the ground by a few questions.”

He put the questions—sharp, suspicious, unbelieving questions, which
clearly showed me, as they proceeded, that he thought I was the
victim of a delusion, and that he might even have doubted, but for my
introduction to him by Miss Halcombe, whether I was not attempting the
perpetration of a cunningly-designed fraud.

“Do you believe that I have spoken the truth, Mr. Kyrle?” I asked, when
he had done examining me.

“So far as your own convictions are concerned, I am certain you have
spoken the truth,” he replied. “I have the highest esteem for Miss
Halcombe, and I have therefore every reason to respect a gentleman
whose mediation she trusts in a matter of this kind. I will even go
farther, if you like, and admit, for courtesy’s sake and for argument’s
sake, that the identity of Lady Glyde as a living person is a proved
fact to Miss Halcombe and yourself. But you come to me for a legal
opinion. As a lawyer, and as a lawyer only, it is my duty to tell you,
Mr. Hartright, that you have not the shadow of a case.”

“You put it strongly, Mr. Kyrle.”

“I will try to put it plainly as well. The evidence of Lady Glyde’s
death is, on the face of it, clear and satisfactory. There is her
aunt’s testimony to prove that she came to Count Fosco’s house, that
she fell ill, and that she died. There is the testimony of the medical
certificate to prove the death, and to show that it took place under
natural circumstances. There is the fact of the funeral at Limmeridge,
and there is the assertion of the inscription on the tomb. That is
the case you want to overthrow. What evidence have you to support the
declaration on your side that the person who died and was buried was
not Lady Glyde? Let us run through the main points of your statement
and see what they are worth. Miss Halcombe goes to a certain private
Asylum, and there sees a certain female patient. It is known that a
woman named Anne Catherick, and bearing an extraordinary personal
resemblance to Lady Glyde, escaped from the Asylum; it is known that
the person received there last July was received as Anne Catherick
brought back; it is known that the gentleman who brought her back
warned Mr. Fairlie that it was part of her insanity to be bent on
personating his dead niece; and it is known that she did repeatedly
declare herself in the Asylum (where no one believed her) to be Lady
Glyde. These are all facts. What have you to set against them? Miss
Halcombe’s recognition of the woman, which recognition after-events
invalidate or contradict. Does Miss Halcombe assert her supposed
sister’s identity to the owner of the Asylum, and take legal means for
rescuing her? No, she secretly bribes a nurse to let her escape. When
the patient has been released in this doubtful manner, and is taken to
Mr. Fairlie, does he recognise her? Is he staggered for one instant in
his belief of his niece’s death? No. Do the servants recognise her? No.
Is she kept in the neighbourhood to assert her own identity, and to
stand the test of further proceedings? No, she is privately taken to
London. In the meantime you have recognised her also, but you are not
a relative—you are not even an old friend of the family. The servants
contradict you, and Mr. Fairlie contradicts Miss Halcombe, and the
supposed Lady Glyde contradicts herself. She declares she passed the
night in London at a certain house. Your own evidence shows that she
has never been near that house, and your own admission is that her
condition of mind prevents you from producing her anywhere to submit to
investigation, and to speak for herself. I pass over minor points of
evidence on both sides to save time, and I ask you, if this case were
to go now into a court of law—to go before a jury, bound to take facts
as they reasonably appear—where are your proofs?”

I was obliged to wait and collect myself before I could answer him.
It was the first time the story of Laura and the story of Marian had
been presented to me from a stranger’s point of view—the first time
the terrible obstacles that lay across our path had been made to show
themselves in their true character.

“There can be no doubt,” I said, “that the facts, as you have stated
them, appear to tell against us, but——”

“But you think those facts can be explained away,” interposed Mr.
Kyrle. “Let me tell you the result of my experience on that point.
When an English jury has to choose between a plain fact ON the surface
and a long explanation UNDER the surface, it always takes the fact in
preference to the explanation. For example, Lady Glyde (I call the lady
you represent by that name for argument’s sake) declares she has slept
at a certain house, and it is proved that she has not slept at that
house. You explain this circumstance by entering into the state of her
mind, and deducing from it a metaphysical conclusion. I don’t say the
conclusion is wrong—I only say that the jury will take the fact of her
contradicting herself in preference to any reason for the contradiction
that you can offer.”

“But is it not possible,” I urged, “by dint of patience and exertion,
to discover additional evidence? Miss Halcombe and I have a few hundred
pounds——”

He looked at me with a half-suppressed pity, and shook his head.

“Consider the subject, Mr. Hartright, from your own point of view,” he
said. “If you are right about Sir Percival Glyde and Count Fosco (which
I don’t admit, mind), every imaginable difficulty would be thrown in
the way of your getting fresh evidence. Every obstacle of litigation
would be raised—every point in the case would be systematically
contested—and by the time we had spent our thousands instead of our
hundreds, the final result would, in all probability, be against
us. Questions of identity, where instances of personal resemblance
are concerned, are, in themselves, the hardest of all questions to
settle—the hardest, even when they are free from the complications
which beset the case we are now discussing. I really see no prospect of
throwing any light whatever on this extraordinary affair. Even if the
person buried in Limmeridge churchyard be not Lady Glyde, she was, in
life, on your own showing, so like her, that we should gain nothing,
if we applied for the necessary authority to have the body exhumed. In
short, there is no case, Mr. Hartright—there is really no case.”

I was determined to believe that there WAS a case, and in that
determination shifted my ground, and appealed to him once more.

“Are there not other proofs that we might produce besides the proof of
identity?” I asked.

“Not as you are situated,” he replied. “The simplest and surest of
all proofs, the proof by comparison of dates, is, as I understand,
altogether out of your reach. If you could show a discrepancy between
the date of the doctor’s certificate and the date of Lady Glyde’s
journey to London, the matter would wear a totally different aspect,
and I should be the first to say, Let us go on.”

“That date may yet be recovered, Mr. Kyrle.”

“On the day when it is recovered, Mr. Hartright, you will have a case.
If you have any prospect, at this moment, of getting at it—tell me, and
we shall see if I can advise you.”

I considered. The housekeeper could not help us—Laura could not help
us—Marian could not help us. In all probability, the only persons in
existence who knew the date were Sir Percival and the Count.

“I can think of no means of ascertaining the date at present,” I said,
“because I can think of no persons who are sure to know it, but Count
Fosco and Sir Percival Glyde.”

Mr. Kyrle’s calmly attentive face relaxed, for the first time, into a
smile.

“With your opinion of the conduct of those two gentlemen,” he said,
“you don’t expect help in that quarter, I presume? If they have
combined to gain large sums of money by a conspiracy, they are not
likely to confess it, at any rate.”

“They may be forced to confess it, Mr. Kyrle.”

“By whom?”

“By me.”

We both rose. He looked me attentively in the face with more appearance
of interest than he had shown yet. I could see that I had perplexed him
a little.

“You are very determined,” he said. “You have, no doubt, a personal
motive for proceeding, into which it is not my business to inquire.
If a case can be produced in the future, I can only say, my best
assistance is at your service. At the same time I must warn you, as the
money question always enters into the law question, that I see little
hope, even if you ultimately established the fact of Lady Glyde’s being
alive, of recovering her fortune. The foreigner would probably leave
the country before proceedings were commenced, and Sir Percival’s
embarrassments are numerous enough and pressing enough to transfer
almost any sum of money he may possess from himself to his creditors.
You are of course aware——”

I stopped him at that point.

“Let me beg that we may not discuss Lady Glyde’s affairs,” I said.
“I have never known anything about them in former times, and I know
nothing of them now—except that her fortune is lost. You are right in
assuming that I have personal motives for stirring in this matter. I
wish those motives to be always as disinterested as they are at the
present moment——”

He tried to interpose and explain. I was a little heated, I suppose, by
feeling that he had doubted me, and I went on bluntly, without waiting
to hear him.

“There shall be no money motive,” I said, “no idea of personal
advantage in the service I mean to render to Lady Glyde. She has been
cast out as a stranger from the house in which she was born—a lie
which records her death has been written on her mother’s tomb—and
there are two men, alive and unpunished, who are responsible for it.
That house shall open again to receive her in the presence of every
soul who followed the false funeral to the grave—that lie shall be
publicly erased from the tombstone by the authority of the head of the
family, and those two men shall answer for their crime to ME, though
the justice that sits in tribunals is powerless to pursue them. I have
given my life to that purpose, and, alone as I stand, if God spares me,
I will accomplish it.”

He drew back towards his table, and said nothing. His face showed
plainly that he thought my delusion had got the better of my reason,
and that he considered it totally useless to give me any more advice.

“We each keep our opinion, Mr. Kyrle,” I said, “and we must wait till
the events of the future decide between us. In the meantime, I am much
obliged to you for the attention you have given to my statement. You
have shown me that the legal remedy lies, in every sense of the word,
beyond our means. We cannot produce the law proof, and we are not rich
enough to pay the law expenses. It is something gained to know that.”

I bowed and walked to the door. He called me back and gave me the
letter which I had seen him place on the table by itself at the
beginning of our interview.

“This came by post a few days ago,” he said. “Perhaps you will not
mind delivering it? Pray tell Miss Halcombe, at the same time, that I
sincerely regret being, thus far, unable to help her, except by advice,
which will not be more welcome, I am afraid, to her than to you.”

I looked at the letter while he was speaking. It was addressed to
“Miss Halcombe. Care of Messrs. Gilmore & Kyrle, Chancery Lane.” The
handwriting was quite unknown to me.

On leaving the room I asked one last question.

“Do you happen to know,” I said, “if Sir Percival Glyde is still in
Paris?”

“He has returned to London,” replied Mr. Kyrle. “At least I heard so
from his solicitor, whom I met yesterday.”

After that answer I went out.

On leaving the office the first precaution to be observed was to
abstain from attracting attention by stopping to look about me. I
walked towards one of the quietest of the large squares on the north of
Holborn, then suddenly stopped and turned round at a place where a long
stretch of pavement was left behind me.

There were two men at the corner of the square who had stopped also,
and who were standing talking together. After a moment’s reflection I
turned back so as to pass them. One moved as I came near, and turned
the corner leading from the square into the street. The other remained
stationary. I looked at him as I passed and instantly recognised one of
the men who had watched me before I left England.

If I had been free to follow my own instincts, I should probably have
begun by speaking to the man, and have ended by knocking him down. But
I was bound to consider consequences. If I once placed myself publicly
in the wrong, I put the weapons at once into Sir Percival’s hands.
There was no choice but to oppose cunning by cunning. I turned into
the street down which the second man had disappeared, and passed him,
waiting in a doorway. He was a stranger to me, and I was glad to make
sure of his personal appearance in case of future annoyance. Having
done this, I again walked northward till I reached the New Road. There
I turned aside to the west (having the men behind me all the time),
and waited at a point where I knew myself to be at some distance from
a cab-stand, until a fast two-wheel cab, empty, should happen to pass
me. One passed in a few minutes. I jumped in and told the man to drive
rapidly towards Hyde Park. There was no second fast cab for the spies
behind me. I saw them dart across to the other side of the road, to
follow me by running, until a cab or a cab-stand came in their way. But
I had the start of them, and when I stopped the driver and got out,
they were nowhere in sight. I crossed Hyde Park and made sure, on the
open ground, that I was free. When I at last turned my steps homewards,
it was not till many hours later—not till after dark.


I found Marian waiting for me alone in the little sitting-room. She
had persuaded Laura to go to rest, after first promising to show me
her drawing the moment I came in. The poor little dim faint sketch—so
trifling in itself, so touching in its associations—was propped up
carefully on the table with two books, and was placed where the faint
light of the one candle we allowed ourselves might fall on it to the
best advantage. I sat down to look at the drawing, and to tell Marian,
in whispers, what had happened. The partition which divided us from the
next room was so thin that we could almost hear Laura’s breathing, and
we might have disturbed her if we had spoken aloud.

Marian preserved her composure while I described my interview with Mr.
Kyrle. But her face became troubled when I spoke next of the men who
had followed me from the lawyer’s office, and when I told her of the
discovery of Sir Percival’s return.

“Bad news, Walter,” she said, “the worst news you could bring. Have you
nothing more to tell me?”

“I have something to give you,” I replied, handing her the note which
Mr. Kyrle had confided to my care.

She looked at the address and recognised the handwriting instantly.

“You know your correspondent?” I said.

“Too well,” she answered. “My correspondent is Count Fosco.”

With that reply she opened the note. Her face flushed deeply while she
read it—her eyes brightened with anger as she handed it to me to read
in my turn.

The note contained these lines—


“Impelled by honourable admiration—honourable to myself, honourable to
you—I write, magnificent Marian, in the interests of your tranquillity,
to say two consoling words—

“Fear nothing!

“Exercise your fine natural sense and remain in retirement. Dear
and admirable woman, invite no dangerous publicity. Resignation
is sublime—adopt it. The modest repose of home is eternally
fresh—enjoy it. The storms of life pass harmless over the valley of
Seclusion—dwell, dear lady, in the valley.

“Do this and I authorise you to fear nothing. No new calamity shall
lacerate your sensibilities—sensibilities precious to me as my own. You
shall not be molested, the fair companion of your retreat shall not be
pursued. She has found a new asylum in your heart. Priceless asylum!—I
envy her and leave her there.

“One last word of affectionate warning, of paternal caution, and I tear
myself from the charm of addressing you—I close these fervent lines.

“Advance no farther than you have gone already, compromise no serious
interests, threaten nobody. Do not, I implore you, force me into
action—ME, the Man of Action—when it is the cherished object of my
ambition to be passive, to restrict the vast reach of my energies and
my combinations for your sake. If you have rash friends, moderate
their deplorable ardour. If Mr. Hartright returns to England, hold
no communication with him. I walk on a path of my own, and Percival
follows at my heels. On the day when Mr. Hartright crosses that path,
he is a lost man.”


The only signature to these lines was the initial letter F, surrounded
by a circle of intricate flourishes. I threw the letter on the table
with all the contempt that I felt for it.

“He is trying to frighten you—a sure sign that he is frightened
himself,” I said.

She was too genuine a woman to treat the letter as I treated it. The
insolent familiarity of the language was too much for her self-control.
As she looked at me across the table, her hands clenched themselves in
her lap, and the old quick fiery temper flamed out again brightly in
her cheeks and her eyes.

“Walter!” she said, “if ever those two men are at your mercy, and if
you are obliged to spare one of them, don’t let it be the Count.”

“I will keep this letter, Marian, to help my memory when the time
comes.”

She looked at me attentively as I put the letter away in my pocket-book.

“When the time comes?” she repeated. “Can you speak of the future as
if you were certain of it?—certain after what you have heard in Mr.
Kyrle’s office, after what has happened to you to-day?”

“I don’t count the time from to-day, Marian. All I have done to-day is
to ask another man to act for me. I count from to-morrow——”

“Why from to-morrow?”

“Because to-morrow I mean to act for myself.”

“How?”

“I shall go to Blackwater by the first train, and return, I hope, at
night.”

“To Blackwater!”

“Yes. I have had time to think since I left Mr. Kyrle. His opinion on
one point confirms my own. We must persist to the last in hunting down
the date of Laura’s journey. The one weak point in the conspiracy, and
probably the one chance of proving that she is a living woman, centre
in the discovery of that date.”

“You mean,” said Marian, “the discovery that Laura did not leave
Blackwater Park till after the date of her death on the doctor’s
certificate?”

“Certainly.”

“What makes you think it might have been AFTER? Laura can tell us
nothing of the time she was in London.”

“But the owner of the Asylum told you that she was received there on
the twenty-seventh of July. I doubt Count Fosco’s ability to keep her
in London, and to keep her insensible to all that was passing around
her, more than one night. In that case, she must have started on the
twenty-sixth, and must have come to London one day after the date of
her own death on the doctor’s certificate. If we can prove that date,
we prove our case against Sir Percival and the Count.”

“Yes, yes—I see! But how is the proof to be obtained?”

“Mrs. Michelson’s narrative has suggested to me two ways of trying to
obtain it. One of them is to question the doctor, Mr. Dawson, who must
know when he resumed his attendance at Blackwater Park after Laura
left the house. The other is to make inquiries at the inn to which Sir
Percival drove away by himself at night. We know that his departure
followed Laura’s after the lapse of a few hours, and we may get at the
date in that way. The attempt is at least worth making, and to-morrow I
am determined it shall be made.”

“And suppose it fails—I look at the worst now, Walter; but I will look
at the best if disappointments come to try us—suppose no one can help
you at Blackwater?”

“There are two men who can help me, and shall help me in London—Sir
Percival and the Count. Innocent people may well forget the date—but
THEY are guilty, and THEY know it. If I fail everywhere else, I mean to
force a confession out of one or both of them on my own terms.”

All the woman flushed up in Marian’s face as I spoke.

“Begin with the Count,” she whispered eagerly. “For my sake, begin with
the Count.”

“We must begin, for Laura’s sake, where there is the best chance of
success,” I replied.

The colour faded from her face again, and she shook her head sadly.

“Yes,” she said, “you are right—it was mean and miserable of me to say
that. I try to be patient, Walter, and succeed better now than I did in
happier times. But I have a little of my old temper still left, and it
will get the better of me when I think of the Count!”

“His turn will come,” I said. “But, remember, there is no weak place in
his life that we know of yet.” I waited a little to let her recover her
self-possession, and then spoke the decisive words—

“Marian! There is a weak place we both know of in Sir Percival’s life——”

“You mean the Secret!”

“Yes: the Secret. It is our only sure hold on him. I can force him from
his position of security, I can drag him and his villainy into the
face of day, by no other means. Whatever the Count may have done, Sir
Percival has consented to the conspiracy against Laura from another
motive besides the motive of gain. You heard him tell the Count that he
believed his wife knew enough to ruin him? You heard him say that he
was a lost man if the secret of Anne Catherick was known?”

“Yes! yes! I did.”

“Well, Marian, when our other resources have failed us, I mean to know
the Secret. My old superstition clings to me, even yet. I say again
the woman in white is a living influence in our three lives. The End
is appointed—the End is drawing us on—and Anne Catherick, dead in her
grave, points the way to it still!”




V


The story of my first inquiries in Hampshire is soon told.

My early departure from London enabled me to reach Mr. Dawson’s house
in the forenoon. Our interview, so far as the object of my visit was
concerned, led to no satisfactory result.

Mr. Dawson’s books certainly showed when he had resumed his attendance
on Miss Halcombe at Blackwater Park, but it was not possible to
calculate back from this date with any exactness, without such help
from Mrs. Michelson as I knew she was unable to afford. She could not
say from memory (who, in similar cases, ever can?) how many days had
elapsed between the renewal of the doctor’s attendance on his patient
and the previous departure of Lady Glyde. She was almost certain of
having mentioned the circumstance of the departure to Miss Halcombe,
on the day after it happened—but then she was no more able to fix the
date of the day on which this disclosure took place, than to fix the
date of the day before, when Lady Glyde had left for London. Neither
could she calculate, with any nearer approach to exactness, the time
that had passed from the departure of her mistress, to the period when
the undated letter from Madame Fosco arrived. Lastly, as if to complete
the series of difficulties, the doctor himself, having been ill at
the time, had omitted to make his usual entry of the day of the week
and month when the gardener from Blackwater Park had called on him to
deliver Mrs. Michelson’s message.

Hopeless of obtaining assistance from Mr. Dawson, I resolved to try
next if I could establish the date of Sir Percival’s arrival at
Knowlesbury.

It seemed like a fatality! When I reached Knowlesbury the inn was shut
up, and bills were posted on the walls. The speculation had been a bad
one, as I was informed, ever since the time of the railway. The new
hotel at the station had gradually absorbed the business, and the old
inn (which we knew to be the inn at which Sir Percival had put up),
had been closed about two months since. The proprietor had left the
town with all his goods and chattels, and where he had gone I could not
positively ascertain from any one. The four people of whom I inquired
gave me four different accounts of his plans and projects when he left
Knowlesbury.

There were still some hours to spare before the last train left for
London, and I drove back again in a fly from the Knowlesbury station to
Blackwater Park, with the purpose of questioning the gardener and the
person who kept the lodge. If they, too, proved unable to assist me, my
resources for the present were at an end, and I might return to town.

I dismissed the fly a mile distant from the park, and getting my
directions from the driver, proceeded by myself to the house.

As I turned into the lane from the high-road, I saw a man, with a
carpet-bag, walking before me rapidly on the way to the lodge. He
was a little man, dressed in shabby black, and wearing a remarkably
large hat. I set him down (as well as it was possible to judge) for
a lawyer’s clerk, and stopped at once to widen the distance between
us. He had not heard me, and he walked on out of sight, without
looking back. When I passed through the gates myself, a little while
afterwards, he was not visible—he had evidently gone on to the house.

There were two women in the lodge. One of them was old, the other I
knew at once, by Marian’s description of her, to be Margaret Porcher.

I asked first if Sir Percival was at the Park, and receiving a reply in
the negative, inquired next when he had left it. Neither of the women
could tell me more than that he had gone away in the summer. I could
extract nothing from Margaret Porcher but vacant smiles and shakings of
the head. The old woman was a little more intelligent, and I managed to
lead her into speaking of the manner of Sir Percival’s departure, and
of the alarm that it caused her. She remembered her master calling her
out of bed, and remembered his frightening her by swearing—but the date
at which the occurrence happened was, as she honestly acknowledged,
“quite beyond her.”

On leaving the lodge I saw the gardener at work not far off. When I
first addressed him, he looked at me rather distrustfully, but on my
using Mrs. Michelson’s name, with a civil reference to himself, he
entered into conversation readily enough. There is no need to describe
what passed between us—it ended, as all my other attempts to discover
the date had ended. The gardener knew that his master had driven away,
at night, “some time in July, the last fortnight or the last ten days
in the month”—and knew no more.

While we were speaking together I saw the man in black, with the
large hat, come out from the house, and stand at some little distance
observing us.

Certain suspicions of his errand at Blackwater Park had already
crossed my mind. They were now increased by the gardener’s inability
(or unwillingness) to tell me who the man was, and I determined to
clear the way before me, if possible, by speaking to him. The plainest
question I could put as a stranger would be to inquire if the house was
allowed to be shown to visitors. I walked up to the man at once, and
accosted him in those words.

His look and manner unmistakably betrayed that he knew who I was, and
that he wanted to irritate me into quarrelling with him. His reply
was insolent enough to have answered the purpose, if I had been less
determined to control myself. As it was, I met him with the most
resolute politeness, apologised for my involuntary intrusion (which
he called a “trespass,”) and left the grounds. It was exactly as I
suspected. The recognition of me when I left Mr. Kyrle’s office had
been evidently communicated to Sir Percival Glyde, and the man in black
had been sent to the Park in anticipation of my making inquiries at the
house or in the neighbourhood. If I had given him the least chance of
lodging any sort of legal complaint against me, the interference of the
local magistrate would no doubt have been turned to account as a clog
on my proceedings, and a means of separating me from Marian and Laura
for some days at least.

I was prepared to be watched on the way from Blackwater Park to the
station, exactly as I had been watched in London the day before.
But I could not discover at the time, whether I was really followed
on this occasion or not. The man in black might have had means of
tracking me at his disposal of which I was not aware, but I certainly
saw nothing of him, in his own person, either on the way to the
station, or afterwards on my arrival at the London terminus in the
evening. I reached home on foot, taking the precaution, before I
approached our own door, of walking round by the loneliest street in
the neighbourhood, and there stopping and looking back more than once
over the open space behind me. I had first learnt to use this stratagem
against suspected treachery in the wilds of Central America—and now I
was practising it again, with the same purpose and with even greater
caution, in the heart of civilised London!

Nothing had happened to alarm Marian during my absence. She asked
eagerly what success I had met with. When I told her she could not
conceal her surprise at the indifference with which I spoke of the
failure of my investigations thus far.

The truth was, that the ill-success of my inquiries had in no sense
daunted me. I had pursued them as a matter of duty, and I had expected
nothing from them. In the state of my mind at that time, it was almost
a relief to me to know that the struggle was now narrowed to a trial of
strength between myself and Sir Percival Glyde. The vindictive motive
had mingled itself all along with my other and better motives, and I
confess it was a satisfaction to me to feel that the surest way, the
only way left, of serving Laura’s cause, was to fasten my hold firmly
on the villain who had married her.

While I acknowledge that I was not strong enough to keep my motives
above the reach of this instinct of revenge, I can honestly say
something in my own favour on the other side. No base speculation
on the future relations of Laura and myself, and on the private and
personal concessions which I might force from Sir Percival if I once
had him at my mercy, ever entered my mind. I never said to myself, “If
I do succeed, it shall be one result of my success that I put it out
of her husband’s power to take her from me again.” I could not look at
her and think of the future with such thoughts as those. The sad sight
of the change in her from her former self, made the one interest of
my love an interest of tenderness and compassion which her father or
her brother might have felt, and which I felt, God knows, in my inmost
heart. All my hopes looked no farther on now than to the day of her
recovery. There, till she was strong again and happy again—there, till
she could look at me as she had once looked, and speak to me as she had
once spoken—the future of my happiest thoughts and my dearest wishes
ended.

These words are written under no prompting of idle self-contemplation.
Passages in this narrative are soon to come which will set the minds
of others in judgment on my conduct. It is right that the best and the
worst of me should be fairly balanced before that time.


On the morning after my return from Hampshire I took Marian upstairs
into my working-room, and there laid before her the plan that I had
matured thus far, for mastering the one assailable point in the life of
Sir Percival Glyde.

The way to the Secret lay through the mystery, hitherto impenetrable
to all of us, of the woman in white. The approach to that in its
turn might be gained by obtaining the assistance of Anne Catherick’s
mother, and the only ascertainable means of prevailing on Mrs.
Catherick to act or to speak in the matter depended on the chance of
my discovering local particulars and family particulars first of all
from Mrs. Clements. After thinking the subject over carefully, I felt
certain that I could only begin the new inquiries by placing myself
in communication with the faithful friend and protectress of Anne
Catherick.

The first difficulty then was to find Mrs. Clements.

I was indebted to Marian’s quick perception for meeting this necessity
at once by the best and simplest means. She proposed to write to the
farm near Limmeridge (Todd’s Corner), to inquire whether Mrs. Clements
had communicated with Mrs. Todd during the past few months. How Mrs.
Clements had been separated from Anne it was impossible for us to say,
but that separation once effected, it would certainly occur to Mrs.
Clements to inquire after the missing woman in the neighbourhood of all
others to which she was known to be most attached—the neighbourhood of
Limmeridge. I saw directly that Marian’s proposal offered us a prospect
of success, and she wrote to Mrs. Todd accordingly by that day’s post.

While we were waiting for the reply, I made myself master of all the
information Marian could afford on the subject of Sir Percival’s
family, and of his early life. She could only speak on these topics
from hearsay, but she was reasonably certain of the truth of what
little she had to tell.

Sir Percival was an only child. His father, Sir Felix Glyde, had
suffered from his birth under a painful and incurable deformity, and
had shunned all society from his earliest years. His sole happiness
was in the enjoyment of music, and he had married a lady with tastes
similar to his own, who was said to be a most accomplished musician. He
inherited the Blackwater property while still a young man. Neither he
nor his wife after taking possession, made advances of any sort towards
the society of the neighbourhood, and no one endeavoured to tempt them
into abandoning their reserve, with the one disastrous exception of the
rector of the parish.

The rector was the worst of all innocent mischief-makers—an
over-zealous man. He had heard that Sir Felix had left College with
the character of being little better than a revolutionist in politics
and an infidel in religion, and he arrived conscientiously at the
conclusion that it was his bounden duty to summon the lord of the manor
to hear sound views enunciated in the parish church. Sir Felix fiercely
resented the clergyman’s well-meant but ill-directed interference,
insulting him so grossly and so publicly, that the families in the
neighbourhood sent letters of indignant remonstrance to the Park, and
even the tenants of the Blackwater property expressed their opinion
as strongly as they dared. The baronet, who had no country tastes of
any kind, and no attachment to the estate or to any one living on it,
declared that society at Blackwater should never have a second chance
of annoying him, and left the place from that moment.

After a short residence in London he and his wife departed for the
Continent, and never returned to England again. They lived part of the
time in France and part in Germany—always keeping themselves in the
strict retirement which the morbid sense of his own personal deformity
had made a necessity to Sir Felix. Their son, Percival, had been born
abroad, and had been educated there by private tutors. His mother was
the first of his parents whom he lost. His father had died a few years
after her, either in 1825 or 1826. Sir Percival had been in England,
as a young man, once or twice before that period, but his acquaintance
with the late Mr. Fairlie did not begin till after the time of his
father’s death. They soon became very intimate, although Sir Percival
was seldom, or never, at Limmeridge House in those days. Mr. Frederick
Fairlie might have met him once or twice in Mr. Philip Fairlie’s
company, but he could have known little of him at that or at any other
time. Sir Percival’s only intimate friend in the Fairlie family had
been Laura’s father.

These were all the particulars that I could gain from Marian. They
suggested nothing which was useful to my present purpose, but I noted
them down carefully, in the event of their proving to be of importance
at any future period.

Mrs. Todd’s reply (addressed, by our own wish, to a post-office at some
distance from us) had arrived at its destination when I went to apply
for it. The chances, which had been all against us hitherto, turned
from this moment in our favour. Mrs. Todd’s letter contained the first
item of information of which we were in search.

Mrs. Clements, it appeared, had (as we had conjectured) written to
Todd’s Corner, asking pardon in the first place for the abrupt manner
in which she and Anne had left their friends at the farm-house (on the
morning after I had met the woman in white in Limmeridge churchyard),
and then informing Mrs. Todd of Anne’s disappearance, and entreating
that she would cause inquiries to be made in the neighbourhood, on the
chance that the lost woman might have strayed back to Limmeridge. In
making this request, Mrs. Clements had been careful to add to it the
address at which she might always be heard of, and that address Mrs.
Todd now transmitted to Marian. It was in London, and within half an
hour’s walk of our own lodging.

In the words of the proverb, I was resolved not to let the grass grow
under my feet. The next morning I set forth to seek an interview with
Mrs. Clements. This was my first step forward in the investigation. The
story of the desperate attempt to which I now stood committed begins
here.




VI


The address communicated by Mrs. Todd took me to a lodging-house
situated in a respectable street near the Gray’s Inn Road.

When I knocked the door was opened by Mrs. Clements herself. She
did not appear to remember me, and asked what my business was. I
recalled to her our meeting in Limmeridge churchyard at the close of
my interview there with the woman in white, taking special care to
remind her that I was the person who assisted Anne Catherick (as Anne
had herself declared) to escape the pursuit from the Asylum. This was
my only claim to the confidence of Mrs. Clements. She remembered the
circumstance the moment I spoke of it, and asked me into the parlour,
in the greatest anxiety to know if I had brought her any news of Anne.

It was impossible for me to tell her the whole truth without, at the
same time, entering into particulars on the subject of the conspiracy,
which it would have been dangerous to confide to a stranger. I could
only abstain most carefully from raising any false hopes, and then
explain that the object of my visit was to discover the persons who
were really responsible for Anne’s disappearance. I even added, so as
to exonerate myself from any after-reproach of my own conscience, that
I entertained not the least hope of being able to trace her—that I
believed we should never see her alive again—and that my main interest
in the affair was to bring to punishment two men whom I suspected to
be concerned in luring her away, and at whose hands I and some dear
friends of mine had suffered a grievous wrong. With this explanation
I left it to Mrs. Clements to say whether our interest in the matter
(whatever difference there might be in the motives which actuated us)
was not the same, and whether she felt any reluctance to forward my
object by giving me such information on the subject of my inquiries as
she happened to possess.

The poor woman was at first too much confused and agitated to
understand thoroughly what I said to her. She could only reply that I
was welcome to anything she could tell me in return for the kindness I
had shown to Anne; but as she was not very quick and ready, at the best
of times, in talking to strangers, she would beg me to put her in the
right way, and to say where I wished her to begin.

Knowing by experience that the plainest narrative attainable from
persons who are not accustomed to arrange their ideas, is the narrative
which goes far enough back at the beginning to avoid all impediments
of retrospection in its course, I asked Mrs. Clements to tell me first
what had happened after she had left Limmeridge, and so, by watchful
questioning, carried her on from point to point, till we reached the
period of Anne’s disappearance.

The substance of the information which I thus obtained was as follows:—

On leaving the farm at Todd’s Corner, Mrs. Clements and Anne had
travelled that day as far as Derby, and had remained there a week on
Anne’s account. They had then gone on to London, and had lived in
the lodging occupied by Mrs. Clements at that time for a month or
more, when circumstances connected with the house and the landlord
had obliged them to change their quarters. Anne’s terror of being
discovered in London or its neighbourhood, whenever they ventured to
walk out, had gradually communicated itself to Mrs. Clements, and she
had determined on removing to one of the most out-of-the-way places
in England—to the town of Grimsby in Lincolnshire, where her deceased
husband had passed all his early life. His relatives were respectable
people settled in the town—they had always treated Mrs. Clements with
great kindness, and she thought it impossible to do better than go
there and take the advice of her husband’s friends. Anne would not hear
of returning to her mother at Welmingham, because she had been removed
to the Asylum from that place, and because Sir Percival would be
certain to go back there and find her again. There was serious weight
in this objection, and Mrs. Clements felt that it was not to be easily
removed.

At Grimsby the first serious symptoms of illness had shown themselves
in Anne. They appeared soon after the news of Lady Glyde’s marriage had
been made public in the newspapers, and had reached her through that
medium.

The medical man who was sent for to attend the sick woman discovered
at once that she was suffering from a serious affection of the heart.
The illness lasted long, left her very weak, and returned at intervals,
though with mitigated severity, again and again. They remained at
Grimsby, in consequence, during the first half of the new year, and
there they might probably have stayed much longer, but for the sudden
resolution which Anne took at this time to venture back to Hampshire,
for the purpose of obtaining a private interview with Lady Glyde.

Mrs. Clements did all in her power to oppose the execution of this
hazardous and unaccountable project. No explanation of her motives
was offered by Anne, except that she believed the day of her death
was not far off, and that she had something on her mind which must be
communicated to Lady Glyde, at any risk, in secret. Her resolution
to accomplish this purpose was so firmly settled that she declared
her intention of going to Hampshire by herself if Mrs. Clements felt
any unwillingness to go with her. The doctor, on being consulted,
was of opinion that serious opposition to her wishes would, in all
probability, produce another and perhaps a fatal fit of illness, and
Mrs. Clements, under this advice, yielded to necessity, and once more,
with sad forebodings of trouble and danger to come, allowed Anne
Catherick to have her own way.

On the journey from London to Hampshire Mrs. Clements discovered
that one of their fellow-passengers was well acquainted with the
neighbourhood of Blackwater, and could give her all the information she
needed on the subject of localities. In this way she found out that
the only place they could go to, which was not dangerously near to Sir
Percival’s residence, was a large village called Sandon. The distance
here from Blackwater Park was between three and four miles—and that
distance, and back again, Anne had walked on each occasion when she had
appeared in the neighbourhood of the lake.

For the few days during which they were at Sandon without being
discovered they had lived a little away from the village, in the
cottage of a decent widow-woman who had a bedroom to let, and whose
discreet silence Mrs. Clements had done her best to secure, for the
first week at least. She had also tried hard to induce Anne to be
content with writing to Lady Glyde, in the first instance; but the
failure of the warning contained in the anonymous letter sent to
Limmeridge had made Anne resolute to speak this time, and obstinate in
the determination to go on her errand alone.

Mrs. Clements, nevertheless, followed her privately on each occasion
when she went to the lake, without, however, venturing near enough
to the boat-house to be witness of what took place there. When Anne
returned for the last time from the dangerous neighbourhood, the
fatigue of walking, day after day, distances which were far too great
for her strength, added to the exhausting effect of the agitation from
which she had suffered, produced the result which Mrs. Clements had
dreaded all along. The old pain over the heart and the other symptoms
of the illness at Grimsby returned, and Anne was confined to her bed in
the cottage.

In this emergency the first necessity, as Mrs. Clements knew by
experience, was to endeavour to quiet Anne’s anxiety of mind, and for
this purpose the good woman went herself the next day to the lake, to
try if she could find Lady Glyde (who would be sure, as Anne said, to
take her daily walk to the boat-house), and prevail on her to come back
privately to the cottage near Sandon. On reaching the outskirts of
the plantation Mrs. Clements encountered, not Lady Glyde, but a tall,
stout, elderly gentleman, with a book in his hand—in other words, Count
Fosco.

The Count, after looking at her very attentively for a moment, asked
if she expected to see any one in that place, and added, before she
could reply, that he was waiting there with a message from Lady Glyde,
but that he was not quite certain whether the person then before him
answered the description of the person with whom he was desired to
communicate.

Upon this Mrs. Clements at once confided her errand to him, and
entreated that he would help to allay Anne’s anxiety by trusting his
message to her. The Count most readily and kindly complied with her
request. The message, he said, was a very important one. Lady Glyde
entreated Anne and her good friend to return immediately to London, as
she felt certain that Sir Percival would discover them if they remained
any longer in the neighbourhood of Blackwater. She was herself going to
London in a short time, and if Mrs. Clements and Anne would go there
first, and would let her know what their address was, they should hear
from her and see her in a fortnight or less. The Count added that he
had already attempted to give a friendly warning to Anne herself, but
that she had been too much startled by seeing that he was a stranger to
let him approach and speak to her.

To this Mrs. Clements replied, in the greatest alarm and distress,
that she asked nothing better than to take Anne safely to London, but
that there was no present hope of removing her from the dangerous
neighbourhood, as she lay ill in her bed at that moment. The Count
inquired if Mrs. Clements had sent for medical advice, and hearing
that she had hitherto hesitated to do so, from the fear of making
their position publicly known in the village, informed her that he
was himself a medical man, and that he would go back with her if she
pleased, and see what could be done for Anne. Mrs. Clements (feeling
a natural confidence in the Count, as a person trusted with a secret
message from Lady Glyde) gratefully accepted the offer, and they went
back together to the cottage.

Anne was asleep when they got there. The Count started at the sight of
her (evidently from astonishment at her resemblance to Lady Glyde).
Poor Mrs. Clements supposed that he was only shocked to see how ill
she was. He would not allow her to be awakened—he was contented with
putting questions to Mrs. Clements about her symptoms, with looking at
her, and with lightly touching her pulse. Sandon was a large enough
place to have a grocer’s and druggist’s shop in it, and thither the
Count went to write his prescription and to get the medicine made up.
He brought it back himself, and told Mrs. Clements that the medicine
was a powerful stimulant, and that it would certainly give Anne
strength to get up and bear the fatigue of a journey to London of only
a few hours. The remedy was to be administered at stated times on that
day and on the day after. On the third day she would be well enough
to travel, and he arranged to meet Mrs. Clements at the Blackwater
station, and to see them off by the midday train. If they did not
appear he would assume that Anne was worse, and would proceed at once
to the cottage.

As events turned out, no such emergency as this occurred.

This medicine had an extraordinary effect on Anne, and the good results
of it were helped by the assurance Mrs. Clements could now give her
that she would soon see Lady Glyde in London. At the appointed day
and time (when they had not been quite so long as a week in Hampshire
altogether), they arrived at the station. The Count was waiting there
for them, and was talking to an elderly lady, who appeared to be going
to travel by the train to London also. He most kindly assisted them,
and put them into the carriage himself, begging Mrs. Clements not to
forget to send her address to Lady Glyde. The elderly lady did not
travel in the same compartment, and they did not notice what became of
her on reaching the London terminus. Mrs. Clements secured respectable
lodgings in a quiet neighbourhood, and then wrote, as she had engaged
to do, to inform Lady Glyde of the address.

A little more than a fortnight passed, and no answer came.

At the end of that time a lady (the same elderly lady whom they had
seen at the station) called in a cab, and said that she came from
Lady Glyde, who was then at an hotel in London, and who wished to see
Mrs. Clements, for the purpose of arranging a future interview with
Anne. Mrs. Clements expressed her willingness (Anne being present at
the time, and entreating her to do so) to forward the object in view,
especially as she was not required to be away from the house for more
than half an hour at the most. She and the elderly lady (clearly Madame
Fosco) then left in the cab. The lady stopped the cab, after it had
driven some distance, at a shop before they got to the hotel, and
begged Mrs. Clements to wait for her for a few minutes while she made a
purchase that had been forgotten. She never appeared again.

After waiting some time Mrs. Clements became alarmed, and ordered the
cabman to drive back to her lodgings. When she got there, after an
absence of rather more than half an hour, Anne was gone.

The only information to be obtained from the people of the house was
derived from the servant who waited on the lodgers. She had opened the
door to a boy from the street, who had left a letter for “the young
woman who lived on the second floor” (the part of the house which Mrs.
Clements occupied). The servant had delivered the letter, had then
gone downstairs, and five minutes afterwards had observed Anne open
the front door and go out, dressed in her bonnet and shawl. She had
probably taken the letter with her, for it was not to be found, and it
was therefore impossible to tell what inducement had been offered to
make her leave the house. It must have been a strong one, for she would
never stir out alone in London of her own accord. If Mrs. Clements had
not known this by experience nothing would have induced her to go away
in the cab, even for so short a time as half an hour only.

As soon as she could collect her thoughts, the first idea that
naturally occurred to Mrs. Clements was to go and make inquiries at the
Asylum, to which she dreaded that Anne had been taken back.

She went there the next day, having been informed of the locality in
which the house was situated by Anne herself. The answer she received
(her application having in all probability been made a day or two
before the false Anne Catherick had really been consigned to safe
keeping in the Asylum) was, that no such person had been brought back
there. She had then written to Mrs. Catherick at Welmingham to know if
she had seen or heard anything of her daughter, and had received an
answer in the negative. After that reply had reached her, she was at
the end of her resources, and perfectly ignorant where else to inquire
or what else to do. From that time to this she had remained in total
ignorance of the cause of Anne’s disappearance and of the end of Anne’s
story.




VII


Thus far the information which I had received from Mrs. Clements—though
it established facts of which I had not previously been aware—was of a
preliminary character only.

It was clear that the series of deceptions which had removed Anne
Catherick to London, and separated her from Mrs. Clements, had been
accomplished solely by Count Fosco and the Countess, and the question
whether any part of the conduct of husband or wife had been of a kind
to place either of them within reach of the law might be well worthy
of future consideration. But the purpose I had now in view led me in
another direction than this. The immediate object of my visit to Mrs.
Clements was to make some approach at least to the discovery of Sir
Percival’s secret, and she had said nothing as yet which advanced me on
my way to that important end. I felt the necessity of trying to awaken
her recollections of other times, persons, and events than those on
which her memory had hitherto been employed, and when I next spoke I
spoke with that object indirectly in view.

“I wish I could be of any help to you in this sad calamity,” I said.
“All I can do is to feel heartily for your distress. If Anne had been
your own child, Mrs. Clements, you could have shown her no truer
kindness—you could have made no readier sacrifices for her sake.”

“There’s no great merit in that, sir,” said Mrs. Clements simply. “The
poor thing was as good as my own child to me. I nursed her from a baby,
sir, bringing her up by hand—and a hard job it was to rear her. It
wouldn’t go to my heart so to lose her if I hadn’t made her first short
clothes and taught her to walk. I always said she was sent to console
me for never having chick or child of my own. And now she’s lost the
old times keep coming back to my mind, and even at my age I can’t help
crying about her—I can’t indeed, sir!”

I waited a little to give Mrs. Clements time to compose herself. Was
the light that I had been looking for so long glimmering on me—far off,
as yet—in the good woman’s recollections of Anne’s early life?

“Did you know Mrs. Catherick before Anne was born?” I asked.

“Not very long, sir—not above four months. We saw a great deal of each
other in that time, but we were never very friendly together.”

Her voice was steadier as she made that reply. Painful as many of her
recollections might be, I observed that it was unconsciously a relief
to her mind to revert to the dimly-seen troubles of the past, after
dwelling so long on the vivid sorrows of the present.

“Were you and Mrs. Catherick neighbours?” I inquired, leading her
memory on as encouragingly as I could.

“Yes, sir—neighbours at Old Welmingham.”

“OLD Welmingham? There are two places of that name, then, in Hampshire?”

“Well, sir, there used to be in those days—better than three-and-twenty
years ago. They built a new town about two miles off, convenient to the
river—and Old Welmingham, which was never much more than a village, got
in time to be deserted. The new town is the place they call Welmingham
now—but the old parish church is the parish church still. It stands by
itself, with the houses pulled down or gone to ruin all round it. I’ve
lived to see sad changes. It was a pleasant, pretty place in my time.”

“Did you live there before your marriage, Mrs. Clements?”

“No, sir—I’m a Norfolk woman. It wasn’t the place my husband belonged
to either. He was from Grimsby, as I told you, and he served his
apprenticeship there. But having friends down south, and hearing of
an opening, he got into business at Southampton. It was in a small
way, but he made enough for a plain man to retire on, and settled at
Old Welmingham. I went there with him when he married me. We were
neither of us young, but we lived very happy together—happier than our
neighbour, Mr. Catherick, lived along with his wife when they came to
Old Welmingham a year or two afterwards.”

“Was your husband acquainted with them before that?”

“With Catherick, sir—not with his wife. She was a stranger to both of
us. Some gentlemen had made interest for Catherick, and he got the
situation of clerk at Welmingham church, which was the reason of his
coming to settle in our neighbourhood. He brought his newly-married
wife along with him, and we heard in course of time she had been
lady’s-maid in a family that lived at Varneck Hall, near Southampton.
Catherick had found it a hard matter to get her to marry him, in
consequence of her holding herself uncommonly high. He had asked and
asked, and given the thing up at last, seeing she was so contrary about
it. When he HAD given it up she turned contrary just the other way, and
came to him of her own accord, without rhyme or reason seemingly. My
poor husband always said that was the time to have given her a lesson.
But Catherick was too fond of her to do anything of the sort—he never
checked her either before they were married or after. He was a quick
man in his feelings, letting them carry him a deal too far, now in one
way and now in another, and he would have spoilt a better wife than
Mrs. Catherick if a better had married him. I don’t like to speak ill
of any one, sir, but she was a heartless woman, with a terrible will
of her own—fond of foolish admiration and fine clothes, and not caring
to show so much as decent outward respect to Catherick, kindly as he
always treated her. My husband said he thought things would turn out
badly when they first came to live near us, and his words proved true.
Before they had been quite four months in our neighbourhood there was a
dreadful scandal and a miserable break-up in their household. Both of
them were in fault—I am afraid both of them were equally in fault.”

“You mean both husband and wife?”

“Oh, no, sir! I don’t mean Catherick—he was only to be pitied. I meant
his wife and the person—”

“And the person who caused the scandal?”

“Yes, sir. A gentleman born and brought up, who ought to have set a
better example. You know him, sir—and my poor dear Anne knew him only
too well.”

“Sir Percival Glyde?”

“Yes, Sir Percival Glyde.”

My heart beat fast—I thought I had my hand on the clue. How little I
knew then of the windings of the labyrinths which were still to mislead
me!

“Did Sir Percival live in your neighbourhood at that time?” I asked.

“No, sir. He came among us as a stranger. His father had died not long
before in foreign parts. I remember he was in mourning. He put up at
the little inn on the river (they have pulled it down since that time),
where gentlemen used to go to fish. He wasn’t much noticed when he
first came—it was a common thing enough for gentlemen to travel from
all parts of England to fish in our river.”

“Did he make his appearance in the village before Anne was born?”

“Yes, sir. Anne was born in the June month of eighteen hundred and
twenty-seven—and I think he came at the end of April or the beginning
of May.”

“Came as a stranger to all of you? A stranger to Mrs. Catherick as well
as to the rest of the neighbours?”

“So we thought at first, sir. But when the scandal broke out, nobody
believed they were strangers. I remember how it happened as well as if
it was yesterday. Catherick came into our garden one night, and woke us
by throwing up a handful of gravel from the walk at our window. I heard
him beg my husband, for the Lord’s sake, to come down and speak to him.
They were a long time together talking in the porch. When my husband
came back upstairs he was all of a tremble. He sat down on the side of
the bed and he says to me, ‘Lizzie! I always told you that woman was
a bad one—I always said she would end ill, and I’m afraid in my own
mind that the end has come already. Catherick has found a lot of lace
handkerchiefs, and two fine rings, and a new gold watch and chain, hid
away in his wife’s drawer—things that nobody but a born lady ought ever
to have—and his wife won’t say how she came by them.’ ‘Does he think
she stole them?’ says I. ‘No,’ says he, ‘stealing would be bad enough.
But it’s worse than that, she’s had no chance of stealing such things
as those, and she’s not a woman to take them if she had. They’re gifts,
Lizzie—there’s her own initials engraved inside the watch—and Catherick
has seen her talking privately, and carrying on as no married woman
should, with that gentleman in mourning, Sir Percival Glyde. Don’t you
say anything about it—I’ve quieted Catherick for to-night. I’ve told
him to keep his tongue to himself, and his eyes and his ears open, and
to wait a day or two, till he can be quite certain.’ ‘I believe you
are both of you wrong,’ says I. ‘It’s not in nature, comfortable and
respectable as she is here, that Mrs. Catherick should take up with a
chance stranger like Sir Percival Glyde.’ ‘Ay, but is he a stranger to
her?’ says my husband. ‘You forget how Catherick’s wife came to marry
him. She went to him of her own accord, after saying No over and over
again when he asked her. There have been wicked women before her time,
Lizzie, who have used honest men who loved them as a means of saving
their characters, and I’m sorely afraid this Mrs. Catherick is as
wicked as the worst of them. We shall see,’ says my husband, ‘we shall
soon see.’ And only two days afterwards we did see.”

Mrs. Clements waited for a moment before she went on. Even in that
moment, I began to doubt whether the clue that I thought I had found
was really leading me to the central mystery of the labyrinth after
all. Was this common, too common, story of a man’s treachery and a
woman’s frailty the key to a secret which had been the lifelong terror
of Sir Percival Glyde?

“Well, sir, Catherick took my husband’s advice and waited,” Mrs.
Clements continued. “And as I told you, he hadn’t long to wait. On
the second day he found his wife and Sir Percival whispering together
quite familiar, close under the vestry of the church. I suppose they
thought the neighbourhood of the vestry was the last place in the world
where anybody would think of looking after them, but, however that
may be, there they were. Sir Percival, being seemingly surprised and
confounded, defended himself in such a guilty way that poor Catherick
(whose quick temper I have told you of already) fell into a kind of
frenzy at his own disgrace, and struck Sir Percival. He was no match
(and I am sorry to say it) for the man who had wronged him, and he was
beaten in the cruelest manner, before the neighbours, who had come to
the place on hearing the disturbance, could run in to part them. All
this happened towards evening, and before nightfall, when my husband
went to Catherick’s house, he was gone, nobody knew where. No living
soul in the village ever saw him again. He knew too well, by that time,
what his wife’s vile reason had been for marrying him, and he felt his
misery and disgrace, especially after what had happened to him with Sir
Percival, too keenly. The clergyman of the parish put an advertisement
in the paper begging him to come back, and saying that he should not
lose his situation or his friends. But Catherick had too much pride and
spirit, as some people said—too much feeling, as I think, sir—to face
his neighbours again, and try to live down the memory of his disgrace.
My husband heard from him when he had left England, and heard a second
time, when he was settled and doing well in America. He is alive there
now, as far as I know, but none of us in the old country—his wicked
wife least of all—are ever likely to set eyes on him again.”

“What became of Sir Percival?” I inquired. “Did he stay in the
neighbourhood?”

“Not he, sir. The place was too hot to hold him. He was heard at high
words with Mrs. Catherick the same night when the scandal broke out,
and the next morning he took himself off.”

“And Mrs. Catherick? Surely she never remained in the village among the
people who knew of her disgrace?”

“She did, sir. She was hard enough and heartless enough to set the
opinions of all her neighbours at flat defiance. She declared to
everybody, from the clergyman downwards, that she was the victim of a
dreadful mistake, and that all the scandal-mongers in the place should
not drive her out of it, as if she was a guilty woman. All through my
time she lived at Old Welmingham, and after my time, when the new town
was building, and the respectable neighbours began moving to it, she
moved too, as if she was determined to live among them and scandalise
them to the very last. There she is now, and there she will stop, in
defiance of the best of them, to her dying day.”

“But how has she lived through all these years?” I asked. “Was her
husband able and willing to help her?”

“Both able and willing, sir,” said Mrs. Clements. “In the second letter
he wrote to my good man, he said she had borne his name, and lived in
his home, and, wicked as she was, she must not starve like a beggar in
the street. He could afford to make her some small allowance, and she
might draw for it quarterly at a place in London.”

“Did she accept the allowance?”

“Not a farthing of it, sir. She said she would never be beholden to
Catherick for bit or drop, if she lived to be a hundred. And she has
kept her word ever since. When my poor dear husband died, and left
all to me, Catherick’s letter was put in my possession with the other
things, and I told her to let me know if she was ever in want. ‘I’ll
let all England know I’m in want,’ she said, ‘before I tell Catherick,
or any friend of Catherick’s. Take that for your answer, and give it to
HIM for an answer, if he ever writes again.’”

“Do you suppose that she had money of her own?”

“Very little, if any, sir. It was said, and said truly, I am afraid,
that her means of living came privately from Sir Percival Glyde.”


After that last reply I waited a little, to reconsider what I had
heard. If I unreservedly accepted the story so far, it was now plain
that no approach, direct or indirect, to the Secret had yet been
revealed to me, and that the pursuit of my object had ended again
in leaving me face to face with the most palpable and the most
disheartening failure.

But there was one point in the narrative which made me doubt the
propriety of accepting it unreservedly, and which suggested the idea of
something hidden below the surface.

I could not account to myself for the circumstance of the clerk’s
guilty wife voluntarily living out all her after-existence on the scene
of her disgrace. The woman’s own reported statement that she had taken
this strange course as a practical assertion of her innocence did not
satisfy me. It seemed, to my mind, more natural and more probable to
assume that she was not so completely a free agent in this matter as
she had herself asserted. In that case, who was the likeliest person
to possess the power of compelling her to remain at Welmingham? The
person unquestionably from whom she derived the means of living. She
had refused assistance from her husband, she had no adequate resources
of her own, she was a friendless, degraded woman—from what source
should she derive help but from the source at which report pointed—Sir
Percival Glyde?

Reasoning on these assumptions, and always bearing in mind the one
certain fact to guide me, that Mrs. Catherick was in possession of the
Secret, I easily understood that it was Sir Percival’s interest to keep
her at Welmingham, because her character in that place was certain
to isolate her from all communication with female neighbours, and to
allow her no opportunities of talking incautiously in moments of free
intercourse with inquisitive bosom friends. But what was the mystery
to be concealed? Not Sir Percival’s infamous connection with Mrs.
Catherick’s disgrace, for the neighbours were the very people who knew
of it—not the suspicion that he was Anne’s father, for Welmingham was
the place in which that suspicion must inevitably exist. If I accepted
the guilty appearances described to me as unreservedly as others had
accepted them, if I drew from them the same superficial conclusion
which Mr. Catherick and all his neighbours had drawn, where was the
suggestion, in all that I had heard, of a dangerous secret between Sir
Percival and Mrs. Catherick, which had been kept hidden from that time
to this?

And yet, in those stolen meetings, in those familiar whisperings
between the clerk’s wife and “the gentleman in mourning,” the clue to
discovery existed beyond a doubt.

Was it possible that appearances in this case had pointed one way while
the truth lay all the while unsuspected in another direction? Could
Mrs. Catherick’s assertion, that she was the victim of a dreadful
mistake, by any possibility be true? Or, assuming it to be false, could
the conclusion which associated Sir Percival with her guilt have been
founded in some inconceivable error? Had Sir Percival, by any chance,
courted the suspicion that was wrong for the sake of diverting from
himself some other suspicion that was right? Here—if I could find
it—here was the approach to the Secret, hidden deep under the surface
of the apparently unpromising story which I had just heard.


My next questions were now directed to the one object of ascertaining
whether Mr. Catherick had or had not arrived truly at the conviction
of his wife’s misconduct. The answers I received from Mrs. Clements
left me in no doubt whatever on that point. Mrs. Catherick had, on the
clearest evidence, compromised her reputation, while a single woman,
with some person unknown, and had married to save her character. It had
been positively ascertained, by calculations of time and place into
which I need not enter particularly, that the daughter who bore her
husband’s name was not her husband’s child.

The next object of inquiry, whether it was equally certain that Sir
Percival must have been the father of Anne, was beset by far greater
difficulties. I was in no position to try the probabilities on one side
or on the other in this instance by any better test than the test of
personal resemblance.

“I suppose you often saw Sir Percival when he was in your village?” I
said.

“Yes, sir, very often,” replied Mrs. Clements.

“Did you ever observe that Anne was like him?”

“She was not at all like him, sir.”

“Was she like her mother, then?”

“Not like her mother either, sir. Mrs. Catherick was dark, and full in
the face.”

Not like her mother and not like her (supposed) father. I knew that
the test by personal resemblance was not to be implicitly trusted,
but, on the other hand, it was not to be altogether rejected on that
account. Was it possible to strengthen the evidence by discovering any
conclusive facts in relation to the lives of Mrs. Catherick and Sir
Percival before they either of them appeared at Old Welmingham? When I
asked my next questions I put them with this view.

“When Sir Percival first arrived in your neighbourhood,” I said, “did
you hear where he had come from last?”

“No, sir. Some said from Blackwater Park, and some said from
Scotland—but nobody knew.”

“Was Mrs. Catherick living in service at Varneck Hall immediately
before her marriage?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And had she been long in her place?”

“Three or four years, sir; I am not quite certain which.”

“Did you ever hear the name of the gentleman to whom Varneck Hall
belonged at that time?”

“Yes, sir. His name was Major Donthorne.”

“Did Mr. Catherick, or did any one else you knew, ever hear that Sir
Percival was a friend of Major Donthorne’s, or ever see Sir Percival in
the neighbourhood of Varneck Hall?”

“Catherick never did, sir, that I can remember—nor any one else either,
that I know of.”

I noted down Major Donthorne’s name and address, on the chance that
he might still be alive, and that it might be useful at some future
time to apply to him. Meanwhile, the impression on my mind was now
decidedly adverse to the opinion that Sir Percival was Anne’s father,
and decidedly favourable to the conclusion that the secret of his
stolen interviews with Mrs. Catherick was entirely unconnected with the
disgrace which the woman had inflicted on her husband’s good name. I
could think of no further inquiries which I might make to strengthen
this impression—I could only encourage Mrs. Clements to speak next of
Anne’s early days, and watch for any chance-suggestion which might in
this way offer itself to me.

“I have not heard yet,” I said, “how the poor child, born in all this
sin and misery, came to be trusted, Mrs. Clements, to your care.”

“There was nobody else, sir, to take the little helpless creature in
hand,” replied Mrs. Clements. “The wicked mother seemed to hate it—as
if the poor baby was in fault!—from the day it was born. My heart was
heavy for the child, and I made the offer to bring it up as tenderly as
if it was my own.”

“Did Anne remain entirely under your care from that time?”

“Not quite entirely, sir. Mrs. Catherick had her whims and fancies
about it at times, and used now and then to lay claim to the child, as
if she wanted to spite me for bringing it up. But these fits of hers
never lasted for long. Poor little Anne was always returned to me,
and was always glad to get back—though she led but a gloomy life in
my house, having no playmates, like other children, to brighten her
up. Our longest separation was when her mother took her to Limmeridge.
Just at that time I lost my husband, and I felt it was as well, in
that miserable affliction, that Anne should not be in the house. She
was between ten and eleven years old then, slow at her lessons, poor
soul, and not so cheerful as other children—but as pretty a little
girl to look at as you would wish to see. I waited at home till her
mother brought her back, and then I made the offer to take her with me
to London—the truth being, sir, that I could not find it in my heart
to stop at Old Welmingham after my husband’s death, the place was so
changed and so dismal to me.”

“And did Mrs. Catherick consent to your proposal?”

“No, sir. She came back from the north harder and bitterer than ever.
Folks did say that she had been obliged to ask Sir Percival’s leave to
go, to begin with; and that she only went to nurse her dying sister at
Limmeridge because the poor woman was reported to have saved money—the
truth being that she hardly left enough to bury her. These things may
have soured Mrs. Catherick likely enough, but however that may be,
she wouldn’t hear of my taking the child away. She seemed to like
distressing us both by parting us. All I could do was to give Anne my
direction, and to tell her privately, if she was ever in trouble, to
come to me. But years passed before she was free to come. I never saw
her again, poor soul, till the night she escaped from the mad-house.”

“You know, Mrs. Clements, why Sir Percival Glyde shut her up?”

“I only know what Anne herself told me, sir. The poor thing used to
ramble and wander about it sadly. She said her mother had got some
secret of Sir Percival’s to keep, and had let it out to her long after
I left Hampshire—and when Sir Percival found she knew it, he shut her
up. But she never could say what it was when I asked her. All she could
tell me was, that her mother might be the ruin and destruction of Sir
Percival if she chose. Mrs. Catherick may have let out just as much as
that, and no more. I’m next to certain I should have heard the whole
truth from Anne, if she had really known it as she pretended to do, and
as she very likely fancied she did, poor soul.”

This idea had more than once occurred to my own mind. I had already
told Marian that I doubted whether Laura was really on the point
of making any important discovery when she and Anne Catherick were
disturbed by Count Fosco at the boat-house. It was perfectly in
character with Anne’s mental affliction that she should assume an
absolute knowledge of the secret on no better grounds than vague
suspicion, derived from hints which her mother had incautiously let
drop in her presence. Sir Percival’s guilty distrust would, in that
case, infallibly inspire him with the false idea that Anne knew all
from her mother, just as it had afterwards fixed in his mind the
equally false suspicion that his wife knew all from Anne.

The time was passing, the morning was wearing away. It was doubtful, if
I stayed longer, whether I should hear anything more from Mrs. Clements
that would be at all useful to my purpose. I had already discovered
those local and family particulars, in relation to Mrs. Catherick, of
which I had been in search, and I had arrived at certain conclusions,
entirely new to me, which might immensely assist in directing the
course of my future proceedings. I rose to take my leave, and to thank
Mrs. Clements for the friendly readiness she had shown in affording me
information.

“I am afraid you must have thought me very inquisitive,” I said. “I
have troubled you with more questions than many people would have cared
to answer.”

“You are heartily welcome, sir, to anything I can tell you,” answered
Mrs. Clements. She stopped and looked at me wistfully. “But I do wish,”
said the poor woman, “you could have told me a little more about Anne,
sir. I thought I saw something in your face when you came in which
looked as if you could. You can’t think how hard it is not even to know
whether she is living or dead. I could bear it better if I was only
certain. You said you never expected we should see her alive again. Do
you know, sir—do you know for truth—that it has pleased God to take
her?”

I was not proof against this appeal; it would have been unspeakably
mean and cruel of me if I had resisted it.

“I am afraid there is no doubt of the truth,” I answered gently; “I
have the certainty in my own mind that her troubles in this world are
over.”

The poor woman dropped into her chair and hid her face from me. “Oh,
sir,” she said, “how do you know it? Who can have told you?”

“No one has told me, Mrs. Clements. But I have reasons for feeling sure
of it—reasons which I promise you shall know as soon as I can safely
explain them. I am certain she was not neglected in her last moments—I
am certain the heart complaint from which she suffered so sadly was
the true cause of her death. You shall feel as sure of this as I do,
soon—you shall know, before long, that she is buried in a quiet country
churchyard—in a pretty, peaceful place, which you might have chosen for
her yourself.”

“Dead!” said Mrs. Clements, “dead so young, and I am left to hear it! I
made her first short frocks. I taught her to walk. The first time she
ever said Mother she said it to me—and now I am left and Anne is taken!
Did you say, sir,” said the poor woman, removing the handkerchief from
her face, and looking up at me for the first time, “did you say that
she had been nicely buried? Was it the sort of funeral she might have
had if she had really been my own child?”

I assured her that it was. She seemed to take an inexplicable pride
in my answer—to find a comfort in it which no other and higher
considerations could afford. “It would have broken my heart,” she said
simply, “if Anne had not been nicely buried—but how do you know it,
sir? who told you?” I once more entreated her to wait until I could
speak to her unreservedly. “You are sure to see me again,” I said, “for
I have a favour to ask when you are a little more composed—perhaps in a
day or two.”

“Don’t keep it waiting, sir, on my account,” said Mrs. Clements. “Never
mind my crying if I can be of use. If you have anything on your mind to
say to me, sir, please to say it now.”

“I only wish to ask you one last question,” I said. “I only want to
know Mrs. Catherick’s address at Welmingham.”

My request so startled Mrs. Clements, that, for the moment, even the
tidings of Anne’s death seemed to be driven from her mind. Her tears
suddenly ceased to flow, and she sat looking at me in blank amazement.

“For the Lord’s sake, sir!” she said, “what do you want with Mrs.
Catherick!”

“I want this, Mrs. Clements,” I replied, “I want to know the secret
of those private meetings of hers with Sir Percival Glyde. There is
something more in what you have told me of that woman’s past conduct,
and of that man’s past relations with her, than you or any of your
neighbours ever suspected. There is a secret we none of us know between
those two, and I am going to Mrs. Catherick with the resolution to find
it out.”

“Think twice about it, sir!” said Mrs. Clements, rising in her
earnestness and laying her hand on my arm. “She’s an awful woman—you
don’t know her as I do. Think twice about it.”

“I am sure your warning is kindly meant, Mrs. Clements. But I am
determined to see the woman, whatever comes of it.”

Mrs. Clements looked me anxiously in the face.

“I see your mind is made up, sir,” she said. “I will give you the
address.”

I wrote it down in my pocket-book and then took her hand to say
farewell.

“You shall hear from me soon,” I said; “you shall know all that I have
promised to tell you.”

Mrs. Clements sighed and shook her head doubtfully.

“An old woman’s advice is sometimes worth taking, sir,” she said.
“Think twice before you go to Welmingham.”




VIII


When I reached home again after my interview with Mrs. Clements, I was
struck by the appearance of a change in Laura.

The unvarying gentleness and patience which long misfortune had tried
so cruelly and had never conquered yet, seemed now to have suddenly
failed her. Insensible to all Marian’s attempts to soothe and amuse
her, she sat, with her neglected drawing pushed away on the table, her
eyes resolutely cast down, her fingers twining and untwining themselves
restlessly in her lap. Marian rose when I came in, with a silent
distress in her face, waited for a moment to see if Laura would look up
at my approach, whispered to me, “Try if you can rouse her,” and left
the room.

I sat down in the vacant chair—gently unclasped the poor, worn,
restless fingers, and took both her hands in mine.

“What are you thinking of, Laura? Tell me, my darling—try and tell me
what it is.”

She struggled with herself, and raised her eyes to mine. “I can’t feel
happy,” she said, “I can’t help thinking——” She stopped, bent forward
a little, and laid her head on my shoulder, with a terrible mute
helplessness that struck me to the heart.

“Try to tell me,” I repeated gently; “try to tell me why you are not
happy.”

“I am so useless—I am such a burden on both of you,” she answered, with
a weary, hopeless sigh. “You work and get money, Walter, and Marian
helps you. Why is there nothing I can do? You will end in liking Marian
better than you like me—you will, because I am so helpless! Oh, don’t,
don’t, don’t treat me like a child!”

I raised her head, and smoothed away the tangled hair that fell over
her face, and kissed her—my poor, faded flower! my lost, afflicted
sister! “You shall help us, Laura,” I said, “you shall begin, my
darling, to-day.”

She looked at me with a feverish eagerness, with a breathless interest,
that made me tremble for the new life of hope which I had called into
being by those few words.

I rose, and set her drawing materials in order, and placed them near
her again.

“You know that I work and get money by drawing,” I said. “Now you have
taken such pains, now you are so much improved, you shall begin to
work and get money too. Try to finish this little sketch as nicely and
prettily as you can. When it is done I will take it away with me, and
the same person will buy it who buys all that I do. You shall keep your
own earnings in your own purse, and Marian shall come to you to help
us, as often as she comes to me. Think how useful you are going to make
yourself to both of us, and you will soon be as happy, Laura, as the
day is long.”

Her face grew eager, and brightened into a smile. In the moment while
it lasted, in the moment when she again took up the pencils that had
been laid aside, she almost looked like the Laura of past days.

I had rightly interpreted the first signs of a new growth and strength
in her mind, unconsciously expressing themselves in the notice she
had taken of the occupations which filled her sister’s life and mine.
Marian (when I told her what had passed) saw, as I saw, that she was
longing to assume her own little position of importance, to raise
herself in her own estimation and in ours—and, from that day, we
tenderly helped the new ambition which gave promise of the hopeful,
happier future, that might now not be far off. Her drawings, as she
finished them, or tried to finish them, were placed in my hands. Marian
took them from me and hid them carefully, and I set aside a little
weekly tribute from my earnings, to be offered to her as the price
paid by strangers for the poor, faint, valueless sketches, of which I
was the only purchaser. It was hard sometimes to maintain our innocent
deception, when she proudly brought out her purse to contribute her
share towards the expenses, and wondered with serious interest,
whether I or she had earned the most that week. I have all those
hidden drawings in my possession still—they are my treasures beyond
price—the dear remembrances that I love to keep alive—the friends in
past adversity that my heart will never part from, my tenderness never
forget.

Am I trifling, here, with the necessities of my task? am I looking
forward to the happier time which my narrative has not yet reached?
Yes. Back again—back to the days of doubt and dread, when the spirit
within me struggled hard for its life, in the icy stillness of
perpetual suspense. I have paused and rested for a while on my forward
course. It is not, perhaps, time wasted, if the friends who read these
pages have paused and rested too.


I took the first opportunity I could find of speaking to Marian in
private, and of communicating to her the result of the inquiries which
I had made that morning. She seemed to share the opinion on the subject
of my proposed journey to Welmingham, which Mrs. Clements had already
expressed to me.

“Surely, Walter,” she said, “you hardly know enough yet to give you any
hope of claiming Mrs. Catherick’s confidence? Is it wise to proceed
to these extremities, before you have really exhausted all safer and
simpler means of attaining your object? When you told me that Sir
Percival and the Count were the only two people in existence who knew
the exact date of Laura’s journey, you forgot, and I forgot, that there
was a third person who must surely know it—I mean Mrs. Rubelle. Would
it not be far easier, and far less dangerous, to insist on a confession
from her, than to force it from Sir Percival?”

“It might be easier,” I replied, “but we are not aware of the full
extent of Mrs. Rubelle’s connivance and interest in the conspiracy,
and we are therefore not certain that the date has been impressed
on her mind, as it has been assuredly impressed on the minds of Sir
Percival and the Count. It is too late, now, to waste the time on
Mrs. Rubelle, which may be all-important to the discovery of the one
assailable point in Sir Percival’s life. Are you thinking a little too
seriously, Marian, of the risk I may run in returning to Hampshire? Are
you beginning to doubt whether Sir Percival Glyde may not in the end be
more than a match for me?”

“He will not be more than your match,” she replied decidedly, “because
he will not be helped in resisting you by the impenetrable wickedness
of the Count.”

“What has led you to that conclusion?” I replied, in some surprise.

“My own knowledge of Sir Percival’s obstinacy and impatience of the
Count’s control,” she answered. “I believe he will insist on meeting
you single-handed—just as he insisted at first on acting for himself at
Blackwater Park. The time for suspecting the Count’s interference will
be the time when you have Sir Percival at your mercy. His own interests
will then be directly threatened, and he will act, Walter, to terrible
purpose in his own defence.”

“We may deprive him of his weapons beforehand,” I said. “Some of the
particulars I have heard from Mrs. Clements may yet be turned to
account against him, and other means of strengthening the case may
be at our disposal. There are passages in Mrs. Michelson’s narrative
which show that the Count found it necessary to place himself in
communication with Mr. Fairlie, and there may be circumstances which
compromise him in that proceeding. While I am away, Marian, write to
Mr. Fairlie and say that you want an answer describing exactly what
passed between the Count and himself, and informing you also of any
particulars that may have come to his knowledge at the same time in
connection with his niece. Tell him that the statement you request
will, sooner or later, be insisted on, if he shows any reluctance to
furnish you with it of his own accord.”

“The letter shall be written, Walter. But are you really determined to
go to Welmingham?”

“Absolutely determined. I will devote the next two days to earning what
we want for the week to come, and on the third day I go to Hampshire.”

When the third day came I was ready for my journey.

As it was possible that I might be absent for some little time, I
arranged with Marian that we were to correspond every day—of course
addressing each other by assumed names, for caution’s sake. As long as
I heard from her regularly, I should assume that nothing was wrong. But
if the morning came and brought me no letter, my return to London would
take place, as a matter of course, by the first train. I contrived to
reconcile Laura to my departure by telling her that I was going to
the country to find new purchasers for her drawings and for mine, and
I left her occupied and happy. Marian followed me downstairs to the
street door.

“Remember what anxious hearts you leave here,” she whispered, as we
stood together in the passage. “Remember all the hopes that hang on
your safe return. If strange things happen to you on this journey—if
you and Sir Percival meet——”

“What makes you think we shall meet?” I asked.

“I don’t know—I have fears and fancies that I cannot account for. Laugh
at them, Walter, if you like—but, for God’s sake, keep your temper if
you come in contact with that man!”

“Never fear, Marian! I answer for my self-control.”

With those words we parted.

I walked briskly to the station. There was a glow of hope in me. There
was a growing conviction in my mind that my journey this time would not
be taken in vain. It was a fine, clear, cold morning. My nerves were
firmly strung, and I felt all the strength of my resolution stirring in
me vigorously from head to foot.

As I crossed the railway platform, and looked right and left among the
people congregated on it, to search for any faces among them that I
knew, the doubt occurred to me whether it might not have been to my
advantage if I had adopted a disguise before setting out for Hampshire.
But there was something so repellent to me in the idea—something so
meanly like the common herd of spies and informers in the mere act of
adopting a disguise—that I dismissed the question from consideration
almost as soon as it had risen in my mind. Even as a mere matter of
expediency the proceeding was doubtful in the extreme. If I tried the
experiment at home the landlord of the house would sooner or later
discover me, and would have his suspicions aroused immediately. If I
tried it away from home the same persons might see me, by the commonest
accident, with the disguise and without it, and I should in that way
be inviting the notice and distrust which it was my most pressing
interest to avoid. In my own character I had acted thus far—and in my
own character I was resolved to continue to the end.

The train left me at Welmingham early in the afternoon.


Is there any wilderness of sand in the deserts of Arabia, is there any
prospect of desolation among the ruins of Palestine, which can rival
the repelling effect on the eye, and the depressing influence on the
mind, of an English country town in the first stage of its existence,
and in the transition state of its prosperity? I asked myself that
question as I passed through the clean desolation, the neat ugliness,
the prim torpor of the streets of Welmingham. And the tradesmen who
stared after me from their lonely shops—the trees that drooped helpless
in their arid exile of unfinished crescents and squares—the dead
house-carcasses that waited in vain for the vivifying human element to
animate them with the breath of life—every creature that I saw, every
object that I passed, seemed to answer with one accord: The deserts of
Arabia are innocent of our civilised desolation—the ruins of Palestine
are incapable of our modern gloom!

I inquired my way to the quarter of the town in which Mrs. Catherick
lived, and on reaching it found myself in a square of small houses,
one story high. There was a bare little plot of grass in the middle,
protected by a cheap wire fence. An elderly nursemaid and two children
were standing in a corner of the enclosure, looking at a lean goat
tethered to the grass. Two foot-passengers were talking together on
one side of the pavement before the houses, and an idle little boy was
leading an idle little dog along by a string on the other. I heard the
dull tinkling of a piano at a distance, accompanied by the intermittent
knocking of a hammer nearer at hand. These were all the sights and
sounds of life that encountered me when I entered the square.

I walked at once to the door of Number Thirteen—the number of Mrs.
Catherick’s house—and knocked, without waiting to consider beforehand
how I might best present myself when I got in. The first necessity was
to see Mrs. Catherick. I could then judge, from my own observation, of
the safest and easiest manner of approaching the object of my visit.

The door was opened by a melancholy middle-aged woman servant. I gave
her my card, and asked if I could see Mrs. Catherick. The card was
taken into the front parlour, and the servant returned with a message
requesting me to mention what my business was.

“Say, if you please, that my business relates to Mrs. Catherick’s
daughter,” I replied. This was the best pretext I could think of, on
the spur of the moment, to account for my visit.

The servant again retired to the parlour, again returned, and this time
begged me, with a look of gloomy amazement, to walk in.

I entered a little room, with a flaring paper of the largest pattern on
the walls. Chairs, tables, cheffonier, and sofa, all gleamed with the
glutinous brightness of cheap upholstery. On the largest table, in the
middle of the room, stood a smart Bible, placed exactly in the centre
on a red and yellow woollen mat and at the side of the table nearest to
the window, with a little knitting-basket on her lap, and a wheezing,
blear-eyed old spaniel crouched at her feet, there sat an elderly
woman, wearing a black net cap and a black silk gown, and having
slate-coloured mittens on her hands. Her iron-grey hair hung in heavy
bands on either side of her face—her dark eyes looked straight forward,
with a hard, defiant, implacable stare. She had full square cheeks, a
long, firm chin, and thick, sensual, colourless lips. Her figure was
stout and sturdy, and her manner aggressively self-possessed. This was
Mrs. Catherick.

“You have come to speak to me about my daughter,” she said, before I
could utter a word on my side. “Be so good as to mention what you have
to say.”

The tone of her voice was as hard, as defiant, as implacable as the
expression of her eyes. She pointed to a chair, and looked me all over
attentively, from head to foot, as I sat down in it. I saw that my only
chance with this woman was to speak to her in her own tone, and to meet
her, at the outset of our interview, on her own ground.

“You are aware,” I said, “that your daughter has been lost?”

“I am perfectly aware of it.”

“Have you felt any apprehension that the misfortune of her loss might
be followed by the misfortune of her death?”

“Yes. Have you come here to tell me she is dead?”

“I have.”

“Why?”

She put that extraordinary question without the slightest change in
her voice, her face, or her manner. She could not have appeared more
perfectly unconcerned if I had told her of the death of the goat in the
enclosure outside.

“Why?” I repeated. “Do you ask why I come here to tell you of your
daughter’s death?”

“Yes. What interest have you in me, or in her? How do you come to know
anything about my daughter?”

“In this way. I met her on the night when she escaped from the Asylum,
and I assisted her in reaching a place of safety.”

“You did very wrong.”

“I am sorry to hear her mother say so.”

“Her mother does say so. How do you know she is dead?”

“I am not at liberty to say how I know it—but I DO know it.”

“Are you at liberty to say how you found out my address?”

“Certainly. I got your address from Mrs. Clements.”

“Mrs. Clements is a foolish woman. Did she tell you to come here?”

“She did not.”

“Then, I ask you again, why did you come?”

As she was determined to have her answer, I gave it to her in the
plainest possible form.

“I came,” I said, “because I thought Anne Catherick’s mother might have
some natural interest in knowing whether she was alive or dead.”

“Just so,” said Mrs. Catherick, with additional self-possession. “Had
you no other motive?”

I hesitated. The right answer to that question was not easy to find at
a moment’s notice.

“If you have no other motive,” she went on, deliberately taking off her
slate-coloured mittens, and rolling them up, “I have only to thank you
for your visit, and to say that I will not detain you here any longer.
Your information would be more satisfactory if you were willing to
explain how you became possessed of it. However, it justifies me, I
suppose, in going into mourning. There is not much alteration necessary
in my dress, as you see. When I have changed my mittens, I shall be all
in black.”

She searched in the pocket of her gown, drew out a pair of black lace
mittens, put them on with the stoniest and steadiest composure, and
then quietly crossed her hands in her lap.

“I wish you good morning,” she said.

The cool contempt of her manner irritated me into directly avowing that
the purpose of my visit had not been answered yet.

“I HAVE another motive in coming here,” I said.

“Ah! I thought so,” remarked Mrs. Catherick.

“Your daughter’s death——”

“What did she die of?”

“Of disease of the heart.”

“Yes. Go on.”

“Your daughter’s death has been made the pretext for inflicting serious
injury on a person who is very dear to me. Two men have been concerned,
to my certain knowledge, in doing that wrong. One of them is Sir
Percival Glyde.”

“Indeed!”

I looked attentively to see if she flinched at the sudden mention of
that name. Not a muscle of her stirred—the hard, defiant, implacable
stare in her eyes never wavered for an instant.

“You may wonder,” I went on, “how the event of your daughter’s death
can have been made the means of inflicting injury on another person.”

“No,” said Mrs. Catherick; “I don’t wonder at all. This appears to be
your affair. You are interested in my affairs. I am not interested in
yours.”

“You may ask, then,” I persisted, “why I mention the matter in your
presence.”

“Yes, I DO ask that.”

“I mention it because I am determined to bring Sir Percival Glyde to
account for the wickedness he has committed.”

“What have I to do with your determination?”

“You shall hear. There are certain events in Sir Percival’s past life
which it is necessary for my purpose to be fully acquainted with. YOU
know them—and for that reason I come to YOU.”

“What events do you mean?”

“Events that occurred at Old Welmingham when your husband was
parish-clerk at that place, and before the time when your daughter was
born.”

I had reached the woman at last through the barrier of impenetrable
reserve that she had tried to set up between us. I saw her temper
smouldering in her eyes—as plainly as I saw her hands grow restless,
then unclasp themselves, and begin mechanically smoothing her dress
over her knees.

“What do you know of those events?” she asked.

“All that Mrs. Clements could tell me,” I answered.

There was a momentary flush on her firm square face, a momentary
stillness in her restless hands, which seemed to betoken a coming
outburst of anger that might throw her off her guard. But no—she
mastered the rising irritation, leaned back in her chair, crossed her
arms on her broad bosom, and with a smile of grim sarcasm on her thick
lips, looked at me as steadily as ever.

“Ah! I begin to understand it all now,” she said, her tamed and
disciplined anger only expressing itself in the elaborate mockery of
her tone and manner. “You have got a grudge of your own against Sir
Percival Glyde, and I must help you to wreak it. I must tell you this,
that, and the other about Sir Percival and myself, must I? Yes, indeed?
You have been prying into my private affairs. You think you have found
a lost woman to deal with, who lives here on sufferance, and who will
do anything you ask for fear you may injure her in the opinions of the
town’s-people. I see through you and your precious speculation—I do!
and it amuses me. Ha! ha!”

She stopped for a moment, her arms tightened over her bosom, and she
laughed to herself—a hard, harsh, angry laugh.

“You don’t know how I have lived in this place, and what I have done in
this place, Mr. What’s-your-name,” she went on. “I’ll tell you, before
I ring the bell and have you shown out. I came here a wronged woman—I
came here robbed of my character and determined to claim it back.
I’ve been years and years about it—and I HAVE claimed it back. I have
matched the respectable people fairly and openly on their own ground.
If they say anything against me now they must say it in secret—they
can’t say it, they daren’t say it, openly. I stand high enough in this
town to be out of your reach. THE CLERGYMAN BOWS TO ME. Aha! you didn’t
bargain for that when you came here. Go to the church and inquire about
me—you will find Mrs. Catherick has her sitting like the rest of them,
and pays the rent on the day it’s due. Go to the town-hall. There’s a
petition lying there—a petition of the respectable inhabitants against
allowing a circus to come and perform here and corrupt our morals—yes!
OUR morals. I signed that petition this morning. Go to the bookseller’s
shop. The clergyman’s Wednesday evening Lectures on Justification by
Faith are publishing there by subscription—I’m down on the list. The
doctor’s wife only put a shilling in the plate at our last charity
sermon—I put half-a-crown. Mr. Churchwarden Soward held the plate, and
bowed to me. Ten years ago he told Pigrum the chemist I ought to be
whipped out of the town at the cart’s tail. Is your mother alive? Has
she got a better Bible on her table than I have got on mine? Does she
stand better with her trades-people than I do with mine? Has she always
lived within her income? I have always lived within mine. Ah! there IS
the clergyman coming along the square. Look, Mr. What’s-your-name—look,
if you please!”

She started up with the activity of a young woman, went to the window,
waited till the clergyman passed, and bowed to him solemnly. The
clergyman ceremoniously raised his hat, and walked on. Mrs. Catherick
returned to her chair, and looked at me with a grimmer sarcasm than
ever.

“There!” she said. “What do you think of that for a woman with a lost
character? How does your speculation look now?”

The singular manner in which she had chosen to assert herself, the
extraordinary practical vindication of her position in the town which
she had just offered, had so perplexed me that I listened to her in
silent surprise. I was not the less resolved, however, to make another
effort to throw her off her guard. If the woman’s fierce temper once
got beyond her control, and once flamed out on me, she might yet say
the words which would put the clue in my hands.

“How does your speculation look now?” she repeated.

“Exactly as it looked when I first came in,” I answered. “I don’t doubt
the position you have gained in the town, and I don’t wish to assail
it even if I could. I came here because Sir Percival Glyde is, to my
certain knowledge, your enemy, as well as mine. If I have a grudge
against him, you have a grudge against him too. You may deny it if you
like, you may distrust me as much as you please, you may be as angry as
you will—but, of all the women in England, you, if you have any sense
of injury, are the woman who ought to help me to crush that man.”

“Crush him for yourself,” she said; “then come back here, and see what
I say to you.”

She spoke those words as she had not spoken yet, quickly, fiercely,
vindictively. I had stirred in its lair the serpent-hatred of years,
but only for a moment. Like a lurking reptile it leaped up at me as she
eagerly bent forward towards the place in which I was sitting. Like a
lurking reptile it dropped out of sight again as she instantly resumed
her former position in the chair.

“You won’t trust me?” I said.

“No.”

“You are afraid?”

“Do I look as if I was?”

“You are afraid of Sir Percival Glyde?”

“Am I?”

Her colour was rising, and her hands were at work again smoothing her
gown. I pressed the point farther and farther home, I went on without
allowing her a moment of delay.

“Sir Percival has a high position in the world,” I said; “it would be
no wonder if you were afraid of him. Sir Percival is a powerful man,
a baronet, the possessor of a fine estate, the descendant of a great
family——”

She amazed me beyond expression by suddenly bursting out laughing.

“Yes,” she repeated, in tones of the bitterest, steadiest contempt.
“A baronet, the possessor of a fine estate, the descendant of a great
family. Yes, indeed! A great family—especially by the mother’s side.”

There was no time to reflect on the words that had just escaped her,
there was only time to feel that they were well worth thinking over the
moment I left the house.

“I am not here to dispute with you about family questions,” I said. “I
know nothing of Sir Percival’s mother——”

“And you know as little of Sir Percival himself,” she interposed
sharply.

“I advise you not to be too sure of that,” I rejoined. “I know some
things about him, and I suspect many more.”

“What do you suspect?”

“I’ll tell you what I DON’T suspect. I DON’T suspect him of being
Anne’s father.”

She started to her feet, and came close up to me with a look of fury.

“How dare you talk to me about Anne’s father! How dare you say who was
her father, or who wasn’t!” she broke out, her face quivering, her
voice trembling with passion.

“The secret between you and Sir Percival is not THAT secret,” I
persisted. “The mystery which darkens Sir Percival’s life was not born
with your daughter’s birth, and has not died with your daughter’s
death.”

She drew back a step. “Go!” she said, and pointed sternly to the door.

“There was no thought of the child in your heart or in his,” I went on,
determined to press her back to her last defences. “There was no bond
of guilty love between you and him when you held those stolen meetings,
when your husband found you whispering together under the vestry of the
church.”

Her pointing hand instantly dropped to her side, and the deep flush of
anger faded from her face while I spoke. I saw the change pass over
her—I saw that hard, firm, fearless, self-possessed woman quail under a
terror which her utmost resolution was not strong enough to resist when
I said those five last words, “the vestry of the church.”

For a minute or more we stood looking at each other in silence. I spoke
first.

“Do you still refuse to trust me?” I asked.

She could not call the colour that had left it back to her face,
but she had steadied her voice, she had recovered the defiant
self-possession of her manner when she answered me.

“I do refuse,” she said.

“Do you still tell me to go?”

“Yes. Go—and never come back.”

I walked to the door, waited a moment before I opened it, and turned
round to look at her again.

“I may have news to bring you of Sir Percival which you don’t expect,”
I said, “and in that case I shall come back.”

“There is no news of Sir Percival that I don’t expect, except——”

She stopped, her pale face darkened, and she stole back with a quiet,
stealthy, cat-like step to her chair.

“Except the news of his death,” she said, sitting down again, with the
mockery of a smile just hovering on her cruel lips, and the furtive
light of hatred lurking deep in her steady eyes.

As I opened the door of the room to go out, she looked round at me
quickly. The cruel smile slowly widened her lips—she eyed me, with a
strange stealthy interest, from head to foot—an unutterable expectation
showed itself wickedly all over her face. Was she speculating, in
the secrecy of her own heart, on my youth and strength, on the force
of my sense of injury and the limits of my self-control, and was she
considering the lengths to which they might carry me, if Sir Percival
and I ever chanced to meet? The bare doubt that it might be so drove me
from her presence, and silenced even the common forms of farewell on my
lips. Without a word more, on my side or on hers, I left the room.

As I opened the outer door, I saw the same clergyman who had already
passed the house once, about to pass it again, on his way back through
the square. I waited on the door-step to let him go by, and looked
round, as I did so, at the parlour window.

Mrs. Catherick had heard his footsteps approaching, in the silence
of that lonely place, and she was on her feet at the window again,
waiting for him. Not all the strength of all the terrible passions I
had roused in that woman’s heart, could loosen her desperate hold on
the one fragment of social consideration which years of resolute effort
had just dragged within her grasp. There she was again, not a minute
after I had left her, placed purposely in a position which made it a
matter of common courtesy on the part of the clergyman to bow to her
for a second time. He raised his hat once more. I saw the hard ghastly
face behind the window soften, and light up with gratified pride—I saw
the head with the grim black cap bend ceremoniously in return. The
clergyman had bowed to her, and in my presence, twice in one day!




IX


I left the house, feeling that Mrs. Catherick had helped me a step
forward, in spite of herself. Before I had reached the turning which
led out of the square, my attention was suddenly aroused by the sound
of a closing door behind me.

I looked round, and saw an undersized man in black on the door-step
of a house, which, as well as I could judge, stood next to Mrs.
Catherick’s place of abode—next to it, on the side nearest to me. The
man did not hesitate a moment about the direction he should take.
He advanced rapidly towards the turning at which I had stopped. I
recognised him as the lawyer’s clerk, who had preceded me in my visit
to Blackwater Park, and who had tried to pick a quarrel with me, when I
asked him if I could see the house.

I waited where I was, to ascertain whether his object was to come to
close quarters and speak on this occasion. To my surprise he passed
on rapidly, without saying a word, without even looking up in my face
as he went by. This was such a complete inversion of the course of
proceeding which I had every reason to expect on his part, that my
curiosity, or rather my suspicion, was aroused, and I determined on my
side to keep him cautiously in view, and to discover what the business
might be in which he was now employed. Without caring whether he saw
me or not, I walked after him. He never looked back, and he led me
straight through the streets to the railway station.

The train was on the point of starting, and two or three passengers who
were late were clustering round the small opening through which the
tickets were issued. I joined them, and distinctly heard the lawyer’s
clerk demand a ticket for the Blackwater station. I satisfied myself
that he had actually left by the train before I came away.

There was only one interpretation that I could place on what I had
just seen and heard. I had unquestionably observed the man leaving a
house which closely adjoined Mrs. Catherick’s residence. He had been
probably placed there, by Sir Percival’s directions, as a lodger,
in anticipation of my inquiries leading me, sooner or later, to
communicate with Mrs. Catherick. He had doubtless seen me go in and
come out, and he had hurried away by the first train to make his report
at Blackwater Park, to which place Sir Percival would naturally betake
himself (knowing what he evidently knew of my movements), in order to
be ready on the spot, if I returned to Hampshire. Before many days were
over, there seemed every likelihood now that he and I might meet.

Whatever result events might be destined to produce, I resolved to
pursue my own course, straight to the end in view, without stopping or
turning aside for Sir Percival or for any one. The great responsibility
which weighed on me heavily in London—the responsibility of so guiding
my slightest actions as to prevent them from leading accidentally to
the discovery of Laura’s place of refuge—was removed, now that I was
in Hampshire. I could go and come as I pleased at Welmingham, and if I
chanced to fail in observing any necessary precautions, the immediate
results, at least, would affect no one but myself.

When I left the station the winter evening was beginning to close in.
There was little hope of continuing my inquiries after dark to any
useful purpose in a neighbourhood that was strange to me. Accordingly,
I made my way to the nearest hotel, and ordered my dinner and my bed.
This done, I wrote to Marian, to tell her that I was safe and well,
and that I had fair prospects of success. I had directed her, on
leaving home, to address the first letter she wrote to me (the letter I
expected to receive the next morning) to “The Post-Office, Welmingham,”
and I now begged her to send her second day’s letter to the same
address.

I could easily receive it by writing to the postmaster if I happened to
be away from the town when it arrived.

The coffee-room of the hotel, as it grew late in the evening, became a
perfect solitude. I was left to reflect on what I had accomplished that
afternoon as uninterruptedly as if the house had been my own. Before
I retired to rest I had attentively thought over my extraordinary
interview with Mrs. Catherick from beginning to end, and had verified
at my leisure the conclusions which I had hastily drawn in the earlier
part of the day.

The vestry of Old Welmingham church was the starting-point from which
my mind slowly worked its way back through all that I had heard Mrs.
Catherick say, and through all I had seen Mrs. Catherick do.

At the time when the neighbourhood of the vestry was first referred
to in my presence by Mrs. Clements, I had thought it the strangest
and most unaccountable of all places for Sir Percival to select for
a clandestine meeting with the clerk’s wife. Influenced by this
impression, and by no other, I had mentioned “the vestry of the church”
before Mrs. Catherick on pure speculation—it represented one of the
minor peculiarities of the story which occurred to me while I was
speaking. I was prepared for her answering me confusedly or angrily,
but the blank terror that seized her when I said the words took me
completely by surprise. I had long before associated Sir Percival’s
Secret with the concealment of a serious crime which Mrs. Catherick
knew of, but I had gone no further than this. Now the woman’s paroxysm
of terror associated the crime, either directly or indirectly, with the
vestry, and convinced me that she had been more than the mere witness
of it—she was also the accomplice, beyond a doubt.

What had been the nature of the crime? Surely there was a contemptible
side to it, as well as a dangerous side, or Mrs. Catherick would not
have repeated my own words, referring to Sir Percival’s rank and power,
with such marked disdain as she had certainly displayed. It was a
contemptible crime then and a dangerous crime, and she had shared in
it, and it was associated with the vestry of the church.

The next consideration to be disposed of led me a step farther from
this point.

Mrs. Catherick’s undisguised contempt for Sir Percival plainly extended
to his mother as well. She had referred with the bitterest sarcasm to
the great family he had descended from—“especially by the mother’s
side.” What did this mean?

There appeared to be only two explanations of it. Either his mother’s
birth had been low, or his mother’s reputation was damaged by some
hidden flaw with which Mrs. Catherick and Sir Percival were both
privately acquainted? I could only put the first explanation to the
test by looking at the register of her marriage, and so ascertaining
her maiden name and her parentage as a preliminary to further inquiries.

On the other hand, if the second case supposed were the true one, what
had been the flaw in her reputation? Remembering the account which
Marian had given me of Sir Percival’s father and mother, and of the
suspiciously unsocial secluded life they had both led, I now asked
myself whether it might not be possible that his mother had never been
married at all. Here again the register might, by offering written
evidence of the marriage, prove to me, at any rate, that this doubt had
no foundation in truth. But where was the register to be found? At this
point I took up the conclusions which I had previously formed, and the
same mental process which had discovered the locality of the concealed
crime, now lodged the register also in the vestry of Old Welmingham
church.

These were the results of my interview with Mrs. Catherick—these were
the various considerations, all steadily converging to one point, which
decided the course of my proceedings on the next day.


The morning was cloudy and lowering, but no rain fell. I left my bag at
the hotel to wait there till I called for it, and, after inquiring the
way, set forth on foot for Old Welmingham church.

It was a walk of rather more than two miles, the ground rising slowly
all the way.

On the highest point stood the church—an ancient, weather-beaten
building, with heavy buttresses at its sides, and a clumsy square tower
in front. The vestry at the back was built out from the church, and
seemed to be of the same age. Round the building at intervals appeared
the remains of the village which Mrs. Clements had described to me as
her husband’s place of abode in former years, and which the principal
inhabitants had long since deserted for the new town. Some of the empty
houses had been dismantled to their outer walls, some had been left to
decay with time, and some were still inhabited by persons evidently of
the poorest class. It was a dreary scene, and yet, in the worst aspect
of its ruin, not so dreary as the modern town that I had just left.
Here there was the brown, breezy sweep of surrounding fields for the
eye to repose on—here the trees, leafless as they were, still varied
the monotony of the prospect, and helped the mind to look forward to
summer-time and shade.

As I moved away from the back of the church, and passed some of
the dismantled cottages in search of a person who might direct me
to the clerk, I saw two men saunter out after me from behind a
wall. The tallest of the two—a stout muscular man in the dress of a
gamekeeper—was a stranger to me. The other was one of the men who had
followed me in London on the day when I left Mr. Kyrle’s office. I had
taken particular notice of him at the time; and I felt sure that I was
not mistaken in identifying the fellow on this occasion.

Neither he nor his companion attempted to speak to me, and both kept
themselves at a respectful distance, but the motive of their presence
in the neighbourhood of the church was plainly apparent. It was exactly
as I had supposed—Sir Percival was already prepared for me. My visit to
Mrs. Catherick had been reported to him the evening before, and those
two men had been placed on the look-out near the church in anticipation
of my appearance at Old Welmingham. If I had wanted any further proof
that my investigations had taken the right direction at last, the plan
now adopted for watching me would have supplied it.

I walked on away from the church till I reached one of the inhabited
houses, with a patch of kitchen garden attached to it on which a
labourer was at work. He directed me to the clerk’s abode, a cottage at
some little distance off, standing by itself on the outskirts of the
forsaken village. The clerk was indoors, and was just putting on his
greatcoat. He was a cheerful, familiar, loudly-talkative old man, with
a very poor opinion (as I soon discovered) of the place in which he
lived, and a happy sense of superiority to his neighbours in virtue of
the great personal distinction of having once been in London.

“It’s well you came so early, sir,” said the old man, when I had
mentioned the object of my visit. “I should have been away in ten
minutes more. Parish business, sir, and a goodish long trot before it’s
all done for a man at my age. But, bless you, I’m strong on my legs
still! As long as a man don’t give at his legs, there’s a deal of work
left in him. Don’t you think so yourself, sir?”

He took his keys down while he was talking from a hook behind the
fireplace, and locked his cottage door behind us.

“Nobody at home to keep house for me,” said the clerk, with a cheerful
sense of perfect freedom from all family encumbrances. “My wife’s in
the churchyard there, and my children are all married. A wretched place
this, isn’t it, sir? But the parish is a large one—every man couldn’t
get through the business as I do. It’s learning does it, and I’ve had
my share, and a little more. I can talk the Queen’s English (God bless
the Queen!), and that’s more than most of the people about here can do.
You’re from London, I suppose, sir? I’ve been in London a matter of
five-and-twenty year ago. What’s the news there now, if you please?”

Chattering on in this way, he led me back to the vestry. I looked about
to see if the two spies were still in sight. They were not visible
anywhere. After having discovered my application to the clerk, they
had probably concealed themselves where they could watch my next
proceedings in perfect freedom.

The vestry door was of stout old oak, studded with strong nails, and
the clerk put his large heavy key into the lock with the air of a man
who knew that he had a difficulty to encounter, and who was not quite
certain of creditably conquering it.

“I’m obliged to bring you this way, sir,” he said, “because the door
from the vestry to the church is bolted on the vestry side. We might
have got in through the church otherwise. This is a perverse lock, if
ever there was one yet. It’s big enough for a prison-door—it’s been
hampered over and over again, and it ought to be changed for a new one.
I’ve mentioned that to the churchwarden fifty times over at least—he’s
always saying, ‘I’ll see about it’—and he never does see. Ah, it’s a
sort of lost corner, this place. Not like London—is it, sir? Bless you,
we are all asleep here! We don’t march with the times.”

After some twisting and turning of the key, the heavy lock yielded, and
he opened the door.

The vestry was larger than I should have supposed it to be, judging
from the outside only. It was a dim, mouldy, melancholy old room, with
a low, raftered ceiling. Round two sides of it, the sides nearest to
the interior of the church, ran heavy wooden presses, worm-eaten and
gaping with age. Hooked to the inner corner of one of these presses
hung several surplices, all bulging out at their lower ends in an
irreverent-looking bundle of limp drapery. Below the surplices, on the
floor, stood three packing-cases, with the lids half off, half on, and
the straw profusely bursting out of their cracks and crevices in every
direction. Behind them, in a corner, was a litter of dusty papers,
some large and rolled up like architects’ plans, some loosely strung
together on files like bills or letters. The room had once been lighted
by a small side window, but this had been bricked up, and a lantern
skylight was now substituted for it. The atmosphere of the place was
heavy and mouldy, being rendered additionally oppressive by the closing
of the door which led into the church. This door also was composed of
solid oak, and was bolted at the top and bottom on the vestry side.

“We might be tidier, mightn’t we, sir?” said the cheerful clerk; “but
when you’re in a lost corner of a place like this, what are you to do?
Why, look here now, just look at these packing-cases. There they’ve
been, for a year or more, ready to go down to London—there they are,
littering the place, and there they’ll stop as long as the nails hold
them together. I’ll tell you what, sir, as I said before, this is not
London. We are all asleep here. Bless you, WE don’t march with the
times!”

“What is there in the packing-cases?” I asked.

“Bits of old wood carvings from the pulpit, and panels from the
chancel, and images from the organ-loft,” said the clerk. “Portraits
of the twelve apostles in wood, and not a whole nose among ’em. All
broken, and worm-eaten, and crumbling to dust at the edges. As brittle
as crockery, sir, and as old as the church, if not older.”

“And why were they going to London? To be repaired?”

“That’s it, sir, to be repaired, and where they were past repair, to be
copied in sound wood. But, bless you, the money fell short, and there
they are, waiting for new subscriptions, and nobody to subscribe. It
was all done a year ago, sir. Six gentlemen dined together about it, at
the hotel in the new town. They made speeches, and passed resolutions,
and put their names down, and printed off thousands of prospectuses.
Beautiful prospectuses, sir, all flourished over with Gothic devices
in red ink, saying it was a disgrace not to restore the church and
repair the famous carvings, and so on. There are the prospectuses that
couldn’t be distributed, and the architect’s plans and estimates,
and the whole correspondence which set everybody at loggerheads and
ended in a dispute, all down together in that corner, behind the
packing-cases. The money dribbled in a little at first—but what CAN
you expect out of London? There was just enough, you know, to pack the
broken carvings, and get the estimates, and pay the printer’s bill,
and after that there wasn’t a halfpenny left. There the things are,
as I said before. We have nowhere else to put them—nobody in the new
town cares about accommodating us—we’re in a lost corner—and this is an
untidy vestry—and who’s to help it?—that’s what I want to know.”

My anxiety to examine the register did not dispose me to offer much
encouragement to the old man’s talkativeness. I agreed with him that
nobody could help the untidiness of the vestry, and then suggested that
we should proceed to our business without more delay.

“Ay, ay, the marriage-register, to be sure,” said the clerk, taking
a little bunch of keys from his pocket. “How far do you want to look
back, sir?”

Marian had informed me of Sir Percival’s age at the time when we had
spoken together of his marriage engagement with Laura. She had then
described him as being forty-five years old. Calculating back from
this, and making due allowance for the year that had passed since I had
gained my information, I found that he must have been born in eighteen
hundred and four, and that I might safely start on my search through
the register from that date.

“I want to begin with the year eighteen hundred and four,” I said.

“Which way after that, sir?” asked the clerk. “Forwards to our time or
backwards away from us?”

“Backwards from eighteen hundred and four.”

He opened the door of one of the presses—the press from the side of
which the surplices were hanging—and produced a large volume bound
in greasy brown leather. I was struck by the insecurity of the place
in which the register was kept. The door of the press was warped and
cracked with age, and the lock was of the smallest and commonest kind.
I could have forced it easily with the walking-stick I carried in my
hand.

“Is that considered a sufficiently secure place for the register?”
I inquired. “Surely a book of such importance as this ought to be
protected by a better lock, and kept carefully in an iron safe?”

“Well, now, that’s curious!” said the clerk, shutting up the book
again, just after he had opened it, and smacking his hand cheerfully
on the cover. “Those were the very words my old master was always
saying years and years ago, when I was a lad. ‘Why isn’t the register’
(meaning this register here, under my hand)—‘why isn’t it kept in an
iron safe?’ If I’ve heard him say that once, I’ve heard him say it
a hundred times. He was the solicitor in those days, sir, who had
the appointment of vestry-clerk to this church. A fine hearty old
gentleman, and the most particular man breathing. As long as he lived
he kept a copy of this book in his office at Knowlesbury, and had it
posted up regular, from time to time, to correspond with the fresh
entries here. You would hardly think it, but he had his own appointed
days, once or twice in every quarter, for riding over to this church on
his old white pony, to check the copy, by the register, with his own
eyes and hands. ‘How do I know?’ (he used to say) ‘how do I know that
the register in this vestry may not be stolen or destroyed? Why isn’t
it kept in an iron safe? Why can’t I make other people as careful as
I am myself? Some of these days there will be an accident happen, and
when the register’s lost, then the parish will find out the value of my
copy.’ He used to take his pinch of snuff after that, and look about
him as bold as a lord. Ah! the like of him for doing business isn’t
easy to find now. You may go to London and not match him, even THERE.
Which year did you say, sir? Eighteen hundred and what?”

“Eighteen hundred and four,” I replied, mentally resolving to give the
old man no more opportunities of talking, until my examination of the
register was over.

The clerk put on his spectacles, and turned over the leaves of the
register, carefully wetting his finger and thumb at every third page.
“There it is, sir,” said he, with another cheerful smack on the open
volume. “There’s the year you want.”

As I was ignorant of the month in which Sir Percival was born, I began
my backward search with the early part of the year. The register-book
was of the old-fashioned kind, the entries being all made on blank
pages in manuscript, and the divisions which separated them being
indicated by ink lines drawn across the page at the close of each entry.

I reached the beginning of the year eighteen hundred and four without
encountering the marriage, and then travelled back through December
eighteen hundred and three—through November and October—through——

No! not through September also. Under the heading of that month in the
year I found the marriage.

I looked carefully at the entry. It was at the bottom of a page,
and was for want of room compressed into a smaller space than
that occupied by the marriages above. The marriage immediately
before it was impressed on my attention by the circumstance of the
bridegroom’s Christian name being the same as my own. The entry
immediately following it (on the top of the next page) was noticeable
in another way from the large space it occupied, the record in this
case registering the marriages of two brothers at the same time.
The register of the marriage of Sir Felix Glyde was in no respect
remarkable except for the narrowness of the space into which it was
compressed at the bottom of the page. The information about his wife
was the usual information given in such cases. She was described as
“Cecilia Jane Elster, of Park-View Cottages, Knowlesbury, only daughter
of the late Patrick Elster, Esq., formerly of Bath.”

I noted down these particulars in my pocket-book, feeling as I did so
both doubtful and disheartened about my next proceedings. The Secret
which I had believed until this moment to be within my grasp seemed now
farther from my reach than ever.

What suggestions of any mystery unexplained had arisen out of my
visit to the vestry? I saw no suggestions anywhere. What progress
had I made towards discovering the suspected stain on the reputation
of Sir Percival’s mother? The one fact I had ascertained vindicated
her reputation. Fresh doubts, fresh difficulties, fresh delays began
to open before me in interminable prospect. What was I to do next?
The one immediate resource left to me appeared to be this. I might
institute inquiries about “Miss Elster of Knowlesbury,” on the chance
of advancing towards the main object of my investigation, by first
discovering the secret of Mrs. Catherick’s contempt for Sir Percival’s
mother.

“Have you found what you wanted, sir?” said the clerk, as I closed the
register-book.

“Yes,” I replied, “but I have some inquiries still to make. I suppose
the clergyman who officiated here in the year eighteen hundred and
three is no longer alive?”

“No, no, sir, he was dead three or four years before I came here, and
that was as long ago as the year twenty-seven. I got this place, sir,”
persisted my talkative old friend, “through the clerk before me leaving
it. They say he was driven out of house and home by his wife—and she’s
living still down in the new town there. I don’t know the rights of
the story myself—all I know is I got the place. Mr. Wansborough got
it for me—the son of my old master that I was telling you of. He’s a
free, pleasant gentleman as ever lived—rides to the hounds, keeps his
pointers and all that. He’s vestry-clerk here now as his father was
before him.”

“Did you not tell me your former master lived at Knowlesbury?” I asked,
calling to mind the long story about the precise gentleman of the old
school with which my talkative friend had wearied me before he opened
the register-book.

“Yes, to be sure, sir,” replied the clerk. “Old Mr. Wansborough lived
at Knowlesbury, and young Mr. Wansborough lives there too.”

“You said just now he was vestry-clerk, like his father before him. I
am not quite sure that I know what a vestry-clerk is.”

“Don’t you indeed, sir?—and you come from London too! Every
parish church, you know, has a vestry-clerk and a parish-clerk.
The parish-clerk is a man like me (except that I’ve got a deal
more learning than most of them—though I don’t boast of it). The
vestry-clerk is a sort of an appointment that the lawyers get, and if
there’s any business to be done for the vestry, why there they are to
do it. It’s just the same in London. Every parish church there has got
its vestry-clerk—and you may take my word for it he’s sure to be a
lawyer.”

“Then young Mr. Wansborough is a lawyer, I suppose?”

“Of course he is, sir! A lawyer in High Street, Knowlesbury—the old
offices that his father had before him. The number of times I’ve swept
those offices out, and seen the old gentleman come trotting in to
business on his white pony, looking right and left all down the street
and nodding to everybody! Bless you, he was a popular character!—he’d
have done in London!”

“How far is it to Knowlesbury from this place?”

“A long stretch, sir,” said the clerk, with that exaggerated idea of
distances, and that vivid perception of difficulties in getting from
place to place, which is peculiar to all country people. “Nigh on five
mile, I can tell you!”

It was still early in the forenoon. There was plenty of time for a walk
to Knowlesbury and back again to Welmingham; and there was no person
probably in the town who was fitter to assist my inquiries about the
character and position of Sir Percival’s mother before her marriage
than the local solicitor. Resolving to go at once to Knowlesbury on
foot, I led the way out of the vestry.

“Thank you kindly, sir,” said the clerk, as I slipped my little present
into his hand. “Are you really going to walk all the way to Knowlesbury
and back? Well! you’re strong on your legs, too—and what a blessing
that is, isn’t it? There’s the road, you can’t miss it. I wish I was
going your way—it’s pleasant to meet with gentlemen from London in a
lost corner like this. One hears the news. Wish you good-morning, sir,
and thank you kindly once more.”

We parted. As I left the church behind me I looked back, and there were
the two men again on the road below, with a third in their company,
that third person being the short man in black whom I had traced to the
railway the evening before.

The three stood talking together for a little while, then separated.
The man in black went away by himself towards Welmingham—the other two
remained together, evidently waiting to follow me as soon as I walked
on.

I proceeded on my way without letting the fellows see that I took any
special notice of them. They caused me no conscious irritation of
feeling at that moment—on the contrary, they rather revived my sinking
hopes. In the surprise of discovering the evidence of the marriage, I
had forgotten the inference I had drawn on first perceiving the men in
the neighbourhood of the vestry. Their reappearance reminded me that
Sir Percival had anticipated my visit to Old Welmingham church as the
next result of my interview with Mrs. Catherick—otherwise he would
never have placed his spies there to wait for me. Smoothly and fairly
as appearances looked in the vestry, there was something wrong beneath
them—there was something in the register-book, for aught I knew, that I
had not discovered yet.




X


Once out of sight of the church, I pressed forward briskly on my way to
Knowlesbury.

The road was, for the most part, straight and level. Whenever I looked
back over it I saw the two spies steadily following me. For the greater
part of the way they kept at a safe distance behind. But once or
twice they quickened their pace, as if with the purpose of overtaking
me, then stopped, consulted together, and fell back again to their
former position. They had some special object evidently in view, and
they seemed to be hesitating or differing about the best means of
accomplishing it. I could not guess exactly what their design might
be, but I felt serious doubts of reaching Knowlesbury without some
mischance happening to me on the way. These doubts were realised.

I had just entered on a lonely part of the road, with a sharp turn at
some distance ahead, and had just concluded (calculating by time) that
I must be getting near to the town, when I suddenly heard the steps of
the men close behind me.

Before I could look round, one of them (the man by whom I had been
followed in London) passed rapidly on my left side and hustled me with
his shoulder. I had been more irritated by the manner in which he and
his companion had dogged my steps all the way from Old Welmingham
than I was myself aware of, and I unfortunately pushed the fellow
away smartly with my open hand. He instantly shouted for help. His
companion, the tall man in the gamekeeper’s clothes, sprang to my right
side, and the next moment the two scoundrels held me pinioned between
them in the middle of the road.

The conviction that a trap had been laid for me, and the vexation of
knowing that I had fallen into it, fortunately restrained me from
making my position still worse by an unavailing struggle with two men,
one of whom would, in all probability, have been more than a match for
me single-handed. I repressed the first natural movement by which I had
attempted to shake them off, and looked about to see if there was any
person near to whom I could appeal.

A labourer was at work in an adjoining field who must have witnessed
all that had passed. I called to him to follow us to the town. He
shook his head with stolid obstinacy, and walked away in the direction
of a cottage which stood back from the high-road. At the same time
the men who held me between them declared their intention of charging
me with an assault. I was cool enough and wise enough now to make no
opposition. “Drop your hold of my arms,” I said, “and I will go with
you to the town.” The man in the gamekeeper’s dress roughly refused.
But the shorter man was sharp enough to look to consequences, and not
to let his companion commit himself by unnecessary violence. He made a
sign to the other, and I walked on between them with my arms free.

We reached the turning in the road, and there, close before us, were
the suburbs of Knowlesbury. One of the local policemen was walking
along the path by the roadside. The men at once appealed to him. He
replied that the magistrate was then sitting at the town-hall, and
recommended that we should appear before him immediately.

We went on to the town-hall. The clerk made out a formal summons, and
the charge was preferred against me, with the customary exaggeration
and the customary perversion of the truth on such occasions. The
magistrate (an ill-tempered man, with a sour enjoyment in the exercise
of his own power) inquired if any one on or near the road had witnessed
the assault, and, greatly to my surprise, the complainant admitted the
presence of the labourer in the field. I was enlightened, however,
as to the object of the admission by the magistrate’s next words. He
remanded me at once for the production of the witness, expressing, at
the same time, his willingness to take bail for my reappearance if I
could produce one responsible surety to offer it. If I had been known
in the town he would have liberated me on my own recognisances, but as
I was a total stranger it was necessary that I should find responsible
bail.

The whole object of the stratagem was now disclosed to me. It had
been so managed as to make a remand necessary in a town where I was a
perfect stranger, and where I could not hope to get my liberty on bail.
The remand merely extended over three days, until the next sitting
of the magistrate. But in that time, while I was in confinement,
Sir Percival might use any means he pleased to embarrass my future
proceedings—perhaps to screen himself from detection altogether—without
the slightest fear of any hindrance on my part. At the end of the three
days the charge would, no doubt, be withdrawn, and the attendance of
the witness would be perfectly useless.

My indignation, I may almost say, my despair, at this mischievous check
to all further progress—so base and trifling in itself, and yet so
disheartening and so serious in its probable results—quite unfitted
me at first to reflect on the best means of extricating myself from
the dilemma in which I now stood. I had the folly to call for writing
materials, and to think of privately communicating my real position to
the magistrate. The hopelessness and the imprudence of this proceeding
failed to strike me before I had actually written the opening lines
of the letter. It was not till I had pushed the paper away—not till,
I am ashamed to say, I had almost allowed the vexation of my helpless
position to conquer me—that a course of action suddenly occurred to
my mind, which Sir Percival had probably not anticipated, and which
might set me free again in a few hours. I determined to communicate the
situation in which I was placed to Mr. Dawson, of Oak Lodge.

I had visited this gentleman’s house, it may be remembered, at the time
of my first inquiries in the Blackwater Park neighbourhood, and I had
presented to him a letter of introduction from Miss Halcombe, in which
she recommended me to his friendly attention in the strongest terms. I
now wrote, referring to this letter, and to what I had previously told
Mr. Dawson of the delicate and dangerous nature of my inquiries. I had
not revealed to him the truth about Laura, having merely described my
errand as being of the utmost importance to private family interests
with which Miss Halcombe was concerned. Using the same caution still, I
now accounted for my presence at Knowlesbury in the same manner, and I
put it to the doctor to say whether the trust reposed in me by a lady
whom he well knew, and the hospitality I had myself received in his
house, justified me or not in asking him to come to my assistance in a
place where I was quite friendless.

I obtained permission to hire a messenger to drive away at once with
my letter in a conveyance which might be used to bring the doctor back
immediately. Oak Lodge was on the Knowlesbury side of Blackwater. The
man declared he could drive there in forty minutes, and could bring Mr.
Dawson back in forty more. I directed him to follow the doctor wherever
he might happen to be, if he was not at home, and then sat down to wait
for the result with all the patience and all the hope that I could
summon to help me.

It was not quite half-past one when the messenger departed. Before
half-past three he returned, and brought the doctor with him. Mr.
Dawson’s kindness, and the delicacy with which he treated his prompt
assistance quite as a matter of course, almost overpowered me. The bail
required was offered, and accepted immediately. Before four o’clock, on
that afternoon, I was shaking hands warmly with the good old doctor—a
free man again—in the streets of Knowlesbury.

Mr. Dawson hospitably invited me to go back with him to Oak Lodge, and
take up my quarters there for the night. I could only reply that my
time was not my own, and I could only ask him to let me pay my visit
in a few days, when I might repeat my thanks, and offer to him all
the explanations which I felt to be only his due, but which I was not
then in a position to make. We parted with friendly assurances on both
sides, and I turned my steps at once to Mr. Wansborough’s office in the
High Street.

Time was now of the last importance.

The news of my being free on bail would reach Sir Percival, to an
absolute certainty, before night. If the next few hours did not put me
in a position to justify his worst fears, and to hold him helpless at
my mercy, I might lose every inch of the ground I had gained, never
to recover it again. The unscrupulous nature of the man, the local
influence he possessed, the desperate peril of exposure with which
my blindfold inquiries threatened him—all warned me to press on to
positive discovery, without the useless waste of a single minute. I had
found time to think while I was waiting for Mr. Dawson’s arrival, and
I had well employed it. Certain portions of the conversation of the
talkative old clerk, which had wearied me at the time, now recurred
to my memory with a new significance, and a suspicion crossed my mind
darkly which had not occurred to me while I was in the vestry. On my
way to Knowlesbury, I had only proposed to apply to Mr. Wansborough for
information on the subject of Sir Percival’s mother. My object now was
to examine the duplicate register of Old Welmingham Church.

Mr. Wansborough was in his office when I inquired for him.

He was a jovial, red-faced, easy-looking man—more like a country squire
than a lawyer—and he seemed to be both surprised and amused by my
application. He had heard of his father’s copy of the register, but
had not even seen it himself. It had never been inquired after, and it
was no doubt in the strong room among other papers that had not been
disturbed since his father’s death. It was a pity (Mr. Wansborough
said) that the old gentleman was not alive to hear his precious copy
asked for at last. He would have ridden his favourite hobby harder than
ever now. How had I come to hear of the copy? was it through anybody in
the town?

I parried the question as well as I could. It was impossible at this
stage of the investigation to be too cautious, and it was just as well
not to let Mr. Wansborough know prematurely that I had already examined
the original register. I described myself, therefore, as pursuing a
family inquiry, to the object of which every possible saving of time
was of great importance. I was anxious to send certain particulars
to London by that day’s post, and one look at the duplicate register
(paying, of course, the necessary fees) might supply what I required,
and save me a further journey to Old Welmingham. I added that, in the
event of my subsequently requiring a copy of the original register, I
should make application to Mr. Wansborough’s office to furnish me with
the document.

After this explanation no objection was made to producing the copy.
A clerk was sent to the strong room, and after some delay returned
with the volume. It was of exactly the same size as the volume in the
vestry, the only difference being that the copy was more smartly bound.
I took it with me to an unoccupied desk. My hands were trembling—my
head was burning hot—I felt the necessity of concealing my agitation
as well as I could from the persons about me in the room, before I
ventured on opening the book.

On the blank page at the beginning, to which I first turned, were
traced some lines in faded ink. They contained these words—

“Copy of the Marriage Register of Welmingham Parish Church. Executed
under my orders, and afterwards compared, entry by entry, with the
original, by myself. (Signed) Robert Wansborough, vestry-clerk.” Below
this note there was a line added, in another handwriting, as follows:
“Extending from the first of January, 1800, to the thirtieth of June,
1815.”

I turned to the month of September, eighteen hundred and three. I found
the marriage of the man whose Christian name was the same as my own.
I found the double register of the marriages of the two brothers. And
between these entries, at the bottom of the page?

Nothing! Not a vestige of the entry which recorded the marriage of Sir
Felix Glyde and Cecilia Jane Elster in the register of the church!

My heart gave a great bound, and throbbed as if it would stifle me.
I looked again—I was afraid to believe the evidence of my own eyes.
No! not a doubt. The marriage was not there. The entries on the copy
occupied exactly the same places on the page as the entries in the
original. The last entry on one page recorded the marriage of the
man with my Christian name. Below it there was a blank space—a space
evidently left because it was too narrow to contain the entry of the
marriages of the two brothers, which in the copy, as in the original,
occupied the top of the next page. That space told the whole story!
There it must have remained in the church register from eighteen
hundred and three (when the marriages had been solemnised and the copy
had been made) to eighteen hundred and twenty-seven, when Sir Percival
appeared at Old Welmingham. Here, at Knowlesbury, was the chance of
committing the forgery shown to me in the copy, and there, at Old
Welmingham, was the forgery committed in the register of the church.

My head turned giddy—I held by the desk to keep myself from falling. Of
all the suspicions which had struck me in relation to that desperate
man, not one had been near the truth.

The idea that he was not Sir Percival Glyde at all, that he had no more
claim to the baronetcy and to Blackwater Park than the poorest labourer
who worked on the estate, had never once occurred to my mind. At one
time I had thought he might be Anne Catherick’s father—at another time
I had thought he might have been Anne Catherick’s husband—the offence
of which he was really guilty had been, from first to last, beyond the
widest reach of my imagination.

The paltry means by which the fraud had been effected, the magnitude
and daring of the crime that it represented, the horror of the
consequences involved in its discovery, overwhelmed me. Who could
wonder now at the brute-restlessness of the wretch’s life—at his
desperate alternations between abject duplicity and reckless
violence—at the madness of guilty distrust which had made him imprison
Anne Catherick in the Asylum, and had given him over to the vile
conspiracy against his wife, on the bare suspicion that the one and the
other knew his terrible secret? The disclosure of that secret might,
in past years, have hanged him—might now transport him for life. The
disclosure of that secret, even if the sufferers by his deception
spared him the penalties of the law, would deprive him at one blow of
the name, the rank, the estate, the whole social existence that he had
usurped. This was the Secret, and it was mine! A word from me, and
house, lands, baronetcy, were gone from him for ever—a word from me,
and he was driven out into the world, a nameless, penniless, friendless
outcast! The man’s whole future hung on my lips—and he knew it by this
time as certainly as I did!

That last thought steadied me. Interests far more precious than my own
depended on the caution which must now guide my slightest actions.
There was no possible treachery which Sir Percival might not attempt
against me. In the danger and desperation of his position he would be
staggered by no risks, he would recoil at no crime—he would literally
hesitate at nothing to save himself.

I considered for a minute. My first necessity was to secure positive
evidence in writing of the discovery that I had just made, and in the
event of any personal misadventure happening to me, to place that
evidence beyond Sir Percival’s reach. The copy of the register was sure
to be safe in Mr. Wansborough’s strong room. But the position of the
original in the vestry was, as I had seen with my own eyes, anything
but secure.

In this emergency I resolved to return to the church, to apply again to
the clerk, and to take the necessary extract from the register before
I slept that night. I was not then aware that a legally-certified
copy was necessary, and that no document merely drawn out by myself
could claim the proper importance as a proof. I was not aware of
this, and my determination to keep my present proceedings a secret
prevented me from asking any questions which might have procured the
necessary information. My one anxiety was the anxiety to get back to
Old Welmingham. I made the best excuses I could for the discomposure in
my face and manner which Mr. Wansborough had already noticed, laid the
necessary fee on his table, arranged that I should write to him in a
day or two, and left the office, with my head in a whirl and my blood
throbbing through my veins at fever heat.

It was just getting dark. The idea occurred to me that I might be
followed again and attacked on the high-road.

My walking-stick was a light one, of little or no use for purposes
of defence. I stopped before leaving Knowlesbury and bought a stout
country cudgel, short, and heavy at the head. With this homely weapon,
if any one man tried to stop me I was a match for him. If more than one
attacked me I could trust to my heels. In my school-days I had been a
noted runner, and I had not wanted for practice since in the later time
of my experience in Central America.

I started from the town at a brisk pace, and kept the middle of the
road.

A small misty rain was falling, and it was impossible for the first
half of the way to make sure whether I was followed or not. But at the
last half of my journey, when I supposed myself to be about two miles
from the church, I saw a man run by me in the rain, and then heard
the gate of a field by the roadside shut to sharply. I kept straight
on, with my cudgel ready in my hand, my ears on the alert, and my
eyes straining to see through the mist and the darkness. Before I had
advanced a hundred yards there was a rustling in the hedge on my right,
and three men sprang out into the road.

I drew aside on the instant to the footpath. The two foremost men were
carried beyond me before they could check themselves. The third was as
quick as lightning. He stopped, half turned, and struck at me with his
stick. The blow was aimed at hazard, and was not a severe one. It fell
on my left shoulder. I returned it heavily on his head. He staggered
back and jostled his two companions just as they were both rushing at
me. This circumstance gave me a moment’s start. I slipped by them, and
took to the middle of the road again at the top of my speed.

The two unhurt men pursued me. They were both good runners—the road
was smooth and level, and for the first five minutes or more I was
conscious that I did not gain on them. It was perilous work to run for
long in the darkness. I could barely see the dim black line of the
hedges on either side, and any chance obstacle in the road would have
thrown me down to a certainty. Ere long I felt the ground changing—it
descended from the level at a turn, and then rose again beyond.
Downhill the men rather gained on me, but uphill I began to distance
them. The rapid, regular thump of their feet grew fainter on my ear,
and I calculated by the sound that I was far enough in advance to take
to the fields with a good chance of their passing me in the darkness.
Diverging to the footpath, I made for the first break that I could
guess at, rather than see, in the hedge. It proved to be a closed gate.
I vaulted over, and finding myself in a field, kept across it steadily
with my back to the road. I heard the men pass the gate, still running,
then in a minute more heard one of them call to the other to come back.
It was no matter what they did now, I was out of their sight and out of
their hearing. I kept straight across the field, and when I had reached
the farther extremity of it, waited there for a minute to recover my
breath.

It was impossible to venture back to the road, but I was determined
nevertheless to get to Old Welmingham that evening.

Neither moon nor stars appeared to guide me. I only knew that I had
kept the wind and rain at my back on leaving Knowlesbury, and if I
now kept them at my back still, I might at least be certain of not
advancing altogether in the wrong direction.

Proceeding on this plan, I crossed the country—meeting with no worse
obstacles than hedges, ditches, and thickets, which every now and then
obliged me to alter my course for a little while—until I found myself
on a hill-side, with the ground sloping away steeply before me. I
descended to the bottom of the hollow, squeezed my way through a hedge,
and got out into a lane. Having turned to the right on leaving the
road, I now turned to the left, on the chance of regaining the line
from which I had wandered. After following the muddy windings of the
lane for ten minutes or more, I saw a cottage with a light in one of
the windows. The garden gate was open to the lane, and I went in at
once to inquire my way.

Before I could knock at the door it was suddenly opened, and a man
came running out with a lighted lantern in his hand. He stopped and
held it up at the sight of me. We both started as we saw each other.
My wanderings had led me round the outskirts of the village, and had
brought me out at the lower end of it. I was back at Old Welmingham,
and the man with the lantern was no other than my acquaintance of the
morning, the parish clerk.

His manner appeared to have altered strangely in the interval since I
had last seen him. He looked suspicious and confused—his ruddy cheeks
were deeply flushed—and his first words, when he spoke, were quite
unintelligible to me.

“Where are the keys?” he asked. “Have you taken them?”

“What keys?” I repeated. “I have this moment come from Knowlesbury.
What keys do you mean?”

“The keys of the vestry. Lord save us and help us! what shall I do? The
keys are gone! Do you hear?” cried the old man, shaking the lantern at
me in his agitation, “the keys are gone!”

“How? When? Who can have taken them?”

“I don’t know,” said the clerk, staring about him wildly in the
darkness. “I’ve only just got back. I told you I had a long day’s work
this morning—I locked the door and shut the window down—it’s open now,
the window’s open. Look! somebody has got in there and taken the keys.”

He turned to the casement window to show me that it was wide open.
The door of the lantern came loose from its fastening as he swayed it
round, and the wind blew the candle out instantly.

“Get another light,” I said, “and let us both go to the vestry
together. Quick! quick!”

I hurried him into the house. The treachery that I had every reason to
expect, the treachery that might deprive me of every advantage I had
gained, was at that moment, perhaps, in process of accomplishment. My
impatience to reach the church was so great that I could not remain
inactive in the cottage while the clerk lit the lantern again. I walked
out, down the garden path, into the lane.

Before I had advanced ten paces a man approached me from the direction
leading to the church. He spoke respectfully as we met. I could not see
his face, but judging by his voice only, he was a perfect stranger to
me.

“I beg your pardon, Sir Percival——” he began.

I stopped him before he could say more.

“The darkness misleads you,” I said. “I am not Sir Percival.”

The man drew back directly.

“I thought it was my master,” he muttered, in a confused, doubtful way.

“You expected to meet your master here?”

“I was told to wait in the lane.”

With that answer he retraced his steps. I looked back at the cottage
and saw the clerk coming out, with the lantern lighted once more. I
took the old man’s arm to help him on the more quickly. We hastened
along the lane, and passed the person who had accosted me. As well as I
could see by the light of the lantern, he was a servant out of livery.

“Who’s that?” whispered the clerk. “Does he know anything about the
keys?”

“We won’t wait to ask him,” I replied. “We will go on to the vestry
first.”

The church was not visible, even by daytime, until the end of the lane
was reached. As we mounted the rising ground which led to the building
from that point, one of the village children—a boy—came close up to us,
attracted by the light we carried, and recognised the clerk.

“I say, measter,” said the boy, pulling officiously at the clerk’s
coat, “there be summun up yander in the church. I heerd un lock the
door on hisself—I heerd un strike a loight wi’ a match.”

The clerk trembled and leaned against me heavily.

“Come! come!” I said encouragingly. “We are not too late. We will catch
the man, whoever he is. Keep the lantern, and follow me as fast as you
can.”

I mounted the hill rapidly. The dark mass of the church-tower was the
first object I discerned dimly against the night sky. As I turned aside
to get round to the vestry, I heard heavy footsteps close to me. The
servant had ascended to the church after us. “I don’t mean any harm,”
he said, when I turned round on him, “I’m only looking for my master.”
The tones in which he spoke betrayed unmistakable fear. I took no
notice of him and went on.

The instant I turned the corner and came in view of the vestry, I saw
the lantern-skylight on the roof brilliantly lit up from within. It
shone out with dazzling brightness against the murky, starless sky.

I hurried through the churchyard to the door.

As I got near there was a strange smell stealing out on the damp
night air. I heard a snapping noise inside—I saw the light above grow
brighter and brighter—a pane of the glass cracked—I ran to the door and
put my hand on it. The vestry was on fire!

Before I could move, before I could draw my breath after that
discovery, I was horror-struck by a heavy thump against the door from
the inside. I heard the key worked violently in the lock—I heard a
man’s voice behind the door, raised to a dreadful shrillness, screaming
for help.

The servant who had followed me staggered back shuddering, and dropped
to his knees. “Oh, my God!” he said, “it’s Sir Percival!”

As the words passed his lips the clerk joined us, and at the same
moment there was another and a last grating turn of the key in the lock.

“The Lord have mercy on his soul!” said the old man. “He is doomed and
dead. He has hampered the lock.”

I rushed to the door. The one absorbing purpose that had filled all
my thoughts, that had controlled all my actions, for weeks and weeks
past, vanished in an instant from my mind. All remembrance of the
heartless injury the man’s crimes had inflicted—of the love, the
innocence, the happiness he had pitilessly laid waste—of the oath I
had sworn in my own heart to summon him to the terrible reckoning that
he deserved—passed from my memory like a dream. I remembered nothing
but the horror of his situation. I felt nothing but the natural human
impulse to save him from a frightful death.

“Try the other door!” I shouted. “Try the door into the church! The
lock’s hampered. You’re a dead man if you waste another moment on it.”

There had been no renewed cry for help when the key was turned for
the last time. There was no sound now of any kind, to give token that
he was still alive. I heard nothing but the quickening crackle of the
flames, and the sharp snap of the glass in the skylight above.

I looked round at my two companions. The servant had risen to his
feet—he had taken the lantern, and was holding it up vacantly at the
door. Terror seemed to have struck him with downright idiocy—he waited
at my heels, he followed me about when I moved like a dog. The clerk
sat crouched up on one of the tombstones, shivering, and moaning to
himself. The one moment in which I looked at them was enough to show me
that they were both helpless.

Hardly knowing what I did, acting desperately on the first impulse that
occurred to me, I seized the servant and pushed him against the vestry
wall. “Stoop!” I said, “and hold by the stones. I am going to climb
over you to the roof—I am going to break the skylight, and give him
some air!”

The man trembled from head to foot, but he held firm. I got on his
back, with my cudgel in my mouth, seized the parapet with both hands,
and was instantly on the roof. In the frantic hurry and agitation of
the moment, it never struck me that I might let out the flame instead
of letting in the air. I struck at the skylight, and battered in the
cracked, loosened glass at a blow. The fire leaped out like a wild
beast from its lair. If the wind had not chanced, in the position I
occupied, to set it away from me, my exertions might have ended then
and there. I crouched on the roof as the smoke poured out above me
with the flame. The gleams and flashes of the light showed me the
servant’s face staring up vacantly under the wall—the clerk risen to
his feet on the tombstone, wringing his hands in despair—and the scanty
population of the village, haggard men and terrified women, clustered
beyond in the churchyard—all appearing and disappearing, in the red
of the dreadful glare, in the black of the choking smoke. And the man
beneath my feet!—the man, suffocating, burning, dying so near us all,
so utterly beyond our reach!

The thought half maddened me. I lowered myself from the roof, by my
hands, and dropped to the ground.

“The key of the church!” I shouted to the clerk. “We must try it that
way—we may save him yet if we can burst open the inner door.”

“No, no, no!” cried the old man. “No hope! the church key and the
vestry key are on the same ring—both inside there! Oh, sir, he’s past
saving—he’s dust and ashes by this time!”

“They’ll see the fire from the town,” said a voice from among the men
behind me. “There’s a ingine in the town. They’ll save the church.”

I called to that man—HE had his wits about him—I called to him to come
and speak to me. It would be a quarter of an hour at least before
the town engine could reach us. The horror of remaining inactive all
that time was more than I could face. In defiance of my own reason
I persuaded myself that the doomed and lost wretch in the vestry
might still be lying senseless on the floor, might not be dead yet.
If we broke open the door, might we save him? I knew the strength
of the heavy lock—I knew the thickness of the nailed oak—I knew the
hopelessness of assailing the one and the other by ordinary means. But
surely there were beams still left in the dismantled cottages near the
church? What if we got one, and used it as a battering-ram against the
door?

The thought leaped through me like the fire leaping out of the
shattered skylight. I appealed to the man who had spoken first of the
fire-engine in the town. “Have you got your pickaxes handy?” Yes, they
had. “And a hatchet, and a saw, and a bit of rope?” Yes! yes! yes!
I ran down among the villagers, with the lantern in my hand. “Five
shillings apiece to every man who helps me!” They started into life
at the words. That ravenous second hunger of poverty—the hunger for
money—roused them into tumult and activity in a moment. “Two of you
for more lanterns, if you have them! Two of you for the pickaxes and
the tools! The rest after me to find the beam!” They cheered—with
shrill starveling voices they cheered. The women and the children fled
back on either side. We rushed in a body down the churchyard path to
the first empty cottage. Not a man was left behind but the clerk—the
poor old clerk standing on the flat tombstone sobbing and wailing over
the church. The servant was still at my heels—his white, helpless,
panic-stricken face was close over my shoulder as we pushed into the
cottage. There were rafters from the torn-down floor above, lying loose
on the ground—but they were too light. A beam ran across over our
heads, but not out of reach of our arms and our pickaxes—a beam fast
at each end in the ruined wall, with ceiling and flooring all ripped
away, and a great gap in the roof above, open to the sky. We attacked
the beam at both ends at once. God! how it held—how the brick and
mortar of the wall resisted us! We struck, and tugged, and tore. The
beam gave at one end—it came down with a lump of brickwork after it.
There was a scream from the women all huddled in the doorway to look at
us—a shout from the men—two of them down but not hurt. Another tug all
together—and the beam was loose at both ends. We raised it, and gave
the word to clear the doorway. Now for the work! now for the rush at
the door! There is the fire streaming into the sky, streaming brighter
than ever to light us! Steady along the churchyard path—steady with the
beam for a rush at the door. One, two, three—and off. Out rings the
cheering again, irrepressibly. We have shaken it already, the hinges
must give if the lock won’t. Another run with the beam! One, two,
three—and off. It’s loose! the stealthy fire darts at us through the
crevice all round it. Another, and a last rush! The door falls in with
a crash. A great hush of awe, a stillness of breathless expectation,
possesses every living soul of us. We look for the body. The scorching
heat on our faces drives us back: we see nothing—above, below, all
through the room, we see nothing but a sheet of living fire.


“Where is he?” whispered the servant, staring vacantly at the flames.

“He’s dust and ashes,” said the clerk. “And the books are dust and
ashes—and oh, sirs! the church will be dust and ashes soon.”

Those were the only two who spoke. When they were silent again, nothing
stirred in the stillness but the bubble and the crackle of the flames.

Hark!

A harsh rattling sound in the distance—then the hollow beat of horses’
hoofs at full gallop—then the low roar, the all-predominant tumult of
hundreds of human voices clamouring and shouting together. The engine
at last.

The people about me all turned from the fire, and ran eagerly to the
brow of the hill. The old clerk tried to go with the rest, but his
strength was exhausted. I saw him holding by one of the tombstones.
“Save the church!” he cried out faintly, as if the firemen could hear
him already.

“Save the church!”

The only man who never moved was the servant. There he stood, his eyes
still fastened on the flames in a changeless, vacant stare. I spoke to
him, I shook him by the arm. He was past rousing. He only whispered
once more, “Where is he?”

In ten minutes the engine was in position, the well at the back of the
church was feeding it, and the hose was carried to the doorway of the
vestry. If help had been wanted from me I could not have afforded it
now. My energy of will was gone—my strength was exhausted—the turmoil
of my thoughts was fearfully and suddenly stilled, now I knew that he
was dead.

I stood useless and helpless—looking, looking, looking into the burning
room.

I saw the fire slowly conquered. The brightness of the glare faded—the
steam rose in white clouds, and the smouldering heaps of embers showed
red and black through it on the floor. There was a pause—then an
advance all together of the firemen and the police which blocked up
the doorway—then a consultation in low voices—and then two men were
detached from the rest, and sent out of the churchyard through the
crowd. The crowd drew back on either side in dead silence to let them
pass.

After a while a great shudder ran through the people, and the living
lane widened slowly. The men came back along it with a door from one of
the empty houses. They carried it to the vestry and went in. The police
closed again round the doorway, and men stole out from among the crowd
by twos and threes and stood behind them to be the first to see. Others
waited near to be the first to hear. Women and children were among
these last.

The tidings from the vestry began to flow out among the crowd—they
dropped slowly from mouth to mouth till they reached the place where
I was standing. I heard the questions and answers repeated again and
again in low, eager tones all round me.

“Have they found him?” “Yes.”—“Where?” “Against the door, on his
face.”—“Which door?” “The door that goes into the church. His head was
against it—he was down on his face.”—“Is his face burnt?” “No.” “Yes,
it is.” “No, scorched, not burnt—he lay on his face, I tell you.”—“Who
was he? A lord, they say.” “No, not a lord. SIR Something; Sir means
Knight.” “And Baronight, too.” “No.” “Yes, it does.”—“What did he
want in there?” “No good, you may depend on it.”—“Did he do it on
purpose?”—“Burn himself on purpose!”—“I don’t mean himself, I mean the
vestry.”—“Is he dreadful to look at?” “Dreadful!”—“Not about the face,
though?” “No, no, not so much about the face. Don’t anybody know him?”
“There’s a man says he does.”—“Who?” “A servant, they say. But he’s
struck stupid-like, and the police don’t believe him.”—“Don’t anybody
else know who it is?” “Hush——!”

The loud, clear voice of a man in authority silenced the low hum of
talking all round me in an instant.

“Where is the gentleman who tried to save him?” said the voice.

“Here, sir—here he is!” Dozens of eager faces pressed about me—dozens
of eager arms parted the crowd. The man in authority came up to me with
a lantern in his hand.

“This way, sir, if you please,” he said quietly.

I was unable to speak to him, I was unable to resist him when he
took my arm. I tried to say that I had never seen the dead man in
his lifetime—that there was no hope of identifying him by means of a
stranger like me. But the words failed on my lips. I was faint, and
silent, and helpless.

“Do you know him, sir?”

I was standing inside a circle of men. Three of them opposite to me
were holding lanterns low down to the ground. Their eyes, and the eyes
of all the rest, were fixed silently and expectantly on my face. I knew
what was at my feet—I knew why they were holding the lanterns so low to
the ground.

“Can you identify him, sir?”

My eyes dropped slowly. At first I saw nothing under them but a coarse
canvas cloth. The dripping of the rain on it was audible in the
dreadful silence. I looked up, along the cloth, and there at the end,
stark and grim and black, in the yellow light—there was his dead face.

So, for the first and last time, I saw him. So the Visitation of God
ruled it that he and I should meet.




XI

The inquest was hurried for certain local reasons which weighed with
the coroner and the town authorities. It was held on the afternoon of
the next day. I was necessarily one among the witnesses summoned to
assist the objects of the investigation.

My first proceeding in the morning was to go to the post-office,
and inquire for the letter which I expected from Marian. No change
of circumstances, however extraordinary, could affect the one great
anxiety which weighed on my mind while I was away from London. The
morning’s letter, which was the only assurance I could receive that no
misfortune had happened in my absence, was still the absorbing interest
with which my day began.

To my relief, the letter from Marian was at the office waiting for me.

Nothing had happened—they were both as safe and as well as when I
had left them. Laura sent her love, and begged that I would let her
know of my return a day beforehand. Her sister added, in explanation
of this message, that she had saved “nearly a sovereign” out of her
own private purse, and that she had claimed the privilege of ordering
the dinner and giving the dinner which was to celebrate the day of
my return. I read these little domestic confidences in the bright
morning with the terrible recollection of what had happened the evening
before vivid in my memory. The necessity of sparing Laura any sudden
knowledge of the truth was the first consideration which the letter
suggested to me. I wrote at once to Marian to tell her what I have
told in these pages—presenting the tidings as gradually and gently as
I could, and warning her not to let any such thing as a newspaper fall
in Laura’s way while I was absent. In the case of any other woman, less
courageous and less reliable, I might have hesitated before I ventured
on unreservedly disclosing the whole truth. But I owed it to Marian to
be faithful to my past experience of her, and to trust her as I trusted
myself.

My letter was necessarily a long one. It occupied me until the time
came for proceeding to the inquest.

The objects of the legal inquiry were necessarily beset by peculiar
complications and difficulties. Besides the investigation into the
manner in which the deceased had met his death, there were serious
questions to be settled relating to the cause of the fire, to the
abstraction of the keys, and to the presence of a stranger in the
vestry at the time when the flames broke out. Even the identification
of the dead man had not yet been accomplished. The helpless condition
of the servant had made the police distrustful of his asserted
recognition of his master. They had sent to Knowlesbury overnight to
secure the attendance of witnesses who were well acquainted with the
personal appearance of Sir Percival Glyde, and they had communicated,
the first thing in the morning, with Blackwater Park. These precautions
enabled the coroner and jury to settle the question of identity, and
to confirm the correctness of the servant’s assertion; the evidence
offered by competent witnesses, and by the discovery of certain facts,
being subsequently strengthened by an examination of the dead man’s
watch. The crest and the name of Sir Percival Glyde were engraved
inside it.

The next inquiries related to the fire.

The servant and I, and the boy who had heard the light struck in the
vestry, were the first witnesses called. The boy gave his evidence
clearly enough, but the servant’s mind had not yet recovered the shock
inflicted on it—he was plainly incapable of assisting the objects of
the inquiry, and he was desired to stand down.

To my own relief, my examination was not a long one. I had not known
the deceased—I had never seen him—I was not aware of his presence at
Old Welmingham—and I had not been in the vestry at the finding of the
body. All I could prove was that I had stopped at the clerk’s cottage
to ask my way—that I had heard from him of the loss of the keys—that
I had accompanied him to the church to render what help I could—that
I had seen the fire—that I had heard some person unknown, inside the
vestry, trying vainly to unlock the door—and that I had done what I
could, from motives of humanity, to save the man. Other witnesses, who
had been acquainted with the deceased, were asked if they could explain
the mystery of his presumed abstraction of the keys, and his presence
in the burning room. But the coroner seemed to take it for granted,
naturally enough, that I, as a total stranger in the neighbourhood, and
a total stranger to Sir Percival Glyde, could not be in a position to
offer any evidence on these two points.

The course that I was myself bound to take, when my formal examination
had closed, seemed clear to me. I did not feel called on to volunteer
any statement of my own private convictions; in the first place,
because my doing so could serve no practical purpose, now that all
proof in support of any surmises of mine was burnt with the burnt
register; in the second place, because I could not have intelligibly
stated my opinion—my unsupported opinion—without disclosing the
whole story of the conspiracy, and producing beyond a doubt the same
unsatisfactory effect an the minds of the coroner and the jury, which I
had already produced on the mind of Mr. Kyrle.

In these pages, however, and after the time that has now elapsed, no
such cautions and restraints as are here described need fetter the free
expression of my opinion. I will state briefly, before my pen occupies
itself with other events, how my own convictions lead me to account for
the abstraction of the keys, for the outbreak of the fire, and for the
death of the man.

The news of my being free on bail drove Sir Percival, as I believe, to
his last resources. The attempted attack on the road was one of those
resources, and the suppression of all practical proof of his crime,
by destroying the page of the register on which the forgery had been
committed, was the other, and the surest of the two. If I could produce
no extract from the original book to compare with the certified copy at
Knowlesbury, I could produce no positive evidence, and could threaten
him with no fatal exposure. All that was necessary to the attainment of
his end was, that he should get into the vestry unperceived, that he
should tear out the page in the register, and that he should leave the
vestry again as privately as he had entered it.

On this supposition, it is easy to understand why he waited until
nightfall before he made the attempt, and why he took advantage of the
clerk’s absence to possess himself of the keys. Necessity would oblige
him to strike a light to find his way to the right register, and common
caution would suggest his locking the door on the inside in case of
intrusion on the part of any inquisitive stranger, or on my part, if I
happened to be in the neighbourhood at the time.

I cannot believe that it was any part of his intention to make the
destruction of the register appear to be the result of accident, by
purposely setting the vestry on fire. The bare chance that prompt
assistance might arrive, and that the books might, by the remotest
possibility, be saved, would have been enough, on a moment’s
consideration, to dismiss any idea of this sort from his mind.
Remembering the quantity of combustible objects in the vestry—the
straw, the papers, the packing-cases, the dry wood, the old worm-eaten
presses—all the probabilities, in my estimation, point to the fire as
the result of an accident with his matches or his light.

His first impulse, under these circumstances, was doubtless to try
to extinguish the flames, and failing in that, his second impulse
(ignorant as he was of the state of the lock) had been to attempt to
escape by the door which had given him entrance. When I had called to
him, the flames must have reached across the door leading into the
church, on either side of which the presses extended, and close to
which the other combustible objects were placed. In all probability,
the smoke and flame (confined as they were to the room) had been too
much for him when he tried to escape by the inner door. He must have
dropped in his death-swoon—he must have sunk in the place where he was
found—just as I got on the roof to break the skylight window. Even if
we had been able, afterwards, to get into the church, and to burst open
the door from that side, the delay must have been fatal. He would have
been past saving, long past saving, by that time. We should only have
given the flames free ingress into the church—the church, which was
now preserved, but which, in that event, would have shared the fate of
the vestry. There is no doubt in my mind, there can be no doubt in the
mind of any one, that he was a dead man before ever we got to the empty
cottage, and worked with might and main to tear down the beam.

This is the nearest approach that any theory of mine can make towards
accounting for a result which was visible matter of fact. As I have
described them, so events passed to us outside. As I have related it,
so his body was found.


The inquest was adjourned over one day—no explanation that the eye of
the law could recognise having been discovered thus far to account for
the mysterious circumstances of the case.

It was arranged that more witnesses should be summoned, and that the
London solicitor of the deceased should be invited to attend. A medical
man was also charged with the duty of reporting on the mental condition
of the servant, which appeared at present to debar him from giving any
evidence of the least importance. He could only declare, in a dazed
way, that he had been ordered, on the night of the fire, to wait in
the lane, and that he knew nothing else, except that the deceased was
certainly his master.

My own impression was, that he had been first used (without any guilty
knowledge on his own part) to ascertain the fact of the clerk’s absence
from home on the previous day, and that he had been afterwards ordered
to wait near the church (but out of sight of the vestry) to assist his
master, in the event of my escaping the attack on the road, and of a
collision occurring between Sir Percival and myself. It is necessary
to add, that the man’s own testimony was never obtained to confirm
this view. The medical report of him declared that what little mental
faculty he possessed was seriously shaken; nothing satisfactory was
extracted from him at the adjourned inquest, and for aught I know to
the contrary, he may never have recovered to this day.

I returned to the hotel at Welmingham so jaded in body and mind, so
weakened and depressed by all that I had gone through, as to be quite
unfit to endure the local gossip about the inquest, and to answer the
trivial questions that the talkers addressed to me in the coffee-room.
I withdrew from my scanty dinner to my cheap garret-chamber to secure
myself a little quiet, and to think undisturbed of Laura and Marian.

If I had been a richer man I would have gone back to London, and
would have comforted myself with a sight of the two dear faces again
that night. But I was bound to appear, if called on, at the adjourned
inquest, and doubly bound to answer my bail before the magistrate
at Knowlesbury. Our slender resources had suffered already, and the
doubtful future—more doubtful than ever now—made me dread decreasing
our means unnecessarily by allowing myself an indulgence even at the
small cost of a double railway journey in the carriages of the second
class.

The next day—the day immediately following the inquest—was left at my
own disposal. I began the morning by again applying at the post-office
for my regular report from Marian. It was waiting for me as before,
and it was written throughout in good spirits. I read the letter
thankfully, and then set forth with my mind at ease for the day to go
to Old Welmingham, and to view the scene of the fire by the morning
light.

What changes met me when I got there!

Through all the ways of our unintelligible world the trivial and the
terrible walk hand in hand together. The irony of circumstances holds
no mortal catastrophe in respect. When I reached the church, the
trampled condition of the burial-ground was the only serious trace
left to tell of the fire and the death. A rough hoarding of boards
had been knocked up before the vestry doorway. Rude caricatures were
scrawled on it already, and the village children were fighting and
shouting for the possession of the best peep-hole to see through. On
the spot where I had heard the cry for help from the burning room, on
the spot where the panic-stricken servant had dropped on his knees, a
fussy flock of poultry was now scrambling for the first choice of worms
after the rain; and on the ground at my feet, where the door and its
dreadful burden had been laid, a workman’s dinner was waiting for him,
tied up in a yellow basin, and his faithful cur in charge was yelping
at me for coming near the food. The old clerk, looking idly at the
slow commencement of the repairs, had only one interest that he could
talk about now—the interest of escaping all blame for his own part on
account of the accident that had happened. One of the village women,
whose white wild face I remembered the picture of terror when we pulled
down the beam, was giggling with another woman, the picture of inanity,
over an old washing-tub. There is nothing serious in mortality! Solomon
in all his glory was Solomon with the elements of the contemptible
lurking in every fold of his robes and in every corner of his palace.

As I left the place, my thoughts turned, not for the first time, to
the complete overthrow that all present hope of establishing Laura’s
identity had now suffered through Sir Percival’s death. He was gone—and
with him the chance was gone which had been the one object of all my
labours and all my hopes.

Could I look at my failure from no truer point of view than this?

Suppose he had lived, would that change of circumstance have altered
the result? Could I have made my discovery a marketable commodity, even
for Laura’s sake, after I had found out that robbery of the rights of
others was the essence of Sir Percival’s crime? Could I have offered
the price of MY silence for HIS confession of the conspiracy, when the
effect of that silence must have been to keep the right heir from the
estates, and the right owner from the name? Impossible! If Sir Percival
had lived, the discovery, from which (in my ignorance of the true
nature of the Secret) I had hoped so much, could not have been mine to
suppress or to make public, as I thought best, for the vindication of
Laura’s rights. In common honesty and common honour I must have gone
at once to the stranger whose birthright had been usurped—I must have
renounced the victory at the moment when it was mine by placing my
discovery unreservedly in that stranger’s hands—and I must have faced
afresh all the difficulties which stood between me and the one object
of my life, exactly as I was resolved in my heart of hearts to face
them now!

I returned to Welmingham with my mind composed, feeling more sure of
myself and my resolution than I had felt yet.

On my way to the hotel I passed the end of the square in which Mrs.
Catherick lived. Should I go back to the house, and make another
attempt to see her? No. That news of Sir Percival’s death, which was
the last news she ever expected to hear, must have reached her hours
since. All the proceedings at the inquest had been reported in the
local paper that morning—there was nothing I could tell her which she
did not know already. My interest in making her speak had slackened. I
remembered the furtive hatred in her face when she said, “There is no
news of Sir Percival that I don’t expect—except the news of his death.”
I remembered the stealthy interest in her eyes when they settled on me
at parting, after she had spoken those words. Some instinct, deep in
my heart, which I felt to be a true one, made the prospect of again
entering her presence repulsive to me—I turned away from the square,
and went straight back to the hotel.

Some hours later, while I was resting in the coffee-room, a letter was
placed in my hands by the waiter. It was addressed to me by name, and
I found on inquiry that it had been left at the bar by a woman just as
it was near dusk, and just before the gas was lighted. She had said
nothing, and she had gone away again before there was time to speak to
her, or even to notice who she was.

I opened the letter. It was neither dated nor signed, and the
handwriting was palpably disguised. Before I had read the first
sentence, however, I knew who my correspondent was—Mrs. Catherick.

The letter ran as follows—I copy it exactly, word for word:—


THE STORY CONTINUED BY MRS. CATHERICK

SIR,—You have not come back, as you said you would. No matter—I know
the news, and I write to tell you so. Did you see anything particular
in my face when you left me? I was wondering, in my own mind, whether
the day of his downfall had come at last, and whether you were the
chosen instrument for working it. You were, and you HAVE worked it.

You were weak enough, as I have heard, to try and save his life. If
you had succeeded, I should have looked upon you as my enemy. Now you
have failed, I hold you as my friend. Your inquiries frightened him
into the vestry by night—your inquiries, without your privity and
against your will, have served the hatred and wreaked the vengeance of
three-and-twenty years. Thank you, sir, in spite of yourself.

I owe something to the man who has done this. How can I pay my debt?
If I was a young woman still I might say, “Come, put your arm round my
waist, and kiss me, if you like.” I should have been fond enough of you
even to go that length, and you would have accepted my invitation—you
would, sir, twenty years ago! But I am an old woman now. Well! I can
satisfy your curiosity, and pay my debt in that way. You HAD a great
curiosity to know certain private affairs of mine when you came to see
me—private affairs which all your sharpness could not look into without
my help—private affairs which you have not discovered, even now. You
SHALL discover them—your curiosity shall be satisfied. I will take any
trouble to please you, my estimable young friend!

You were a little boy, I suppose, in the year twenty-seven? I was a
handsome young woman at that time, living at Old Welmingham. I had
a contemptible fool for a husband. I had also the honour of being
acquainted (never mind how) with a certain gentleman (never mind whom).
I shall not call him by his name. Why should I? It was not his own. He
never had a name: you know that, by this time, as well as I do.

It will be more to the purpose to tell you how he worked himself into
my good graces. I was born with the tastes of a lady, and he gratified
them—in other words, he admired me, and he made me presents. No woman
can resist admiration and presents—especially presents, provided they
happen to be just the thing she wants. He was sharp enough to know
that—most men are. Naturally he wanted something in return—all men do.
And what do you think was the something? The merest trifle. Nothing
but the key of the vestry, and the key of the press inside it, when my
husband’s back was turned. Of course he lied when I asked him why he
wished me to get him the keys in that private way. He might have saved
himself the trouble—I didn’t believe him. But I liked my presents, and
I wanted more. So I got him the keys, without my husband’s knowledge,
and I watched him, without his own knowledge. Once, twice, four times I
watched him, and the fourth time I found him out.

I was never over-scrupulous where other people’s affairs were
concerned, and I was not over-scrupulous about his adding one to the
marriages in the register on his own account.

Of course I knew it was wrong, but it did no harm to me, which was one
good reason for not making a fuss about it. And I had not got a gold
watch and chain, which was another, still better—and he had promised
me one from London only the day before, which was a third, best of
all. If I had known what the law considered the crime to be, and how
the law punished it, I should have taken proper care of myself, and
have exposed him then and there. But I knew nothing, and I longed for
the gold watch. All the conditions I insisted on were that he should
take me into his confidence and tell me everything. I was as curious
about his affairs then as you are about mine now. He granted my
conditions—why, you will see presently.

This, put in short, is what I heard from him. He did not willingly tell
me all that I tell you here. I drew some of it from him by persuasion
and some of it by questions. I was determined to have all the truth,
and I believe I got it.

He knew no more than any one else of what the state of things really
was between his father and mother till after his mother’s death. Then
his father confessed it, and promised to do what he could for his son.
He died having done nothing—not having even made a will. The son (who
can blame him?) wisely provided for himself. He came to England at
once, and took possession of the property. There was no one to suspect
him, and no one to say him nay. His father and mother had always lived
as man and wife—none of the few people who were acquainted with them
ever supposed them to be anything else. The right person to claim the
property (if the truth had been known) was a distant relation, who had
no idea of ever getting it, and who was away at sea when his father
died. He had no difficulty so far—he took possession, as a matter of
course. But he could not borrow money on the property as a matter of
course. There were two things wanted of him before he could do this.
One was a certificate of his birth, and the other was a certificate
of his parents’ marriage. The certificate of his birth was easily
got—he was born abroad, and the certificate was there in due form. The
other matter was a difficulty, and that difficulty brought him to Old
Welmingham.

But for one consideration he might have gone to Knowlesbury instead.

His mother had been living there just before she met with his
father—living under her maiden name, the truth being that she was
really a married woman, married in Ireland, where her husband had
ill-used her, and had afterwards gone off with some other person. I
give you this fact on good authority—Sir Felix mentioned it to his
son as the reason why he had not married. You may wonder why the
son, knowing that his parents had met each other at Knowlesbury, did
not play his first tricks with the register of that church, where it
might have been fairly presumed his father and mother were married.
The reason was that the clergyman who did duty at Knowlesbury church,
in the year eighteen hundred and three (when, according to his birth
certificate, his father and mother OUGHT to have been married), was
alive still when he took possession of the property in the New Year of
eighteen hundred and twenty-seven. This awkward circumstance forced
him to extend his inquiries to our neighbourhood. There no such danger
existed, the former clergyman at our church having been dead for some
years.

Old Welmingham suited his purpose as well as Knowlesbury. His father
had removed his mother from Knowlesbury, and had lived with her at a
cottage on the river, a little distance from our village. People who
had known his solitary ways when he was single did not wonder at his
solitary ways when he was supposed to be married. If he had not been a
hideous creature to look at, his retired life with the lady might have
raised suspicions; but, as things were, his hiding his ugliness and his
deformity in the strictest privacy surprised nobody. He lived in our
neighbourhood till he came in possession of the Park. After three or
four and twenty years had passed, who was to say (the clergyman being
dead) that his marriage had not been as private as the rest of his
life, and that it had not taken place at Old Welmingham church?

So, as I told you, the son found our neighbourhood the surest place he
could choose to set things right secretly in his own interests. It may
surprise you to hear that what he really did to the marriage register
was done on the spur of the moment—done on second thoughts.

His first notion was only to tear the leaf out (in the right year and
month), to destroy it privately, to go back to London, and to tell the
lawyers to get him the necessary certificate of his father’s marriage,
innocently referring them of course to the date on the leaf that was
gone. Nobody could say his father and mother had NOT been married after
that, and whether, under the circumstances, they would stretch a point
or not about lending him the money (he thought they would), he had his
answer ready at all events, if a question was ever raised about his
right to the name and the estate.

But when he came to look privately at the register for himself, he
found at the bottom of one of the pages for the year eighteen hundred
and three a blank space left, seemingly through there being no room
to make a long entry there, which was made instead at the top of the
next page. The sight of this chance altered all his plans. It was an
opportunity he had never hoped for, or thought of—and he took it—you
know how. The blank space, to have exactly tallied with his birth
certificate, ought to have occurred in the July part of the register.
It occurred in the September part instead. However, in this case, if
suspicious questions were asked, the answer was not hard to find. He
had only to describe himself as a seven months’ child.

I was fool enough, when he told me his story, to feel some interest and
some pity for him—which was just what he calculated on, as you will
see. I thought him hardly used. It was not his fault that his father
and mother were not married, and it was not his father’s and mother’s
fault either. A more scrupulous woman than I was—a woman who had not
set her heart on a gold watch and chain—would have found some excuses
for him. At all events, I held my tongue, and helped to screen what he
was about.

He was some time getting the ink the right colour (mixing it over and
over again in pots and bottles of mine), and some time afterwards in
practising the handwriting. But he succeeded in the end, and made an
honest woman of his mother after she was dead in her grave! So far, I
don’t deny that he behaved honourably enough to myself. He gave me my
watch and chain, and spared no expense in buying them; both were of
superior workmanship, and very expensive. I have got them still—the
watch goes beautifully.

You said the other day that Mrs. Clements had told you everything she
knew. In that case there is no need for me to write about the trumpery
scandal by which I was the sufferer—the innocent sufferer, I positively
assert. You must know as well as I do what the notion was which my
husband took into his head when he found me and my fine-gentleman
acquaintance meeting each other privately and talking secrets together.
But what you don’t know is how it ended between that same gentleman and
myself. You shall read and see how he behaved to me.

The first words I said to him, when I saw the turn things had taken,
were, “Do me justice—clear my character of a stain on it which you
know I don’t deserve. I don’t want you to make a clean breast of it to
my husband—only tell him, on your word of honour as a gentleman, that
he is wrong, and that I am not to blame in the way he thinks I am. Do
me that justice, at least, after all I have done for you.” He flatly
refused, in so many words. He told me plainly that it was his interest
to let my husband and all my neighbours believe the falsehood—because,
as long as they did so they were quite certain never to suspect the
truth. I had a spirit of my own, and I told him they should know the
truth from my lips. His reply was short, and to the point. If I spoke,
I was a lost woman, as certainly as he was a lost man.

Yes! it had come to that. He had deceived me about the risk I ran
in helping him. He had practised on my ignorance, he had tempted me
with his gifts, he had interested me with his story—and the result of
it was that he made me his accomplice. He owned this coolly, and he
ended by telling me, for the first time, what the frightful punishment
really was for his offence, and for any one who helped him to commit
it. In those days the law was not so tender-hearted as I hear it is
now. Murderers were not the only people liable to be hanged, and women
convicts were not treated like ladies in undeserved distress. I confess
he frightened me—the mean impostor! the cowardly blackguard! Do you
understand now how I hated him? Do you understand why I am taking all
this trouble—thankfully taking it—to gratify the curiosity of the
meritorious young gentleman who hunted him down?

Well, to go on. He was hardly fool enough to drive me to downright
desperation. I was not the sort of woman whom it was quite safe to hunt
into a corner—he knew that, and wisely quieted me with proposals for
the future.

I deserved some reward (he was kind enough to say) for the service I
had done him, and some compensation (he was so obliging as to add) for
what I had suffered. He was quite willing—generous scoundrel!—to make
me a handsome yearly allowance, payable quarterly, on two conditions.
First, I was to hold my tongue—in my own interests as well as in his.
Secondly, I was not to stir away from Welmingham without first letting
him know, and waiting till I had obtained his permission. In my own
neighbourhood, no virtuous female friends would tempt me into dangerous
gossiping at the tea-table. In my own neighbourhood, he would always
know where to find me. A hard condition, that second one—but I accepted
it.

What else was I to do? I was left helpless, with the prospect of a
coming incumbrance in the shape of a child. What else was I to do? Cast
myself on the mercy of my runaway idiot of a husband who had raised the
scandal against me? I would have died first. Besides, the allowance WAS
a handsome one. I had a better income, a better house over my head,
better carpets on my floors, than half the women who turned up the
whites of their eyes at the sight of me. The dress of Virtue, in our
parts, was cotton print. I had silk.

So I accepted the conditions he offered me, and made the best of
them, and fought my battle with my respectable neighbours on their
own ground, and won it in course of time—as you saw yourself. How I
kept his Secret (and mine) through all the years that have passed from
that time to this, and whether my late daughter, Anne, ever really
crept into my confidence, and got the keeping of the Secret too—are
questions, I dare say, to which you are curious to find an answer.
Well! my gratitude refuses you nothing. I will turn to a fresh page
and give you the answer immediately. But you must excuse one thing—you
must excuse my beginning, Mr. Hartright, with an expression of surprise
at the interest which you appear to have felt in my late daughter. It
is quite unaccountable to me. If that interest makes you anxious for
any particulars of her early life, I must refer you to Mrs. Clements,
who knows more of the subject than I do. Pray understand that I do
not profess to have been at all overfond of my late daughter. She was
a worry to me from first to last, with the additional disadvantage
of being always weak in the head. You like candour, and I hope this
satisfies you.

There is no need to trouble you with many personal particulars relating
to those past times. It will be enough to say that I observed the terms
of the bargain on my side, and that I enjoyed my comfortable income in
return, paid quarterly.

Now and then I got away and changed the scene for a short time, always
asking leave of my lord and master first, and generally getting it. He
was not, as I have already told you, fool enough to drive me too hard,
and he could reasonably rely on my holding my tongue for my own sake,
if not for his. One of my longest trips away from home was the trip I
took to Limmeridge to nurse a half-sister there, who was dying. She was
reported to have saved money, and I thought it as well (in case any
accident happened to stop my allowance) to look after my own interests
in that direction. As things turned out, however, my pains were all
thrown away, and I got nothing, because nothing was to be had.

I had taken Anne to the north with me, having my whims and fancies,
occasionally, about my child, and getting, at such times, jealous of
Mrs. Clements’ influence over her. I never liked Mrs. Clements. She was
a poor, empty-headed, spiritless woman—what you call a born drudge—and
I was now and then not averse to plaguing her by taking Anne away. Not
knowing what else to do with my girl while I was nursing in Cumberland,
I put her to school at Limmeridge. The lady of the manor, Mrs. Fairlie
(a remarkably plain-looking woman, who had entrapped one of the
handsomest men in England into marrying her), amused me wonderfully
by taking a violent fancy to my girl. The consequence was, she learnt
nothing at school, and was petted and spoilt at Limmeridge House. Among
other whims and fancies which they taught her there, they put some
nonsense into her head about always wearing white. Hating white and
liking colours myself, I determined to take the nonsense out of her
head as soon as we got home again.

Strange to say, my daughter resolutely resisted me. When she HAD got a
notion once fixed in her mind she was, like other half-witted people,
as obstinate as a mule in keeping it. We quarrelled finely, and Mrs.
Clements, not liking to see it, I suppose, offered to take Anne away
to live in London with her. I should have said Yes, if Mrs. Clements
had not sided with my daughter about her dressing herself in white. But
being determined she should NOT dress herself in white, and disliking
Mrs. Clements more than ever for taking part against me, I said No, and
meant No, and stuck to No. The consequence was, my daughter remained
with me, and the consequence of that, in its turn, was the first
serious quarrel that happened about the Secret.

The circumstance took place long after the time I have just been
writing of. I had been settled for years in the new town, and was
steadily living down my bad character and slowly gaining ground among
the respectable inhabitants. It helped me forward greatly towards this
object to have my daughter with me. Her harmlessness and her fancy
for dressing in white excited a certain amount of sympathy. I left
off opposing her favourite whim on that account, because some of the
sympathy was sure, in course of time, to fall to my share. Some of it
did fall. I date my getting a choice of the two best sittings to let in
the church from that time, and I date the clergyman’s first bow from my
getting the sittings.

Well, being settled in this way, I received a letter one morning from
that highly born gentleman (now deceased) in answer to one of mine,
warning him, according to agreement, of my wishing to leave the town
for a little change of air and scene.

The ruffianly side of him must have been uppermost, I suppose, when
he got my letter, for he wrote back, refusing me in such abominably
insolent language, that I lost all command over myself, and abused him,
in my daughter’s presence, as “a low impostor whom I could ruin for
life if I chose to open my lips and let out his Secret.” I said no more
about him than that, being brought to my senses as soon as those words
had escaped me by the sight of my daughter’s face looking eagerly and
curiously at mine. I instantly ordered her out of the room until I had
composed myself again.

My sensations were not pleasant, I can tell you, when I came to reflect
on my own folly. Anne had been more than usually crazy and queer that
year, and when I thought of the chance there might be of her repeating
my words in the town, and mentioning HIS name in connection with them,
if inquisitive people got hold of her, I was finely terrified at the
possible consequences. My worst fears for myself, my worst dread of
what he might do, led me no farther than this. I was quite unprepared
for what really did happen only the next day.

On that next day, without any warning to me to expect him, he came to
the house.

His first words, and the tone in which he spoke them, surly as it was,
showed me plainly enough that he had repented already of his insolent
answer to my application, and that he had come in a mighty bad temper
to try and set matters right again before it was too late. Seeing my
daughter in the room with me (I had been afraid to let her out of my
sight after what had happened the day before) he ordered her away. They
neither of them liked each other, and he vented the ill-temper on HER
which he was afraid to show to ME.

“Leave us,” he said, looking at her over his shoulder. She looked back
over HER shoulder and waited as if she didn’t care to go. “Do you
hear?” he roared out, “leave the room.” “Speak to me civilly,” says
she, getting red in the face. “Turn the idiot out,” says he, looking
my way. She had always had crazy notions of her own about her dignity,
and that word “idiot” upset her in a moment. Before I could interfere
she stepped up to him in a fine passion. “Beg my pardon, directly,”
says she, “or I’ll make it the worse for you. I’ll let out your
Secret. I can ruin you for life if I choose to open my lips.” My own
words!—repeated exactly from what I had said the day before—repeated,
in his presence, as if they had come from herself. He sat speechless,
as white as the paper I am writing on, while I pushed her out of the
room. When he recovered himself——

No! I am too respectable a woman to mention what he said when he
recovered himself. My pen is the pen of a member of the rector’s
congregation, and a subscriber to the “Wednesday Lectures on
Justification by Faith”—how can you expect me to employ it in writing
bad language? Suppose, for yourself, the raging, swearing frenzy of the
lowest ruffian in England, and let us get on together, as fast as may
be, to the way in which it all ended.

It ended, as you probably guess by this time, in his insisting on
securing his own safety by shutting her up.

I tried to set things right. I told him that she had merely repeated,
like a parrot, the words she had heard me say and that she knew no
particulars whatever, because I had mentioned none. I explained that
she had affected, out of crazy spite against him, to know what she
really did NOT know—that she only wanted to threaten him and aggravate
him for speaking to her as he had just spoken—and that my unlucky words
gave her just the chance of doing mischief of which she was in search.
I referred him to other queer ways of hers, and to his own experience
of the vagaries of half-witted people—it was all to no purpose—he would
not believe me on my oath—he was absolutely certain I had betrayed the
whole Secret. In short, he would hear of nothing but shutting her up.

Under these circumstances, I did my duty as a mother. “No pauper
Asylum,” I said, “I won’t have her put in a pauper Asylum. A Private
Establishment, if you please. I have my feelings as a mother, and my
character to preserve in the town, and I will submit to nothing but a
Private Establishment, of the sort which my genteel neighbours would
choose for afflicted relatives of their own.” Those were my words.
It is gratifying to me to reflect that I did my duty. Though never
overfond of my late daughter, I had a proper pride about her. No pauper
stain—thanks to my firmness and resolution—ever rested on MY child.

Having carried my point (which I did the more easily, in consequence of
the facilities offered by private Asylums), I could not refuse to admit
that there were certain advantages gained by shutting her up. In the
first place, she was taken excellent care of—being treated (as I took
care to mention in the town) on the footing of a lady. In the second
place, she was kept away from Welmingham, where she might have set
people suspecting and inquiring, by repeating my own incautious words.

The only drawback of putting her under restraint was a very slight one.
We merely turned her empty boast about knowing the Secret into a fixed
delusion. Having first spoken in sheer crazy spitefulness against the
man who had offended her, she was cunning enough to see that she had
seriously frightened him, and sharp enough afterwards to discover that
HE was concerned in shutting her up. The consequence was she flamed out
into a perfect frenzy of passion against him, going to the Asylum, and
the first words she said to the nurses, after they had quieted her,
were, that she was put in confinement for knowing his Secret, and that
she meant to open her lips and ruin him, when the right time came.

She may have said the same thing to you, when you thoughtlessly
assisted her escape. She certainly said it (as I heard last summer)
to the unfortunate woman who married our sweet-tempered, nameless
gentleman lately deceased. If either you, or that unlucky lady, had
questioned my daughter closely, and had insisted on her explaining what
she really meant, you would have found her lose all her self-importance
suddenly, and get vacant, and restless, and confused—you would have
discovered that I am writing nothing here but the plain truth. She knew
that there was a Secret—she knew who was connected with it—she knew
who would suffer by its being known—and beyond that, whatever airs of
importance she may have given herself, whatever crazy boasting she may
have indulged in with strangers, she never to her dying day knew more.

Have I satisfied your curiosity? I have taken pains enough to satisfy
it at any rate. There is really nothing else I have to tell you about
myself or my daughter. My worst responsibilities, so far as she was
concerned, were all over when she was secured in the Asylum. I had a
form of letter relating to the circumstances under which she was shut
up, given me to write, in answer to one Miss Halcombe, who was curious
in the matter, and who must have heard plenty of lies about me from a
certain tongue well accustomed to the telling of the same. And I did
what I could afterwards to trace my runaway daughter, and prevent her
from doing mischief by making inquiries myself in the neighbourhood
where she was falsely reported to have been seen. But these, and other
trifles like them, are of little or no interest to you after what you
have heard already.

So far, I have written in the friendliest possible spirit. But I cannot
close this letter without adding a word here of serious remonstrance
and reproof, addressed to yourself.

In the course of your personal interview with me, you audaciously
referred to my late daughter’s parentage on the father’s side, as
if that parentage was a matter of doubt. This was highly improper
and very ungentlemanlike on your part! If we see each other again,
remember, if you please, that I will allow no liberties to be taken
with my reputation, and that the moral atmosphere of Welmingham (to
use a favourite expression of my friend the rector’s) must not be
tainted by loose conversation of any kind. If you allow yourself to
doubt that my husband was Anne’s father, you personally insult me in
the grossest manner. If you have felt, and if you still continue to
feel, an unhallowed curiosity on this subject, I recommend you, in your
own interests, to check it at once, and for ever. On this side of the
grave, Mr. Hartright, whatever may happen on the other, THAT curiosity
will never be gratified.

Perhaps, after what I have just said, you will see the necessity of
writing me an apology. Do so, and I will willingly receive it. I will,
afterwards, if your wishes point to a second interview with me, go
a step farther, and receive you. My circumstances only enable me to
invite you to tea—not that they are at all altered for the worse by
what has happened. I have always lived, as I think I told you, well
within my income, and I have saved enough, in the last twenty years,
to make me quite comfortable for the rest of my life. It is not my
intention to leave Welmingham. There are one or two little advantages
which I have still to gain in the town. The clergyman bows to me—as you
saw. He is married, and his wife is not quite so civil. I propose to
join the Dorcas Society, and I mean to make the clergyman’s wife bow to
me next.

If you favour me with your company, pray understand that the
conversation must be entirely on general subjects. Any attempted
reference to this letter will be quite useless—I am determined not to
acknowledge having written it. The evidence has been destroyed in the
fire, I know, but I think it desirable to err on the side of caution,
nevertheless.

On this account no names are mentioned here, nor is any signature
attached to these lines: the handwriting is disguised throughout, and
I mean to deliver the letter myself, under circumstances which will
prevent all fear of its being traced to my house. You can have no
possible cause to complain of these precautions, seeing that they do
not affect the information I here communicate, in consideration of the
special indulgence which you have deserved at my hands. My hour for tea
is half-past five, and my buttered toast waits for nobody.




THE STORY CONTINUED BY WALTER HARTRIGHT




I


My first impulse, after reading Mrs. Catherick’s extraordinary
narrative, was to destroy it. The hardened shameless depravity of the
whole composition, from beginning to end—the atrocious perversity of
mind which persistently associated me with a calamity for which I was
in no sense answerable, and with a death which I had risked my life in
trying to avert—so disgusted me, that I was on the point of tearing the
letter, when a consideration suggested itself which warned me to wait a
little before I destroyed it.

This consideration was entirely unconnected with Sir Percival. The
information communicated to me, so far as it concerned him, did little
more than confirm the conclusions at which I had already arrived.

He had committed his offence, as I had supposed him to have committed
it, and the absence of all reference, on Mrs. Catherick’s part, to
the duplicate register at Knowlesbury, strengthened my previous
conviction that the existence of the book, and the risk of detection
which it implied, must have been necessarily unknown to Sir Percival.
My interest in the question of the forgery was now at an end, and my
only object in keeping the letter was to make it of some future service
in clearing up the last mystery that still remained to baffle me—the
parentage of Anne Catherick on the father’s side. There were one or two
sentences dropped in her mother’s narrative, which it might be useful
to refer to again, when matters of more immediate importance allowed me
leisure to search for the missing evidence. I did not despair of still
finding that evidence, and I had lost none of my anxiety to discover
it, for I had lost none of my interest in tracing the father of the
poor creature who now lay at rest in Mrs. Fairlie’s grave.

Accordingly, I sealed up the letter and put it away carefully in my
pocket-book, to be referred to again when the time came.

The next day was my last in Hampshire. When I had appeared again before
the magistrate at Knowlesbury, and when I had attended at the adjourned
inquest, I should be free to return to London by the afternoon or the
evening train.

My first errand in the morning was, as usual, to the post-office. The
letter from Marian was there, but I thought when it was handed to me
that it felt unusually light. I anxiously opened the envelope. There
was nothing inside but a small strip of paper folded in two. The few
blotted hurriedly-written lines which were traced on it contained these
words:

“Come back as soon as you can. I have been obliged to move. Come to
Gower’s Walk, Fulham (number five). I will be on the look-out for
you. Don’t be alarmed about us, we are both safe and well. But come
back.—Marian.”

The news which those lines contained—news which I instantly associated
with some attempted treachery on the part of Count Fosco—fairly
overwhelmed me. I stood breathless with the paper crumpled up in my
hand. What had happened? What subtle wickedness had the Count planned
and executed in my absence? A night had passed since Marian’s note was
written—hours must elapse still before I could get back to them—some
new disaster might have happened already of which I was ignorant. And
here, miles and miles away from them, here I must remain—held, doubly
held, at the disposal of the law!

I hardly know to what forgetfulness of my obligations anxiety and
alarm might not have tempted me, but for the quieting influence of
my faith in Marian. My absolute reliance on her was the one earthly
consideration which helped me to restrain myself, and gave me courage
to wait. The inquest was the first of the impediments in the way of
my freedom of action. I attended it at the appointed time, the legal
formalities requiring my presence in the room, but as it turned out,
not calling on me to repeat my evidence. This useless delay was a hard
trial, although I did my best to quiet my impatience by following the
course of the proceedings as closely as I could.

The London solicitor of the deceased (Mr. Merriman) was among the
persons present. But he was quite unable to assist the objects of
the inquiry. He could only say that he was inexpressibly shocked
and astonished, and that he could throw no light whatever on the
mysterious circumstances of the case. At intervals during the adjourned
investigation, he suggested questions which the Coroner put, but which
led to no results. After a patient inquiry, which lasted nearly three
hours, and which exhausted every available source of information, the
jury pronounced the customary verdict in cases of sudden death by
accident. They added to the formal decision a statement, that there
had been no evidence to show how the keys had been abstracted, how the
fire had been caused, or what the purpose was for which the deceased
had entered the vestry. This act closed the proceedings. The legal
representative of the dead man was left to provide for the necessities
of the interment, and the witnesses were free to retire.

Resolved not to lose a minute in getting to Knowlesbury, I paid my bill
at the hotel, and hired a fly to take me to the town. A gentleman who
heard me give the order, and who saw that I was going alone, informed
me that he lived in the neighbourhood of Knowlesbury, and asked if I
would have any objection to his getting home by sharing the fly with
me. I accepted his proposal as a matter of course.

Our conversation during the drive was naturally occupied by the one
absorbing subject of local interest.

My new acquaintance had some knowledge of the late Sir Percival’s
solicitor, and he and Mr. Merriman had been discussing the state of
the deceased gentleman’s affairs and the succession to the property.
Sir Percival’s embarrassments were so well known all over the county
that his solicitor could only make a virtue of necessity and plainly
acknowledge them. He had died without leaving a will, and he had no
personal property to bequeath, even if he had made one, the whole
fortune which he had derived from his wife having been swallowed up
by his creditors. The heir to the estate (Sir Percival having left
no issue) was a son of Sir Felix Glyde’s first cousin, an officer in
command of an East Indiaman. He would find his unexpected inheritance
sadly encumbered, but the property would recover with time, and, if
“the captain” was careful, he might be a rich man yet before he died.

Absorbed as I was in the one idea of getting to London, this
information (which events proved to be perfectly correct) had an
interest of its own to attract my attention. I thought it justified me
in keeping secret my discovery of Sir Percival’s fraud. The heir, whose
rights he had usurped, was the heir who would now have the estate.
The income from it, for the last three-and-twenty years, which should
properly have been his, and which the dead man had squandered to the
last farthing, was gone beyond recall. If I spoke, my speaking would
confer advantage on no one. If I kept the secret, my silence concealed
the character of the man who had cheated Laura into marrying him. For
her sake, I wished to conceal it—for her sake, still, I tell this story
under feigned names.

I parted with my chance companion at Knowlesbury, and went at once to
the town-hall. As I had anticipated, no one was present to prosecute
the case against me—the necessary formalities were observed, and I was
discharged. On leaving the court a letter from Mr. Dawson was put into
my hand. It informed me that he was absent on professional duty, and it
reiterated the offer I had already received from him of any assistance
which I might require at his hands. I wrote back, warmly acknowledging
my obligations to his kindness, and apologising for not expressing my
thanks personally, in consequence of my immediate recall on pressing
business to town.

Half an hour later I was speeding back to London by the express train.




II

It was between nine and ten o’clock before I reached Fulham, and found
my way to Gower’s Walk.

Both Laura and Marian came to the door to let me in. I think we had
hardly known how close the tie was which bound us three together, until
the evening came which united us again. We met as if we had been parted
for months instead of for a few days only. Marian’s face was sadly
worn and anxious. I saw who had known all the danger and borne all the
trouble in my absence the moment I looked at her. Laura’s brighter
looks and better spirits told me how carefully she had been spared all
knowledge of the dreadful death at Welmingham, and of the true reason
of our change of abode.

The stir of the removal seemed to have cheered and interested her.
She only spoke of it as a happy thought of Marian’s to surprise me on
my return with a change from the close, noisy street to the pleasant
neighbourhood of trees and fields and the river. She was full of
projects for the future—of the drawings she was to finish—of the
purchasers I had found in the country who were to buy them—of the
shillings and sixpences she had saved, till her purse was so heavy that
she proudly asked me to weigh it in my own hand. The change for the
better which had been wrought in her during the few days of my absence
was a surprise to me for which I was quite unprepared—and for all the
unspeakable happiness of seeing it, I was indebted to Marian’s courage
and to Marian’s love.

When Laura had left us, and when we could speak to one another without
restraint, I tried to give some expression to the gratitude and the
admiration which filled my heart. But the generous creature would not
wait to hear me. That sublime self-forgetfulness of women, which yields
so much and asks so little, turned all her thoughts from herself to me.

“I had only a moment left before post-time,” she said, “or I should
have written less abruptly. You look worn and weary, Walter. I am
afraid my letter must have seriously alarmed you?”

“Only at first,” I replied. “My mind was quieted, Marian, by my trust
in you. Was I right in attributing this sudden change of place to some
threatened annoyance on the part of Count Fosco?”

“Perfectly right,” she said. “I saw him yesterday, and worse than that,
Walter—I spoke to him.”

“Spoke to him? Did he know where we lived? Did he come to the house?”

“He did. To the house—but not upstairs. Laura never saw him—Laura
suspects nothing. I will tell you how it happened: the danger, I
believe and hope, is over now. Yesterday, I was in the sitting-room,
at our old lodgings. Laura was drawing at the table, and I was walking
about and setting things to rights. I passed the window, and as I
passed it, looked out into the street. There, on the opposite side of
the way, I saw the Count, with a man talking to him——”

“Did he notice you at the window?”

“No—at least, I thought not. I was too violently startled to be quite
sure.”

“Who was the other man? A stranger?”

“Not a stranger, Walter. As soon as I could draw my breath again, I
recognised him. He was the owner of the Lunatic Asylum.”

“Was the Count pointing out the house to him?”

“No, they were talking together as if they had accidentally met in
the street. I remained at the window looking at them from behind the
curtain. If I had turned round, and if Laura had seen my face at that
moment——Thank God, she was absorbed over her drawing! They soon parted.
The man from the Asylum went one way, and the Count the other. I began
to hope they were in the street by chance, till I saw the Count come
back, stop opposite to us again, take out his card-case and pencil,
write something, and then cross the road to the shop below us. I ran
past Laura before she could see me, and said I had forgotten something
upstairs. As soon as I was out of the room I went down to the first
landing and waited—I was determined to stop him if he tried to come
upstairs. He made no such attempt. The girl from the shop came through
the door into the passage, with his card in her hand—a large gilt card
with his name, and a coronet above it, and these lines underneath in
pencil: ‘Dear lady’ (yes! the villain could address me in that way
still)—‘dear lady, one word, I implore you, on a matter serious to us
both.’ If one can think at all, in serious difficulties, one thinks
quick. I felt directly that it might be a fatal mistake to leave
myself and to leave you in the dark, where such a man as the Count was
concerned. I felt that the doubt of what he might do, in your absence,
would be ten times more trying to me if I declined to see him than if I
consented. ‘Ask the gentleman to wait in the shop,’ I said. ‘I will be
with him in a moment.’ I ran upstairs for my bonnet, being determined
not to let him speak to me indoors. I knew his deep ringing voice, and
I was afraid Laura might hear it, even in the shop. In less than a
minute I was down again in the passage, and had opened the door into
the street. He came round to meet me from the shop. There he was in
deep mourning, with his smooth bow and his deadly smile, and some idle
boys and women near him, staring at his great size, his fine black
clothes, and his large cane with the gold knob to it. All the horrible
time at Blackwater came back to me the moment I set eyes on him. All
the old loathing crept and crawled through me, when he took off his hat
with a flourish and spoke to me, as if we had parted on the friendliest
terms hardly a day since.”

“You remember what he said?”

“I can’t repeat it, Walter. You shall know directly what he said about
you—-but I can’t repeat what he said to me. It was worse than the
polite insolence of his letter. My hands tingled to strike him, as if
I had been a man! I only kept them quiet by tearing his card to pieces
under my shawl. Without saying a word on my side, I walked away from
the house (for fear of Laura seeing us), and he followed, protesting
softly all the way. In the first by-street I turned, and asked him what
he wanted with me. He wanted two things. First, if I had no objection,
to express his sentiments. I declined to hear them. Secondly, to
repeat the warning in his letter. I asked, what occasion there was
for repeating it. He bowed and smiled, and said he would explain. The
explanation exactly confirmed the fears I expressed before you left us.
I told you, if you remember, that Sir Percival would be too headstrong
to take his friend’s advice where you were concerned, and that there
was no danger to be dreaded from the Count till his own interests were
threatened, and he was roused into acting for himself?”

“I recollect, Marian.”

“Well, so it has really turned out. The Count offered his advice,
but it was refused. Sir Percival would only take counsel of his own
violence, his own obstinacy, and his own hatred of you. The Count let
him have his way, first privately ascertaining, in case of his own
interests being threatened next, where we lived. You were followed,
Walter, on returning here, after your first journey to Hampshire, by
the lawyer’s men for some distance from the railway, and by the Count
himself to the door of the house. How he contrived to escape being
seen by you he did not tell me, but he found us out on that occasion,
and in that way. Having made the discovery, he took no advantage of
it till the news reached him of Sir Percival’s death, and then, as I
told you, he acted for himself, because he believed you would next
proceed against the dead man’s partner in the conspiracy. He at once
made his arrangements to meet the owner of the Asylum in London, and to
take him to the place where his runaway patient was hidden, believing
that the results, whichever way they ended, would be to involve you in
interminable legal disputes and difficulties, and to tie your hands
for all purposes of offence, so far as he was concerned. That was his
purpose, on his own confession to me. The only consideration which made
him hesitate, at the last moment——”

“Yes?”

“It is hard to acknowledge it, Walter, and yet I must. I was the
only consideration. No words can say how degraded I feel in my own
estimation when I think of it, but the one weak point in that man’s
iron character is the horrible admiration he feels for me. I have
tried, for the sake of my own self-respect, to disbelieve it as long
as I could; but his looks, his actions, force on me the shameful
conviction of the truth. The eyes of that monster of wickedness
moistened while he was speaking to me—they did, Walter! He declared
that at the moment of pointing out the house to the doctor, he thought
of my misery if I was separated from Laura, of my responsibility if I
was called on to answer for effecting her escape, and he risked the
worst that you could do to him, the second time, for my sake. All
he asked was that I would remember the sacrifice, and restrain your
rashness, in my own interests—interests which he might never be able to
consult again. I made no such bargain with him—I would have died first.
But believe him or not, whether it is true or false that he sent the
doctor away with an excuse, one thing is certain, I saw the man leave
him without so much as a glance at our window, or even at our side of
the way.”

“I believe it, Marian. The best men are not consistent in good—why
should the worst men be consistent in evil? At the same time, I suspect
him of merely attempting to frighten you, by threatening what he cannot
really do. I doubt his power of annoying us, by means of the owner of
the Asylum, now that Sir Percival is dead, and Mrs. Catherick is free
from all control. But let me hear more. What did the Count say of me?”

“He spoke last of you. His eyes brightened and hardened, and his manner
changed to what I remember it in past times—to that mixture of pitiless
resolution and mountebank mockery which makes it so impossible to
fathom him. ‘Warn Mr. Hartright!’ he said in his loftiest manner. ‘He
has a man of brains to deal with, a man who snaps his big fingers at
the laws and conventions of society, when he measures himself with ME.
If my lamented friend had taken my advice, the business of the inquest
would have been with the body of Mr. Hartright. But my lamented friend
was obstinate. See! I mourn his loss—inwardly in my soul, outwardly on
my hat. This trivial crape expresses sensibilities which I summon Mr.
Hartright to respect. They may be transformed to immeasurable enmities
if he ventures to disturb them. Let him be content with what he has
got—with what I leave unmolested, for your sake, to him and to you.
Say to him (with my compliments), if he stirs me, he has Fosco to deal
with. In the English of the Popular Tongue, I inform him—Fosco sticks
at nothing. Dear lady, good morning.’ His cold grey eyes settled on my
face—he took off his hat solemnly—bowed, bare-headed—and left me.”

“Without returning? without saying more last words?”

“He turned at the corner of the street, and waved his hand, and then
struck it theatrically on his breast. I lost sight of him after that.
He disappeared in the opposite direction to our house, and I ran back
to Laura. Before I was indoors again, I had made up my mind that we
must go. The house (especially in your absence) was a place of danger
instead of a place of safety, now that the Count had discovered it. If
I could have felt certain of your return, I should have risked waiting
till you came back. But I was certain of nothing, and I acted at once
on my own impulse. You had spoken, before leaving us, of moving into a
quieter neighbourhood and purer air, for the sake of Laura’s health.
I had only to remind her of that, and to suggest surprising you and
saving you trouble by managing the move in your absence, to make her
quite as anxious for the change as I was. She helped me to pack up your
things, and she has arranged them all for you in your new working-room
here.”

“What made you think of coming to this place?”

“My ignorance of other localities in the neighbourhood of London. I
felt the necessity of getting as far away as possible from our old
lodgings, and I knew something of Fulham, because I had once been at
school there. I despatched a messenger with a note, on the chance
that the school might still be in existence. It was in existence—the
daughters of my old mistress were carrying it on for her, and they
engaged this place from the instructions I had sent. It was just
post-time when the messenger returned to me with the address of the
house. We moved after dark—we came here quite unobserved. Have I done
right, Walter? Have I justified your trust in me?”

I answered her warmly and gratefully, as I really felt. But the anxious
look still remained on her face while I was speaking, and the first
question she asked, when I had done, related to Count Fosco.

I saw that she was thinking of him now with a changed mind. No fresh
outbreak of anger against him, no new appeal to me to hasten the day of
reckoning escaped her. Her conviction that the man’s hateful admiration
of herself was really sincere, seemed to have increased a hundredfold
her distrust of his unfathomable cunning, her inborn dread of the
wicked energy and vigilance of all his faculties. Her voice fell low,
her manner was hesitating, her eyes searched into mine with an eager
fear when she asked me what I thought of his message, and what I meant
to do next after hearing it.

“Not many weeks have passed, Marian,” I answered, “since my interview
with Mr. Kyrle. When he and I parted, the last words I said to him
about Laura were these: ‘Her uncle’s house shall open to receive her,
in the presence of every soul who followed the false funeral to the
grave; the lie that records her death shall be publicly erased from the
tombstone by the authority of the head of the family, and the two men
who have wronged her shall answer for their crime to ME, though the
justice that sits in tribunals is powerless to pursue them.’ One of
those men is beyond mortal reach. The other remains, and my resolution
remains.”

Her eyes lit up—her colour rose. She said nothing, but I saw all her
sympathies gathering to mine in her face.

“I don’t disguise from myself, or from you,” I went on, “that the
prospect before us is more than doubtful. The risks we have run already
are, it may be, trifles compared with the risks that threaten us in
the future, but the venture shall be tried, Marian, for all that. I
am not rash enough to measure myself against such a man as the Count
before I am well prepared for him. I have learnt patience—I can wait
my time. Let him believe that his message has produced its effect—let
him know nothing of us, and hear nothing of us—let us give him full
time to feel secure—his own boastful nature, unless I seriously mistake
him, will hasten that result. This is one reason for waiting, but there
is another more important still. My position, Marian, towards you and
towards Laura ought to be a stronger one than it is now before I try
our last chance.”

She leaned near to me, with a look of surprise.

“How can it be stronger?” she asked.

“I will tell you,” I replied, “when the time comes. It has not come
yet—it may never come at all. I may be silent about it to Laura for
ever—I must be silent now, even to YOU, till I see for myself that I
can harmlessly and honourably speak. Let us leave that subject. There
is another which has more pressing claims on our attention. You have
kept Laura, mercifully kept her, in ignorance of her husband’s death——”

“Oh, Walter, surely it must be long yet before we tell her of it?”

“No, Marian. Better that you should reveal it to her now, than that
accident, which no one can guard against, should reveal it to her
at some future time. Spare her all the details—break it to her very
tenderly, but tell her that he is dead.”

“You have a reason, Walter, for wishing her to know of her husband’s
death besides the reason you have just mentioned?”

“I have.”

“A reason connected with that subject which must not be mentioned
between us yet?—which may never be mentioned to Laura at all?”

She dwelt on the last words meaningly. When I answered her in the
affirmative, I dwelt on them too.

Her face grew pale. For a while she looked at me with a sad, hesitating
interest. An unaccustomed tenderness trembled in her dark eyes and
softened her firm lips, as she glanced aside at the empty chair in
which the dear companion of all our joys and sorrows had been sitting.

“I think I understand,” she said. “I think I owe it to her and to you,
Walter, to tell her of her husband’s death.”

She sighed, and held my hand fast for a moment—then dropped it
abruptly, and left the room. On the next day Laura knew that his death
had released her, and that the error and the calamity of her life lay
buried in his tomb.


His name was mentioned among us no more. Thenceforward, we shrank from
the slightest approach to the subject of his death, and in the same
scrupulous manner, Marian and I avoided all further reference to that
other subject, which, by her consent and mine, was not to be mentioned
between us yet. It was not the less present in our minds—it was rather
kept alive in them by the restraint which we had imposed on ourselves.
We both watched Laura more anxiously than ever, sometimes waiting and
hoping, sometimes waiting and fearing, till the time came.

By degrees we returned to our accustomed way of life. I resumed the
daily work, which had been suspended during my absence in Hampshire.
Our new lodgings cost us more than the smaller and less convenient
rooms which we had left, and the claim thus implied on my increased
exertions was strengthened by the doubtfulness of our future prospects.
Emergencies might yet happen which would exhaust our little fund at the
banker’s, and the work of my hands might be, ultimately, all we had to
look to for support. More permanent and more lucrative employment than
had yet been offered to me was a necessity of our position—a necessity
for which I now diligently set myself to provide.

It must not be supposed that the interval of rest and seclusion of
which I am now writing, entirely suspended, on my part, all pursuit
of the one absorbing purpose with which my thoughts and actions are
associated in these pages. That purpose was, for months and months yet,
never to relax its claims on me. The slow ripening of it still left me
a measure of precaution to take, an obligation of gratitude to perform,
and a doubtful question to solve.

The measure of precaution related, necessarily, to the Count. It was
of the last importance to ascertain, if possible, whether his plans
committed him to remaining in England—or, in other words, to remaining
within my reach. I contrived to set this doubt at rest by very simple
means. His address in St. John’s Wood being known to me, I inquired in
the neighbourhood, and having found out the agent who had the disposal
of the furnished house in which he lived, I asked if number five,
Forest Road, was likely to be let within a reasonable time. The reply
was in the negative. I was informed that the foreign gentleman then
residing in the house had renewed his term of occupation for another
six months, and would remain in possession until the end of June in the
following year. We were then at the beginning of December only. I left
the agent with my mind relieved from all present fear of the Count’s
escaping me.

The obligation I had to perform took me once more into the presence of
Mrs. Clements. I had promised to return, and to confide to her those
particulars relating to the death and burial of Anne Catherick which
I had been obliged to withhold at our first interview. Changed as
circumstances now were, there was no hindrance to my trusting the good
woman with as much of the story of the conspiracy as it was necessary
to tell. I had every reason that sympathy and friendly feeling could
suggest to urge on me the speedy performance of my promise, and I did
conscientiously and carefully perform it. There is no need to burden
these pages with any statement of what passed at the interview. It will
be more to the purpose to say, that the interview itself necessarily
brought to my mind the one doubtful question still remaining to be
solved—the question of Anne Catherick’s parentage on the father’s side.

A multitude of small considerations in connection with this
subject—trifling enough in themselves, but strikingly important when
massed together—had latterly led my mind to a conclusion which I
resolved to verify. I obtained Marian’s permission to write to Major
Donthorne, of Varneck Hall (where Mrs. Catherick had lived in service
for some years previous to her marriage), to ask him certain questions.
I made the inquiries in Marian’s name, and described them as relating
to matters of personal history in her family, which might explain
and excuse my application. When I wrote the letter I had no certain
knowledge that Major Donthorne was still alive—I despatched it on the
chance that he might be living, and able and willing to reply.

After a lapse of two days proof came, in the shape of a letter, that
the Major was living, and that he was ready to help us.

The idea in my mind when I wrote to him, and the nature of my inquiries
will be easily inferred from his reply. His letter answered my
questions by communicating these important facts—

In the first place, “the late Sir Percival Glyde, of Blackwater Park,”
had never set foot in Varneck Hall. The deceased gentleman was a total
stranger to Major Donthorne, and to all his family.

In the second place, “the late Mr. Philip Fairlie, of Limmeridge
House,” had been, in his younger days, the intimate friend and constant
guest of Major Donthorne. Having refreshed his memory by looking back
to old letters and other papers, the Major was in a position to say
positively that Mr. Philip Fairlie was staying at Varneck Hall in the
month of August, eighteen hundred and twenty-six, and that he remained
there for the shooting during the month of September and part of
October following. He then left, to the best of the Major’s belief,
for Scotland, and did not return to Varneck Hall till after a lapse of
time, when he reappeared in the character of a newly-married man.

Taken by itself, this statement was, perhaps, of little positive value,
but taken in connection with certain facts, every one of which either
Marian or I knew to be true, it suggested one plain conclusion that
was, to our minds, irresistible.

Knowing, now, that Mr. Philip Fairlie had been at Varneck Hall in the
autumn of eighteen hundred and twenty-six, and that Mrs. Catherick had
been living there in service at the same time, we knew also—first,
that Anne had been born in June, eighteen hundred and twenty-seven;
secondly, that she had always presented an extraordinary personal
resemblance to Laura; and, thirdly, that Laura herself was strikingly
like her father. Mr. Philip Fairlie had been one of the notoriously
handsome men of his time. In disposition entirely unlike his brother
Frederick, he was the spoilt darling of society, especially of the
women—an easy, light-hearted, impulsive, affectionate man—generous
to a fault—constitutionally lax in his principles, and notoriously
thoughtless of moral obligations where women were concerned. Such were
the facts we knew—such was the character of the man. Surely the plain
inference that follows needs no pointing out?

Read by the new light which had now broken upon me, even Mrs.
Catherick’s letter, in despite of herself, rendered its mite of
assistance towards strengthening the conclusion at which I had arrived.
She had described Mrs. Fairlie (in writing to me) as “plain-looking,”
and as having “entrapped the handsomest man in England into marrying
her.” Both assertions were gratuitously made, and both were false.
Jealous dislike (which, in such a woman as Mrs. Catherick, would
express itself in petty malice rather than not express itself at
all) appeared to me to be the only assignable cause for the peculiar
insolence of her reference to Mrs. Fairlie, under circumstances which
did not necessitate any reference at all.

The mention here of Mrs. Fairlie’s name naturally suggests one other
question. Did she ever suspect whose child the little girl brought to
her at Limmeridge might be?

Marian’s testimony was positive on this point. Mrs. Fairlie’s
letter to her husband, which had been read to me in former days—the
