CHAPTER II

THE EAST


But the world is not merely threatened by the prospect of future wars.
It is filled with wars at the present moment. There are quarrels and
bickerings between most of the newly liberated states in eastern Europe;
there is a war, sometimes avowed and sometimes underground, between
Communist Russia and all her neighbours and rivals, a war whose
tentacles reach far throughout Europe and Asia; and there are wars
against the British and French in various parts of the East. Let us
briefly touch upon a few sample cases.


I. SYRIA, MESOPOTAMIA, EGYPT, AND INDIA

The simplest case is Syria. In 1915, during the war, a Syrian National
Committee, including representatives from Damascus and Mosul, negotiated
with us through Sherif Husein, and we signed a document promising to
"recognize and uphold Arab independence" in an area including the whole
of Arabia, Palestine, Syria, and Mesopotamia, except (1) Aden and (2)
the Syrian coast. Within the independent area we merely claimed for
ourselves "a measure of administrative control" in Bagdad and Bosra--not
in Mosul--and reserved any special interests of France. The French were
informed of the negotiations immediately. They expressed themselves
content with the possession of the Syrian coast, and agreed in our
promises to Husein. On the strength of this agreement the Hejaz
revolted, and Feisul's army, consisting mainly of Syrian and
Mesopotamian soldiers who had formerly been in the Turkish service,
fought as our allies to the end of the war. An attempted rising in Syria
proper was crushed with great severity by the Turks.

In 1918 the Syrians welcomed the Entente armies as liberators, and were
again promised their national independence, though this time it was to
be under the guidance of one of the Entente Powers as mandatory. They
asked that the mandatory should be England, but England had too much on
her hands. The Syrians next asked for America; but America refused all
mandates. France, meantime, had always claimed special rights in Syria,
and England by a treaty made during the war had recognized Syria as a
French interest. If they must be under France, the Syrian
representatives specially demanded pledges that the government should be
a civil government, that a certain degree of independence should be
allowed to the natives, and that the country should not be occupied by
French troops. How far these pledges were given and broken by the
French; how far it was only we ourselves who gave assurances which we
had neither the right nor the power to carry out, and thus unconsciously
deceived Feisul, these are questions still in dispute. It seems
unfortunately certain that the Syrians considered themselves betrayed.
In the end, Syria was occupied by French troops; the native government
was not recognized, but dispersed; there were raids and pitched battles,
and the Emir Feisul, one of our most popular heroes during the Great
War, was expelled from his throne and country. He is now an exile, and
was for a time officially forbidden to land in England.

France so far has neither accepted nor asked for any mandate from the
League of Nations, and appears not fully to realize the obligations
undertaken by her in signing the Covenant of the League, or the pledge
repeated in the Reply of the Allied Powers to Germany, "that the
Mandatory Powers, in so far as they may be appointed trustees by the
League of Nations, will derive no benefits from such trusteeship."

In Mesopotamia the British established themselves during the war after a
long and chequered campaign by defeating the Turks and capturing Bagdad.
The Indian soldiers and officials who were in command showed the most
praiseworthy zeal and energy in proceeding at once to develop the
country: to drain and irrigate, to plant crops, to establish order and
good government in regions which had not known such things since a
remote antiquity. The English were welcomed as liberators and made
explicit promises to set up an independent Arab kingdom under a "measure
of British administrative control." So much propagandist literature was
poured forth on the glories of the independent Arab nation which the
English were to create, that serious discontent was caused in Egypt. "Is
a half-naked Arab to have independence, and am I not good enough to have
even self-government?" wrote a highly educated Egyptian to a British
official. Meantime the actual government of Mesopotamia became more and
more severely effective, and remained entirely concentrated in the hands
of the British. The expenses were enormous and the rate of taxation per
head appears to have risen to four times what it had been under the
Turks. The productivity of the country, however, was so great as to hold
out a prospect of almost making up the loss, and the important oil-wells
at Mosul were expected to do so completely. The native cultivators
profited by the improved harvests and the increased area of cultivation,
and the expenses of government were in part to be met out of the future
oil profits. And the best British administrators were certainly beloved
by their people.

The educated classes in Bagdad, the sheikhs and the ex-Turkish
officials, became restive at the high taxation and the indefinite delay
of "Arab independence." The turbulent desert tribes and the disorderly
elements in general were disgusted at the good policing. But there was
no general discontent, because personal assurances were given to leading
Arabs that the Covenant of the League of Nations, which Great Britain
had signed, laid down definitely that Mesopotamia was to be recognized
provisionally as an independent nation and that the mandate was to be
given to Great Britain. There would be, it was promised, a native
Government with a British Resident to advise it, as in an Indian native
state. Doubtless the Government would also ask for other help from
England, especially in the matter of public works, irrigation, and the
engineering of the oil-wells.

But the League issued no mandate. According to rumour, it had offered a
scheme of mandate to the Great Powers concerned, and one at least of
them had refused the terms. The precious oil, it was discovered, had
already been divided by a private treaty between France and England,
which left only a small fraction for the Mesopotamians and none for the
rest of the world. There was no attempt to set up an Arab Government.
Some beginnings were occasionally made of associating Arab officials
with the Englishmen who did the real work of governing. But they were
not whole-hearted. A letter was accidentally divulged in which an
English soldier said of the high Arab official attached to him, "I will
soon make him lick my boots." There were symptoms of disaffection,
non-payment of taxes, the resurgence of old discredited Turkish and
German agents, open rebellions. And the Government replied by numerous
executions and punitive expeditions. The bombing aeroplane, which had
revealed itself as a very convenient weapon of war, proved an utterly
disastrous instrument of police. The British liberators, who had come by
the special desire of the population to establish a free Arab nation
helped by friendly advice from British Residents, ended, according to
Colonel Lawrence's estimate, in killing ten thousand Arabs and setting
the whole country in a blaze of war. An army of over one hundred
thousand men is now reconquering it. And at the same time, perhaps at
the eleventh hour and perhaps too late altogether, that section in the
British Government which believed in the League of Nations and wished
scrupulously to carry out in victory the pledges it had given in time of
distress, prevailed to bring about a definite change of policy. Sir
Percy Cox and Mr. Philby were sent to Mesopotamia with instructions, so
it was stated, to reverse the previous policy and try to set up that
independent Arab Government which we had promised in 1915 and again in
1917, and ought to have set working before the end of 1919. The
"rebellion" will doubtless be crushed, and the native Government may or
not be successfully organized. There is a strong desire among the Arab
leaders to have it based on a treaty of alliance with Great Britain
after the Egyptian model, and not on Article XXII of the Covenant. In
any case the task is infinitely more difficult than it was before so
much blood was shed, and the original friendship of the Arabs turned to
hatred. On simple men executive action makes a much deeper impression
than policy. In Mesopotamia our policy itself was bad because it was not
consistent. It was a muddle of two contradictory policies, resulting in
confusion and hypocrisy. But the executive action seems to have been
such as to make the chances of even the best policy very precarious. A
government which multiplies the taxes by four and shoots and hangs its
subjects in batches is seldom excused because of its good drainage or
its progressive ideas.

The story in Egypt is shorter and perhaps less unhappy, but essentially
similar. Early in the war, when Turkey joined the enemy, we declared a
British protectorate over Egypt, accompanied by a promise to give the
country independence or free institutions at the end of the war. This in
itself was a perfectly good and defensible policy, though, to be
correct, it should have had the concurrence of Egypt. But in the course
of the war Egypt became full of discontent. Experienced officials were
wanted elsewhere, and inexperienced substitutes made mistakes. Labour in
great quantities was required for the Army, and was obtained through
native contractors or headmen, who practised the ordinary Oriental
methods of extortion and corruption while professing to act by orders of
the English. The peasant who was dragged off to forced labour, or
compelled to buy his freedom by heavy bribes, blamed the British for
both. At one time Egypt was garrisoned by large numbers of Australian
troops, who had the habit of thinking of all Asiatics as "blackfellows,"
and whose ways of dealing with "blackfellows" were not of the gentlest.
The seed was thus sown of a passionate hatred, partly just and partly
unjust; and feeling was already ripe for explosion when it transpired at
the end of the war that the British Government had no apparent intention
of fulfilling their promise to confer on Egypt "free institutions." Open
rebellion was impossible, owing to the presence of overpowering numbers
of British troops; but a time of danger and infinite trouble, well
controlled by Lord Allenby, led at last to the appointment of a
Commission under Lord Milner, which grasped its almost desperate problem
with great courage and skill.

Among other curious misfortunes, it turned out that the word
"protectorate" had been translated into Arabic by a term which denoted
the sort of protection that is extended to an outcast or a person with
no national rights. The Commissioners were met on their arrival by a
universal boycott, and by constant threats of assassination. They lived
in considerable danger, and no Egyptian would be seen speaking to them.
But tact and patience gradually broke down the boycott; and a much
larger measure of agreement was obtained with Zaghlul and the moderate
Nationalists than had at the outset seemed possible. After inquiry, the
Commission has taken the line of recommending, first, the cancellation
of the Capitulations, or special privileges granted to European states,
which have paralyzed the progress of Egypt for several generations; the
separation from Egypt of the Canal zone, as a special British interest
and of vital importance to the Empire; the retention of British advisers
in two posts, the ministries of Justice and of Finance--a safeguard
without which the European Powers would not consent to forgo the special
protection of the Capitulations; and in other respects the establishment
of Egypt as an independent national state. As far as is possible to
forecast, it looks as if this settlement would succeed.

The history of recent events in India is too large and complicated a
subject to be dealt with here. But in its main outline it has been
curiously similar to that of the other regions of the East. A wonderful
response from almost the whole continent to the need of Great Britain
during the war; blunders of the War Office and reactions of discontent;
German propaganda; Turkish and Pan-Islamic intrigue; repressive Press
Acts and Conspiracy Acts; passive resistance, dangerous riots, and
widespread conspiracies; the severe and sometimes lawless coercion of
the Punjab; the savage massacre of Amritsar, and at last, amid great
obstructions and hesitations, the passing of the Montagu-Chelmsford Act
and the conferring of a new and liberal constitution upon India. It is
the same story as in Egypt and Mesopotamia. So much time was wasted in
doing the wrong thing, that when at last resort was had to the right
thing the right time was past. The Indian Government was faced with
great difficulties and very real dangers. Its errors have been so signal
and notorious that public opinion is apt to forget or ignore the
admirable skill and patience with which most officials steered their
districts through periods of extreme strain. But reforms long promised
were delayed until too late. The executive plunged into excesses which
will not be forgotten for centuries. And when the long-hoped-for reforms
at last have come, it may be that they come to a people too exasperated
to give them a fair trial.


II. AN EASTERN POLICY

The policies here described have been so full of errors that it is hard
to derive from them a very clear moral. Government without principle
has many conveniences; if life consisted of isolated moments it might be
entirely successful. But life is continuous, and human beings have
memories and expectations. And almost any policy that is continuous and
consistent and true to itself is more likely to succeed in the end than
a mixture of momentary expedients and plunges for safety. It is
conceivable that a perfectly resolute and unfaltering military coercion
of India, Egypt, and Mesopotamia might have succeeded. But such a
policy, if it was ever possible, is certainly so no longer; and also it
would hardly be a policy for avoiding international strife. And that is
the subject we are considering.

If we look below the mistakes of policy and administration committed by
the British or French Governments, we find underneath the surface a
profound and instinctive resentment of the Moslem East against the
Western Powers. The Western Powers, which for convenience we term
Christian, have been for some centuries far more efficient than any
Moslem state. The West has increasingly taken charge of the East;
beaten it, managed it, "run" it, governed it, and in some cases
exploited it. Western government, or at least British government, has
been just, incorruptible, impartial, strong, intelligent, far beyond
ordinary Eastern standards. It may have been unsympathetic and grossly
expensive; it may, in spite of the unexampled personal integrity of the
whole governing class, have led to the presence in Eastern countries of
undesirable money-seekers. But it has been, on the whole, essentially
and undeniably good, efficient government, backed by a military power
which committed few excesses, lived on its own pay, and never failed in
an emergency. No one who studies even superficially the history of
average Oriental governments, from Morocco or Bokhara to Oudh, can be
surprised or sorry that they have been superseded by the better
governments of the West. The peoples of the East themselves have gained
by Western penetration; nay, more, they are conscious of their need of
the West. But they have had too much of it; they resent it, and they
are frightened of it. The Moslem nations have lost their independence
one after another. At the beginning of the Great War only one Moslem
Power remained free and powerful--the Turkish Empire. At the end of the
war there was not one.

The Turks were not popular in the East. The Syrians and Arabs hated them
almost as much as their Christian subjects did. The Turkish peasants of
Anatolia suffered cruelly under the exactions of Constantinople,
especially in the matter of military service. But all through the Moslem
East ran the consciousness that the Sultan, with all his faults, was
their own man. He was the acknowledged Head of the great majority of
Moslems in the world. He was, above all, the last barrier that seemed to
protect them from the overwhelming flood of Western aggression, and the
last great Moslem figure which enabled them to preserve their
self-respect.

While the Turkish Empire stood, the Moslem peoples, though fallen on
evil days, could think of Islam as an independent and even an imperial
entity. In places, doubtless, they had to kiss the feet of dogs; but
their Caliph still ruled masses of Christian subject populations and
still was master of the capital city of the world. With the fall of
Turkey, the last free Moslem state was gone. Not here and there, but
everywhere throughout the whole world, the faithful were set beneath the
heel of these rich, drunken, pork-eating idolaters with their indecent
women, their three Gods, and their terrific material civilization.
"Pan-Islamism," as Mr. Toynbee says, "is only an extreme example of the
feeling at the back of almost any modern Oriental movement we may
examine. It may take aggressive forms, but the essence of it is a
defensive impulse. Its appeal is to fear, and if the fear of the West
could be lifted from off the minds of the Oriental peoples, its
mainspring would be gone."

The problem of our Eastern policy is to remove that fear. And that ought
not to be so very difficult. The essential fact to grasp is that the
East needs us far more than we need the East. We need markets; but that
idea is only suggested to us by the fact that Eastern peoples want our
goods. We do almost everything better than they do. They want our
textiles, our knives and tools, our engines and ploughs, our books, our
learning. They cannot make railways or ships without us. They cannot
work their mines or oil-wells except by Western help. They cannot really
govern their countries satisfactorily without European advisers. The
language of Article XXII of the League of Nations Covenant is quite
correct when it says that "Certain communities formerly belonging to the
Turkish Empire have reached a stage of development where their existence
as independent nations can be provisionally recognized, subject to the
rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a mandatory until
such time as they are able to stand alone." At present "they are not yet
able to stand by themselves under the strenuous conditions of the modern
world."

They ought to want us, and if left alone they would want us. We have
frightened them into fighting and hating us by forcing ourselves upon
them instead of waiting to be asked. We have conferred incalculable
benefits on India: the benefit of protection from invasion, of
comparative protection from plague and famine, of social order, of
administrative justice, to say nothing of roads and railways, and the
enlivening force of Western knowledge. We have immensely increased the
prosperity of Egypt, we have put down all kinds of Oriental abuses and
protected the fellaheen against _corvées_ and extortions and tortures.
We were in process of beginning to perform the same services for
Mesopotamia. But in the latter regions at any rate--for in India our
roots are far deeper and the problem is more complex--the people did not
want us. We only held them and did them good by force. And the chief
reason why they did not want us was fear. We came to them with machine
guns and bombing planes as conquerors and masters, having destroyed the
only free Moslem Power; and they found it difficult to believe in our
good intentions. We came to them, most unfortunately, also with
specious promises which we made in time of need and broke in the days
of victory.

The right policy is something very easy to state and extremely difficult
to carry out, even for a single-minded and clear-headed Government. It
needs first, perhaps, an effort of imaginative understanding more
far-reaching than has ever yet in history been demanded of an Imperial
Power. Only those who understand the East can win the respect and
confidence of the East. But in the meantime, if we cannot fully
understand, there is a way at least to make ourselves understood.
Justice is the passport to confidence all the world over. And our first
business is to act quite simply and sincerely up to all our engagements.
We undertook certain obligations when we signed Article XXII of the
Covenant. We should make the "wishes of these communities a principal
consideration" in deciding whether we should go to them at all. We
should really treat them "as independent nations," and should honestly
give them "administrative advice and assistance until they shall be able
to stand alone." And we should not allow our minds to be confused by
thoughts of gain, nor our advice to take the form of horse, foot, and
artillery. Two illustrations may make this point clear. An experienced
and very successful administrator was asked a few weeks ago whether he
would accept the post of adviser to a certain Moslem Government. He
said, "Yes, upon one condition. That there is no British army anywhere
in the country." That is the right and wise spirit. The second is even
simpler. One of the most obvious and matter-of-course obligations laid
upon imperial administrators and civil servants is that they shall not
embark in trade or in any way make a profit out of the administration of
their office. That is the right rule. The Empire should set an example
of the behaviour that it expects from its best servants.

When we apportioned to ourselves the German colonies, we specially
declined to take over their public debts. And when protest was raised
against this proceeding, we stated definitely in our official Reply: "It
would be unjust to make this responsibility rest on the Mandatory
Powers, which, in so far as they may be appointed trustees by the League
of Nations, will derive no benefit from such trusteeship." Is it
entirely quixotic and idealist to hope that, even in post-war
conditions, a great nation may remain true to her word?

It seems at least as if the only alternative was to hold these Eastern
territories by armed force, and that is no longer possible. It might be
possible to hold by force India alone, or Egypt alone, or Mesopotamia
alone. It is not possible so to hold all three. We must govern by
consent of the governed or not all.




