
                    THE PROBLEM OF FOREIGN POLICY




                            THE PROBLEM OF
                            FOREIGN POLICY

                     A CONSIDERATION OF PRESENT
                        DANGERS AND THE BEST
                      METHODS FOR MEETING THEM

                                 BY
                           GILBERT MURRAY

          AUTHOR OF "THE FOREIGN POLICY OF SIR EDWARD GREY,"
                "THE RELIGION OF A MAN OF LETTERS,"
                   "FAITH, WAR, AND POLICY," ETC.


                        BOSTON AND NEW YORK
                     HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
                   The Riverside Press Cambridge
                                1921




                 COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY GILBERT MURRAY
                        ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




PREFACE


The publication of this little book was interrupted by an incident which
made me realize how easy it is for one who spends much time in trying to
study sincerely a political problem to find himself out of touch with
average opinion. The discovery has made me re-read what I have written.
But re-reading has not led to any weakening of my expressions, rather
the reverse. I wish only to make a brief general statement about the
point of view from which I write.

I start from the profound conviction that what the world needs is peace.
There has been too much war, and too much of many things that naturally
go with war; too much force and fraud, too much intrigue and lying, too
much impatience, violence, avarice, unreasonableness, and lack of
principle. Before the war I was a Liberal, and I believe now that
nothing but the sincere practice of Liberal principles will save
European society from imminent revolution and collapse. But I am
conscious of a certain change of emphasis in my feeling. Before the war
I was eager for large and sweeping reforms, I was intolerant of
Conservatism and I laughed at risks. The social order had then such a
margin of strength that risks could safely be taken. Now I feel a need
above all things of the qualities that will preserve civilization. For
that preservation, of course, Liberality in the full sense is necessary,
and constant progress and a great development of democracy.

But what is needed most is a return to a standard of public conduct
which was practised, or at least recognized, by the best Governments of
the world before the war, and which now seems to have been shaken, if
not shattered. I am not demanding in any wild idealist spirit that
Governments should act according to the Sermon on the Mount--though they
well might study it a good deal more than they do. I am only saying that
they must get back to the standard of veracity, of consistency, of
honesty and economy, and of intellectual competence, that we had from
Peel or Lord Salisbury or Gladstone.

I do not say that is enough. It is emphatically not enough. We need in
foreign policy and home policy a higher standard than we had before, the
standard implied by the League of Nations in international affairs and
the ideal of Coöperation in domestic affairs. But the first thing is to
recover our wholesome tradition.

I think few serious students of public affairs will dispute that the
long strain of the war, confusing our ideas of good and evil, and at
times centring our hopes upon things which a normal civilized man
regards with loathing, has resulted in a widespread degradation of
political conduct. Things are done now, in time of peace, which would
have been inconceivable before 1914. And they are done now because we
grew accustomed to worse things during the war. I do not wish to attack
any individuals; but, as an instance of what I mean, one finds a
Ministerial newspaper complacently remarking that certain country towns
sacked by the police in Ireland were very small and poor places in any
case, and the sacking not nearly so complete as the sacking of Belgian
towns by the Germans on less provocation. I find to-day (November 4,
1920) the Chief Secretary for Ireland announcing in the House of Commons
that he has had a court of inquiry into the alleged murder of John
Conway by the police, and presenting an official report that Conway
"died from natural causes"; while at the same time the _Times_ special
correspondent writes: "I went to the cottage in Rock Street of John
Conway, who was shot on Monday evening, and saw him lying on his bed
with a bullet wound in the temple." This is one case out of dozens. It
is not a slip or an isolated crime. I put it to any man who can remember
the years before the war that this represents a startling degradation of
the standard of government. Such things used to happen in Mexico; now
they happen in Great Britain.

Of course I supported the war. I believe it was necessary. I make no
self-righteous claim to throw the guilt of it upon others, who did the
fighting by which I and mine were saved. Let me therefore try to make
clear why certain things shock me profoundly, while I supported others
which can loosely be called "just as bad."

One of the worst things about war, as Thucydides has remarked, is that
it takes away your freedom and puts you in a region of necessity. You
may choose whether or not to fight; but, once fighting, your power of
choice has gone.

Take the treaty with Italy in 1915. Italy demanded a certain price, if
she was to come into the war on our side. Another party in Italy was
negotiating with the Germans, to see what inducement could be offered
for Italy to come in on the other side. (I make no complaint whatever of
the conduct of these Italian statesmen; they naturally consulted the
interests of their country.) The price was high, and involved the
transference to Italy of territory to which, on principles of
self-determination, she had little claim. But who could refuse the
price? War "is a violent master and teaches by compulsion."

Take the blockade of Germany. It was a slow and somewhat cruel weapon to
employ, falling most severely on the most innocent classes. But Germany
was trying to blockade us, and only our superior strength and skill at
sea caused her plan to fail. It was part of the normal means of war, and
of course we used it.

Then came an extension of it. Poland, most unhappy of European nations,
was swept by alternate armies, conquered by the Germans, devastated and
laid bare. The Poles were our allies. Our newspapers had accounts of the
appalling distress in Poland--the roads strewn with skeletons, the
almost complete blotting-out of children under seven, and the like. The
Americans proposed to send food for the relief of the Poles. But we made
objection. We did not allow food to go into Poland, to save our own
allies, who were starving. Why? Because the Germans were still taking
from the miserable country all the food they could wring out of it. And
if the Americans brought in more food, undoubtedly the enemy would take
more. There was no choice. We had to refuse the entry of the food ships.
But the man who had to sign that order may well have wished he had died
before the need came to him.

These results and necessities of war, though I have chosen none of a
sensational kind, are very horrible. It is not easy to think of actions
much more horrible. But they are not exactly crimes, they are not marks
of degradation in those who order them, because they are done under the
compulsion of war. The alternative in each case is something equivalent
to helping the enemy.

At the end of the war, after the signing of an armistice on the basis of
the Fourteen Points, there came at last a moment of free choice. It came
after five years of unspeakable waste--five years during which the
nations of Europe had become habituated to cruelty and "all pity choked
with custom of fell deeds." I am anxious to avoid the faintest semblance
of heat or exaggeration, but I think it can hardly be disputed that
practically every economist agreed that Europe was on the brink of
economic ruin and could only be saved by a quick revival of trade; every
man of conscience, irrespective of political party, knew that the first
condition for the recovery of civilization was a change from the war
mind to the peace mind. Such a change could not happen in a night. It
must needs be gradual. It could only be brought about by a strong and
persistent lead from those who possessed the ear of the world and the
confidence of their own people. Never in the whole course of modern
history has there been a more magnificent opportunity than then lay
before the British Prime Minister, never has there been a clearer call
of plain duty. He was free, as men in public life are seldom free. Great
Britain hung on his lips, and Europe was waiting for the lead of Great
Britain. It was for him to choose plain good or plain evil. And he
chose, deliberately, evil. He dissolved Parliament and appealed to the
country in a General Election on a programme of frantic war passion,
coupled with promises which he knew to be false, and which were
ridiculed by every educated man among his surroundings. This man had
before him a task and an opportunity so glorious that one can scarcely
speak of it except in the language of religion. Many ordinary men would
willingly give their lives if they could save their fellow creatures
from sufferings and perils far less terrible than those which then
threatened. And he could have saved them without any sacrifice. It
needed only a little courage. For a week or ten days he hesitated. Then
on December 11 he proclaimed his programme: the Kaiser's head; the
punishment of enemy war-criminals; Germany to pay the whole cost of the
war; Britain for the British; rehabilitation of those whom the war had
broken.

At the time when this programme was put forward I felt bewildered. I did
not realize that any one could be, I will not say so wicked, but so
curiously destitute of generous ambition, so incapable of thinking
greatly. And when I tried to find out what motive could lie at the back
of a failure so incredible, I was told by his supporters that the Prime
Minister was not thinking about the matters of which I was thinking. He
was trying to get a very large majority in the House of Commons and to
crush his old colleagues, and conceivable rivals, entirely out of
existence. Of course he succeeded.

I hope I have put this statement forward without any malice or party
feeling. The state of the world is far too serious to permit of either.
And I hope that the profound and burning indignation which I undoubtedly
feel has not biased my judgment. In any case, the conclusion that I wish
to draw is not a personal but a general one. I doubt if such action
would have been possible before the war in any constitutional statesman,
not to speak of a clever and humane man like Mr. George. I doubt if the
public opinion of any nation would have endured it. A nation in which
such conduct is tolerated, and even approved, ought surely to pause and
bethink itself. For it is not a particular reckless or unfortunate act
which is thus condoned; it is a way of behaviour. It is a way of
behaviour which has its origin in the methods of war, and of which the
characteristic is that it gives the unscrupulous man the advantage over
the scrupulous man, the cheat over the honest player, the violent and
the criminal over those who obey the law. It fosters exactly those
things which it is the business of civilized society to prevent. There
are always lawless and dishonest men in every large community, as there
are criminals in every army. There are always men who make profit out of
their neighbours' extremity, who use advertisement to stifle truth, who
jeer at all that is higher than themselves. But in a good social order
they are not influential. They acquire power only in a society which, in
external conduct, is losing its traditional standards and inwardly, in
the words of Tolstoy's great condemnation, has forgotten God.

My criticism here is directed against my own country, and in particular
against the British Prime Minister, not in the least because I have any
anti-British bias. On the contrary, I think that in most of the
international problems of Europe the influence of Great Britain, and in
particular of the British Prime Minister, is generally an influence for
good, though not nearly such a strong and clear influence as it might
be. I confine these criticisms to our own policy because the scolding of
foreign countries is a notoriously profitless task. The only criticism
that has any chance of being useful is that of matters for which the
critic or his readers have some degree of responsibility.

I believe profoundly in the traditions of Liberal England. As every one
knows who has cared to read my writings, I look to the League of Nations
as the main hope of the world, and to the British Commonwealth as the
mainstay of the League of Nations. But, if it was ever doubtful, it is
surely clear in the present state of the world that the Commonwealth
cannot rest upon any secure foundation except the good-will of its
members. And that good-will in its turn depends upon equal law, good
government, and good faith.

It is not a new lesson that we have to learn: it is an old lesson that
good Englishmen once knew better than any rulers the world has ever
seen, though five years of madness have made it largely forgotten. But,
as Lord Grey has said, the choice now before us is absolute; we must
learn or perish.

It is in this belief and this spirit that I have written the following
pages, which I hope, except to those who still live in some
unsubstantial paradise of war-bred delusions, will cause no permanent
offence, nor leave the impression that where I think others have made
mistakes I imagine that I should make none.

Readers will see that I have aimed throughout at simplicity of outline.
I have deliberately focused attention on the one central problem, how to
avoid the causes of international strife. And out of the many and
multifarious difficulties that confront our harassed Foreign Office
to-day, I have concentrated on a few typical cases. I have omitted, for
instance, any discussion of Turkey, Armenia, Persia, Ireland, and the
relations between Great Britain and the United States. I have omitted
Africa, where, unless the white man's methods of administration are
reconsidered, one of the gravest of the world's future dangers may soon
be in fermentation. And I have said nothing of the economic problem in
Europe, especially in Austria. The International Financial Commission,
summoned at Brussels by the League of Nations, has issued a report on
this matter which no government can afford to neglect. Its first
recommendations are disarmament and freedom of trade, but they will not
be enough without some system of international credits by which
production may be set going among those populations which at present
have neither food nor raw materials nor the means of buying them.

    *    *    *    *    *

Since an edition of this little book is asked for in America I feel
constrained to add a few words to the Preface. It will be seen that I
have said nothing about two subjects of the first importance, the Irish
Question and the relations between Great Britain and the United States.
The Irish Question is, under present conditions, a domestic matter,
since Ireland forms by law part of the United Kingdom and has the right
of full representation in the British Parliament. It only touches
foreign policy through its effect on foreign opinion.

I do not therefore propose to discuss the Irish Question here.
Personally I believe that a favourable prospect of settlement is to be
found in the policy advocated by Mr. Asquith and Lord Grey, and loosely
called "Dominion Home Rule." This would put Ireland roughly in the same
position as the self-governing British colonies, and would at once have
two very important effects. It would put an end to the present
oppressions and would give Ireland the right to a seat at the Assembly
of the League of Nations. But I fear that no settlement whatever is
possible in Ireland until the present Government is replaced by some
other with more sincerity in its purpose and less blood upon its hands.
The accounts of British misdeeds which I read in the Sinn Fein Bulletin
and in some American newspapers appear to me to be both exaggerated and
one-sided. Men exasperated by persecution are not as a rule capable of
giving a perfectly fair and benevolent account of the behaviour of
their persecutors. But in spite of the Government's policy of rigorous
concealment, the Irish can now appeal to the evidence of a witness as
nearly unimpeachable as can be expected in human affairs, a County Court
Judge appointed originally by the British Government itself. Judge
Bodkin, in a report submitted to the British Government on cases of
crime which came before his Court in Clare County at the Hilary Sessions
of 1920, states: "There were in all 139 cases in which it was proved
that the criminal injuries were committed by armed forces of the
Government, and only in the five cases already mentioned were any
witnesses examined to justify, deny, or explain. In no case was there
any evidence to suggest that the victims had been guilty of any
offence."

In answer to a report like this the Government allows no public inquiry,
inflicts, so far as is known, no punishment on the criminals, awards no
compensation to the victims, and yet does not take any legal steps
against its accuser. Such conduct does not seem compatible with
innocence. Indeed the complicity of the Government, particularly of Mr.
Lloyd George and Sir Hamar Greenwood, in the system of illegal outrages
called "reprisals" is no longer disputed, and has especially been
brought out in Parliament by a conservative member, Mr. Oswald Moseley.
The exact degree of complicity is, of course, open to doubt. If I may
give my own opinion for what it is worth, I suspect that at some time
when the Irish police forces were disposed to resign or to strike owing
to the constant danger of assassination in which the Government's policy
required them to live, the Government gave their officers some assurance
that, if they would only stay on, their own conduct in dealing with Sinn
Feiners would not be too closely scrutinized. That was the usual method
pursued by the Czar's Government when arranging pogroms.

The defence of the British Ministers is that they were faced from the
outset by a very difficult situation, owing to the irreconcilable
differences between the northeast corner of Ulster and the rest of
Ireland. Anxious for Tory support they gave pledges, the exact tenor of
which has not been divulged, to Sir Edward Carson, the Ulster leader,
and thus tied their own hands. The condition of Ireland became
increasingly embittered, till, shortly after Sir Hamar Greenwood's
appointment, the extreme Sinn Fein party, refusing parliamentary action
and unable to meet the English in battle, adopted a policy of
assassination. The Government, much embarrassed, did just what most bad
governments generally have done in other parts of the world. They tried
to stamp out the Sinn Fein terror by organizing a terror of their own,
meeting crime by still more formidable crime, and recklessly confusing
the innocent with the guilty. At last they have succeeded in uniting all
Catholic Ireland in such detestation of the British name that an
Irishman will now never betray another Irishman, however guilty, to the
British police, nor even feel that the killing of an Englishman is quite
the same thing as murder. "Things being in this state," the Government
pleads, "how can we be expected to govern Ireland according to
civilized standards?" The answer is that they cannot, and had better
make room for another Government which can.

I cannot tell how great an effect this Irish calamity has had in
embittering the relations between America and Great Britain. I would
only venture to lay before Americans of moderate views my conviction
that the great mass of educated opinion in England joins with the Free
Liberals and the Labour Party in utterly condemning the Government's
Irish administration. This conclusion is derived from personal
conversation with people of various parties, and from the overwhelming
anti-Government votes in the bye-elections, and the increasing protests
and rebellions among the Government's supporters in Parliament. I have
to admit that this condemnation is not reflected in the House of Commons
as a whole, an utterly abnormal House elected in a moment when not only
the fever of war, but many other fevers and corruptions of the body
politic were at their height. It is not even reflected adequately in the
press. For the press in England, with a few most honourable exceptions,
is in the hands of a small number of individuals who--to say the least
of it--were not elected to their present position of power by the
confidence of their countrymen nor appointed thereto on grounds of
intellect or character or public spirit. England is admittedly not in a
very healthy state of mind. But, even now, at her worst, she is a far
better and more decent country than could be concluded from either the
London press or the House of Commons.

The picture I have given of European affairs may, I can well see, be
taken in either of two ways by an American. It may well confirm his
determination to keep absolutely clear of a world at once so
ill-directed and so miserable. The case for American isolation is very
easy to state and to understand. What is there to attract America
towards further coöperation with any of the larger European nations?
France? I can imagine no sane statesmen wishing to be drawn into the
orbit of France in her present mood or with her present prospects.
Germany? The existing German Government seems good, but old enmities do
not so quickly die down, and Germany has still to prove that she is an
honest and a peaceful power. Russia? To ask the question is to answer
it. England? Who would wish to coöperate with the British Government in
holding down Ireland by "competition in crime," in reëstablishing her
slippery grasp on Mesopotamia, laboriously pacifying India and Egypt,
and struggling indefinitely against Russian conspiracies to destroy her
influence in the Moslem world? How can an American wish to remit
England's debt to America when she is at this moment invading Germany in
order to collect "to the last farthing" a claim which the American
delegates at the Peace Conference rejected as extortionate? And who
would wish to increase the wealth of a Government which, immediately
after the War to end War, is lavishing all it can afford, and more, on
armaments and military expeditions? Other less plausible arguments could
easily be added. The suggestion, for instance, that this country, or any
party or any fraction of a party in this country, intends or ever
intended to use the Japanese Alliance for a war against the United
States is the merest moonshine, and has been repeatedly disproved by the
terms of the old treaty and by the public statements of both parties.
But, taking only arguments that have some basis of truth, the case for
American isolation is very strong.

And yet it is the wrong case. It is based, I venture to think, first on
a misunderstanding, and next on too narrow a point of view. A
misunderstanding; because it is not coöperation in that sense which is
asked of her. She is not asked to support the policies of any European
nation. The League of Nations is not an alliance. She is asked only to
sit in council with the other nations--as free and unpledged as they,
or, if she wishes, still more so--to help those who have suffered, and
are in part still sick in body and brain with their suffering, to face
the vast problems which now confront mankind, and which the rest of us
have pledged ourselves to face in the spirit of peace and justice and
common sense which we thought was characteristically American. It is
based on too narrow a view, because all summary judgments of foreign
nations are that, whether they end in praise or blame. "La noble,
l'incomparable Angleterre" of M. Briand is just as remote from fact as
the "brutal and bloody Britain" of Mr. Hearst. Nations are made up of
masses of individuals, who differ among themselves within each nation
just about as much as the citizens of one nation differ from those of
another. In every nation there are numbers of criminals and numbers of
fine men. In every nation's past there are black places and white. Only
it so happens that just now, after a time of hideous suffering and
wrong-doing, in the midst of a time of savage resentments and passions
and great material difficulties, the nations of the world are from the
depth of their hearts longing for some way of avoiding war and treating
one another in future a little more openly and fairly than they have in
the past. They know they must have disputes, and that when the disputes
come it is one of two things; they must either talk them out or fight
them out. They are meeting to talk them out. But how can the talk be
quite frank and free, or how can the promises of peace and fair dealing
carry full conviction, while the greatest and the least wounded of all
the nations refuses to join in them, but sits aloof in silence, from
time to time sharpening her sword?
                                                             G. M.




CONTENTS


PREFACE                                              v

  I. GERMANY AND FRANCE                              1
       I. THE PREDICAMENT OF GERMANY                 1
      II. THE POSITION OF FRANCE                    33
     III. THE SOLUTION                              42

 II. THE EAST                                       58
       I. SYRIA, MESOPOTAMIA, EGYPT, AND INDIA      58
      II. AN EASTERN POLICY                         70

III. RUSSIA AND ITS BORDERS                         80
       I. THE CIVIL WAR                             82
      II. RUSSIA'S NEIGHBOURS                       90

 IV. PRE-WAR AND POST-WAR CAUSES OF STRIFE          98
       I. ARMAMENTS                                100
      II. MARKETS AND FOOD                         107

  V. THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS                         114

     BOOKS FOR FURTHER READING                     125




THE PROBLEM
OF FOREIGN POLICY




CHAPTER I

GERMANY AND FRANCE


I. THE PREDICAMENT OF GERMANY

A friend of mine was recently travelling in Germany in a third-class
railway carriage. The engine was slow and in lack of oil. The carriages,
once so clean, warm, and well lighted, were unlit, dirty, and bitterly
cold. There was an air of broken nerves and misery among the passengers,
and one woman was still sobbing from some indignity offered to her by a
foreign official in the occupied area. Presently an old gentleman,
apparently a lawyer of some eminence, broke out: "A reckoning must come.
My little grandchildren are drinking in revenge with their mother's
milk. In thirty years or thereabouts we shall settle accounts with
France, and then we shall make"--he swept the air with his
hand--"_tabula rasa!_"

"Herr Justizrat," answered a younger man, "did you take part in the war?
I think not--you would be over the age. I was in the war for four years.
. . . I agree with you that, in all probability, in thirty or forty
years we shall settle our account with France and make _tabula rasa_.
And in thirty or forty years after that France will have her reckoning
with us and make _tabula rasa_ of Germany; and then we again, and so on.
But, if you will excuse me, Herr Justizrat, I do not find in the
prospect any of the satisfaction which it appears to give you."

An incident of this sort may be significant or may not. It may be
typical or may be exceptional. But my friend's experience seems exactly
to agree with the report made by Herr Simons to the Reichstag in the
last week of August, 1920, upon the attitude of the German Government
towards the war then proceeding between Poland and Russia. The Entente
Powers had invited Germany to take certain unneutral steps on the side
of Poland; the Government had, as a matter of course, refused. The
Soviet Government had also invited Germany to join in the war on their
side, holding out the hope that such action by Germany would precipitate
a Bolshevik revolution in Poland and other parts of eastern Europe and
lead to an alliance capable of defying the Entente. The German
Government, said Herr Simons, carefully considered these proposals, as
it felt bound to consider any possible prospect of escape for Germany
from the intolerable servitude imposed upon her by the Peace of
Versailles, but decided that it was not in the public interest to accept
them.

Thus the German Foreign Minister, a man respected by all parties,
expresses in sober and thoughtful language much the same sentiment as
the Justizrat in his passion. The Peace of Versailles has, like most
settlements imposed by conquerors upon their beaten enemies, produced a
condition so intolerable that the vanquished must be expected to seize
the first favourable opportunity for fighting to free themselves. It has
sown the seeds of future war.

Now, it was the great hope of English Liberals and those who agreed
with them, that, contrary to almost all precedent, this war might be
ended by a peace so high-minded and statesmanlike and far-seeing, so
scrupulously fair to the vanquished and so single-mindedly set upon the
healing of national wounds and the reconstruction of a shattered
society, that the ordinary motives for a war of revenge would not exist,
and the nations might really coöperate with one another to save all
Europe from a common ruin. In 1914 and 1915, when war still seemed to
Englishmen an almost incredible horror, and it was still necessary to
appeal to men's consciences if we wished them to fight, volunteers were
invited for a "war to end war." The statesmen who, in those days, were
still the leaders of the country, were emphatic in stating that we were
not engaged in any attempt to destroy or oppress the German people, but
only "the military domination of Prussia." Even later, when the Liberal
and idealist elements in the country withered in the poisonous air or
were supplanted by more robust forces, it seemed as if President Wilson
was upholding, with even greater insistence and emphasis, the banner of
ultimate reconciliation as the goal of the war. For the war itself he
prescribed "Force, Force to the utmost, Force without stint or limit,
righteous and triumphant Force, which shall make Right the Law of the
World and cast every selfish dominion down in the dust" (April 6, 1918);
but, as soon as the Hohenzollerns were overthrown, he was for what he
called "peace without victory," a peace with no element of revenge, "a
new international order based upon broad and universal principles of
right and justice" (February 11, 1918). Especial emphasis was laid on
our good-will towards the German people. "We have no quarrel with the
German people. We have no feeling towards them but one of sympathy and
friendship" (April 2, 1917). "They did not originate or desire this
hideous war . . . we are fighting their cause, as they will some day see
it, as well as our own" (Flag Day, 1917).

It is not clear that this ideal was an impossible one. The war of
Prussia against Austria in 1866 was unscrupulous and aggressive in its
origin; but Bismarck meant it to end in a reconciliation after victory,
and so it did. He secured a peace which left no sting of injustice
behind it, Lincoln did not live to make the settlement with the South
after the American Civil War; but enough is known of his intentions to
make us sure that he intended to carry through at all costs a peace of
reconciliation, extremely different from that which took place when he
was gone. The British war against the Boers in 1899-1902, though open to
the severest criticism in its origin, ended in a genuine peace of
reconciliation in the settlement of 1906, for which the reward came
rapidly and in full measure at the outbreak of the Great War. Had things
been a little different in 1918, had President Wilson had the same
support from his own people that he had from the best elements in
Europe, had a Liberal or Labour Government been in power to make a
settlement of the Great War like the settlement which followed the Boer
War, had the popular influences of the time been better guided, Europe
might have had a genuinely Liberal peace. Indeed, it seemed at the last
moment almost certain that a Liberal peace had been secured. In an
address to Congress on January 8, 1918, President Wilson laid down his
memorable Fourteen Points to be observed in any treaty of peace with
Germany. The first five may be especially noted:

     1. Open covenants of peace openly arrived at, after which there
     shall be no private international understandings of any kind, but
     diplomacy shall always proceed frankly and in the public view.

     2. Absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas outside territorial
     waters, alike in peace and in war, except as the seas may be closed
     in whole or in part by international action for the enforcement of
     international covenants.

     3. The removal as far as possible of all economic barriers, and the
     establishment of an equality of trade conditions among all nations
     consenting to the peace and associating themselves for its
     maintenance.

     4. Adequate guarantees given and taken that national armaments will
     be reduced to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety.

     5. A free, open-minded and absolutely impartial adjustment of all
     colonial claims, based upon a strict observance of the principle
     that in determining all such questions of sovereignty the interests
     of the populations concerned must have equal weight with the
     equitable claims of the Government whose title is to be
     determined.[1]

[Footnote 1: The other points were briefly: Evacuation of Russia:
restoration of Belgium; of France; transference of Alsace-Lorraine;
territorial settlement of Italy; autonomy of peoples of Austria-Hungary;
settlement of Balkan States; of Turkey; restoration of Poland; and
lastly a League of Nations--though President Wilson never used that
somewhat inaccurate phrase. I should like to acknowledge here my
indebtedness to the admirable and convenient series of publications
issued by the American Association for International Conciliation, 407
West 117th Street, New York.]

The Fourteen Points were not only acclaimed by Liberal opinion in
England: they were vigorously circulated by our Government propaganda in
Germany and Austria, as were all other statements considered likely to
induce the enemy peoples to weaken or surrender. On October 5, 1918, the
German Republican Government proposed peace on the basis of the Fourteen
Points. "They requested President Wilson to take into his hands the task
of establishing peace on the basis of the Fourteen Points contained in
his message to Congress of January 8, 1918, and on the basis of his
subsequent proclamations, especially his speech of September 27, 1918."
Later on they asked the President to inquire if the Allied Governments
also agreed to them. In response to his inquiries the Allied Governments
sent in to him an identical memorandum:

     The Allied Governments have given careful consideration to the
     correspondence which has passed between the President of the United
     States and the German Government. Subject to the qualifications
     which follow, they declare their willingness to make peace with the
     Government of Germany on the terms of peace laid down in the
     President's address to Congress of January 8, 1918, and the
     principles of settlement enunciated in his subsequent addresses.
     They must point out, however, that what is usually described as the
     Freedom of the Seas is open to various interpretations, some of
     which they could not accept. They must therefore reserve to
     themselves complete freedom on this subject when they enter the
     Peace Conference.

One further "qualification" was made by the Allied Powers: by the
"restoration" of the invaded territories they understood "that
compensation would be made by Germany for all damage done to the
civilian population of the Allies and their property by the aggression
of Germany by land, by sea and from the air."

Thus the Fourteen Points were converted into a solemn international
agreement. The Allies agreed that the treaty of peace should consist of
the application in detail of that fundamental document. On that
understanding the Germans laid down their arms and surrendered their
means of defence.

It is always difficult in the affairs of a democratic country to
determine the exact point where mere inconsistency and laxity of
thought, or even mere lack of coördination between the various organs of
government, merge into something like deliberate perfidy. It may so
easily happen that one set of individuals give the promise and quite
another set act in breach of it. But an Englishman who wishes seriously
to understand the present international situation must begin by
realizing clearly that the treaty imposed on the Germans at Versailles,
after they had surrendered their arms, appears to them and to a large
number of neutral observers as a monstrous breach of faith. It
contravened in spirit and in detail much of what they understood by the
Fourteen Points. I confess that, after reading carefully the German
Protest and the Allied Reply, it seems to me that the German reading of
President Wilson's terms was in some points the natural one; and, apart
from the treaty itself, that the action taken against the Germans when
they were disarmed was not consistent with the language and the pledges
addressed to them while they were still in the field. As a matter of
fact, certain of those responsible, or partly responsible, for the
negotiations on the Entente side, when they saw the way things were
going, recalled bitterly the great historic perfidy by which Rome
trapped Carthage to her doom.

A charge of this kind is, of course, very serious; and the results of
the action taken at Versailles have been more than serious. I will ask
my readers patiently to consider in broad outlines the causes,
psychological and other, which seem to have been at work; for of course
it is quite possible and even probable that, of the main actors
concerned, not one had any intention of trying to trap the Germans by
perjury. Some of them doubtless were unscrupulous men, such as wars
habitually throw to the surface; but they were not men of the
Machiavellian type.

Two broad facts stand out clearly to one who studies the documents.
First, the Governments which accepted President Wilson's Fourteen Points
as the basis of peace with Germany were from the start quite out of
sympathy with his spirit. Why, then, did they accept them? Because they
had really no choice. To refuse would not have been only to reject a
long delayed and desperately needed peace. It would have been to confess
to the world that, contrary to so many previous professions, their aims
were frankly what is now termed "imperialistic." Above all, it would
have been to alienate Mr. Wilson, without whom victory was impossible.
They were bound to accept.

But Mr. Wilson's language was often rather lacking in definiteness. Who
knows exactly what "justice" is, or what may be regarded as
consideration for "the true interests" of the German people? They
accepted the terms; but they were free to use all permissible ingenuity
in interpreting a document which they had not drawn up, and which had
been forced upon them in a time of need.

Furthermore, one who labours through the four hundred and forty articles
of the treaty, with their innumerable subdivisions, will find not merely
that the treaty represents broadly the victory of the right side over
the wrong, and is a charter of emancipation to large parts of Europe. He
will find also that four hundred or more of the detailed articles are
reasonable enough and many of them excellent. The injustice arises in
two ways. First, that on every doubtful point, and there are many, the
decision is apt to be given against the enemy; and next, that behind the
respectable structure of the treaty there existed in fact a flood of
white-hot war-passion--revenge, hate, terror, suspicion, and raging
covetousness--which poisoned the atmosphere and here and there made a
breach in the protecting wall.

A great English military critic somewhat shocked public opinion by
saying at the time of the armistice, "This armistice is wrong. We have
got them down, and now we ought to kick them till we have had enough."
The French, he said, ought to have continued the war and marched on to
Berlin, plundering and ravaging till they had satisfied their revenge.
The words sound like insanity, but the speaker explained them later on.
A war of revenge, he argued, is within the limits of pardonable human
nature. And it comes to an end. But, being cheated of their decisive
campaign of victory, the French were making a peace of revenge; and that
is a thing which is apt to admit of no forgiveness and no finish.

I quote these words not because I agree with them in practical policy,
but because of the profound psychological truth that they express.
Behind the statesmen who had pledged their words, however unwillingly,
remained masses of ignorant, violent, and war-maddened people, many of
them with terrible wrongs to avenge and no guide or leader to help them
against themselves. We need not recall, though few sensitive people will
ever forget, the horrors of the propaganda of hate. It is only worth
realizing that the mob-inspired journalists and journalist-inspired
mobs who clamoured for an utter and all-devouring peace of revenge,
including the starvation and enslavement of half Europe for thirty or
fifty or a hundred years, had never themselves signed the Fourteen
Points and felt no personal inconsistency or turpitude if they compelled
the Supreme Council of the Allies to break its faith.

The first step in this policy lay outside the treaty. The third of the
Fourteen Points established "equality of trade conditions" and the
"removal of economic barriers" between all the nations consenting to the
peace. Immediately after the armistice a proposal was made, and met with
strong American support, that the Allies should set themselves at once
to attempting to cope with the threatened famine and the lack of raw
materials in Central Europe, and thus get European trade on its legs
again as early as possible. This would relieve a vast amount of
distress, serve as a stepping-stone to reconciliation, save many nations
from the danger of irremediable collapse, and also make far more
possible the restoration of the invaded areas and the payment of large
reparations by Germany. It was proposed to follow the analogy of the
peace of 1871; to draw up a preliminary peace agreement, stating
principles and limits but not details. For example, it might be agreed
that Germany must surrender some territory in the West and in Poland,
but not beyond certain geographical lines; must pay an indemnity to be
fixed on certain principles, but not to exceed a certain sum, and the
like. The territorial agreement, again, might be based on the elaborate
statement of war aims issued by the British Government on January 10,
1917. The Germans could have accepted this, and the work of
reconstruction been begun immediately. Incalculable distress and
suffering would thus have been saved.

But another view prevailed. With the short-sightedness that so often
accompanies brutality, the German High Command had, in the very last
months of the war, when their defeat was certain, tried systematically
to cripple the industry of Belgium and France by destroying mines,
breaking machinery, carrying off movable plant, and the like. Their own
manufacturing plant was undamaged, and they indulged in the fatuous
expectation that they might recapture their lost markets and spring into
prosperity, while France and Belgium were still too crippled to commence
work. Of course, this could not be allowed. The obvious alternatives,
such as allocating certain German factories to French or Belgian
companies whose plant had been destroyed, or simply allocating the
profits to purposes of reparation, appear not to have been considered.
The blinder motives were too strong, and no statesman arose to give
guidance. All Germany must be punished. She had not been invaded and
ravaged. She must be made to suffer the pains of invasion. She must be
ravaged in cold blood. The complete ruin of Germany, argued certain
French journalists and politicians, was demanded by all considerations
both of justice and of safety, and it had not by any means been
attained. Russia was paralyzed and wrecked by Bolshevism. But the German
Revolution had been carried successfully through. The people were not
yet demoralized, and the problem was how to demoralize them. Perhaps
starvation would do it. Hence was started the policy of deliberately
ruining Germany, after her surrender, by a long blockade in time of
what, to the ordinary man, appeared to be peace, and immediately after a
promise of "the removal of economic barriers and the establishment of
equality of trade conditions." This was not a technical breach of faith;
technically we were still at war with Germany, and we had never promised
not to starve our enemies after their surrender. The promise of equality
of trade conditions only applied to conditions after the peace.
Nevertheless, a historian will probably regard the establishment and
continuance of this blockade of the enemy lands after their surrender as
one of those many acts of almost incredible inhumanity which have made
the recent Great War conspicuous in the annals of mankind and shaken
thoughtful men's faith in the reality of modern civilization. Certain
articles in the _Matin_ discussing the exact dose of famine desirable in
order to create the maximum of individual suffering and public weakness
in the Boche are difficult to parallel in the literature of morbid hate,
except among some of the German war pamphlets.

Thus the Fourteen Points, besides a regrettable indefiniteness of
phrasing, had the fatal fault of being utterly out of touch with the
feeling of most of the belligerents. As the time wore on this feeling
asserted its influence on the terms of the treaty. The Boche had
deliberately and treacherously plunged Europe into war; he had waged the
war with revolting cruelty; he had inflicted unheard-of suffering on the
innocent, and, by a miracle, he had been beaten. Now let him pay the
penalty! President Wilson had pledged the Allies "to be just to the
German people as to all others. . . . To propose anything but justice to
Germany at any time would be to renounce our own cause." "Very good,"
answered the dominant voices of 1918; "the criminal asks for justice,
and so far as our power reaches, justice he shall have!" The total of
wrongs done by Germany, in plotting the war, in waging it, and in the
destruction of life and property, could easily be regarded as an almost
infinite sum, and "Justice" surely demanded for that an almost infinite
punishment.

The first concession to this insistent pressure was on a point of form.
The language of the Fourteen Points and the accompanying documents
implied that the treaty would be a matter of discussion and negotiation.
The basis was agreed upon; it seemed natural to suppose that the next
step was to negotiate. But popular feeling had caught at the phrase
"unconditional surrender"; and, though nothing could be clearer than the
fact that the German army had surrendered on perfectly explicit
conditions, signed and agreed to by every Government concerned, it was
decided that terms were not to be negotiated but "imposed." Mr. Keynes
has shown in an interesting way how great was the effect of this
decision. Terms were drawn up with a view to bargaining, leaving a
margin for possible concessions; and then there was no bargaining. The
whole demand was suddenly enforced.

Questions of territory outside Europe were decided purely by conquest.
Immense areas in Asia and Africa were seized as spoil by the strongest
Powers, though the conditions of their tenure were, so it was hoped, to
be regulated by the League of Nations. In some cases there was a
pretence of consulting the wishes of the inhabitants; in most cases this
was not practicable. In Syria and South Tyrol the wishes of the
inhabitants were notoriously overridden. In Europe as a whole, however,
the decisions were made on Wilsonian principles. True, they told heavily
against Germany. But as a matter of fact the Germans and German
Austrians, by reason of their great strength and high organizing power,
had an imperial position in Europe, and any liberation of subject or
quasi-subject nationalities was bound to be at the expense of the
Germans. The territorial settlement, in spite of the great and needless
distress produced by the break-up of the Austro-Hungarian system, is on
principles of nationality juster than that which preceded it. The more
extreme anti-German claims were successfully resisted. France was not
allowed to annex Germany up to the Elbe, as M. Hanotaux wished; nor even
up to the Rhine. No partition of Germany by force was permitted, though
an agitation for that purpose still continues in France and the
prohibition of any future union between German-Austria and the rest of
Germany was actually embodied in the treaty. The treaty of Berlin had in
just the same way attempted to forbid the unity of Bulgaria.

As regards the penal clauses, it may be convincingly argued that the
great crimes and cruelties and breaches of law which have signalized
this war ought emphatically to meet with judgment and punishment from
some tribunal representing the conscience of civilized mankind. On
grounds of justice the presence of such penal clauses in the treaty
could be amply justified, though considerations of policy make it more
questionable. But all thoughts of equal justice disappeared in derision
when it was found that only crimes committed by the enemies of the
Entente were to be punished; crimes committed by British, French,
Italian, Serbian or American criminals were privileged acts, to which
"Justice" had nothing to say.

This absurd clause has, of course, given rise to suspicions, more absurd
than itself, of dark crimes committed by Entente generals which must be
concealed at any cost. Such suggestions are nonsense. Indefensible as it
is, the clause was dictated by no more sinister passion than ordinary
national vanity. The economic clauses were open to graver suspicions. It
was whispered that trade interests of not quite unimpeachable character
had some influence with members of the French, the Italian, and even the
English Government; and the old German accusation that England entered
the war in order to destroy a trade rival, utterly untrue at the time,
seemed to receive some colour by the terms of peace. Germany depended
for her prosperity on her industry and her overseas trade. Her industry
was wrecked by an immense demand upon her coal. The mines of Lorraine,
the Saar Valley, and, subject to plebiscite, of Silesia, were handed
over to other states; and out of the remainder Germany was condemned to
pay an amount of coal which proved, on investigation at Spa, two years
later, to be beyond her powers. Her overseas trade was annihilated at a
blow by the seizure of all the vessels of her mercantile marine
exceeding 1600 tons gross and a large proportion of her small vessels
and fishing-boats, combined with a demand upon such ships as she might
build in future. Her voice was stifled by the seizure of all her
telegraphic cables: news henceforth was to be a monopoly of the
conquerors. At the same time all her colonies were taken from her. She
was forbidden to set up any tariffs for her own protection. Her
navigable rivers were put under the control of international commissions
on which the Germans or Austrians were a small minority. And while it
was somewhat unctuously explained to Germany that in a virtuous world
trade would be free and untrammelled, and that the commissions only
intended to see that she did not erect barriers against her innocent
neighbours, there was no provision whatever made to debar the Allies
from erecting what barriers they pleased against Germany. "It would
appear to be a fundamental fallacy," declared the Allied Reply, "that
the political control of a country is essential in order to procure a
reasonable share of its products. Such a proposal finds no foundation in
economic law or history." It has found some foundation in history since.

The triumph of penal ingenuity, however, was the indefinite indemnity.
It was agreed on both sides that Germany was to pay an indemnity. She
did not demur. Indeed, her mouth was closed by the monstrously
oppressive and inhuman proposals various Germans had themselves put
forward when they expected to win the war. She had openly intended to
"bleed France and England white." Now that she was beaten she was
prepared to pay. She accepted the duty of "restoring" the invaded
territories. This was defined as "reparation for all damage done to the
civil population of the Allies by German aggression." The Germans
probably understood this to mean the damage done to civilian life and
property by invasions or raids; but they were told that this view was
too narrow. Every soldier killed or wounded had civilians dependent on
him; nay, he himself was really a civilian forced by German aggression
to desert his business. All his business losses, the separation
allowances to his wife, the pensions to ex-soldiers or to their
dependents, all damage to any one's "health or honour," were ultimately
"due to German aggression" and should be paid by Germany. No such terms
had ever been heard of before, true; but the British electors had been
promised that "Germany should pay the whole cost of the war"; and the
sense of the solemn contract was distorted to suit the election cry.
After 1871 the Germans had imposed on France what was then considered
the extremely severe indemnity of two hundred million pounds sterling.
Some experts now proposed two thousand million sterling as an adequate
indemnity to be paid by Germany, others three thousand million. That was
emended by popular orators to ten thousand million; thirty thousand
million; fifty thousand million. Absurd to say that Germany could not
pay! If all German property were confiscated and all Germans for
seventy-five years were made to work for the Allies at a bare
subsistence wage, a well-known English public man was prepared to get
more than fifty thousand million out of them.

The Americans bluntly refused to endorse demands which they considered
extortionate. The indemnity was left unspecified. It should depend on
Germany's capacity to pay. Let the Germans get to work at once and do
their best. The more they produced, the more the Allies would take; and
if, after two years or so, it became necessary to fix the sum, the less
the Germans had produced in those two years the less they would
eventually have to pay. It is said that some of the British Ministers,
secretly anxious to be more reasonable than was consistent with
popularity at the moment, wished to postpone the fixing of the indemnity
until the rage of their own "Khaki Election" should have cooled down.
But their calculation was a bad one. As the German delegation observed:
"The German people would feel themselves condemned in slavery, because
everything they accomplished would benefit neither themselves nor even
their children, but merely strangers. But the system of slave labour has
never been successful."

For the purpose of raising money the proposal was merely fatuous. It
took away from the Germans every possible motive for producing wealth.
But its object in some minds was not money: its object was the permanent
ruin of Germany. It was feared in France that, though the Germans were
now exhausted and beggared, their notorious industry and ingenuity might
in time enable them to pay off their indemnity and rise again to
affluence and strength. So it was arranged that, for some years at
least, they should be deprived of every motive for industry.

Lastly, a new provision was made about private property. The rule
hitherto observed in the land wars of civilized states was that enemy
private property was respected, and if seized during the war was
restored at the conclusion of peace. This rule was, of course, enforced
in favour of any property belonging to nationals of the Entente
countries situated in enemy lands; but reciprocity was not admitted. The
private property of any German situate in any part of the world which
was under the control of the Ententes was _ipso facto_ confiscated. "The
Allied and Associated Powers reserve the right to retain and liquidate
all" such property. Every German, however innocent, who had settled in
our territory before the war was thus exposed to be robbed of everything
he possessed. Nay, it seems almost incredible, but in the original form
of the treaty which was put before the enemy for signature the
stipulation seems actually to have been laid down that any property
which a German might hereafter make or acquire in Entente territory
should be liable to confiscation at the will of the Entente Governments!
This clause was too much even for the atmosphere of Versailles, and in
response to the German protest the stipulation about the future was
dropped.[2] For the rest of the confiscation, the Entente Reply brazens
it out with the remark that the property is not really taken from the
individual, as his own Government can always pay him back! And in case
the private property of Germans in neutral countries should have an
unfair advantage, the Reparation Commission obtained special powers for
confiscating that too, up to the limit of £100,000,000.

[Footnote 2: See Keynes, pp. 60-102. A provision was kept enabling all
such private property to be confiscated in case the German Government
should "voluntarily fail" to fulfil its engagements. But this also was
dropped by the British Government in October, 1920.]

We need not stop to consider whether there was any extraordinary
exhibition of "Teutonic insolence" in the action of certain German
officials who resigned their offices rather than sign this treaty; nor
need we swell the chorus of English, French, Italian, and American
newspapers in expressing the natural horror of those refined nations at
the bad manners of Count Brockdorf-Rantzau in actually breaking a
paper-knife in the stress of his emotion, when, under protest, he
consented to sign. There was one man among the British representatives
who had known what it was to be conquered after a desperate war.
General Smuts was a man of imagination as well as a soldier and a
statesman. He hesitated long before signing the treaty; and when, in the
end, he decided that it was necessary to do so, he immediately published
a statement of protest. "I have signed the peace treaty, not because I
consider it a satisfactory document, but because it is imperatively
necessary to close the war. . . . The six months since the armistice was
signed have perhaps been as upsetting, unsettling, and ruinous to Europe
as the previous four years of war. I look upon the peace treaty as the
close of those two chapters of war and armistice, and only on that
ground do I sign it." Liberal opinion in England muttered assent. Some
important officials resigned. But the fear of upsetting peace altogether
prevented any open protest in Parliament. We need not lose ourselves in
speculations as to the strange devices to which public men can sink when
their self-interest is clear and their responsibility can be denied or
evaded; nor yet as to the infinite ramifications by which war spreads
its poison through human society, a thing twice-cursed, cursing him that
strikes and him that suffers. The old German Government had committed a
vast crime against humanity; its people had backed it up, as all
European peoples back up their own Governments, and could not expect to
escape heavy punishment. The one question we need ask ourselves is this:
Is it not as certain, as anything in human nature can be, that a treaty
of such a character, imposed on a conquered nation by force, if not also
by treachery, will, as a matter of course and without the faintest
scruple, be broken as soon as there is a favourable opportunity for
breaking it? Of course the Germans will break it if they can; and of
course they will make another war, call it a war of revenge or a war for
freedom as you please, as soon as there is any chance of winning it.

So said the Justizrat in the train. So, in effect, says Herr Simons; so
almost _ad nauseam_ repeat all the German Conservative and patriotic
newspapers. It is difficult to see how any German who is not a
convinced pacifist should do otherwise than prepare with all his
energies for the next war, unless some other way is made possible of
escape from a tormenting servitude.


II. THE POSITION OF FRANCE

If that is so, what is the position of France? France in 1914 was forced
into a war which she tried hard to avoid. The French suffered horribly
and fought heroically. They sacrificed everything to the war. And we,
who know what our own people paid in broken nerve, in bitterness, and in
economic dislocation, cannot be surprised that France has paid a heavier
price. They escaped defeat by the help of England, Russia, Italy, and
America; without these powerful allies they would certainly have been
defeated. We need not try to estimate exactly what their fate would have
been if they had lost the late war, because if they lose the next their
treatment will be infinitely worse. It will be, as far as possible,
_tabula rasa_. It will be the passing of the horse-hoofs of Attila.
Meantime France's allies are, naturally enough, going home and
attending to their own businesses; her population is much smaller than
Germany's and increases even more slowly.

A French statesman of the type of M. Poincaré or M. Hanotaux makes
himself no illusions. Germany is the enemy. Germany will fight again as
soon as she is strong enough. Therefore she must never be allowed to
become strong enough. M. Hanotaux, who was Foreign Minister during the
years 1894-98, when French foreign policy was more ably managed than
now, has recently published a book in criticism of the Treaty of
Versailles. He does not deal in any Wilsonian phrases about justice or
humanity; he considers the treaty solely with a view to the security of
France, and he finds it sadly wanting. And a large mass of opinion,
probably the prevailing opinion, in France supports him.

First of all, it must be remembered, France wanted, and thought she had
received, a special guarantee against future German attacks in the form
of a defensive Alliance between France, England, and America. The
representatives at Paris had agreed to this treaty, which definitely
pledged England and America to come again to the help of France in case
of another unprovoked attack by Germany. The English Parliament, amid
some protests, ratified the treaty, but the United States Senate threw
it out, and therewith the treaty ceased to be binding on England.

I think, after considerable hesitation, that the rejection of the treaty
was a misfortune. Formally, no doubt, it was open to objection. It
seemed like an unnecessary excrescence upon the Covenant of the League
of Nations, which already gave guarantees against war. It contravened
one of Mr. Wilson's principles, and a very sound one, laid down on
September 27, 1918: "Thirdly, there can be no leagues or alliances or
special covenants and understandings within the general and common
family of the League of Nations." Yet the practical importance of
reassuring France was so urgent that a little formal incorrectness might
have been worth incurring; and even formal incorrectness could have been
avoided by the simple expedient of making this guarantee to France take
the form of a special rider to Article XVI of the Covenant.

That article provides: "Should any member of the League resort to war in
disregard of its covenants under Articles XII, XIII, or XV, it shall
_ipso facto_ be deemed to have committed an act of war against all other
members of the League, which hereby undertake immediately to . . ." To
do what? One expects that they will undertake to declare war, and this
is what the French wanted. But no. They only undertake to apply an
economic boycott to the offending state, while the Council may
"recommend to the several Governments concerned what effective military,
naval, or air force they shall severally contribute to the armed forces
to be used to protect the covenants of the League." In case of a future
attack by Germany on France, France's late allies are bound to boycott
German trade, but are not explicitly bound to give military help to
France. I suggest that it would have been possible for Great Britain and
America to add a rider stating specifically that in one of the cases
contemplated by this article, namely, an unprovoked attack on France by
Germany, they would not merely proclaim a blockade and consider what to
do next, but would immediately and unconditionally declare war. Such an
undertaking would involve some risk and be contrary to our usual policy;
but I am inclined to suggest that the risk would have been worth taking.

However, this was not done. France was left with the impression that if
attacked she could not count with confidence on the military support of
her late allies or of the other Powers of the League. The result was
disastrous. While the rest of Europe, supported by a small but generous
and brilliant band of French radicals and Socialists, considered the
Treaty of Versailles intolerably harsh, the dominant French policy
complained that it was inadequate for her protection. The line of
criticism was somewhat as follows:

1. Germany should have been broken up. No peace should have been made
with Germany as a whole, but separate treaties of peace with Saxony,
Bavaria, Westphalia, Prussia, etc. These states should have been
provided with separate systems of coinage, postage, tariffs, laws, etc.,
so as to make the diversity stable and permanent. They should be
forbidden ever to unite. Also, France should have annexed a large part
of Germany; not up to the Rhine--which was the view of Marshal Foch--but
up to the Elbe. The occupation of this territory might impose a burden
on France, but burdens must be borne when such important purposes are
involved. And after all the cost could be charged to the Germans! . . .

As this simple precaution was not taken, the next best thing is to keep
Germany weak. Starve her by the blockade till sheer misery produces a
Bolshevik revolution and society collapses in common ruin. Then apply
the indefinite indemnity, not from the desire to get money, but to
prevent Germany again raising her head.

2. Since France's late allies cannot be relied upon, she must make by
diplomacy new allies whose hands she can force, and who occupy a
convenient geographical situation. Poland is in just the right place.
Let France help Poland and stimulate Polish ambitions. She too is a
nation maddened by suffering and now dazzled by success. A great
imperialist Poland, on bad terms with her neighbours, but backed by
France, will need a large and effective army, and will be ready to
strike at Germany's rear the moment she attempts to move westward.
Unfortunately, Poland is apt to be on bad terms with Russia; and as
things now are Russia is so much the enemy of the Entente that she is
thrown into the arms of Germany. That is deplorable and must not be
allowed to continue. The Bolsheviks must be overthrown and a Government
set up in Russia which is dependent for its existence on French support.
As an additional safeguard, perhaps it will be necessary to secure a
pro-French Hungary, to back up the pro-French Poland. But we must not
despair yet of overthrowing the Bolsheviks.

3. Lastly, France herself needs more soldiers. And she knows where to
get them! The late King Leopold of Belgium once said to M. Hanotaux,
"Qu'est-ce que vous cherchez en Afrique, vous autres Français?" and M.
Hanotaux replied, "Sire, des soldats!" France during the war established
conscription in her African territories and, in spite of a somewhat
bloody rebellion by the ignorant savages, who thought the slave trade
was being reëstablished, succeeded in importing to France a black army
which at one time numbered 600,000 fighting men. With a little more
energy and greatly increased territories, that number might be trebled.
France is a smaller nation than Germany; but France plus Algeria, Tunis,
Morocco, Senegambia, French Congo, and the new German territories is a
much larger nation than Germany without colonies. And blacks fortunately
have not the same rights as white men!

A permanently wrecked Germany, vast black armies for France, armed
allies always ready on Germany's eastern frontier; with these conditions
fulfilled, France, it is hoped by these politicians, may at last breathe
freely.

    *    *    *    *    *

What is wrong with this policy? You may call it devilish, if you will,
since it is based on the deliberate and artificial creation of human
misery; but is it bad policy? After all, air-bombs and poison gas and
the like may be called devilish. But, devilish or not, they have
sometimes to be used. If Germany is certainly and confessedly looking
out for the next opportunity of escaping from the consequences of the
treaty and retrieving her fortunes on the battlefield, is not France
bound to take every precaution to see that Germany shall never be strong
enough to do so with success? The next war will be far worse than the
last. The terms imposed on the beaten party will be even more desolating
and destructive. France is probably a less vigorous plant than her
enemy. She has failed to kill Germany, but Germany might succeed in
killing her.

It seems that Germany is absolutely bound to fight, if there is no other
way of recovering her freedom and her right to live, while France is
absolutely bound to hold her enemy down mercilessly, if there is no
other way of securing her own safety.


III. THE SOLUTION

But perhaps after all there is. Last among the Fourteen Points came the
proposal to found "A general Association of Nations under specific
covenants for the purpose of affording mutual guarantees of political
independence and territorial integrity to small and great states alike."
The Treaty of Versailles has after all two faces. It had to express two
great waves of feeling and two international necessities. Mr. Wilson was
not so utterly "bamboozled" as Mr. Keynes would have us believe. General
Smuts and Lord Robert Cecil were not so utterly without influence on the
settlement. The least depressing paragraphs in the Allied Reply to the
German delegation are those in which they explain that the terrific
severity of the greater part of the treaty applies only to a "transition
period" of punishment, of reparation and of trial, at the end of which
they see the realization of Mr. Wilson's promises. "The conditions of
peace contain some provisions for the future which may outlast the
transition period during which the economic balance"--between Germany
and the invaded countries--"is to be restored; and a reciprocity is
foreseen after that period which is very clearly that equality of trade
conditions for which President Wilson has stipulated." The phrasing of
the paragraph is awkward, but the main drift is clear. The Fourteen
Points are accepted, but adjourned; when Germany has been punished and
reparation made, they will come into force. "The Allied and Associated
Powers look forward to the time when the League of Nations established
by this treaty shall extend its membership to all peoples." "They see no
reason why Germany should not become a member of the League in the early
future," provided she satisfies certain tests. "It has never been their
intention that Germany or any other Power should be indefinitely
excluded from the League of Nations." They are convinced that the
Covenant of the League "introduces an element of progress into the
relations of peoples which will develop and strengthen to the advantage
of justice and of peace."

This is as it should be; but the world does not stand still while
Germany is making reparation and being taught gradually to love her
chastisers. If the League "introduces an element of progress," the
sooner it gets to work the better. It is only too clear that every month
which passes with the League entirely dominated by England, France, and
Italy encourages and deepens the suspicion with which the League is
regarded by its critics. I say nothing of American criticisms, in which
many factors coöperate. But the Swiss Federal Council, in the very able
and persuasive message which it issued to the Assembly on February 17,
1920, in favour of joining the League, has to deal with this suspicion.
"One has been tempted at times to consider the League as an alliance of
the conquerors against the conquered. The fact that Germany, Austria,
and the former Russian Empire remain provisionally excluded from the
League may have given a semblance of truth to this manner of thinking."
The suspicion is afterwards described as "this apparently accurate
criticism." Switzerland as a whole has fortunately rejected the
suspicion and by a small majority joined the League. But in most of
Central Europe the League of Nations movement is strangled in its birth
by the general feeling that the present League means merely the Entente
Powers and their clients, and the elements for starting a counter-league
are consolidating month by month. This counter-league would probably not
be an open and confessed alliance. But Russia, Germany, and the United
States are still outside, and there are many unpaid grudges amongst the
Moslems of Asia. The test which is exacted by Article I from any new
state desiring to become a member of the League is that "it shall give
effective guarantees of its sincere intention to observe its
international obligations." Interpreted with theological strictness,
this would probably result in the rejection of all candidates, to say
nothing of the expulsion of many of the original members. Perfect
sincerity in observing unpleasant obligations is not a common
characteristic of human societies. But in the ordinary sense of the
words the test is already satisfied by Germany and Austria and most of
the succession states. The Assembly of the League meets for the first
time on November 15, 1920. It ought not to dissolve without admitting to
its membership Germany and Austria, as well as several other candidates
who have already applied. At the moment of writing (November, 1920),
Lord Grey, Lord Selborne, and Mr. Barnes have issued a joint appeal for
the immediate admission of Germany, which has long been the accepted
policy of the League of Nations Union. There are many obstacles, but the
result will doubtless be known before these words are in print.
Fortunately, the admission of new members is decided by a two-thirds
majority of the Assembly and does not require a unanimous vote. Once the
League is established on a broad base, including the conquered nations
on equal terms with the victorious, the prospect of that war of revenge
which has hitherto seemed almost inevitable will dwindle and become
remote.

    *    *    *    *    *

The hope expressed above has not been realized. Austria, Bulgaria, and
many less important states applied for admission to the League and were
accepted, but French feeling was known to be very strong, and Germany
did not even apply. Had she done so she would probably have had a
majority in her favour, and it was considered until the beginning of
March, 1921, that she was certain of admission at the next meeting of
the Assembly in September. But in the meantime untoward events have
taken place.

The French Government, like the English, obtained success at the
elections by wild promises to make Germany pay all the costs of the war.
As M. Poincaré has observed, "the French people will not understand how
the victors in a great war can be on the verge of bankruptcy."
Consequently they think their rulers are cheating them. Educated people,
in France as in England, have long since ceased to expect much from
German indemnities, but the Governments still depend on their appeal to
mob-psychology; and it was believed that if M. Briand ventured to make
any concessions in the direction of reason or moderation he would lose
his majority in the Chamber. The proposals made at the Inter-Allied
Conference at Brussels and drawn up by the French expert, M. Seydoux,
had been silently dropped as unsatisfying; the subsequent British
proposals made at Boulogne had been rejected for the same reason. It was
necessary, however, to make some definite proposals to Germany without
much further delay, since the treaty had laid down May 1, 1921, as the
time for a settlement. Germany was by that time to have paid a thousand
million pounds on account, and was to learn the extent, finite or
infinite, of the total bill. Mr. Lloyd George, as might have been
expected, showed much sympathy with M. Briand in his awkward position,
and agreed to a demand for reparations on a scale which was obviously
fantastic. It began, reasonably enough, with a system of annuities,
though the first figure was probably too high and the last figures can
scarcely have been meant seriously. Germany was to pay £150,000,000 a
year for the first five years; then the annual sum was to increase at
intervals for the extraordinary period of forty-two years, towards the
end of which time Germany was expected to pay annually £300,000,000, or
half as much again every year as the total indemnity exacted from France
after the war of 1870. Even that was not enough for a population which
had been sedulously fed on lies by a class of politician who at times
seem to possess among them no single sane and honest man. And an
additional payment was demanded of a yearly sum equivalent to a duty of
twelve per cent _ad valorem_ on all German exports.

Opinion in Germany was sharply divided. All they had to pay with was an
enormous deficit on the Budget, with the prospect of presently losing
the Silesian coal-mines and having prohibitive duties placed by the
Allies upon their exports. One party insisted that the Government should
make no promise which it could not expect to perform; another, that what
Germany wanted was peace, and that they had better sign anything
required of them. The first party, on the whole, carried the day. The
German delegation in London made a counter-proposal based, very
sensibly, on the idea of finding the present value of the forty-two-year
annuities and raising that sum by means of a loan; but as they worked
out the idea they favoured Germany on every detailed calculation to an
extent which they must have known to be unacceptable. Apparently they
expected a long and serious bargaining march. But, to most people's
surprise, Mr. George leapt with alacrity at the prospect of a rupture.
The proposal was rejected with every semblance of virtuous indignation.
No time was allowed for the delegation to consult the German Government.
A hurried second proposal, to pay the terms demanded for five years and
then have the matter reconsidered, was tossed aside without
consideration, and French and British troops proceeded to invade
Germany, occupy more territory, and set up a new and artificial
customs-barrier in the most unsuitable places, at which they proceeded
themselves to collect the German customs.

The plan is very expensive, and utterly unprofitable. It involves a
straining if not a breach of the treaty,[3] and it is likely, if any
untoward event occurs, to provoke a war of the most humiliating and
embittered kind--the war of a desperate and helpless population trying
to rid themselves of foreign oppressors. But it has saved M. Briand's
Government. If he had agreed to accept any German terms whatever, he
would have been upset for not exacting more. But if he marches French
and British troops into the heart of Germany no one can accuse him of
lack of spirit. So for the present all is well; and as for the future,
it is conceivable that the Germans will give way and make some
impossible promise. That will increase M. Briand's prestige. It is more
likely that they will simply sit still and let the Allied armies do
their worst. Then there will be a chance of carrying out one of the
darling aims of the French chauvinists, and annexing, or at least
separating from Germany, all the German provinces which they occupy.

[Footnote 3: The Allies are apparently acting under Part VIII, clause
18, of the treaty. This gives them the right to "take such other
measures as the respective Governments may determine to be necessary" in
case of "voluntary default" by Germany in the payment of her dues under
Part VIII (Reparations). A failure by Germany to disarm sufficiently
gives the Allies no right to increase the area of their occupation,
since the present occupation is specifically laid down in the treaty
negotiations as the means of enforcing disarmament. Nor has Germany yet
actually committed a voluntary default in the payment of her
reparations, since the first payment, £100,000,000, is not to be
completed until May 1, 1921. I am informed on high authority that the
Allied case probably rests on the point that they judge by their
debtor's manner and by statements which she has made that she intends
not to pay by May 1; according to English law this would apparently give
them some right of taking immediate action.]

In face of these lunatic proceedings the German Government has behaved
with considerable dignity and good sense, though naturally the German
newspapers are running a little wild. It has announced its intention of
appealing to the Assembly of the League of Nations, and although, not
being a member, Germany cannot herself raise the subject, it may be
taken as certain that some member will take it up on her behalf. This
produces a most critical situation.

According to the Covenant, Article III, the Assembly may be summoned to
meet "from time to time as occasion may require." But presumably it is
the Council which decides whether occasion does require it or not, and
no one can expect the Council to favour Germany's appeal. The appeal
will only be considered when the Assembly has its next regular meeting
in September. We shall then see whether the Assembly possesses the force
and courage necessary to discuss freely and, if necessary, to condemn
the actions of the two leading European Powers; or if the two can
successfully silence all criticism. For my own part I think the
discussion will take place; and that, for the first time since the war,
the voice of an impartial third party wilt be heard in discussing the
terms imposed on Germany by her conquerors. That does not mean the
realization of the "enthronement of public right on the common law of
nations," but it is one of the first steps toward it.

    *    *    *    *    *

The League of Nations is in a position to say to France: "You are afraid
of another attack by Germany; and to avert that danger you propose in
various ways to follow a policy which will plunge Europe into continued
distress. We hereby guarantee you against attack. Thirty-nine nations
at present, who will shortly be increased to fifty-one, if not more,
have signed a definite and unqualified contract to preserve your
'existing political independence and territorial integrity' against any
'external aggression'; and further, if you are attacked in such a way as
not actually to threaten your territory or independence, all the States
of the League will consider that an act of war has been committed
against themselves, will apply the complete economic boycott to your
enemy, and arrange plans for giving you immediate military support. We
offer you here a far more effective guarantee of safety than you can
possibly attain by your own diplomacy. But we demand in return that your
foreign policy shall be frankly and sincerely a League of Nations
policy; that you shall not make secret treaties, not set up inequitable
tariffs, not plot the ruin of your late enemies or any other people; but
work as a loyal member of the League with a view to the welfare of the
whole."

The League says to Germany: "You complain of the undue severity of the
treaty and the impossibility of carrying out its economic provisions.
Commissions already exist, and you have taken part in them, for
discussing these latter and fixing the terms of the reparation which you
owe. But, beyond that, if there is any clause in the treaty which
appears to any member of the League as 'threatening to disturb
international peace or the good understanding between nations upon which
peace depends,' it will, under Article XI, be brought before the League
and considered. Further, if any clause in the treaty appears to 'have
become inapplicable' or to give rise to 'international conditions which
might endanger the peace of the world,' under Article XXIII the Assembly
of the League may at any time 'advise their reconsideration.' You
complain that the terms of the present treaty were imposed upon you,
without discussion, by implacable enemies who had you at their mercy;
that you have been made a sort of outlaw nation, without freedom,
without colonies, without ships, sitting apart while the world is
administered by your enemies. But at our Assembly table you will sit as
an equal and free member, with the same rights as those who were lately
your conquerors. We submit to you that this gives you a far better
chance of improving your condition than another war could. Your lot must
be for some time a hard one. That is inevitable, and we cannot think it
unjust. You challenged the Entente to war, you staked all on victory,
and you were beaten. Now you have to make reparation. But the
recuperative power of a great nation is immense; and wherever you have
been subjected to a definitely unjust or dangerous condition, we offer
you a remedy. Wherever you may have a dispute with any other Power, we
offer you a Court of Arbitration as impartially constituted as the wit
of man could devise."

    *    *    *    *    *

At present neither party quite believes this guarantee. If they did, it
would probably be enough for them. It used to be said of Sir Edward Grey
in the Balkan Conferences that he was not only sincere; he had the power
of making other people see that he was sincere. If Europe is to be saved
from new Great Wars, the Powers of the League must first of all be
sincere in their undertakings, and next, they must convince the world in
general of their sincerity. To that subject we must return later.




