CHAPTER XI.

     SCIENCE IN RELATION TO MODERN CIVILIZATION.

     Illustration of the general influences of Science from the
     history of America.

     THE INTRODUCTION OF SCIENCE INTO EUROPE.--It passed from
     Moorish Spain to Upper Italy, and was favored by the absence
     of the popes at Avignon.--The effects of printing, of
     maritime adventure, and of the Reformation--Establishment of
     the Italian scientific societies.

     THE INTELLECTUAL INFLUENCE OF SCIENCE.--It changed the mode
     and the direction of thought in Europe.--The transactions of
     the Royal Society of London, and other scientific societies,
     furnish an illustration of this.

     THE ECONOMICAL INFLUENCE OF SCIENCE is illustrated by the
     numerous mechanical and physical inventions, made since the
     fourteenth century.--Their influence on health and domestic
     life, on the arts of peace and of war.

     Answer to the question, What has Science done for humanity?


EUROPE, at the epoch of the Reformation, furnishes us with the result of
the influences of Roman Christianity in the promotion of civilization.
America, examined in like manner at the present time, furnishes us with
an illustration of the influences of science.

SCIENCE AND CIVILIZATION. In the course of the seventeenth century a
sparse European population had settled along the western Atlantic coast.
Attracted by the cod-fishery of Newfoundland, the French had a little
colony north of the St. Lawrence; the English, Dutch, and Swedes,
occupied the shore of New England and the Middle States; some Huguenots
were living in the Carolinas. Rumors of a spring that could confer
perpetual youth--a fountain of life--had brought a few Spaniards into
Florida. Behind the fringe of villages which these adventurers had
built, lay a vast and unknown country, inhabited by wandering Indians,
whose numbers from the Gulf of Mexico to the St. Lawrence did not exceed
one hundred and eighty thousand. From them the European strangers had
learned that in those solitary regions there were fresh-water seas,
and a great river which they called the Mississippi. Some said that it
flowed through Virginia into the Atlantic, some that it passed through
Florida, some that it emptied into the Pacific, and some that it reached
the Gulf of Mexico. Parted from their native countries by the stormy
Atlantic, to cross which implied a voyage of many months, these refugees
seemed lost to the world.

But before the close of the nineteenth century the descendants of this
feeble people had become one of the great powers of the earth. They
had established a republic whose sway extended from the Atlantic to
the Pacific. With an army of more than a million men, not on paper, but
actually in the field, they had overthrown a domestic assailant.
They had maintained at sea a war-fleet of nearly seven hundred ships,
carrying five thousand guns, some of them the heaviest in the world. The
tonnage of this navy amounted to half a million. In the defense of their
national life they had expended in less than five years more than four
thousand million dollars. Their census, periodically taken, showed that
the population was doubling itself every twenty-five years; it justified
the expectation that at the close of that century it would number nearly
one hundred million souls.

KNOWLEDGE IS POWER. A silent continent had been changed into a scene of
industry; it was full of the din of machinery and the restless moving
of men. Where there had been an unbroken forest, there were hundreds of
cities and towns. To commerce were furnished in profusion some of the
most important staples, as cotton, tobacco, breadstuffs. The mines
yielded incredible quantities of gold, iron, coal. Countless churches,
colleges, and public schools, testified that a moral influence vivified
this material activity. Locomotion was effectually provided for. The
railways exceeded in aggregate length those of all Europe combined.
In 1873 the aggregate length of the European railways was sixty-three
thousand three hundred and sixty miles, that of the American was seventy
thousand six hundred and fifty miles. One of them, built across the
continent, connected the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

But not alone are these material results worthy of notice. Others of a
moral and social kind force themselves on our attention. Four million
negro slaves had been set free. Legislation, if it inclined to the
advantage of any class, inclined to that of the poor. Its intention was
to raise them from poverty, and better their lot. A career was open
to talent, and that without any restraint. Every thing was possible to
intelligence and industry. Many of the most important public offices
were filled by men who had risen from the humblest walks of life.
If there was not social equality, as there never can be in rich and
prosperous communities, there was civil equality, rigorously maintained.

It may perhaps be said that much of this material prosperity arose from
special conditions, such as had never occurred in the case of any people
before, There was a vast, an open theatre of action, a whole continent
ready for any who chose to take possession of it. Nothing more than
courage and industry was needed to overcome Nature, and to seize the
abounding advantages she offered.

ILLUSTRATIONS FROM AMERICAN HISTORY. But must not men be animated by a
great principle who successfully transform the primeval solitudes into
an abode of civilization, who are not dismayed by gloomy forests, or
rivers, mountains, or frightful deserts, who push their conquering
way in the course of a century across a continent, and hold it in
subjection? Let us contrast with this the results of the invasion of
Mexico and Peru by the Spaniards, who in those countries overthrew
a wonderful civilization, in many respects superior to their own--a
civilization that had been accomplished without iron and gunpowder--a
civilization resting on an agriculture that had neither horse, nor
ox, nor plough. The Spaniards had a clear base to start from, and
no obstruction whatever in their advance. They ruined all that the
aboriginal children of America had accomplished. Millions of those
unfortunates were destroyed by their cruelty. Nations that for
many centuries had been living in contentment and prosperity, under
institutions shown by their history to be suitable to them, were plunged
into anarchy; the people fell into a baneful superstition, and a
greater part of their landed and other property found its way into the
possession of the Roman Church.

I have selected the foregoing illustration, drawn from American history,
in preference to many others that might have been taken from European,
because it furnishes an instance of the operation of the acting
principle least interfered with by extraneous conditions. European
political progress is less simple than American.

QUARREL BETWEEN FRANCE AND THE PAPACY. Before considering its manner
of action, and its results, I will briefly relate how the scientific
principle found an introduction into Europe.

INTRODUCTION OF SCIENCE INTO EUROPE. Not only had the Crusades, for many
years, brought vast sums to Rome, extorted from the fears or the piety
of every Christian nation; they had also increased the papal power to a
most dangerous extent. In the dual governments everywhere prevailing in
Europe, the spiritual had obtained the mastery; the temporal was little
better than its servant.

From all quarters, and under all kinds of pretenses, streams of money
were steadily flowing into Italy. The temporal princes found that there
were left for them inadequate and impoverished revenues. Philip the
Fair, King of France (A.D. 1300), not only determined to check this
drain from his dominions, by prohibiting the export of gold and
silver without his license; he also resolved that the clergy and the
ecclesiastical estates should pay their share of taxes to him.
This brought on a mortal contest with the papacy. The king was
excommunicated, and, in retaliation, he accused the pope, Boniface
VIII., of atheism; demanding that he should be tried by a general
council. He sent some trusty persons into Italy, who seized Boniface in
his palace at Anagni, and treated him with so much severity, that in a
few days he died. The succeeding pontiff, Benedict XI., was poisoned.

The French king was determined that the papacy should be purified and
reformed; that it should no longer be the appanage of a few Italian
families, who were dexterously transmuting the credulity of Europe into
coin--that French influence should prevail in it. He Therefore came to
an understanding with the cardinals; a French archbishop was elevated
to the pontificate; he took the name of Clement V. The papal court was
removed to Avignon, in France, and Rome was abandoned as the metropolis
of Christianity.

MOORISH SCIENCE INTRODUCED THROUGH FRANCE. Seventy years elapsed before
the papacy was restored to the Eternal City (A.D. 1376). The diminution
of its influence in the peninsula, that had thus occurred, gave
opportunity for the memorable intellectual movement which soon
manifested itself in the great commercial cities of Upper Italy.
Contemporaneously, also, there were other propitious events. The result
of the Crusades had shaken the faith of all Christendom. In an age when
the test of the ordeal of battle was universally accepted, those wars
had ended in leaving the Holy Land in the hands of the Saracens; the
many thousand Christian warriors who had returned from them did not
hesitate to declare that they had found their antagonists not such as
had been pictured by the Church, but valiant, courteous, just. Through
the gay cities of the South of France a love of romantic literature
had been spreading; the wandering troubadours had been singing their
songs--songs far from being restricted to ladye-love and feats of war;
often their burden was the awful atrocities that had been perpetrated
by papal authority--the religious massacres of Languedoc; often their
burden was the illicit amours of the clergy. From Moorish Spain the
gentle and gallant idea of chivalry had been brought, and with it the
noble sentiment of "personal honor," destined in the course of time to
give a code of its own to Europe.

EFFECT OF THE GREAT SCHISM. The return of the papacy to Rome was far
from restoring the influence of the popes over the Italian Peninsula.
More than two generations had passed away since their departure, and,
had they come back even in their original strength, they could not
have resisted the intellectual progress that had been made during their
absence. The papacy, however, came back not to rule, but to be divided
against itself, to encounter the Great Schism. Out of its dissensions
emerged two rival popes; eventually there were three, each pressing
his claims upon the religious, each cursing his rival. A sentiment
of indignation soon spread all over Europe, a determination that the
shameful scenes which were then enacting should be ended. How could the
dogma of a Vicar of God upon earth, the dogma of an infallible pope,
be sustained in presence of such scandals? Herein lay the cause of that
resolution of the ablest ecclesiastics of those times (which, alas for
Europe! could not be carried into effect), that a general council should
be made the permanent religious parliament of the whole continent,
with the pope as its chief executive officer. Had that intention been
accomplished, there would have been at this day no conflict between
science and religion; the convulsion of the Reformation would have been
avoided; there would have been no jarring Protestant sects. But the
Councils of Constance and Basle failed to shake off the Italian yoke,
failed to attain that noble result.

Catholicism was thus weakening; as its leaden pressure lifted, the
intellect of man expanded. The Saracens had invented the method of
making paper from linen rags and from cotton. The Venetians had brought
from China to Europe the art of printing. The former of these inventions
was essential to the latter. Hence forth, without the possibility of a
check, there was intellectual intercommunication among all men.

INVENTION OF PRINTING. The invention of printing was a severe blow to
Catholicism, which had, previously, enjoyed the inappreciable advantage
of a monopoly of intercommunication. From its central seat, orders could
be disseminated through all the ecclesiastical ranks, and fulminated
through the pulpits. This monopoly and the amazing power it conferred
were destroyed by the press. In modern times, the influence of the
pulpit has become insignificant. The pulpit has been thoroughly
supplanted by the newspaper.

Yet, Catholicism did not yield its ancient advantage without a struggle.
As soon as the inevitable tendency of the new art was detected, a
restraint upon it, under the form of a censorship, was attempted. It was
made necessary to have a permit, in order to print a book. For this, it
was needful that the work should have been read, examined, and approved
by the clergy. There must be a certificate that it was a godly and
orthodox book. A bull of excommunication was issued in 1501, by
Alexander VI., against printers who should publish pernicious doctrines.
In 1515 the Lateran Council ordered that no books should be printed but
such as had been inspected by the ecclesiastical censors, under pain of
excommunication and fine; the censors being directed "to take the utmost
care that nothing should be printed contrary to the orthodox faith."
There was thus a dread of religious discussion; a terror lest truth
should emerge.

But these frantic struggles of the powers of ignorance were unavailing.
Intellectual intercommunication among men was secured. It culminated in
the modern newspaper, which daily gives its contemporaneous intelligence
from all parts of the world. Reading became a common occupation. In
ancient society that art was possessed by comparatively few persons.
Modern society owes some of its most striking characteristics to this
change.

EFFECTS OF MARITIME ENTERPRISE. Such was the result of bringing into
Europe the manufacture of paper and the printing-press. In like manner
the introduction of the mariner's compass was followed by imposing
material and moral effects. These were--the discovery of America in
consequence of the rivalry of the Venetians and Genoese about the India
trade; the doubling of Africa by De Gama; and the circumnavigation of
the earth by Magellan. With respect to the last, the grandest of
all human undertakings, it is to be remembered that Catholicism had
irrevocably committed itself to the dogma of a flat earth, with the
sky as the floor of heaven, and hell in the under-world. Some of the
Fathers, whose authority was held to be paramount, had, as we have
previously said, furnished philosophical and religious arguments against
the globular form. The controversy had now suddenly come to an end--the
Church was found to be in error.

The correction of that geographical error was by no means the only
important result that followed the three great voyages. The spirit of
Columbus, De Gama, Magellan, diffused itself among all the enterprising
men of Western Europe. Society had been hitherto living under the dogma
of "loyalty to the king, obedience to the Church." It had therefore been
living for others, not for itself. The political effect of that dogma
had culminated in the Crusades. Countless thousands had perished in
wars that could bring them no reward, and of which the result had been
conspicuous failure. Experience had revealed the fact that the only
gainers were the pontiffs, cardinals, and other ecclesiastics in Rome,
and the shipmasters of Venice. But, when it became known that the
wealth of Mexico, Peru, and India, might be shared by any one who had
enterprise and courage, the motives that had animated the restless
populations of Europe suddenly changed. The story of Cortez and Pizarro
found enthusiastic listeners everywhere. Maritime adventure supplanted
religious enthusiasm.

If we attempt to isolate the principle that lay at the basis of the
wonderful social changes that now took place, we may recognize it
without difficulty. Heretofore each man had dedicated his services to
his superior--feudal or ecclesiastical; now he had resolved to gather
the fruits of his exertions himself. Individualism was becoming
predominant, loyalty was declining into a sentiment. We shall now see
how it was with the Church.

INDIVIDUALISM. Individualism rests on the principle that a man shall
be his own master, that he shall have liberty to form his own opinions,
freedom to carry into effect his resolves. He is, therefore, ever
brought into competition with his fellow-men. His life is a display of
energy.

To remove the stagnation of centuries front European life, to vivify
suddenly what had hitherto been an inert mass, to impart to it
individualism, was to bring it into conflict with the influences
that had been oppressing it. All through the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries uneasy strugglings gave a premonition of what was coming.
In the early part of the sixteenth (1517), the battle was joined.
Individualism found its embodiment in a sturdy German monk, and
therefore, perhaps necessarily, asserted its rights under theological
forms. There were some preliminary skirmishes about indulgences and
other minor matters, but very soon the real cause of dispute came
plainly into view. Martin Luther refused to think as he was ordered to
do by his ecclesiastical superiors at Rome; he asserted that he had an
inalienable right to interpret the Bible for himself.

At her first glance, Rome saw nothing in Martin Luther but a vulgar,
insubordinate, quarrelsome monk. Could the Inquisition have laid hold of
him, it would have speedily disposed of his affair; but, as the conflict
went on, it was discovered that Martin was not standing alone. Many
thousands of men, as resolute as himself, were coming up to his support;
and, while he carried on the combat with writings and words, they made
good his propositions with the sword.

THE REFORMATION. The vilification which was poured on Luther and his
doings was so bitter as to be ludicrous. It was declared that his father
was not his mother's husband, but an impish incubus, who had deluded
her; that, after ten years' struggling with his conscience, he had
become an atheist; that he denied the immortality of the soul; that
he had composed hymns in honor of drunkenness, a vice to which he
was unceasingly addicted; that he blasphemed the Holy Scriptures, and
particularly Moses; that he did not believe a word of what he preached;
that he had called the Epistle of St. James a thing of straw; and, above
all, that the Reformation was no work of his, but, in reality, was due
to a certain astrological position of the stars. It was, however, a
vulgar saying among the Roman ecclesiastics that Erasmus laid the egg of
the Reformation, and Luther hatched it.

Rome at first made the mistake of supposing that this was nothing more
than a casual outbreak; she failed to discern that it was, in fact, the
culmination of an internal movement which for two centuries had been
going on in Europe, and which had been hourly gathering force; that,
had there been nothing else, the existence of three popes--three
obediences--would have compelled men to think, to deliberate, to
conclude for themselves. The Councils of Constance and Basle taught them
that there was a higher power than the popes. The long and bloody wars
that ensued were closed by the Peace of Westphalia; and then it was
found that Central and Northern Europe had cast off the intellectual
tyranny of Rome, that individualism had carried its point, and had
established the right of every man to think for himself.

DECOMPOSITION OF PROTESTANTISM. But it was impossible that the
establishment of this right of private judgment should end with the
rejection of Catholicism. Early in the movement some of the most
distinguished men, such as Erasmus, who had been among its first
promoters, abandoned it. They perceived that many of the Reformers
entertained a bitter dislike of learning, and they were afraid of
being brought under bigoted caprice. The Protestant party, having thus
established its existence by dissent and separation, must, in its turn,
submit to the operation of the same principles. A decomposition into
many subordinate sects was inevitable. And these, now that they had no
longer any thing to fear from their great Italian adversary, commenced
partisan warfares on each other. As, in different countries, first one
and then another sect rose to power, it stained itself with cruelties
perpetrated upon its competitors. The mortal retaliations that had
ensued, when, in the chances of the times, the oppressed got the better
of their oppressors, convinced the contending sectarians that they must
concede to their competitors what they claimed for themselves; and thus,
from their broils and their crimes, the great principle of toleration
extricated itself. But toleration is only an intermediate stage; and,
as the intellectual decomposition of Protestantism keeps going on, that
transitional condition will lead to a higher and nobler state--the hope
of philosophy in all past ages of the world--a social state in which
there shall be unfettered freedom for thought. Toleration, except
when extorted by fear, can only come from those who are capable of
entertaining and respecting other opinions than their own. It can
therefore only come from philosophy. History teaches us only too plainly
that fanaticism is stimulated by religion, and neutralized or eradicated
by philosophy.

TOLERATION. The avowed object of the Reformation was, to remove from
Christianity the pagan ideas and pagan rites engrafted upon it by
Constantine and his successors, in their attempt to reconcile the Roman
Empire to it. The Protestants designed to bring it back to its primitive
purity; and hence, while restoring the ancient doctrines, they cast out
of it all such practices as the adoration of the Virgin Mary and
the invocation of saints. The Virgin Mary, we are assured by the
Evangelists, had accepted the duties of married life, and borne to her
husband several children. In the prevailing idolatry, she had ceased to
be regarded as the carpenter's wife; she had become the queen of heaven,
and the mother of God.

DA VINCI. The science of the Arabians followed the invading track of
their literature, which had come into Christendom by two routes--the
south of France, and Sicily. Favored by the exile of the popes to
Avignon, and by the Great Schism, it made good its foothold in Upper
Italy. The Aristotelian or Inductive philosophy, clad in the Saracenic
costume that Averroes had given it, made many secret and not a few open
friends. It found many minds eager to receive and able to appreciate
it. Among these were Leonardo da Vinci, who proclaimed the fundamental
principle that experiment and observation are the only reliable
foundations of reasoning in science, that experiment is the only
trustworthy interpreter of Nature, and is essential to the ascertainment
of laws. He showed that the action of two perpendicular forces upon a
point is the same as that denoted by the diagonal of a rectangle, of
which they represent the sides. From this the passage to the proposition
of oblique forces was very easy. This proposition was rediscovered by
Stevinus, a century later, and applied by him to the explanation of the
mechanical powers. Da Vinci gave a clear exposition of the theory of
forces applied obliquely on a lever, discovered the laws of friction
subsequently demonstrated by Amontons, and understood the principle of
virtual velocities. He treated of the conditions of descent of bodies
along inclined planes and circular arcs, invented the camera-obscura,
discussed correctly several physiological problems, and foreshadowed
some of the great conclusions of modern geology, such as the nature
of fossil remains, and the elevation of continents. He explained the
earth-light reflected by the moon. With surprising versatility of genius
he excelled as a sculptor, architect, engineer; was thoroughly versed in
the astronomy, anatomy, and chemistry of his times. In painting, he
was the rival of Michel Angelo; in a competition between them, he was
considered to have established his superiority. His "Last Supper," on
the wall of the refectory of the Dominican convent of Sta. Maria delle
Grazie, is well known, from the numerous engravings and copies that have
been made of it.

ITALIAN SCIENTIFIC SOCIETIES. Once firmly established in the north of
Italy, Science soon extended her sway over the entire peninsula. The
increasing number of her devotees is indicated by the rise and rapid
multiplication of learned societies. These were reproductions of the
Moorish ones that had formerly existed in Granada and Cordova. As if
to mark by a monument the track through which civilizing influences had
come, the Academy of Toulouse, founded in 1345, has survived to our
own times. It represented, however, the gay literature of the south of
France, and was known under the fanciful title of "the Academy of Floral
Games." The first society for the promotion of physical science, the
Academia Secretorum Naturae, was founded at Naples, by Baptista
Porta. It was, as Tiraboschi relates, dissolved by the ecclesiastical
authorities. The Lyncean was founded by Prince Frederic Cesi at Rome;
its device plainly indicated its intention: a lynx, with its eyes turned
upward toward heaven, tearing a triple-headed Cerberus with its claws.
The Accademia del Cimento, established at Florence, 1657, held its
meetings in the ducal palace. It lasted ten years, and was then
suppressed at the instance of the papal government; as an equivalent,
the brother of the grand-duke was made a cardinal. It numbered many
great men, such as Torricelli and Castelli, among its members. The
condition of admission into it was an abjuration of all faith, and a
resolution to inquire into the truth. These societies extricated the
cultivators of science from the isolation in which they had hitherto
lived, and, by promoting their intercommunication and union, imparted
activity and strength to them all.

Returning now from this digression, this historical sketch of the
circumstances under which science was introduced into Europe, I pass to
the consideration of its manner of action and its results.

INTELLECTUAL INFLUENCE OF SCIENCE. The influence of science on modern
civilization has been twofold: 1. Intellectual; 2. Economical. Under
these titles we may conveniently consider it.

Intellectually it overthrew the authority of tradition. It refused to
accept, unless accompanied by proof, the dicta of any master, no matter
how eminent or honored his name. The conditions of admission into
the Italian Accademia del Cimento, and the motto adopted by the Royal
Society of London, illustrate the position it took in this respect.

It rejected the supernatural and miraculous as evidence in physical
discussions. It abandoned sign-proof such as the Jews in old days
required, and denied that a demonstration can be given through an
illustration of something else, thus casting aside the logic that had
been in vogue for many centuries.

In physical inquiries, its mode of procedure was, to test the value of
any proposed hypothesis, by executing computations in any special case
on the basis or principle of that hypothesis, and then, by performing an
experiment or making an observation, to ascertain whether the result
of these agreed with the result of the computation. If it did not, the
hypothesis was to be rejected.

We may here introduce an illustration or two of this mode of procedure:

THEORIES OF GRAVITATION AND PHLOGISTON. Newton, suspecting that the
influence of the earth's attraction, gravity, may extend as far as the
moon, and be the force that causes her to revolve in her orbit round the
earth, calculated that, by her motion in her orbit, she was deflected
from the tangent thirteen feet every minute; but, by ascertaining the
space through which bodies would fall in one minute at the earth's
surface, and supposing it to be diminished in the ratio of the inverse
square, it appeared that the attraction at the moon's orbit would draw
a body through more than fifteen feet. He, therefore, for the time,
considered his hypothesis as unsustained. But it so happened that Picard
shortly afterward executed more correctly a new measurement of a degree;
this changed the estimated magnitude of the earth, and the distance of
the moon, which was measured in earth-semidiameters. Newton now renewed
his computation, and, as I have related on a previous page, as it drew
to a close, foreseeing that a coincidence was about to be established,
was so much agitated that he was obliged to ask a friend to complete it.
The hypothesis was sustained.

A second instance will sufficiently illustrate the method under
consideration. It is presented by the chemical theory of phlogiston.
Stahl, the author of this theory, asserted that there is a principle of
inflammability, to which he gave the name phlogiston, having the quality
of uniting with substances. Thus, when what we now term a metallic oxide
was united to it, a metal was produced; and, if the phlogiston were
withdrawn, the metal passed back into its earthy or oxidized state. On
this principle, then, the metals were compound bodies, earths combined
with phlogiston.

SCIENCE AND ECCLESIASTICISM. But during the eighteenth century the
balance was introduced as an instrument of chemical research. Now, if
the phlogistic hypothesis be true, it would follow that a metal should
be the heavier, its oxide the lighter body, for the former contains
something--phlogiston--that has been added to the latter. But, on
weighing a portion of any metal, and also the oxide producible from it,
the latter proves to be the heavier, and here the phlogistic hypothesis
fails. Still further, on continuing the investigation, it may be shown
that the oxide or calx, as it used to be called, has become heavier by
combining with one of the ingredients of the air.

To Lavoisier is usually attributed this test experiment; but the fact
that the weight of a metal increases by calcination was established
by earlier European experimenters, and, indeed, was well known to the
Arabian chemists. Lavoisier, however, was the first to recognize its
great importance. In his hands it produced a revolution in chemistry.

The abandonment of the phlogistic theory is an illustration of the
readiness with which scientific hypotheses are surrendered, when found
to be wanting in accordance with facts. Authority and tradition pass for
nothing. Every thing is settled by an appeal to Nature. It is assumed
that the answers she gives to a practical interrogation will ever be
true.

Comparing now the philosophical principles on which science was
proceeding, with the principles on which ecclesiasticism rested, we see
that, while the former repudiated tradition, to the latter it was the
main support while the former insisted on the agreement of calculation
and observation, or the correspondence of reasoning and fact, the latter
leaned upon mysteries; while the former summarily rejected its own
theories, if it saw that they could not be coordinated with Nature, the
latter found merit in a faith that blindly accepted the inexplicable, a
satisfied contemplation of "things above reason." The alienation between
the two continually increased. On one side there was a sentiment of
disdain, on the other a sentiment of hatred. Impartial witnesses on all
hands perceived that science was rapidly undermining ecclesiasticism.

MATHEMATICS. Mathematics had thus become the great instrument of
scientific research, it had become the instrument of scientific
reasoning. In one respect it may be said that it reduced the operations
of the mind to a mechanical process, for its symbols often saved the
labor of thinking. The habit of mental exactness it encouraged extended
to other branches of thought, and produced an intellectual revolution.
No longer was it possible to be satisfied with miracle-proof, or the
logic that had been relied upon throughout the middle ages. Not only did
it thus influence the manner of thinking, it also changed the direction
of thought. Of this we may be satisfied by comparing the subjects
considered in the transactions of the various learned societies with the
discussions that had occupied the attention of the middle ages.

But the use of mathematics was not limited to the verification of
theories; as above indicated, it also furnished a means of predicting
what had hitherto been unobserved. In this it offered a counterpart
to the prophecies of ecclesiasticism. The discovery of Neptune is
an instance of the kind furnished by astronomy, and that of conical
refraction by the optical theory of undulations.

But, while this great instrument led to such a wonderful development in
natural science, it was itself undergoing development--improvement. Let
us in a few lines recall its progress.

The germ of algebra may be discerned in the works of Diophantus of
Alexandria, who is supposed to have lived in the second century of our
era. In that Egyptian school Euclid had formerly collected the great
truths of geometry, and arranged them in logical sequence. Archimedes,
in Syracuse, had attempted the solution of the higher problems by the
method of exhaustions. Such was the tendency of things that, had the
patronage of science been continued, algebra would inevitably have been
invented.

To the Arabians we owe our knowledge of the rudiments of algebra; we
owe to them the very name under which this branch of mathematics passes.
They had carefully added, to the remains of the Alexandrian School,
improvements obtained in India, and had communicated to the subject
a certain consistency and form. The knowledge of algebra, as they
possessed it, was first brought into Italy about the beginning of the
thirteenth century. It attracted so little attention, that nearly three
hundred years elapsed before any European work on the subject appeared.
In 1496 Paccioli published his book entitled "Arte Maggiore," or
"Alghebra." In 1501, Cardan, of Milan, gave a method for the solution of
cubic equations; other improvements were contributed by Scipio Ferreo,
1508, by Tartalea, by Vieta. The Germans now took up the subject. At
this time the notation was in an imperfect state.

The publication of the Geometry of Descartes, which contains the
application of algebra to the definition and investigation of curve
lines (1637), constitutes an epoch in the history of the mathematical
sciences. Two years previously, Cavalieri's work on Indivisibles had
appeared. This method was improved by Torricelli and others. The way was
now open, for the development of the Infinitesimal Calculus, the method
of Fluxions of Newton, and the Differential and Integral Calculus
of Leibnitz. Though in his possession many years previously, Newton
published nothing on Fluxions until 1704; the imperfect notation he
employed retarded very much the application of his method. Meantime, on
the Continent, very largely through the brilliant solutions of some of
the higher problems, accomplished by the Bernouillis, the Calculus of
Leibnitz was universally accepted, and improved by many mathematicians.
An extraordinary development of the science now took place, and
continued throughout the century. To the Binomial theorem, previously
discovered by Newton, Taylor now added, in his "Method of Increments,"
the celebrated theorem that bears his name. This was in 1715. The
Calculus of Partial Differences was introduced by Euler in 1734. It was
extended by D'Alembert, and was followed by that of Variations, by Euler
and Lagrange, and by the method of Derivative Functions, by Lagrange, in
1772.

But it was not only in Italy, in Germany, in England, in France, that
this great movement in mathematics was witnessed; Scotland had added a
new gem to the intellectual diadem with which her brow is encircled,
by the grand invention of Logarithms, by Napier of Merchiston. It is
impossible to give any adequate conception of the scientific importance
of this incomparable invention. The modern physicist and astronomer
will most cordially agree with Briggs, the Professor of Mathematics in
Gresham College, in his exclamation: "I never saw a book that pleased
me better, and that made I me more wonder!" Not without reason did the
immortal Kepler regard Napier "to be the greatest man of his age, in the
department to which he had applied his abilities." Napier died in 1617.
It is no exaggeration to say that this invention, by shortening the
labors, doubled the life of the astronomer.

But here I must check myself. I must remember that my present purpose is
not to give the history of mathematics, but to consider what science has
done for the advancement of human civilization. And now, at once, recurs
the question, How is it that the Church produced no geometer in her
autocratic reign of twelve hundred years?

With respect to pure mathematics this remark may be made: Its
cultivation does not demand appliances that are beyond the reach of
most individuals. Astronomy must have its observatory, chemistry its
laboratory; but mathematics asks only personal disposition and a
few books. No great expenditures are called for, nor the services
of assistants. One would think that nothing could be more congenial,
nothing more delightful, even in the retirement of monastic life.

Shall we answer with Eusebius, "It is through contempt of such useless
labor that we think so little of these matters; we turn our souls to
the exercise of better things?" Better things! What can be better than
absolute truth? Are mysteries, miracles, lying impostures, better? It
was these that stood in the way!

The ecclesiastical authorities had recognized, from the outset of this
scientific invasion, that the principles it was disseminating were
absolutely irreconcilable with the current theology. Directly and
indirectly, they struggled against it. So great was their detestation
of experimental science, that they thought they had gained a great
advantage when the Accademia del Cimento was suppressed. Nor was the
sentiment restricted to Catholicism. When the Royal Society of London
was founded, theological odium was directed against it with so much
rancor that, doubtless, it would have been extinguished, had not King
Charles II. given it his open and avowed support. It was accused of
an intention of "destroying the established religion, of injuring the
universities, and of upsetting ancient and solid learning."

THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. We have only to turn over the pages of its
Transactions to discern how much this society has done for the progress
of humanity. It was incorporated in 1662, and has interested itself in
all the great scientific movements and discoveries that have since been
made. It published Newton's "Principia;" it promoted Halley's voyage,
the first scientific expedition undertaken by any government; it made
experiments on the transfusion of blood, and accepted Harvey's discovery
of the circulation. The encouragement it gave to inoculation led Queen
Caroline to beg six condemned criminals for experiment, and then to
submit her own children to that operation. Through its encouragement
Bradley accomplished his great discovery, the aberration of the fixed
stars, and that of the nutation of the earth's axis; to these two
discoveries, Delambre says, we owe the exactness of modern astronomy. It
promoted the improvement of the thermometer, the measure of temperature,
and in Harrison's watch, the chronometer, the measure of time. Through
it the Gregorian Calendar was introduced into England, in 1752, against
a violent religious opposition. Some of its Fellows were pursued through
the streets by an ignorant and infuriated mob, who believed it had
robbed them of eleven days of their lives; it was found necessary to
conceal the name of Father Walmesley, a learned Jesuit, who had taken
deep interest in the matter; and, Bradley happening to die during the
commotion, it was declared that he had suffered a judgment from Heaven
for his crime!

THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. If I were to attempt to do justice to the
merits of this great society, I should have to devote many pages, to
such subjects as the achromatic telescope of Dollond; the dividing
engine of Ramsden, which first gave precision to astronomical
observations, the measurement of a degree on the earth's surface by
Mason and Dixon; the expeditions of Cook in connection with the transit
of Venus; his circumnavigation of the earth; his proof that scurvy,
the curse of long sea-voyages, may be avoided by the use of vegetable
substances; the polar expeditions; the determination of the density of
the earth by Maskelyne's experiments at Scheliallion, and by those
of Cavendish; the discovery of the planet Uranus by Herschel; the
composition of water by Cavendish and Watt; the determination of the
difference of longitude between London and Paris; the invention of
the voltaic pile; the surveys of the heavens by the Herschels;
the development of the principle of interference by Young, and his
establishment of the undulatory theory of light; the ventilation
of jails and other buildings; the introduction of gas for city
illumination; the ascertainment of the length of the seconds-pendulum;
the measurement of the variations of gravity in different latitudes; the
operations to ascertain the curvature of the earth; the polar expedition
of Ross; the invention of the safety-lamp by Davy, and his decomposition
of the alkalies and earths; the electro-magnetic discoveries of Oersted
and Faraday; the calculating-engines of Babbage; the measures taken
at the instance of Humboldt for the establishment of many magnetic
observatories; the verification of contemporaneous magnetic disturbances
over the earth's surface. But it is impossible, in the limited space at
my disposal, to give even so little as a catalogue of its Transactions.
Its spirit was identical with that which animated the Accademia del
Cimento, and its motto accordingly was "Nullius in Verba." It proscribed
superstition, and permitted only calculation, observation, and
experiment.

INFLUENCE OF SCIENCE. Not for a moment must it be supposed that in these
great attempts, these great Successes, the Royal Society stood alone.
In all the capitals of Europe there were Academies, Institutes, or
Societies, equal in distinction, and equally successful in promoting
human knowledge and modern civilization.


THE ECONOMICAL INFLUENCES OF SCIENCE.

The scientific study of Nature tends not only to correct and ennoble
the intellectual conceptions of man; it serves also to ameliorate his
physical condition. It perpetually suggests to him the inquiry, how he
may make, by their economical application, ascertained facts subservient
to his use.

The investigation of principles is quickly followed by practical
inventions. This, indeed, is the characteristic feature of our times. It
has produced a great revolution in national policy.

In former ages wars were made for the procuring of slaves. A conqueror
transported entire populations, and extorted from them forced labor, for
it was only by human labor that human labor could be relieved. But when
it was discovered that physical agents and mechanical combinations could
be employed to incomparably greater advantage, public policy underwent a
change; when it was recognized that the application of a new principle,
or the invention of a new machine, was better than the acquisition of an
additional slave, peace became preferable to war. And not only so, but
nations possessing great slave or serf populations, as was the care in
America and Russia, found that considerations of humanity were supported
by considerations of interest, and set their bondmen free.

SCIENTIFIC INVENTIONS. Thus we live in a period of which a
characteristic is the supplanting of human and animal labor by machines.
Its mechanical inventions have wrought a social revolution. We appeal
to the natural, not to the supernatural, for the accomplishment of our
ends. It is with the "modern civilization" thus arising that Catholicism
refuses to be reconciled. The papacy loudly proclaims its inflexible
repudiation of this state of affairs, and insists on a restoration of
the medieval condition of things.

That a piece of amber, when rubbed, will attract and then repel light
bodies, was a fact known six hundred years before Christ. It remained an
isolated, uncultivated fact, a mere trifle, until sixteen hundred years
after Christ. Then dealt with by the scientific methods of mathematical
discussion and experiment, and practical application made of the result,
it has permitted men to communicate instantaneously with each other
across continents and under oceans. It has centralized the world. By
enabling the sovereign authority to transmit its mandates without
regard to distance or to time, it has revolutionized statesmanship and
condensed political power.

In the Museum of Alexandria there was a machine invented by Hero, the
mathematician, a little more than one hundred years before Christ. It
revolved by the agency of steam, and was of the form that we should
now call a reaction-engine. This, the germ of one of the most important
inventions ever made, was remembered as a mere curiosity for seventeen
hundred years.

Chance had nothing to do with the invention of the modern steam-engine.
It was the product of meditation and experiment. In the middle of the
seventeenth century several mechanical engineers attempted to utilize
the properties of steam; their labors were brought to perfection by Watt
in the middle of the eighteenth.

The steam-engine quickly became the drudge of civilization. It performed
the work of many millions of men. It gave, to those who would have been
condemned to a life of brutal toil, the opportunity of better pursuits.
He who formerly labored might now think.

Its earliest application was in such operations as pumping, wherein mere
force is required. Soon, however, it vindicated its delicacy of touch
in the industrial arts of spinning and weaving. It created vast
manufacturing establishments, and supplied clothing for the world. It
changed the industry of nations.

In its application, first to the navigation of rivers, and then to the
navigation of the ocean, it more than quadrupled the speed that had
heretofore been attained. Instead of forty days being requisite for
the passage, the Atlantic might now be crossed in eight. But, in land
transportation, its power was most strikingly displayed. The admirable
invention of the locomotive enabled men to travel farther in less than
an hour than they formerly could have done in more than a day.

The locomotive has not only enlarged the field of human activity, but,
by diminishing space, it has increased the capabilities of human life.
In the swift transportation of manufactured goods and agricultural
products, it has become a most efficient incentive to human industry

The perfection of ocean steam-navigation was greatly promoted by the
invention of the chronometer, which rendered it possible to find
with accuracy the place of a ship at sea. The great drawback on the
advancement of science in the Alexandrian School was the want of an
instrument for the measurement of time, and one for the measurement of
temperature--the chronometer and the thermometer; indeed, the invention
of the latter is essential to that of the former. Clepsydras, or
water-clocks, had been tried, but they were deficient in accuracy. Of
one of them, ornamented with the signs of the zodiac, and destroyed by
certain primitive Christians, St. Polycarp significantly remarked, "In
all these monstrous demons is seen an art hostile to God." Not until
about 1680 did the chronometer begin to approach accuracy. Hooke, the
contemporary of Newton, gave it the balance-wheel, with the spiral
spring, and various escapements in succession were devised, such as the
anchor, the dead-beat, the duplex, the remontoir. Provisions for the
variation of temperature were introduced. It was brought to perfection
eventually by Harrison and Arnold, in their hands becoming an accurate
measure of the flight of time. To the invention of the chronometer
must be added that of the reflecting sextant by Godfrey. This permitted
astronomical observations to be made, notwithstanding the motion of a
ship.

Improvements in ocean navigation are exercising a powerful influence on
the distribution of mankind. They are increasing the amount and altering
the character of colonization.

DOMESTIC IMPROVEMENT. But not alone have these great discoveries and
inventions, the offspring of scientific investigation, changed the
lot of the human race; very many minor ones, perhaps individually
insignificant, have in their aggregate accomplished surprising effects.
The commencing cultivation of science in the fourteenth century gave
a wonderful stimulus to inventive talent, directed mainly to useful
practical results; and this, subsequently, was greatly encouraged by the
system of patents, which secure to the originator a reasonable portion
of the benefits of his skill. It is sufficient to refer in the most
cursory manner to a few of these improvements; we appreciate at once how
much they have done. The introduction of the saw-mill gave wooden floors
to houses, banishing those of gypsum, tile, or stone; improvements
cheapening the manufacture of glass gave windows, making possible the
warming of apartments. However, it was not until the sixteenth century
that glazing could be well done. The cutting of glass by the diamond
was then introduced. The addition of chimneys purified the atmosphere
of dwellings, smoky and sooty as the huts of savages; it gave that
indescribable blessing of northern homes--a cheerful fireside. Hitherto
a hole in the roof for the escape of the smoke, a pit in the midst of
the floor to contain the fuel, and to be covered with a lid when the
curfew-bell sounded or night came, such had been the cheerless and
inadequate means of warming.

MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENTS. Though not without a bitter resistance on
the part of the clergy, men began to think that pestilences are not
punishments inflicted by God on society for its religious shortcomings,
but the physical consequences of filth and wretchedness; that the proper
mode of avoiding them is not by praying to the saints, but by insuring
personal and municipal cleanliness. In the twelfth century it was
found necessary to pave the streets of Paris, the stench in them was so
dreadful At once dysenteries and spotted fever diminished; a sanitary
condition approaching that of the Moorish cities of Spain, which had
been paved for centuries, was attained. In that now beautiful metropolis
it was forbidden to keep swine, an ordinance resented by the monks
of the abbey of St. Anthony, who demanded that the pigs of that saint
should go where they chose; the government was obliged to compromise the
matter by requiring that bells should be fastened to the animals' necks.
King Philip, the son of Louis the Fat, had been killed by his horse
stumbling over a sow. Prohibitions were published against throwing slops
out of the windows. In 1870 an eye-witness, the author of this book,
at the close of the pontifical rule in Rome, found that, in walking the
ordure-defiled streets of that city, it was more necessary to inspect
the earth than to contemplate the heavens, in order to preserve personal
purity. Until the beginning of the seventeenth century, the streets of
Berlin were never swept. There was a law that every countryman, who came
to market with a cart, should carry back a load of dirt!

Paving was followed by attempts, often of an imperfect kind, at
the construction of drains and sewers. It had become obvious to all
reflecting men that these were necessary to the preservation of health,
not only in towns, but in isolated houses. Then followed the lighting
of the public thoroughfares. At first houses facing the streets were
compelled to have candles or lamps in their windows; next the system
that had been followed with so much advantage in Cordova and Granada--of
having public lamps--was tried, but this was not brought to perfection
until the present century, when lighting by gas was invented.
Contemporaneously with public lamps were improved organizations for
night-watchmen and police.

By the sixteenth century, mechanical inventions and manufacturing
improvements were exercising a conspicuous influence on domestic and
social life. There were looking-glasses and clocks on the walls, mantels
over the fireplaces. Though in many districts the kitchen-fire was still
supplied with turf, the use of coal began to prevail. The table in the
dining-room offered new delicacies; commerce was bringing to it foreign
products; the coarse drinks of the North were supplanted by the delicate
wines of the South. Ice-houses were constructed. The bolting of flour,
introduced at the windmills, had given whiter and finer bread. By
degrees things that had been rarities became common--Indian-corn, the
potato, the turkey, and, conspicuous in the long list, tobacco. Forks,
an Italian invention, displaced the filthy use of the fingers. It may be
said that the diet of civilized men now underwent a radical change. Tea
came from China, coffee from Arabia, the use of sugar from India, and
these to no insignificant degree supplanted fermented liquors. Carpets
replaced on the floors the layer of straw; in the chambers
there appeared better beds, in the wardrobes cleaner and more
frequently-changed clothing. In many towns the aqueduct was substituted
for the public fountain and the street-pump. Ceilings which in the old
days would have been dingy with soot and dirt, were now decorated with
ornamental frescoes. Baths were more commonly resorted to; there was
less need to use perfumery for the concealment of personal odors.
An increasing taste for the innocent pleasures of horticulture
was manifested, by the introduction of many foreign flowers in the
gardens--the tuberose, the auricula, the crown imperial, the Persian
lily, the ranunculus, and African marigolds. In the streets there
appeared sedans, then close carriages, and at length hackney-coaches.

Among the dull rustics mechanical improvements forced their way, and
gradually attained, in the implements for ploughing, sowing, mowing,
reaping, thrashing, the perfection of our own times.

MERCANTILE INVENTIONS. It began to be recognized, in spite of the
preaching of the mendicant orders, that poverty is the source of crime,
the obstruction to knowledge; that the pursuit of riches by commerce is
far better than the acquisition of power by war. For, though it may
be true, as Montesquieu says, that, while commerce unites nations, it
antagonizes individuals, and makes a traffic of morality, it alone can
give unity to the world; its dream, its hope, is universal peace.

MEDICAL IMPROVEMENTS. Though, instead of a few pages, it would require
volumes to record adequately the ameliorations that took place in
domestic and social life after science began to exert its beneficent
influences, and inventive talent came to the aid of industry, there
are some things which cannot be passed in silence. From the port of
Barcelona the Spanish khalifs had carried on an enormous commerce, and
they with their coadjutors--Jewish merchants--had adopted or originated
many commercial inventions, which, with matters of pure science,
they had transmitted to the trading communities of Europe. The art of
book-keeping by double entry was thus brought into Upper Italy. The
different kinds of insurance were adopted, though strenuously resisted
by the clergy. They opposed fire and marine insurance, on the ground
that it is a tempting of Providence. Life insurance was regarded as
an act of interference with the consequences of God's will. Houses
for lending money on interest and on pledges, that is, banking and
pawnbroking establishments, were bitterly denounced, and especially was
indignation excited against the taking of high rates of interest,
which was stigmatized as usury--a feeling existing in some backward
communities up to the present day. Bills of exchange in the present form
and terms were adopted, the office of the public notary established, and
protests for dishonored obligations resorted to. Indeed, it may be said,
with but little exaggeration, that the commercial machinery now used
was thus introduced. I have already remarked that, in consequence of the
discovery of America, the front of Europe had been changed. Many rich
Italian merchants and many enterprising Jews, had settled in Holland
England, France, and brought into those countries various mercantile
devices. The Jews, who cared nothing about papal maledictions, were
enriched by the pontifical action in relation to the lending of money at
high interest; but Pius II., perceiving the mistake that had been
made, withdrew his opposition. Pawnbroking establishments were finally
authorized by Leo X., who threatened excommunication of those who wrote
against them. In their turn the Protestants now exhibited a dislike
against establishments thus authorized by Rome. As the theological
dogma, that the plague, like the earthquake, is an unavoidable
visitation from God for the sins of men, began to be doubted, attempts
were made to resist its progress by the establishment of quarantines.
When the Mohammedan discovery of inoculation was brought from
Constantinople in 1721, by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, it was so
strenuously resisted by the clergy, that nothing short of its adoption
by the royal family of England brought it into use. A similar resistance
was exhibited when Jenner introduced his great improvement, vaccination;
yet a century ago it was the exception to see a face unpitted by
smallpox--now it is the exception to see one so disfigured. In like
manner, when the great American discovery of anaesthetics was applied
in obstetrical cases, it was discouraged, not so much for physiological
reasons, as under the pretense that it was an impious attempt to escape
from the curse denounced against all women in Genesis iii. 16.

MAGIC AND MIRACLES. Inventive ingenuity did not restrict itself to the
production of useful contrivances, it added amusing ones. Soon after the
introduction of science into Italy, the houses of the virtuosi began to
abound in all kinds of curious mechanical surprises, and, as they
were termed, magical effects. In the latter the invention of the
magic-lantern greatly assisted. Not without reason did the ecclesiastics
detest experimental philosophy, for a result of no little importance
ensued--the juggler became a successful rival to the miracle-worker. The
pious frauds enacted in the churches lost their wonder when brought
into competition with the tricks of the conjurer in the market-place: he
breathed flame, walked on burning coals, held red-hot iron in his
teeth, drew basketfuls of eggs out of his mouth, worked miracles by
marionettes. Yet the old idea of the supernatural was with difficulty
destroyed. A horse, whose master had taught him many tricks, was tried
at Lisbon in 1601, found guilty of being, possessed by the devil, and
was burnt. Still later than that many witches were brought to the stake.

DISCOVERIES IN ASTRONOMY AND CHEMISTRY. Once fairly introduced,
discovery and invention have unceasingly advanced at an accelerated
pace. Each continually reacted on the other, continually they sapped
supernaturalism. De Dominis commenced, and Newton completed, the
explanation of the rainbow; they showed that it was not the weapon of
warfare of God, but the accident of rays of light in drops of water. De
Dominis was decoyed to Rome through the promise of an archbishopric,
and the hope of a cardinal's hat. He was lodged in a fine residence, but
carefully watched. Accused of having suggested a concord between Rome
and England, he was imprisoned in the castle of St Angelo, and there
died. He was brought in his coffin before an ecclesiastical tribunal,
adjudged guilty of heresy, and his body, with a heap of heretical books,
was cast into the flames. Franklin, by demonstrating the identity of
lightning and electricity, deprived Jupiter of his thunder-bolt. The
marvels of superstition were displaced by the wonders of truth. The two
telescopes, the reflector and the achromatic, inventions of the last
century, permitted man to penetrate into the infinite grandeurs of
the universe, to recognize, as far as such a thing is possible, its
illimitable spaces, its measureless times; and a little later the
achromatic microscope placed before his eyes the world of the infinitely
small. The air-balloon carried him above the clouds, the diving-bell
to the bottom of the sea. The thermometer gave him true measures of
the variations of heat; the barometer, of the pressure of the air. The
introduction of the balance imparted exactness to chemistry, it proved
the indestructibility of matter. The discovery of oxygen, hydrogen, and
many other gases, the isolation of aluminum, calcium, and other metals,
showed that earth and air and water are not elements. With an enterprise
that can never be too much commended, advantage was taken of the
transits of Venus, and, by sending expeditions to different regions,
the distance of the earth from the sun was determined. The step that
European intellect had made between 1456 and 1759 was illustrated by
Halley's comet. When it appeared in the former year, it was considered
as the harbinger of the vengeance of God, the dispenser of the most
dreadful of his retributions, war, pestilence, famine. By order of the
pope, all the church-bells in Europe were rung to scare it away, the
faithful were commanded to add each day another prayer; and, as their
prayers had often in so marked a manner been answered in eclipses and
droughts and rains, so on this occasion it was declared that a victory
over the comet had been vouchsafed to the pope. But, in the mean time,
Halley, guided by the revelations of Kepler and Newton, had discovered
that its motions, so far from being controlled by the supplications of
Christendom, were guided in an elliptic orbit by destiny. Knowing that
Nature bad denied to him an opportunity of witnessing the fulfillment
of his daring prophecy, he besought the astronomers of the succeeding
generation to watch for its return in 1759, and in that year it came.

INVENTIONS AND DISCOVERIES. Whoever will in a spirit of impartiality
examine what had been done by Catholicism for the intellectual and
material advancement of Europe, during her long reign, and what has been
done by science in its brief period of action, can, I am persuaded, come
to no other conclusion than this, that, in instituting a comparison, he
has established a contrast. And yet, how imperfect, how inadequate is
the catalogue of facts I have furnished in the foregoing pages! I have
said nothing of the spread of instruction by the diffusion of the arts
of reading and writing, through public schools, and the consequent
creation of a reading community; the modes of manufacturing public
opinion by newspapers and reviews, the power of journalism, the
diffusion of information public and private by the post-office and cheap
mails, the individual and social advantages of newspaper advertisements.
I have said nothing of the establishment of hospitals, the first
exemplar of which was the Invalides of Paris; nothing of the improved
prisons, reformatories, penitentiaries, asylums, the treatment of
lunatics, paupers, criminals; nothing of the construction of canals, of
sanitary engineering, or of census reports; nothing of the invention of
stereotyping, bleaching by chlorine, the cotton-gin, or of the marvelous
contrivances with which cotton-mills are filled--contrivances which have
given us cheap clothing, and therefore added to cleanliness, comfort,
health; nothing of the grand advancement of medicine and surgery, or
of the discoveries in physiology, the cultivation of the fine arts,
the improvement of agriculture and rural economy, the introduction
of chemical manures and farm-machinery. I have not referred to the
manufacture of iron and its vast affiliated industries; to those of
textile fabrics; to the collection of museums of natural history,
antiquities, curiosities. I have passed unnoticed the great subject of
the manufacture of machinery by itself--the invention of the slide-rest,
the planing-machine, and many other contrivances by which engines can
be constructed with almost mathematical correctness. I have said nothing
adequate about the railway system, or the electric telegraph, nor about
the calculus, or lithography, the airpump, or the voltaic battery; the
discovery of Uranus or Neptune, and more than a hundred asteroids; the
relation of meteoric streams to comets; nothing of the expeditions by
land and sea that have been sent forth by various governments for the
determination of important astronomical or geographical questions;
nothing of the costly and accurate experiments they have caused to be
made for the ascertainment of fundamental physical data. I have been so
unjust to our own century that I have made no allusion to some of its
greatest scientific triumphs: its grand conceptions in natural history;
its discoveries in magnetism and electricity; its invention of the
beautiful art of photography; its applications of spectrum analysis; its
attempts to bring chemistry under the three laws of Avogadro, of Boyle
and Mariotte, and of Charles; its artificial production of organic
substances from inorganic material, of which the philosophical
consequences are of the utmost importance; its reconstruction of
physiology by laying the foundation of that science on chemistry; its
improvements and advances in topographical surveying and in the correct
representation of the surface of the globe. I have said nothing about
rifled-guns and armored ships, nor of the revolution that has been made
in the art of war; nothing of that gift to women, the sewing-machine;
nothing of the noble contentions and triumphs of the arts of peace--the
industrial exhibitions and world's fairs.

What a catalogue have we here, and yet how imperfect! It gives merely a
random glimpse at an ever-increasing intellectual commotion--a mention
of things as they casually present themselves to view. How striking
the contrast between this literary, this scientific activity, and the
stagnation of the middle ages!

The intellectual enlightenment that surrounds this activity has imparted
unnumbered blessings to the human race. In Russia it has emancipated a
vast serf-population; in America it has given freedom to four million
negro slaves. In place of the sparse dole of the monastery-gate, it has
organized charity and directed legislation to the poor. It has shown
medicine its true function, to prevent rather than to cure disease. In
statesmanship it has introduced scientific methods, displacing random
and empirical legislation by a laborious ascertainment of social facts
previous to the application of legal remedies. So conspicuous, so
impressive is the manner in which it is elevating men, that the hoary
nations of Asia seek to participate in the boon. Let us not forget that
our action on them must be attended by their reaction on us. If the
destruction of paganism was completed when all the gods were brought
to Rome and confronted there, now, when by our wonderful facilities of
locomotion strange nations and conflicting religions are brought into
common presence--the Mohammedan, the Buddhist, the Brahman-modifications
of them all must ensue. In that conflict science alone will stand
secure; for it has given us grander views of the universe, more awful
views of God.

AMERICAN AND FRENCH REVOLUTIONS. The spirit that has imparted life to
this movement, that has animated these discoveries and inventions, is
Individualism; in some minds the hope of gain, in other and nobler ones
the expectation of honor. It is, then, not to be wondered at that
this principle found a political embodiment, and that, during the last
century, on two occasions, it gave rise to social convulsions--the
American and the French Revolutions. The former has ended in the
dedication of a continent to Individualism--there, under republican
forms, before the close of the present century, one hundred million
people, with no more restraint than their common security requires, will
be pursuing an unfettered career. The latter, though it has modified
the political aspect of all Europe, and though illustrated by surprising
military successes, has, thus far, not consummated its intentions; again
and again it has brought upon France fearful disasters. Her dual form of
government--her allegiance to her two sovereigns, the political and the
spiritual--has made her at once the leader and the antagonist of modern
progress. With one hand she has enthroned Reason, with the other she
has re-established and sustained the pope. Nor will this anomaly in her
conduct cease until she bestows a true education on all her children,
even on those of the humblest rustic.

SCIENCE AND CIVILIZATION. The intellectual attack made on existing
opinions by the French Revolution was not of a scientific, but of a
literary character; it was critical and aggressive. But Science has
never been an aggressor. She has always acted on the defensive, and left
to her antagonist the making of wanton attacks. Nevertheless, literary
dissent is not of such ominous import as scientific; for literature is,
in its nature, local--science is cosmopolitan.

If, now, we demand, What has science done for the promotion of modern
civilization; what has it done for the happiness, the well-being of
society? we shall find our answer in the same manner that we reached
a just estimate of what Latin Christianity had done. The reader of the
foregoing paragraphs would undoubtedly infer that there must have
been an amelioration in the lot of our race; but, when we apply the
touchstone of statistics, that inference gathers precision. Systems of
philosophy and forms of religion find a measure of their influence on
humanity in census-returns. Latin Christianity, in a thousand years,
could not double the population of Europe; it did not add perceptibly
to the term of individual life. But, as Dr. Jarvis, in his report to
the Massachusetts Board of Health, has stated, at the epoch of the
Reformation "the average longevity in Geneva was 21.21 years, between
1814 and 1833 it was 40.68; as large a number of persons now live to
seventy years as lived to forty, three hundred years ago. In 1693 the
British Government borrowed money by selling annuities on lives from
infancy upward, on the basis of the average longevity. The contract
was profitable. Ninety-seven years later another tontine, or scale
of annuities, on the basis of the same expectation of life as in the
previous century, was issued. These latter annuitants, however, lived so
much longer than their predecessors, that it proved to be a very costly
loan for the government. It was found that, while ten thousand of each
sex in the first tontine died under the age of twenty-eight, only five
thousand seven hundred and seventy-two males and six thousand four
hundred and sixteen females in the second tontine died at the same age,
one hundred years later."

We have been comparing the spiritual with the practical, the imaginary
with the real. The maxims that have been followed in the earlier and the
later period produced their inevitable result. In the former that maxim
was, "Ignorance is the mother of Devotion in the latter, Knowledge is
Power."



