CHAPTER V.

     CONFLICT RESPECTING THE NATURE OF THE SOUL.--DOCTRINE OF
     EMANATION AND ABSORPTION.

     European ideas respecting the soul.--It resembles the form
     of the body.

     Philosophical views of the Orientals.--The Vedic theology
     and Buddhism assert the doctrine of emanation and
     absorption.--It is advocated by Aristotle, who is followed
     by the Alexandrian school, and subsequently by the Jews and
     Arabians.--It is found in the writings of Erigena.

     Connection of this doctrine with the theory of conservation
     and correlation of force.--Parallel between the origin and
     destiny of the body and the soul.--The necessity of founding
     human on comparative psychology.

     Averroism, which is based on these facts, is brought into
     Christendom through Spain and Sicily.

     History of the repression of Averroism.--Revolt of Islam
     against it.--Antagonism of the Jewish synagogues.--Its
     destruction undertaken by the papacy.--Institution of the
     Inquisition in Spain.--Frightful persecutions and their
     results.--Expulsion of the Jews and Moors.--Overthrow of
     Averroism in Europe.--Decisive action of the late Vatican
     Council.


THE pagan Greeks and Romans believed that the spirit of man resembles
his bodily form, varying its appearance with his variations, and growing
with his growth. Heroes, to whom it had been permitted to descend into
Hades, had therefore without difficulty recognized their former friends.
Not only had the corporeal aspect been retained, but even the customary
raiment.

THE SOUL. The primitive Christians, whose conceptions of a future life
and of heaven and hell, the abodes of the blessed and the sinful, were
far more vivid than those of their pagan predecessors, accepted and
intensified these ancient ideas. They did not doubt that in the world
to come they should meet their friends, and hold converse with them, as
they had done here upon earth--an expectation that gives consolation to
the human heart, reconciling it to the most sorrowful bereavements, and
restoring to it its dead.

In the uncertainty as to what becomes of the soul in the interval
between its separation from the body and the judgment-day, many
different opinions were held. Some thought that it hovered over the
grave, some that it wandered disconsolate through the air. In the
popular belief, St. Peter sat as a door-keeper at the gate of heaven. To
him it had been given to bind or to loose. He admitted or excluded the
Spirits of men at his pleasure. Many persons, however, were disposed to
deny him this power, since his decisions would be anticipatory of the
judgment-day, which would thus be rendered needless. After the time
of Gregory the Great, the doctrine of purgatory met with general
acceptance. A resting-place was provided for departed spirits.

That the spirits of the dead occasionally revisit the living, or haunt
their former abodes, has been in all ages, in all European countries,
a fixed belief, not confined to rustics, but participated in by the
intelligent. A pleasing terror gathers round the winter's-evening
fireside at the stories of apparitions, goblins, ghosts. In the old
times the Romans had their lares, or spirits of those who had led
virtuous lives; their larvae or lemures, the spirits of the wicked;
their manes, the spirits of those of whom the merits were doubtful. If
human testimony on such subjects can be of any value, there is a body
of evidence reaching from the remotest ages to the present time, as
extensive and unimpeachable as is to be found in support of any thing
whatever, that these shades of the dead congregate near tombstones,
or take up their secret abode in the gloomy chambers of dilapidated
castles, or walk by moonlight in moody solitude.

ASIATIC PSYCHOLOGICAL VIEWS. While these opinions have universally found
popular acceptance in Europe, others of a very different nature have
prevailed extensively in Asia, and indeed very generally in the higher
regions of thought. Ecclesiastical authority succeeded in repressing
them in the sixteenth century, but they never altogether disappeared.
In our own times so silently and extensively have they been diffused in
Europe, that it was found expedient in the papal Syllabus to draw
them in a very conspicuous manner into the open light; and the Vatican
Council, agreeing in that view of their obnoxious tendency and secret
spread, has in an equally prominent and signal manner among its first
canons anathematized all persons who hold them. "Let him be anathema who
says that spiritual things are emanations of the divine substance, or
that the divine essence by manifestation or development becomes all
things." In view of this authoritative action, it is necessary now to
consider the character and history of these opinions.

Ideas respecting the nature of God necessarily influence ideas
respecting the nature of the soul. The eastern Asiatics had adopted the
conception of an impersonal God, and, as regards the soul, its necessary
consequence, the doctrine of emanation and absorption.

EMANATION AND ABSORPTION. Thus the Vedic theology is based on the
acknowledgment of a universal spirit pervading all things. "There is in
truth but one Deity, the supreme Spirit; he is of the same nature as the
soul of man." Both the Vedas and the Institutes of Menu affirm that
the soul is an emanation of the all-pervading Intellect, and that it is
necessarily destined to be reabsorbed. They consider it to be without
form, and that visible Nature, with all its beauties and harmonies, is
only the shadow of God.

Vedaism developed itself into Buddhism, which has become the faith of
a majority of the human race. This system acknowledges that there is a
supreme Power, but denies that there is a supreme Being. It contemplates
the existence of Force, giving rise as its manifestation to matter. It
adopts the theory of emanation and absorption. In a burning taper it
sees an effigy of man--an embodiment of matter, and an evolution of
force. If we interrogate it respecting the destiny of the soul, it
demands of us what has become of the flame when it is blown out, and in
what condition it was before the taper was lighted. Was it a nonentity?
Has it been annihilated? It admits that the idea of personality which
has deluded us through life may not be instantaneously extinguished at
death, but may be lost by slow degrees. On this is founded the doctrine
of transmigration. But at length reunion with the universal Intellect
takes place, Nirwana is reached, oblivion is attained, a state that has
no relation to matter, space, or time, the state into which the departed
flame of the extinguished taper has gone, the state in which we were
before we were born. This is the end that we ought to hope for; it is
reabsorption in the universal Force--supreme bliss, eternal rest.

Through Aristotle these doctrines were first introduced into Eastern
Europe; indeed, eventually, as we shall see, he was regarded as the
author of them. They exerted a dominating influence in the later period
of the Alexandrian school. Philo, the Jew, who lived in the time of
Caligula, based his philosophy on the theory of emanation. Plotinus
not only accepted that theory as applicable to the soul of man, but as
affording an illustration of the nature of the Trinity. For, as a beam
of light emanates from the sun, and as warmth emanates from the beam
when it touches material bodies, so from the Father the Son emanates,
and thence the Holy Ghost. From these views Plotinus derived a practical
religious system, teaching the devout how to pass into a condition of
ecstasy, a foretaste of absorption into the universal mundane soul.
In that condition the soul loses its individual consciousness. In like
manner Porphyry sought absorption in or union with God. He was a Tyrian
by birth, established a school at Rome, and wrote against Christianity;
his treatise on that subject was answered by Eusebius and St. Jerome,
but the Emperor Theodosius silenced it more effectually by causing all
the copies to be burnt. Porphyry bewails his own unworthiness, saying
that he had been united to God in ecstasy but once in eighty-six years,
whereas his master Plotinus had been so united six times in sixty years.
A complete system of theology, based on the theory of emanation, was
constructed by Proclus, who speculated on the manner in which absorption
takes place: whether the soul is instantly reabsorbed and reunited in
the moment of death, or whether it retains the sentiment of personality
for a time, and subsides into complete reunion by successive steps.

ARABIC PSYCHOLOGY. From the Alexandrian Greeks these ideas passed to
the Saracen philosophers, who very soon after the capture of the great
Egyptian city abandoned to the lower orders their anthropomorphic
notions of the nature of God and the simulachral form of the spirit of
man. As Arabism developed itself into a distinct scientific system,
the theories of emanation and absorption were among its characteristic
features. In this abandonment of vulgar Mohammedanism, the example of
the Jews greatly assisted. They, too, had given up the anthropomorphism
of their ancestors; they had exchanged the God who of old lived behind
the veil of the temple for an infinite Intelligence pervading the
universe, and, avowing their inability to conceive that any thing
which had on a sudden been called into existence should be capable of
immortality, they affirmed that the soul of man is connected with a past
of which there was no beginning, and with a future to which there is no
end.

In the intellectual history of Arabism the Jew and the Saracen are
continually seen together. It was the same in their political history,
whether we consider it in Syria, in Egypt, or in Spain. From them
conjointly Western Europe derived its philosophical ideas, which in
the course of time culminated in Averroism; Averroism is philosophical
Islamism. Europeans generally regarded Averroes as the author of these
heresies, and the orthodox branded him accordingly, but he was nothing
more than their collector and commentator. His works invaded Christendom
by two routes: from Spain through Southern France they reached Upper
Italy, engendering numerous heresies on their way; from Sicily they
passed to Naples and South Italy, under the auspices of Frederick II.

But, long before Europe suffered this great intellectual invasion, there
were what might, perhaps, be termed sporadic instances of Orientalism.
As an example I may quote the views of John Erigena (A.D. 800) He had
adopted and taught the philosophy of Aristotle had made a pilgrimage
to the birthplace of that philosopher, and indulged a hope of uniting
philosophy and religion in the manner proposed by the Christian
ecclesiastics who were then studying in the Mohammedan universities of
Spain. He was a native of Britain.

In a letter to Charles the Bald, Anastasius expresses his astonishment
"how such a barbarian man, coming from the very ends of the earth, and
remote from human conversation, could comprehend things so clearly, and
transfer them into another language so well." The general intention of
his writings was, as we have said, to unite philosophy with religion,
but his treatment of these subjects brought him under ecclesiastical
censure, and some of his works were adjudged to the flames. His most
important book is entitled "De Divisione Nature."

Erigena's philosophy rests upon the observed and admitted fact that
every living thing comes from something that had previously lived. The
visible world, being a world of life, has therefore emanated necessarily
from some primordial existence, and that existence is God, who is thus
the originator and conservator of all. Whatever we see maintains itself
as a visible thing through force derived from him, and, were that force
withdrawn, it must necessarily disappear. Erigena thus conceives of
the Deity as an unceasing participator in Nature, being its preserver,
maintainer, upholder, and in that respect answering to the soul of the
world of the Greeks. The particular life of individuals is therefore a
part of general existence, that is, of the mundane soul.

If ever there were a withdrawal of the maintaining power, all things
must return to the source from which they issued--that is, they must
return to God, and be absorbed in him. All visible Nature must thus
pass back into "the Intellect" at last. "The death of the flesh is the
auspices of the restitution of things, and of a return to their ancient
conservation. So sounds revert back to the air in which they were born,
and by which they were maintained, and they are heard no more; no man
knows what has become of them. In that final absorption which, after
a lapse of time, must necessarily come, God will be all in all, and
nothing exist but him alone." "I contemplate him as the beginning and
cause of all things; all things that are and those that have been, but
now are not, were created from him, and by him, and in him. I also view
him as the end and intransgressible term of all things.... There is a
fourfold conception of universal Nature--two views of divine Nature, as
origin and end; two also of framed Nature, causes and effects. There is
nothing eternal but God."

The return of the soul to the universal Intellect is designated by
Erigena as Theosis, or Deification. In that final absorption all
remembrance of its past experiences is lost. The soul reverts to the
condition in which it was before it animated the body. Necessarily,
therefore, Erigena fell under the displeasure of the Church.

It was in India that men first recognized the fact that force is
indestructible and eternal. This implies ideas more or less distinct
of that which we now term its "correlation and conservation."
Considerations connected with the stability of the universe give
strength to this view, since it is clear that, were there either
an increase or a diminution, the order of the world must cease. The
definite and invariable amount of energy in the universe must therefore
be accepted as a scientific fact. The changes we witness are in its
distribution.

But, since the soul must be regarded as an active principle, to call a
new one into existence out of nothing is necessarily to add to the force
previously in the world. And, if this has been done in the case of every
individual who has been born, and is to be repeated for every individual
hereafter, the totality of force must be continually increasing.

Moreover, to many devout persons there is something very revolting in
the suggestion that the Almighty is a servitor to the caprices and lusts
of man, and that, at a certain term after its origin, it is necessary
for him to create for the embryo a soul.

Considering man as composed of two portions, a soul and a body, the
obvious relations of the latter may cast much light on the mysterious,
the obscure relations of the former. Now, the substance of which the
body consists is obtained from the general mass of matter around us,
and after death to that general mass it is restored. Has Nature, then,
displayed before our eyes in the origin, mutations, and destiny of the
material part, the body, a revelation that may guide us to a knowledge
of the origin and destiny of the companion, the spiritual part, the
soul?

Let us listen for a moment to one of the most powerful of Mohammedan
writers:

"God has created the spirit of man out of a drop of his own light;
its destiny is to return to him. Do not deceive yourself with the vain
imagination that it will die when the body dies. The form you had on
your entrance into this world, and your present form, are not the
same; hence there is no necessity of your perishing, on account of the
perishing of your body. Your spirit came into this world a stranger, it
is only sojourning, in a temporary home. From the trials and tempests
of this troublesome life, our refuge is in God. In reunion with him we
shall find eternal rest--a rest without sorrow, a joy without pain, a
strength without infirmity, a knowledge without doubt, a tranquil and
yet an ecstatic vision of the source of life and light and glory, the
source from which we came." So says the Saracen philosopher, Al-Gazzali
(A.D. 1010).

In a stone the material particles are in a state of stable equilibrium;
it may, therefore, endure forever. An animal is in reality only a form
through which a stream of matter is incessantly flowing. It receives its
supplies, and dismisses its wastes. In this it resembles a cataract,
a river, a flame. The particles that compose it at one instant have
departed from it the next. It depends for its continuance on exterior
supplies. It has a definite duration in time, and an inevitable moment
comes in which it must die.

In the great problem of psychology we cannot expect to reach a
scientific result, if we persist in restricting ourselves to the
contemplation of one fact. We must avail ourselves of all accessible
facts. Human psychology can never be completely resolved except through
comparative psychology. With Descartes, we must inquire whether the
souls of animals be relations of the human soul, less perfect members in
the same series of development. We must take account of what we discover
in the intelligent principle of the ant, as well as what we discern in
the intelligent principle of man. Where would human physiology be, if
it were not illuminated by the bright irradiations of comparative
physiology?

Brodie, after an exhaustive consideration of the facts, affirms that
the mind of animals is essentially the same as that of man. Every one
familiar with the dog will admit that that creature knows right from
wrong, and is conscious when he has committed a fault. Many domestic
animals have reasoning powers, and employ proper means for the
attainment of ends. How numerous are the anecdotes related of the
intentional actions of the elephant and the ape! Nor is this apparent
intelligence due to imitation, to their association with man, for
wild animals that have no such relation exhibit similar properties. In
different species, the capacity and character greatly vary. Thus the dog
is not only more intelligent, but has social and moral qualities that
the cat does not possess; the former loves his master, the latter her
home.

Du Bois-Reymond makes this striking remark: "With awe and wonder must
the student of Nature regard that microscopic molecule of nervous
substance which is the seat of the laborious, constructive, orderly,
loyal, dauntless soul of the ant. It has developed itself to its present
state through a countless series of generations." What an impressive
inference we may draw from the statement of Huber, who has written so
well on this subject: "If you will watch a single ant at work, you can
tell what he will next do!" He is considering the matter, and reasoning
as you are doing. Listen to one of the many anecdotes which Huber, at
once truthful and artless, relates: "On the visit of an overseer ant to
the works, when the laborers had begun the roof too soon, he examined it
and had it taken down, the wall raised to the proper height, and a new
ceiling constructed with the fragments of the old one." Surely these
insects are not automata, they show intention. They recognize their old
companions, who have been shut up from them for many months, and exhibit
sentiments of joy at their return. Their antennal language is capable
of manifold expression; it suits the interior of the nest, where all is
dark.

While solitary insects do not live to raise their young, social insects
have a longer term, they exhibit moral affections and educate
their offspring. Patterns of patience and industry, some of these
insignificant creatures will work sixteen or eighteen hours a day. Few
men are capable of sustained mental application more than four or five
hours.

Similarity of effects indicates similarity of causes; similarity of
actions demands similarity of organs. I would ask the reader of these
paragraphs, who is familiar with the habits of animals, and especially
with the social relations of that wonderful insect to which reference
has been made, to turn to the nineteenth chapter of my work on
the "Intellectual Development of Europe," in which he will find a
description of the social system of the Incas of Peru. Perhaps, then, in
view of the similarity of the social institutions and personal conduct
of the insect, and the social institutions and personal conduct of the
civilized Indian--the one an insignificant speck, the other a man--he
will not be disposed to disagree with me in the opinion that "from bees,
and wasps, and ants, and birds, from all that low animal life on which
he looks with supercilious contempt, man is destined one day to learn
what in truth he really is."

The views of Descartes, who regarded all insects as automata, can
scarcely be accepted without modification. Insects are automata only
so far as the action of their ventral cord, and that portion of their
cephalic ganglia which deals with contemporaneous impressions, is
concerned.

It is one of the functions of vesicular-nervous material to retain
traces or relics of impressions brought to it by the organs of sense;
hence, nervous ganglia, being composed of that material, may be
considered as registering apparatus. They also introduce the element
of time into the action of the nervous mechanism. An impression, which
without them might have forthwith ended in reflex action, is delayed,
and with this duration come all those important effects arising through
the interaction of many impressions, old and new, upon each other.

There is no such thing as a spontaneous, or self-originated, thought.
Every intellectual act is the consequence of some preceding act. It
comes into existence in virtue of something that has gone before. Two
minds constituted precisely alike, and placed under the influence of
precisely the same environment, must give rise to precisely the same
thought. To such sameness of action we allude in the popular expression
"common-sense"--a term full of meaning. In the origination of a
thought there are two distinct conditions: the state of the organism
as dependent on antecedent impressions, and on the existing physical
circumstances.

In the cephalic ganglia of insects are stored up the relics of
impressions that have been made upon the common peripheral nerves, and
in them are kept those which are brought in by the organs of special
sense--the visual, olfactive, auditory. The interaction of these raises
insects above mere mechanical automata, in which the reaction instantly
follows the impression.

In all cases the action of every nerve-centre, no matter what its stage
of development may be, high or low, depends upon an essential chemical
condition--oxidation. Even in man, if the supply of arterial blood
be stopped but for a moment, the nerve-mechanism loses its power; if
diminished, it correspondingly declines; if, on the contrary, it
be increased--as when nitrogen monoxide is breathed--there is more
energetic action. Hence there arises a need of repair, a necessity for
rest and sleep.

Two fundamental ideas are essentially attached to all our perceptions
of external things: they are SPACE and TIME, and for these provision is
made in the nervous mechanism while it is yet in an almost rudimentary
state. The eye is the organ of space, the ear of time; the perceptions
of which by the elaborate mechanism of these structures become
infinitely more precise than would be possible if the sense of touch
alone were resorted to.

There are some simple experiments which illustrate the vestiges of
ganglionic impressions. If on a cold, polished metal, as a new razor,
any object, such as a wafer, be laid, and the metal be then breathed
upon, and, when the moisture has had time to disappear, the wafer be
thrown off, though now the most critical inspection of the polished
surface can discover no trace of any form, if we breathe once more upon
it, a spectral image of the wafer comes plainly into view; and this may
be done again and again. Nay, more, if the polished metal be carefully
put aside where nothing can deteriorate its surface, and be so kept for
many months, on breathing again upon it the shadowy form emerges.

Such an illustration shows how trivial an impression may be thus
registered and preserved. But, if, on such an inorganic surface, an
impression may thus be indelibly marked, how much more likely in the
purposely-constructed ganglion! A shadow never falls upon a wall without
leaving thereupon a permanent trace, a trace which might be made visible
by resorting to proper processes. Photographic operations are cases in
point. The portraits of our friends, or landscape views, may be hidden
on the sensitive surface from the eye, but they are ready to make their
appearance as soon as proper developers are resorted to. A spectre is
concealed on a silver or glassy surface until, by our necromancy, we
make it come forth into the visible world. Upon the walls of our most
private apartments, where we think the eye of intrusion is altogether
shut out and our retirement can never be profaned, there exist the
vestiges of all our acts, silhouettes of whatever we have done.

If, after the eyelids have been closed for some time, as when we
first awake in the morning, we suddenly and steadfastly gaze at a
brightly-illuminated object and then quickly close the lids again, a
phantom image is perceived in the indefinite darkness beyond us. We may
satisfy ourselves that this is not a fiction, but a reality, for many
details that we had not time to identify in the momentary glance may
be contemplated at our leisure in the phantom. We may thus make out the
pattern of such an object as a lace curtain hanging in the window, or
the branches of a tree beyond. By degrees the image becomes less and
less distinct; in a minute or two it has disappeared. It seems to have a
tendency to float away in the vacancy before us. If we attempt to follow
it by moving the eyeball, it suddenly vanishes.

Such a duration of impressions on the retina proves that the effect of
external influences on nerve-vesicles is not necessarily transitory.
In this there is a correspondence to the duration, the emergence, the
extinction, of impressions on photographic preparations. Thus, I have
seen landscapes and architectural views taken in Mexico developed, as
artists say, months subsequently in New York--the images coming out,
after the long voyage, in all their proper forms and in all their proper
contrast of light and shade. The photograph had forgotten nothing. It
had equally preserved the contour of the everlasting mountains and the
passing smoke of a bandit-fire.

Are there, then, contained in the brain more permanently, as in the
retina more transiently, the vestiges of impressions that have been
gathered by the sensory organs? Is this the explanation of memory--the
Mind contemplating such pictures of past things and events as have
been committed to her custody. In her silent galleries are there hung
micrographs of the living and the dead, of scenes that we have
visited, of incidents in which we have borne a part? Are these abiding
impressions mere signal-marks, like the letters of a book, which impart
ideas to the mind? or are they actual picture-images, inconceivably
smaller than those made for us by artists, in which, by the aid of a
microscope, we can see, in a space not bigger than a pinhole, a whole
family group at a glance?

The phantom images of the retina are not perceptible in the light of the
day. Those that exist in the sensorium in like manner do not attract our
attention so long as the sensory organs are in vigorous operation, and
occupied in bringing new impressions in. But, when those organs become
weary or dull, or when we experience hours of great anxiety, or are
in twilight reveries, or are asleep, the latent apparitions have their
vividness increased by the contrast, and obtrude themselves on the
mind. For the same reason they occupy us in the delirium of fevers, and
doubtless also in the solemn moments of death. During a third part of
our life, in sleep, we are withdrawn from external influences; hearing
and sight and the other senses are inactive, but the never-sleeping Mind,
that pensive, that veiled enchantress, in her mysterious retirement,
looks over the ambrotypes she has collected--ambrotypes, for they are
truly unfading impressions--and, combining them together, as they chance
to occur, constructs from them the panorama of a dream.

Nature has thus implanted in the organization of every man means which
impressively suggest to him the immortality of the soul and a future
life. Even the benighted savage thus sees in his visions the fading
forms of landscapes, which are, perhaps, connected with some of his
most pleasant recollections; and what other conclusion can be possibly
extract from those unreal pictures than that they are the foreshadowings
of another land beyond that in which his lot is cast? At intervals he is
visited in his dreams by the resemblances of those whom he has loved
or hated while they were alive; and these manifestations are to him
incontrovertible proofs of the existence and immortality of the soul.
In our most refined social conditions we are never able to shake off the
impressions of these occurrences, and are perpetually drawing from
them the same conclusions that our uncivilized ancestors did. Our more
elevated condition of life in no respect relieves us from the inevitable
operation of our own organization, any more than it relieves us from
infirmities and disease. In these respects, all over the globe men are
on an equality. Savage or civilized, we carry within us a mechanism
which presents us with mementoes of the most solemn facts with which we
can be concerned. It wants only moments of repose or sickness, when the
influence of external things is diminished, to come into full play, and
these are precisely the moments when we are best prepared for the truths
it is going to suggest. That mechanism is no respecter of persons. It
neither permits the haughtiest to be free from the monitions, nor leaves
the humblest without the consolation of a knowledge of another life.
Open to no opportunities of being tampered with by the designing or
interested, requiring no extraneous human agency for its effect,
out always present with every man wherever he may go, it marvelously
extracts from vestiges of the impressions of the past overwhelming
proofs of the realities of the future, and, gathering its power from
what would seem to be a most unlikely source, it insensibly leads us, no
matter who or where we may be, to a profound belief in the immortal and
imperishable, from phantoms which have scarcely made their appearance
before they are ready to vanish away.

The insect differs from a mere automaton in this, that it is influenced
by old, by registered impressions. In the higher forms of animated life
that registration becomes more and more complete, memory becomes more
perfect. There is not any necessary resemblance between an external form
and its ganglionic impression, any more than there is between the words
of a message delivered in a telegraphic office and the signals which
the telegraph may give to the distant station; any more than there
is between the letters of a printed page and the acts or scenes they
describe, but the letters call up with clearness to the mind of the
reader the events and scenes.

An animal without any apparatus for the retention of impressions must
be a pure automaton--it cannot have memory. From insignificant and
uncertain beginnings, such an apparatus is gradually evolved, and, as
its development advances, the intellectual capacity increases. In man,
this retention or registration reaches perfection; he guides, himself by
past as well as by present impressions; he is influenced by experience;
his conduct is determined by reason.

A most important advance is made when the capability is acquired by any
animal of imparting a knowledge of the impressions stored up in its own
nerve-centres to another of the same kind. This marks the extension of
individual into social life, and indeed is essential thereto. In the
higher insects it is accomplished by antennal contacts, in man by
speech. Humanity, in its earlier, its savage stages, was limited to
this: the knowledge of one person could be transmitted to another by
conversation. The acts and thoughts of one generation could be imparted
to another, and influence its acts and thoughts.

But tradition has its limit. The faculty of speech makes society
possible--nothing more.

Not without interest do we remark the progress of development of
this function. The invention of the art of writing gave extension and
durability to the registration or record of impressions. These, which
had hitherto been stored up in the brain of one man, might now be
imparted to the whole human race, and be made to endure forever.
Civilization became possible--for civilization cannot exist without
writing, or the means of record in some shape.

From this psychological point of view we perceive the real significance
of the invention of printing--a development of writing which, by
increasing the rapidity of the diffusion of ideas, and insuring their
permanence, tends to promote civilization and to unify the human race.

In the foregoing paragraphs, relating to nervous impressions, their
registry, and the consequences, that spring from them, I have given an
abstract of views presented in my work on "Human Physiology," published
in 1856, and may, therefore, refer the reader to the chapter on "Inverse
Vision, or Cerebral Sight;" to Chapter XIV., Book I.; and to Chapter
VIII., Book II.; of that work, for other particulars.


The only path to scientific human psychology is through comparative
psychology. It is a long and wearisome path, but it leads to truth.

Is there, then, a vast spiritual existence pervading the universe, even
as there is a vast existence of matter pervading it--a spirit which,
as a great German author tells us, "sleeps in the stone, dreams in the
animal, awakes in man?" Does the soul arise from the one as the body
arises from the other? Do they in like manner return, each to the source
from which it has come? If so, we can interpret human existence, and our
ideas may still be in unison with scientific truth, and in accord with
our conception of the stability, the unchangeability of the universe.

To this spiritual existence the Saracens, following Eastern nations,
gave the designation "the Active Intellect." They believed that the soul
of man emanated from it, as a rain-drop comes from the sea, and, after a
season, returns. So arose among them the imposing doctrines of emanation
and absorption. The active intellect is God.

In one of its forms, as we have seen, this idea was developed by Chakia
Mouni, in India, in a most masterly manner, and embodied in the vast
practical system of Buddhism; in another, it was with less power
presented among the Saracens by Averroes.

But, perhaps we ought rather to say that Europeans hold Averroes as
the author of this doctrine, because they saw him isolated from his
antecedents. But Mohammedans gave him little credit for originality.
He stood to them in the light of a commentator on Aristotle, and as
presenting the opinions of the Alexandrian and other philosophical
schools up to his time. The following excerpts from the "Historical
Essay on Averroism," by M. Renan, will show how closely the Sarscenic
ideas approached those presented above:

This system supposes that, at the death of an individual, his
intelligent principle or soul no longer possesses a separate existence,
but returns to or is absorbed in the universal mind, the active
intelligence, the mundane soul, which is God; from whom, indeed, it had
originally emanated or issued forth.

The universal, or active, or objective intellect, is uncreated,
impassible, incorruptible, has neither beginning nor end; nor does it
increase as the number of individual souls increases. It is altogether
separate from matter. It is, as it were, a cosmic principle. This
oneness of the active intellect, or reason, is the essential principle
of the Averroistic theory, and is in harmony with the cardinal doctrine
of Mohammedanism--the unity of God.

The individual, or passive, or subjective intellect, is an emanation
from the universal, and constitutes what is termed the soul of man. In
one sense it is perishable and ends with the body, but in a higher
sense it endures; for, after death, it returns to or is absorbed in the
universal soul, and thus of all human souls there remains at last
but one--the aggregate of them all, life is not the property of the
individual, it belongs to Nature. The end of, man is to enter into union
more and more complete with the active intellect--reason. In that the
happiness of the soul consists. Our destiny is quietude. It was the
opinion of Averroes that the transition from the individual to the
universal is instantaneous at death, but the Buddhists maintain that
human personality continues in a declining manner for a certain term
before nonentity, or Nirwana, is attained.

Philosophy has never proposed but two hypotheses to explain the system
of the world: first, a personal God existing apart, and a human soul
called into existence or created, and thenceforth immortal; second, an
impersonal intelligence, or indeterminate God, and a soul emerging from
and returning to him. As to the origin of beings, there are two opposite
opinions: first, that they are created from nothing; second, that they
come by development from pre-existing forms. The theory of creation
belongs to the first of the above hypotheses, that of evolution to the
last.

Philosophy among the Arabs thus took the same direction that it had
taken in China, in India, and indeed throughout the East. Its whole
spirit depended on the admission of the indestructibility of matter and
force. It saw an analogy between the gathering of the material of which
the body of man consists from the vast store of matter in Nature, and
its final restoration to that store, and the emanation of the spirit
of man from the universal Intellect, the Divinity, and its final
reabsorption.


Having thus indicated in sufficient detail the philosophical
characteristics of the doctrine of emanation and absorption, I have in
the next place to relate its history. It was introduced into Europe by
the Spanish Arabs. Spain was the focal point from which, issuing forth,
it affected the ranks of intelligence and fashion all over Europe, and
in Spain it had a melancholy end.

The Spanish khalifs had surrounded themselves with all the luxuries
of Oriental life. They had magnificent palaces, enchanting gardens,
seraglios filled with beautiful women. Europe at the present day does
not offer more taste, more refinement, more elegance, than might have
been seen, at the epoch of which we are speaking, in the capitals of the
Spanish Arabs. Their streets were lighted and solidly paved. The houses
were frescoed and carpeted; they were warmed in winter by furnaces, and
cooled in summer with perfumed air brought by underground pipes from
flower-beds. They had baths, and libraries, and dining-halls, fountains
of quicksilver and water. City and country were full of conviviality,
and of dancing to the lute and mandolin. Instead of the drunken and
gluttonous wassail orgies of their Northern neighbors, the feasts of the
Saracens were marked by sobriety. Wine was prohibited. The enchanting
moonlight evenings of Andalusia were spent by the Moors in sequestered,
fairy-like gardens or in orange-groves, listening to the romances of
the story-teller, or engaged in philosophical discourse; consoling
themselves for the disappointments of this life by such reflections
as that, if virtue were rewarded in this world, we should be without
expectations in the life to come; and reconciling themselves to their
daily toil by the expectation that rest will be found after death--a
rest never to be succeeded by labor.

In the tenth century the Khalif Hakein II. had made beautiful Andalusia
the paradise of the world. Christians, Mussulmen, Jews, mixed together
without restraint. There, among many celebrated names that have
descended to our times, was Gerbert, destined subsequently to
become pope. There, too, was Peter the Venerable, and many Christian
ecclesiastics. Peter says that he found learned men even from Britain
pursuing astronomy. All learned men, no matter from what country they
came, or what their religious views, were welcomed. The khalif had in
his palace a manufactory of books, and copyists, binders, illuminators.
He kept book-buyers in all the great cities of Asia and Africa. His
library contained four hundred thousand volumes, superbly bound and
illuminated.

Throughout the Mohammedan dominions in Asia, in Africa, and in Spain,
the lower order of Mussulmen entertained a fanatical hatred against
learning. Among the more devout--those who claimed to be orthodox--there
were painful doubts as to the salvation of the great Khalif
Al-Mamun--the wicked khalif, as they called him--for he had not only
disturbed the people by introducing the writings of Aristotle and other
Greek heathens, but had even struck at the existence of heaven and
hell by saying that the earth is a globe, and pretending that he could
measure its size. These persons, from their numbers, constituted a
political power.

Almansor, who usurped the khalifate to the prejudice of Hakem's son,
thought that his usurpation would be sustained if he put himself at
the head of the orthodox party. He therefore had the library of Hakem
searched, and all works of a scientific or philosophical nature carried
into the public places and burnt, or thrown into the cisterns of the
palace. By a similar court revolution Averroes, in his old age--he died
A.D. 1193--was expelled from Spain; the religious party had triumphed
over the philosophical. He was denounced as a traitor to religion.
An opposition to philosophy had been organized all over the Mussulman
world. There was hardly a philosopher who was not punished. Some
were put to death, and the consequence was, that Islam was full of
hypocrites.

Into Italy, Germany, England, Averroism had silently made its way.
It found favor in the eyes of the Franciscans, and a focus in the
University of Paris. By very many of the leading minds it had been
accepted. But at length the Dominicans, the rivals of the Franciscans,
sounded an alarm. They said it destroys all personality, conducts
to fatalism, and renders inexplicable the difference and progress
of individual intelligences. The declaration that there is but one
intellect is an error subversive of the merits of the saints, it is
an assertion that there is no difference among men. What! is there no
difference between the holy soul of Peter and the damned soul of Judas?
are they identical? Averroes in this his blasphemous doctrine denies
creation, providence, revelation, the Trinity, the efficacy of prayers,
of alms, and of litanies; he disbelieves in the resurrection and
immortality; he places the summum bonum in mere pleasure.

So, too, among the Jews who were then the leading intellects of the
world, Averroism had been largely propagated. Their great writer
Maimonides had thoroughly accepted it; his school was spreading it in
all directions. A furious persecution arose on the part of the orthodox
Jews. Of Maimonides it had been formerly their delight to declare that
he was "the Eagle of the Doctors, the Great Sage, the Glory of the West,
the Light of the East, second only to Moses." Now, they proclaimed that
he had abandoned the faith of Abraham; had denied the possibility of
creation, believed in the eternity of the world; had given himself up to
the manufacture of atheists; had deprived God of his attributes; made a
vacuum of him; had declared him inaccessible to prayer, and a stranger
to the government of the world. The works of Maimonides were committed
to the flames by the synagogues of Montpellier, Barcelona, and Toledo.

Scarcely had the conquering arms of Ferdinand and Isabella overthrown
the Arabian dominion in Spain, when measures were taken by the papacy
to extinguish these opinions, which, it was believed, were undermining
European Christianity.

Until Innocent IV. (1243), there was no special tribunal against
heretics, distinct from those of the bishops. The Inquisition, then
introduced, in accordance with the centralization of the times, was
a general and papal tribunal, which displaced the old local ones.
The bishops, therefore, viewed the innovation with great dislike,
considering it as an intrusion on their rights. It was established in
Italy, Spain, Germany, and the southern provinces of France.

The temporal sovereigns were only too desirous to make use of this
powerful engine for their own political purposes. Against this the popes
strongly protested. They were not willing that its use should pass out
of the ecclesiastical hand.

The Inquisition, having already been tried in the south of France, had
there proved to be very effective for the suppression of heresy. It had
been introduced into Aragon. Now was assigned to it the duty of dealing
with the Jews.

In the old times under Visigothic rule these people had greatly
prospered, but the leniency that had been shown to them was succeeded by
atrocious persecution, when the Visigoths abandoned their Arianism and
became orthodox. The most inhuman ordinances were issued against them--a
law was enacted condemning them all to be slaves. It was not to be
wondered at that, when the Saracen invasion took place, the Jews did
whatever they could to promote its success. They, like the Arabs, were
an Oriental people, both traced their lineage to Abraham, their common
ancestor; both were believers in the unity of God. It was their
defense of that doctrine that had brought upon them the hatred of their
Visigothic masters.

Under the Saracen rule they were treated with the highest consideration.
They became distinguished for their wealth and their learning. For
the most part they were Aristotelians. They founded many schools and
colleges. Their mercantile interests led them to travel all over the
world. They particularly studied the science of medicine. Throughout the
middle ages they were the physicians and bankers of Europe. Of all men
they saw the course of human affairs from the most elevated point of
view. Among the special sciences they became proficient in mathematics
and astronomy; they composed the tables of Alfonso, and were the cause
of the voyage of De Gama. They distinguished themselves greatly in light
literature. From the tenth to the fourteenth century their literature
was the first in Europe. They were to be found in the courts of princes
as physicians, or as treasurers managing the public finances.

The orthodox clergy in Navarre had excited popular prejudices against
them. To escape the persecutions that arose, many of them feigned to
turn Christians, and of these many apostatized to their former
faith. The papal nuncio at the court of Castile raised a cry for the
establishment of the Inquisition. The poorer Jews were accused of
sacrificing Christian children at the Passover, in mockery of the
crucifixion; the richer were denounced as Averroists. Under the
influence of Torquemada, a Dominican monk, the confessor of Queen
Isabella, that princess solicited a bull from the pope for the
establishment of the Holy Office. A bull was accordingly issued in
November, 1478, for the detection and suppression of heresy. In the
first year of the operation of the Inquisition, 1481, two thousand
victims were burnt in Andalusia; besides these, many thousands were dug
up from their graves and burnt; seventeen thousand were fined or
imprisoned for life. Whoever of the persecuted race could flee, escaped
for his life. Torquemada, now appointed inquisitor-general for Castile
and Leon, illustrated his office by his ferocity. Anonymous accusations
were received, the accused was not confronted by witnesses, torture was
relied upon for conviction; it was inflicted in vaults where no one
could hear the cries of the tormented. As, in pretended mercy, it was
forbidden to inflict torture a second time, with horrible duplicity it
was affirmed that the torment had not been completed at first, but had
only been suspended out of charity until the following day! The families
of the convicted were plunged into irretrievable ruin. Llorente, the
historian of the Inquisition, computes that Torquemada and his
collaborators, in the course of eighteen years, burnt at the stake ten
thousand two hundred and twenty persons, six thousand eight hundred and
sixty in effigy, and otherwise punished ninety-seven thousand three
hundred and twenty-one. This frantic priest destroyed Hebrew Bibles
wherever he could find them, And burnt six thousand volumes of Oriental
literature at Salamanca, under an imputation that they inculcated
Judaism. With unutterable disgust and indignation, we learn that the
papal government realized much money by selling to the rich
dispensations to secure them from the Inquisition.

But all these frightful atrocities proved failures. The conversions
were few. Torquemada, therefore, insisted on the immediate banishment
of every unbaptized Jew. On March 30, 1492, the edict of expulsion was
signed. All unbaptized Jews, of whatever age, sex, or condition, were
ordered to leave the realm by the end of the following July. If they
revisited it, they should suffer death. They might sell their effects
and take the proceeds in merchandise or bills of exchange, but not in
gold or silver. Exiled thus suddenly from the land of their birth, the
land of their ancestors for hundreds of years, they could not in
the glutted market that arose sell what they possessed. Nobody would
purchase what could be got for nothing after July. The Spanish clergy
occupied themselves by preaching in the public squares sermons filled
with denunciations against their victims, who, when the time for
expatriation came, swarmed in the roads and filled the air with their
cries of despair. Even the Spanish onlookers wept at the scene of agony.
Torquemada, however, enforced the ordinance that no one should afford
them any help.

Of the banished persons some made their way into Africa, some into
Italy; the latter carried with them to Naples ship-fever, which
destroyed not fewer than twenty thousand in that city, and devastated
that peninsula; some reached Turkey, a few England. Thousands,
especially mothers with nursing children, infants, and old people, died
by the way; many of them in the agonies of thirst.

This action against the Jews was soon followed by one against the Moors.
A pragmatica was issued at Seville, February, 1502, setting forth the
obligations of the Castilians to drive the enemies of God from the land,
and ordering that all unbaptized Moors in the kingdoms of Castile and
Leon above the age of infancy should leave the country by the end of
April. They might sell their property, but not take away any gold or
silver; they were forbidden to emigrate to the Mohammedan dominions; the
penalty of disobedience was death. Their condition was thus worse than
that of the Jews, who had been permitted to go where they chose. Such
was the fiendish intolerance of the Spaniards, that they asserted the
government would be justified in taking the lives of all the Moors for
their shameless infidelity.

What an ungrateful return for the toleration that the Moors in their
day of power had given to the Christians! No faith was kept with the
victims. Granada had surrendered under the solemn guarantee of the full
enjoyment of civil and religious liberty. At the instigation of
Cardinal Ximenes that pledge was broken, and, after a residence of eight
centuries, the Mohammedans were driven out of the land.


The coexistence of three religions in Andalusia--the Christian, the
Mohammedan, the Mosaic--had given opportunity for the development of
Averroism or philosophical Arabism. This was a repetition of what had
occurred at Rome, when the gods of all the conquered countries were
confronted in that capital, and universal disbelief in them all ensued.
Averroes himself was accused of having been first a Mussulman, then a
Christian, then a Jew, and finally a misbeliever. It was affirmed that
he was the author of the mysterious book "De Tribus Impostoribus."

In the middle ages there were two celebrated heretical books, "The
Everlasting Gospel," and the "De Tribus Impostoribus." The latter was
variously imputed to Pope Gerbert, to Frederick II., and to Averroes.
In their unrelenting hatred the Dominicans fastened all the blasphemies
current in those times on Averroes; they never tired of recalling the
celebrated and outrageous one respecting the eucharist. His writings had
first been generally made known to Christian Europe by the translation
of Michael Scot in the beginning of the thirteenth century, but long
before his time the literature of the West, like that of Asia, was full
of these ideas. We have seen how broadly they were set forth by Erigena.
The Arabians, from their first cultivation of philosophy, had been
infected by them; they were current in all the colleges of the three
khalifates. Considered not as a mode of thought, that will spontaneously
occur to all men at a certain stage of intellectual development, but as
having originated with Aristotle, they continually found favor with men
of the highest culture. We see them in Robert Grostete, in Roger Bacon,
and eventually in Spinoza. Averroes was not their inventor, he merely
gave them clearness and expression. Among the Jews of the thirteenth
century, he had completely supplanted his imputed master. Aristotle had
passed away from their eyes; his great commentator, Averroes, stood in
his place. So numerous were the converts to the doctrine of emanation
in Christendom, that Pope Alexander IV. (1255) found it necessary to
interfere. By his order, Albertus Magnus composed a work against the
"Unity of the Intellect." Treating of the origin and nature of the
soul, he attempted to prove that the theory of "a separate intellect,
enlightening man by irradiation anterior to the individual and surviving
the individual, is a detestable error." But the most illustrious
antagonist of the great commentator was St. Thomas Aquinas, the
destroyer of all such heresies as the unity of the intellect, the denial
of Providence, the impossibility of creation; the victories of "the
Angelic Doctor" were celebrated not only in the disputations of the
Dominicans, but also in the works of art of the painters of Florence
and Pisa. The indignation of that saint knew no bounds when Christians
became the disciples of an infidel, who was worse than a Mohammedan.
The wrath of the Dominicans, the order to which St. Thomas belonged, was
sharpened by the fact that their rivals, the Franciscans, inclined to
Averroistic views; and Dante, who leaned to the Dominicans, denounced
Averroes as the author of a most dangerous system. The theological odium
of all three dominant religions was put upon him; he was pointed out
as the originator of the atrocious maxim that "all religions are false,
although all are probably useful." An attempt was made at the Council
of Vienne to have his writings absolutely suppressed, and to forbid all
Christians reading them. The Dominicans, armed with the weapons of
the Inquisition, terrified Christian Europe with their unrelenting
persecutions. They imputed all the infidelity of the times to the
Arabian philosopher. But he was not without support. In Paris and in the
cities of Northern Italy the Franciscans sustained his views, and all
Christendom was agitated with these disputes.

Under the inspiration of the Dominicans, Averroes became to the Italian
painters the emblem of unbelief. Many of the Italian towns had pictures
or frescoes of the Day of Judgment and of Hell. In these Averroes not
unfrequently appears. Thus, in one at Pisa, he figures with Arius,
Mohammed, and Antichrist. In another he is represented as overthrown by
St. Thomas. He had become an essential element in the triumphs of the
great Dominican doctor. He continued thus to be familiar to the Italian
painters until the sixteenth century. His doctrines were maintained in
the University of Padua until the seventeenth.

Such is, in brief, the history of Averroism as it invaded Europe from
Spain. Under the auspices of Frederick II., it, in a less imposing
manner, issued from Sicily. That sovereign bad adopted it fully. In his
"Sicilian Questions" he had demanded light on the eternity of the world,
and on the nature of the soul, and supposed he had found it in the
replies of Ibn Sabin, an upholder of these doctrines. But in his
conflict with the papacy be was overthrown, and with him these heresies
were destroyed.

In Upper Italy, Averroism long maintained its ground. It was so
fashionable in high Venetian society that every gentleman felt
constrained to profess it. At length the Church took decisive action
against it. The Lateran Council, A.D. 1512, condemned the abettors of
these detestable doctrines to be held as heretics and infidels. As
we have seen, the late Vatican Council has anathematized them.
Notwithstanding that stigma, it is to be borne in mind that these
opinions are held to be true by a majority of the human race.



