CHAPTER II.

     THE ORIGIN OF CHRISTIANITY.--ITS TRANSFORMATION ON ATTAINING
     IMPERIAL POWER.--ITS RELATIONS TO SCIENCE.

     Religious condition of the Roman Republic.--The adoption of
     imperialism leads to monotheism.--Christianity spreads over
     the Roman Empire.--The circumstances under which it
     attained imperial power make its union with Paganism a
     political necessity.--Tertullian's description of its
     doctrines and practices.--Debasing effect of the policy of
     Constantine on it.--Its alliance with the civil power.--Its
     incompatibility with science.--Destruction of the
     Alexandrian Library and prohibition of philosophy.--
     Exposition of the Augustinian philosophy and Patristic
     science generally.--The Scriptures made the standard of
     science.


IN a political sense, Christianity is the bequest of the Roman Empire to
the world.

At the epoch of the transition of Rome from the republican to the
imperial form of government, all the independent nationalities around
the Mediterranean Sea had been brought under the control of that central
power. The conquest that had befallen them in succession had been by no
means a disaster. The perpetual wars they had maintained with each
other came to an end; the miseries their conflicts had engendered were
exchanged for universal peace.

Not only as a token of the conquest she had made but also as a
gratification to her pride, the conquering republic brought the gods
of the vanquished peoples to Rome. With disdainful toleration, she
permitted the worship of them all. That paramount authority exercised by
each divinity in his original seat disappeared at once in the crowd of
gods and goddesses among whom he had been brought. Already, as we have
seen, through geographical discoveries and philosophical criticism,
faith in the religion of the old days had been profoundly shaken. It
was, by this policy of Rome, brought to an end.

MONOTHEISM IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE. The kings of all the conquered provinces
had vanished; in their stead one emperor had come. The gods also had
disappeared. Considering the connection which in all ages has existed
between political and religious ideas, it was then not at all strange
that polytheism should manifest a tendency to pass into monotheism.
Accordingly, divine honors were paid at first to the deceased and at
length to the living emperor.

The facility with which gods were thus called into existence had a
powerful moral effect. The manufacture of a new one cast ridicule on
the origin of the old Incarnation in the East and apotheosis in the West
were fast filling Olympus with divinities. In the East, gods descended
from heaven, and were made incarnate in men; in the West, men ascended
from earth, and took their seat among the gods. It was not the
importation of Greek skepticism that made Rome skeptical. The excesses
of religion itself sapped the foundations of faith.

Not with equal rapidity did all classes of the population adopt
monotheistic views. The merchants and lawyers and soldiers, who by the
nature of their pursuits are more familiar with the vicissitudes of
life, and have larger intellectual views, were the first to be affected,
the land laborers and farmers the last.

THE RISE OF CHRISTIANITY When the empire in a military and political
sense had reached its culmination, in a religious and social aspect
it had attained its height of immorality. It had become thoroughly
epicurean; its maxim was, that life should be made a feast, that
virtue is only the seasoning of pleasure, and temperance the means of
prolonging it. Dining-rooms glittering with gold and incrusted with
gems, slaves in superb apparel, the fascinations of female society where
all the women were dissolute, magnificent baths, theatres, gladiators,
such were the objects of Roman desire. The conquerors of the world had
discovered that the only thing worth worshiping is Force. By it all
things might be secured, all that toil and trade had laboriously
obtained. The confiscation of goods and lands, the taxation of
provinces, were the reward of successful warfare; and the emperor
was the symbol of force. There was a social splendor, but it was the
phosphorescent corruption of the ancient Mediterranean world.

In one of the Eastern provinces, Syria, some persons in very humble
life had associated themselves together for benevolent and religious
purposes. The doctrines they held were in harmony with that sentiment
of universal brotherhood arising from the coalescence of the conquered
kingdoms. They were doctrines inculcated by Jesus.

The Jewish people at that time entertained a belief, founded on old
traditions, that a deliverer would arise among them, who would restore
them to their ancient splendor. The disciples of Jesus regarded him
as this long-expected Messiah. But the priesthood, believing that the
doctrines he taught were prejudicial to their interests, denounced
him to the Roman governor, who, to satisfy their clamors, reluctantly
delivered him over to death.

His doctrines of benevolence and human brotherhood outlasted that
event. The disciples, instead of scattering, organized. They associated
themselves on a principle of communism, each throwing into the common
stock whatever property he possessed, and all his gains. The widows
and orphans of the community were thus supported, the poor and the sick
sustained. From this germ was developed a new, and as the events proved,
all-powerful society--the Church; new, for nothing of the kind had
existed in antiquity; powerful, for the local churches, at first
isolated, soon began to confederate for their common interest. Through
this organization Christianity achieved all her political triumphs.

As we have said, the military domination of Rome had brought about
universal peace, and had generated a sentiment of brotherhood among the
vanquished nations. Things were, therefore, propitious for the rapid
diffusion of the newly-established--the Christian--principle
throughout the empire. It spread from Syria through all Asia Minor,
and successively reached Cyprus, Greece, Italy, eventually extending
westward as far as Gaul and Britain.

Its propagation was hastened by missionaries who made it known in all
directions. None of the ancient classical philosophies had ever taken
advantage of such a means.

Political conditions determined the boundaries of the new religion. Its
limits were eventually those of the Roman Empire; Rome, doubtfully the
place of death of Peter, not Jerusalem, indisputably the place of the
death of our Savior, became the religious capital. It was better to have
possession of the imperial seven hilled city, than of Gethsemane and
Calvary with all their holy souvenirs.

IT GATHERS POLITICAL POWER. For many years Christianity manifested
itself as a system enjoining three things--toward God veneration, in
personal life purity, in social life benevolence. In its early days of
feebleness it made proselytes only by persuasion, but, as it increased
in numbers and influence, it began to exhibit political tendencies, a
disposition to form a government within the government, an empire within
the empire. These tendencies it has never since lost. They are, in
truth, the logical result of its development. The Roman emperors,
discovering that it was absolutely incompatible with the imperial
system, tried to put it down by force. This was in accordance with the
spirit of their military maxims, which had no other means but force for
the establishment of conformity.

In the winter A.D. 302-'3, the Christian soldiers in some of the legions
refused to join in the time-honored solemnities for propitiating the
gods. The mutiny spread so quickly, the emergency became so pressing,
that the Emperor Diocletian was compelled to hold a council for the
purpose of determining what should be done. The difficulty of the
position may perhaps be appreciated when it is understood that the wife
and the daughter of Diocletian himself were Christians. He was a man
of great capacity and large political views; he recognized in the
opposition that must be made to the new party a political necessity,
yet he expressly enjoined that there should be no bloodshed. But who can
control an infuriated civil commotion? The church of Nicomedia was razed
to the ground; in retaliation the imperial palace was set on fire, an
edict was openly insulted and torn down. The Christian officers in the
army were cashiered; in all directions, martyrdoms and massacres were
taking place. So resistless was the march of events, that not even the
emperor himself could stop the persecution.

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN EMPEROR. It had now become evident that the
Christians constituted a powerful party in the state, animated with
indignation at the atrocities they had suffered, and determined to
endure them no longer. After the abdication of Diocletian (A.D. 305),
Constantine, one of the competitors for the purple, perceiving the
advantages that would accrue to him from such a policy, put himself
forth as the head of the Christian party. This gave him, in every part
of the empire, men and women ready to encounter fire and sword in his
behalf; it gave him unwavering adherents in every legion of the armies.
In a decisive battle, near the Milvian bridge, victory crowned his
schemes. The death of Maximin, and subsequently that of Licinius,
removed all obstacles. He ascended the throne of the Caesars--the first
Christian emperor.

Place, profit, power--these were in view of whoever now joined the
conquering sect. Crowds of worldly persons, who cared nothing about its
religious ideas, became its warmest supporters. Pagans at heart, their
influence was soon manifested in the paganization of Christianity that
forthwith ensued. The emperor, no better than they, did nothing to check
their proceedings. But he did not personally conform to the ceremonial
requirements of the Church until the close of his evil life, A.D. 337.

TERTULLIAN'S EXPOSITION OF CHRISTIANITY. That we may clearly appreciate
the modifications now impressed on Christianity--modifications which
eventually brought it in conflict with science--we must have, as a
means of comparison, a statement of what it was in its purer days.
Such, fortunately, we find in the "Apology or Defense of the Christians
against the Accusations of the Gentiles," written by Tertullian, at
Rome, during the persecution of Severus. He addressed it, not to the
emperor, but to the magistrates who sat in judgment on the accused. It
is a solemn and most earnest expostulation, setting forth all that could
be said in explanation of the subject, a representation of the belief
and cause of the Christians made in the imperial city in the face of the
whole world, not a querulous or passionate ecclesiastical appeal, but
a grave historical document. It has ever been looked upon as one of the
ablest of the early Christian works. Its date is about A.D. 200.

With no inconsiderable skill Tertullian opens his argument. He tells
the magistrates that Christianity is a stranger upon earth, and that she
expects to meet with enemies in a country which is not her own. She only
asks that she may not be condemned unheard, and that Roman magistrates
will permit her to defend herself; that the laws of the empire will
gather lustre, if judgment be passed upon her after she has been tried
but not if she is sentenced without a hearing of her cause; that it is
unjust to hate a thing of which we are ignorant, even though it may be a
thing worthy of hate; that the laws of Rome deal with actions, not with
mere names; but that, notwithstanding this, persons have been punished
because they were called Christians, and that without any accusation of
crime.

He then advances to an exposition of the origin, the nature, and the
effects of Christianity, stating that it is founded on the Hebrew
Scriptures, which are the most venerable of all books. He says to the
magistrates: "The books of Moses, in which God has inclosed, as in
a treasure, all the religion of the Jews, and consequently all the
Christian religion, reach far beyond the oldest you have, even beyond
all your public monuments, the establishment of your state, the
foundation of many great cities--all that is most advanced by you in all
ages of history, and memory of times; the invention of letters, which
are the interpreters of sciences and the guardians of all excellent
things. I think I may say more--beyond your gods, your temples, your
oracles and sacrifices. The author of those books lived a thousand years
before the siege of Troy, and more than fifteen hundred before Homer."
Time is the ally of truth, and wise men believe nothing but what is
certain, and what has been verified by time. The principal authority
of these Scriptures is derived from their venerable antiquity. The most
learned of the Ptolemies, who was surnamed Philadelphus, an accomplished
prince, by the advice of Demetrius Phalareus, obtained a copy of these
holy books. It may be found at this day in his library. The divinity of
these Scriptures is proved by this, that all that is done in our days
may be found predicted in them; they contain all that has since passed
in the view of men.

Is not the accomplishment of a prophecy a testimony to its truth? Seeing
that events which are past have vindicated these prophecies, shall we be
blamed for trusting them in events that are to come? Now, as we believe
things that have been prophesied and have come to pass, so we believe
things that have been told us, but not yet come to pass, because they
have all been foretold by the same Scriptures, as well those that are
verified every day as those that still remain to be fulfilled.

These Holy Scriptures teach us that there is one God, who made the world
out of nothing, who, though daily seen, is invisible; his infiniteness
is known only to himself; his immensity conceals, but at the same
time discovers him. He has ordained for men, according to their lives,
rewards and punishments; he will raise all the dead that have ever lived
from the creation of the world, will command them to reassume their
bodies, and thereupon adjudge them to felicity that has so end, or to
eternal flames. The fires of hell are those hidden flames which the
earth shuts up in her bosom. He has in past times sent into the world
preachers or prophets. The prophets of those old times were Jews; they
addressed their oracles, for such they were, to the Jews, who
have stored them up in the Scriptures. On them, as has been said,
Christianity is founded, though the Christian differs in his ceremonies
from the Jew. We are accused of worshiping a man, and not the God of
the Jews. Not so. The honor we bear to Christ does not derogate from the
honor we bear to God.

On account of the merit of these ancient patriarchs, the Jews were the
only beloved people of God; he delighted to be in communication with
them by his own mouth. By him they were raised to admirable greatness.
But with perversity they wickedly ceased to regard him; they changed
his laws into a profane worship. He warned them that he would take to
himself servants more faithful than they, and, for their crime, punished
them by driving them forth from their country. They are now spread all
over the world; they wander in all parts; they cannot enjoy the air they
breathed at their birth; they have neither man nor God for their king.
As he threatened them, so he has done. He has taken, in all nations
and countries of the earth, people more faithful than they. Through his
prophets he had declared that these should have greater favors, and that
a Messiah should come, to publish a new law among them. This Messiah was
Jesus, who is also God. For God may be derived from God, as the light
of a candle may be derived from the light of another candle. God and his
Son are the self-same God--a light is the same light as that from which
it was taken.

The Scriptures make known two comings of the Son of God; the first in
humility, the second at the day of judgment, in power. The Jews might
have known all this from the prophets, but their sins have so blinded
them that they did not recognize him at his first coming, and are still
vainly expecting him. They believed that all the miracles wrought by
him were the work of magic. The doctors of the law and the chief priests
were envious of him; they denounced him to Pilate. He was crucified,
died, was buried, and after three days rose again. For forty days he
remained among his disciples. Then he was environed in a cloud, and
rose up to heaven--a truth far more certain than any human testimonies
touching the ascension of Romulus or of any other Roman prince mounting
up to the same place.

Tertullian then describes the origin and nature of devils, who, under
Satan, their prince, produce diseases, irregularities of the air,
plagues, and the blighting of the blossoms of the earth, who seduce men
to offer sacrifices, that they may have the blood of the victims, which
is their food. They are as nimble as the birds, and hence know every
thing that is passing upon earth; they live in the air, and hence can
spy what is going on in heaven; for this reason they can impose on men
reigned prophecies, and deliver oracles. Thus they announced in Rome
that a victory would be obtained over King Perseus, when in truth they
knew that the battle was already won. They falsely cure diseases; for,
taking possession of the body of a man, they produce in him a distemper,
and then ordaining some remedy to be used, they cease to afflict him,
and men think that a cure has taken place.

Though Christians deny that the emperor is a god, they nevertheless pray
for his prosperity, because the general dissolution that threatens the
universe, the conflagration of the world, is retarded so long as the
glorious majesty of the triumphant Roman Empire shall last. They desire
not to be present at the subversion of all Nature. They acknowledge
only one republic, but it is the whole world; they constitute one body,
worship one God, and all look forward to eternal happiness. Not only do
they pray for the emperor and the magistrates, but also for peace. They
read the Scriptures to nourish their faith, lift up their hope, and
strengthen the confidence they have in God. They assemble to exhort one
another; they remove sinners from their societies; they have bishops who
preside over them, approved by the suffrages of those whom they are to
conduct. At the end of each month every one contributes if he will, but
no one is constrained to give; the money gathered in this manner is
the pledge of piety; it is not consumed in eating and drinking, but
in feeding the poor, and burying them, in comforting children that are
destitute of parents and goods, in helping old men who have spent the
best of their days in the service of the faithful, in assisting those
who have lost by shipwreck what they had, and those who are condemned
to the mines, or have been banished to islands, or shut up in prisons,
because they professed the religion of the true God. There is but one
thing that Christians have not in common, and that one thing is their
wives. They do not feast as if they should die to-morrow, nor build
as if they should never die. The objects of their life are innocence,
justice, patience, temperance, chastity.

To this noble exposition of Christian belief and life in his day,
Tertullian does not hesitate to add an ominous warning to the
magistrates he is addressing--ominous, for it was a forecast of a great
event soon to come to pass: "Our origin is but recent, yet already we
fill all that your power acknowledges--cities, fortresses, islands,
provinces, the assemblies of the people, the wards of Rome, the palace,
the senate, the public places, and especially the armies. We have
left you nothing but your temples. Reflect what wars we are able to
undertake! With what promptitude might we not arm ourselves were we not
restrained by our religion, which teaches us that it is better to be
killed than to kill!"

Before he closes his defense, Tertullian renews an assertion which,
carried into practice, as it subsequently was, affected the intellectual
development of all Europe. He declares that the Holy Scriptures are a
treasure from which all the true wisdom in the world has been drawn;
that every philosopher and every poet is indebted to them. He labors
to show that they are the standard and measure of all truth, and that
whatever is inconsistent with them must necessarily be false.

From Tertullian's able work we see what Christianity was while it was
suffering persecution and struggling for existence. We have now to
see what it became when in possession of imperial power. Great is the
difference between Christianity under Severus and Christianity after
Constantine. Many of the doctrines which at the latter period were
preeminent, in the former were unknown.

PAGANIZATION OF CHRISTIANITY. Two causes led to the amalgamation of
Christianity with paganism: 1. The political necessities of the new
dynasty; 2. The policy adopted by the new religion to insure its spread.

1. Though the Christian party had proved itself sufficiently strong to
give a master to the empire, it was never sufficiently strong to destroy
its antagonist, paganism. The issue of the struggle between them was an
amalgamation of the principles of both. In this, Christianity differed
from Mohammedanism, which absolutely annihilated its antagonist, and
spread its own doctrines without adulteration.

Constantine continually showed by his acts that he felt he must be the
impartial sovereign of all his people, not merely the representative
of a successful faction. Hence, if he built Christian churches, he also
restored pagan temples; if he listened to the clergy, he also consulted
the haruspices; if he summoned the Council of Nicea, he also honored the
statue of Fortune; if he accepted the rite of baptism, he also struck
a medal bearing his title of "God." His statue, on the top of the great
porphyry pillar at Constantinople, consisted of an ancient image of
Apollo, whose features were replaced by those of the emperor, and
its head surrounded by the nails feigned to have been used at the
crucifixion of Christ, arranged so as to form a crown of glory.

Feeling that there must be concessions to the defeated pagan party,
in accordance with its ideas, he looked with favor on the idolatrous
movements of his court. In fact, the leaders of these movements were
persons of his own family.

CHRISTIANITY UNDER CONSTANTINE. 2. To the emperor--a mere worldling--a
man without any religious convictions, doubtless it appeared best for
himself, best for the empire, and best for the contending parties,
Christian and pagan, to promote their union or amalgamation as much as
possible. Even sincere Christians do not seem to have been averse to
this; perhaps they believed that the new doctrines would diffuse most
thoroughly by incorporating in themselves ideas borrowed from the old,
that Truth would assert her self in the end, and the impurity be cast
off. In accomplishing this amalgamation, Helena, the empress-mother,
aided by the court ladies, led the way. For her gratification there were
discovered, in a cavern at Jerusalem, wherein they had lain buried for
more than three centuries, the Savior's cross, and those of the two
thieves, the inscription, and the nails that had been used. They were
identified by miracle. A true relic-worship set in. The superstition of
the old Greek times reappeared; the times when the tools with which the
Trojan horse was made might still be seen at Metapontum, the sceptre of
Pelops at Chaeroneia, the spear of Achilles at Phaselis, the sword
of Memnon at Nicomedia, when the Tegeates could show the hide of the
Calydonian boar and very many cities boasted their possession of the
true palladium of Troy; when there were statues of Minerva that could
brandish spears, paintings that could blush, images that could sweat,
and endless shrines and sanctuaries at which miracle-cures could be
performed.

As years passed on, the faith described by Tertullian was transmuted
into one more fashionable and more debased. It was incorporated with
the old Greek mythology. Olympus was restored, but the divinities passed
under other names. The more powerful provinces insisted on the adoption
of their time-honored conceptions. Views of the Trinity, in accordance
with Egyptian traditions, were established. Not only was the adoration
of Isis under a new name restored, but even her image, standing on the
crescent moon, reappeared. The well-known effigy of that goddess,
with the infant Horus in her arms, has descended to our days in
the beautiful, artistic creations of the Madonna and Child. Such
restorations of old conceptions under novel forms were everywhere
received with delight. When it was announced to the Ephesians that the
Council of that place, headed by Cyril, had decreed that the Virgin
should be called "the Mother of God," with tears of joy they embraced
the knees of their bishop; it was the old instinct peeping out; their
ancestors would have done the same for Diana.

This attempt to conciliate worldly converts, by adopting their ideas
and practices, did not pass without remonstrance from those whose
intelligence discerned the motive. "You have," says Faustus to
Augustine, "substituted your agapae for the sacrifices of the pagans;
for their idols your martyrs, whom you serve with the very same honors.
You appease the shades of the dead with wine and feasts; you celebrate
the solemn festivities of the Gentiles, their calends, and their
solstices; and, as to their manners, those you have retained without any
alteration. Nothing distinguishes you from the pagans, except that you
hold your assemblies apart from them." Pagan observances were everywhere
introduced. At weddings it was the custom to sing hymns to Venus.

INTRODUCTION OF ROMAN RITES. Let us pause here a moment, and see, in
anticipation, to what a depth of intellectual degradation this policy of
paganization eventually led. Heathen rites were adopted, a pompous
and splendid ritual, gorgeous robes, mitres, tiaras, wax-tapers,
processional services, lustrations, gold and silver vases, were
introduced. The Roman lituus, the chief ensign of the augurs, became the
crozier. Churches were built over the tombs of martyrs, and consecrated
with rites borrowed from the ancient laws of the Roman pontiffs.
Festivals and commemorations of martyrs multiplied with the numberless
fictitious discoveries of their remains. Fasting became the grand means
of repelling the devil and appeasing God; celibacy the greatest of
the virtues. Pilgrimages were made to Palestine and the tombs of the
martyrs. Quantities of dust and earth were brought from the Holy Land
and sold at enormous prices, as antidotes against devils. The virtues
of consecrated water were upheld. Images and relics were introduced into
the churches, and worshiped after the fashion of the heathen gods. It
was given out that prodigies and miracles were to be seen in certain
places, as in the heathen times. The happy souls of departed Christians
were invoked; it was believed that they were wandering about the world,
or haunting their graves. There was a multiplication of temples, altars,
and penitential garments. The festival of the purification of the Virgin
was invented to remove the uneasiness of heathen converts on account of
the loss of their Lupercalia, or feasts of Pan. The worship of images,
of fragments of the cross, or bones, nails, and other relics, a true
fetich worship, was cultivated. Two arguments were relied on for the
authenticity of these objects--the authority of the Church, and the
working of miracles. Even the worn-out clothing of the saints and the
earth of their graves were venerated. From Palestine were brought what
were affirmed to be the skeletons of St. Mark and St. James, and other
ancient worthies. The apotheosis of the old Roman times was replaced by
canonization; tutelary saints succeed to local mythological divinities.
Then came the mystery of transubstantiation, or the conversion of bread
and wine by the priest into the flesh and blood of Christ. As centuries
passed, the paganization became more and more complete. Festivals sacred
to the memory of the lance with which the Savior's side was pierced,
the nails that fastened him to the cross, and the crown of thorns, were
instituted. Though there were several abbeys that possessed this last
peerless relic, no one dared to say that it was impossible they could
all be authentic.

We may read with advantage the remarks made by Bishop Newton on this
paganization of Christianity. He asks: "Is not the worship of saints and
angels now in all respects the same that the worship of demons was in
former times? The name only is different, the thing is identically
the same,... the deified men of the Christians are substituted for the
deified men of the heathens. The promoters of this worship were sensible
that it was the same, and that the one succeeded to the other; and,
as the worship is the same, so likewise it is performed with the same
ceremonies. The burning of incense or perfumes on several altars at one
and the same time; the sprinkling of holy water, or a mixture of salt
and common water, at going into and coming out of places of public
worship; the lighting up of a great number of lamps and wax-candles in
broad daylight before altars and statues of these deities; the hanging
up of votive offerings and rich presents as attestations of so many
miraculous cures and deliverances from diseases and dangers; the
canonization or deification of deceased worthies; the assigning of
distinct provinces or prefectures to departed heroes and saints; the
worshiping and adoring of the dead in their sepulchres, shrines, and
relics; the consecrating and bowing down to images; the attributing
of miraculous powers and virtues to idols; the setting up of little
oratories, altars, and statues in the streets and highways, and on
the tops of mountains; the carrying of images and relics in pompous
procession, with numerous lights and with music and singing;
flagellations at solemn seasons under the notion of penance; a great
variety of religious orders and fraternities of priests; the shaving of
priests, or the tonsure as it is called, on the crown of their heads;
the imposing of celibacy and vows of chastity on the religious of both
sexes--all these and many more rites and ceremonies are equally parts of
pagan and popish superstition. Nay, the very same temples, the very same
images, which were once consecrated to Jupiter and the other demons, are
now consecrated to the Virgin Mary and the other saints. The very same
rites and inscriptions are ascribed to both, the very same prodigies and
miracles are related of these as of those. In short, almost the whole
of paganism is converted and applied to popery; the one is manifestly
formed upon the same plan and principles as the other; so that there is
not only a conformity, but even a uniformity, in the worship of ancient
and modern, of heathen and Christian Rome."

DEBASEMENT OF CHRISTIANITY. Thus far Bishop Newton; but to return to the
times of Constantine: though these concessions to old and popular ideas
were permitted and even encouraged, the dominant religious party never
for a moment hesitated to enforce its decisions by the aid of the civil
power--an aid which was freely given. Constantine thus carried into
effect the acts of the Council of Nicea. In the affair of Arius, he even
ordered that whoever should find a book of that heretic, and not burn
it, should be put to death. In like manner Nestor was by Theodosius the
Younger banished to an Egyptian oasis.

The pagan party included many of the old aristocratic families of the
empire; it counted among its adherents all the disciples of the old
philosophical schools. It looked down on its antagonist with contempt.
It asserted that knowledge is to be obtained only by the laborious
exercise of human observation and human reason.

The Christian party asserted that all knowledge is to be found in the
Scriptures and in the traditions of the Church; that, in the written
revelation, God had not only given a criterion of truth, but had
furnished us all that he intended us to know. The Scriptures, therefore,
contain the sum, the end of all knowledge. The clergy, with the emperor
at their back, would endure no intellectual competition.

Thus came into prominence what were termed sacred and profane knowledge;
thus came into presence of each other two opposing parties, one relying
on human reason as its guide, the other on revelation. Paganism leaned
for support on the learning of its philosophers, Christianity on the
inspiration of its Fathers.

The Church thus set herself forth as the depository and arbiter of
knowledge; she was ever ready to resort to the civil power to compel
obedience to her decisions. She thus took a course which determined her
whole future career: she became a stumbling-block in the intellectual
advancement of Europe for more than a thousand years.

The reign of Constantine marks the epoch of the transformation of
Christianity from a religion into a political system; and though, in
one sense, that system was degraded into an idolatry, in another it had
risen into a development of the old Greek mythology. The maxim holds
good in the social as well as in the mechanical world, that, when two
bodies strike, the form of both is changed. Paganism was modified by
Christianity; Christianity by Paganism.

THE TRINITARIAN DISPUTE. In the Trinitarian controversy, which first
broke out in Egypt--Egypt, the land of Trinities--the chief point in
discussion was to define the position of "the Son." There lived in
Alexandria a presbyter of the name of Arius, a disappointed candidate
for the office of bishop. He took the ground that there was a time when,
from the very nature of sonship, the Son did not exist, and a time at
which he commenced to be, asserting that it is the necessary condition
of the filial relation that a father must be older than his son. But
this assertion evidently denied the coeternity of the three persons of
the Trinity; it suggested a subordination or inequality among them,
and indeed implied a time when the Trinity did not exist. Hereupon, the
bishop, who had been the successful competitor against Arius, displayed
his rhetorical powers in public debates on the question, and, the strife
spreading, the Jews and pagans, who formed a very large portion of
the population of Alexandria, amused themselves with theatrical
representations of the contest on the stage--the point of their
burlesques being the equality of age of the Father and his Son.

Such was the violence the controversy at length assumed, that the matter
had to be referred to the emperor. At first he looked upon the dispute
as altogether frivolous, and perhaps in truth inclined to the assertion
of Arius, that in the very nature of the thing a father must be older
than his son. So great, however, was the pressure laid upon him, that
he was eventually compelled to summon the Council of Nicea, which, to
dispose of the conflict, set forth a formulary or creed, and attached to
it this anathema: "The Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes
those who say that there was a time when the Son of God was not, and
that, before he was begotten, he was not, and that he was made out of
nothing, or out of another substance or essence, and is created, or
changeable, or alterable." Constantine at once enforced the decision of
the council by the civil power.

A few years subsequently the Emperor Theodosius prohibited sacrifices,
made the inspection of the entrails of animals a capital offense, and
forbade any one entering a temple. He instituted Inquisitors of Faith,
and ordained that all who did not accord with the belief of Damasus, the
Bishop of Rome, and Peter, the Bishop of Alexandria, should be driven
into exile, and deprived of civil rights. Those who presumed to
celebrate Easter on the same day as the Jews, he condemned to death.
The Greek language was now ceasing to be known in the West, and true
learning was becoming extinct.

At this time the bishopric of Alexandria was held by one Theophilus. An
ancient temple of Osiris having been given to the Christians of the city
for the site of a church, it happened that, in digging the foundation
for the new edifice, the obscene symbols of the former worship chanced
to be found. These, with more zeal than modesty, Theophilus exhibited
in the market-place to public derision. With less forbearance than the
Christian party showed when it was insulted in the theatre during the
Trinitarian dispute, the pagans resorted to violence, and a riot ensued.
They held the Serapion as their headquarters. Such were the disorder and
bloodshed that the emperor had to interfere. He dispatched a rescript to
Alexandria, enjoining the bishop, Theophilus, to destroy the Serapion;
and the great library, which had been collected by the Ptolemies, and
had escaped the fire of Julius Caesar, was by that fanatic dispersed.

THE MURDER OF HYPATIA. The bishopric thus held by Theophilus was in due
time occupied by his nephew St. Cyril, who had commended himself to
the approval of the Alexandrian congregations as a successful and
fashionable preacher. It was he who had so much to do with the
introduction of the worship of the Virgin Mary. His hold upon the
audiences of the giddy city was, however, much weakened by Hypatia, the
daughter of Theon, the mathematician, who not only distinguished herself
by her expositions of the doctrines of Plato and Aristotle, but also by
her comments on the writings of Apollonius and other geometers. Each day
before her academy stood a long train of chariots; her lecture-room was
crowded with the wealth and fashion of Alexandria. They came to listen
to her discourses on those questions which man in all ages has asked,
but which never yet have been answered: "What am I? Where am I? What can
I know?"

Hypatia and Cyril! Philosophy and bigotry. They cannot exist together.
So Cyril felt, and on that feeling he acted. As Hypatia repaired to her
academy, she was assaulted by Cyril's mob--a mob of many monks. Stripped
naked in the street, she was dragged into a church, and there killed by
the club of Peter the Reader. The corpse was cut to pieces, the flesh
was scraped from the bones with shells, and the remnants cast into a
fire. For this frightful crime Cyril was never called to account. It
seemed to be admitted that the end sanctified the means.

So ended Greek philosophy in Alexandria, so came to an untimely close
the learning that the Ptolemies had done so much to promote. The
"Daughter Library," that of the Serapion, had been dispersed. The fate
of Hypatia was a warning to all who would cultivate profane knowledge.
Henceforth there was to be no freedom for human thought. Every one must
think as the ecclesiastical authority ordered him, A.D. 414. In Athens
itself philosophy awaited its doom. Justinian at length prohibited its
teaching, and caused all its schools in that city to be closed.

PELAGIUS. While these events were transpiring in the Eastern provinces
of the Roman Empire, the spirit that had produced them was displaying
itself in the West. A British monk, who had assumed the name of
Pelagius, passed through Western Europe and Northern Africa, teaching
that death was not introduced into the world by the sin of Adam; that
on the contrary he was necessarily and by nature mortal, and had he not
sinned he would nevertheless have died; that the consequences of his
sins were confined to himself, and did not affect his posterity. From
these premises Pelagius drew certain important theological conclusions.

At Rome, Pelagius had been received with favor; at Carthage, at the
instigation of St. Augustine, he was denounced. By a synod, held at
Diospolis, he was acquitted of heresy, but, on referring the matter to
the Bishop of Rome, Innocent I., he was, on the contrary, condemned. It
happened that at this moment Innocent died, and his successor, Zosimus,
annulled his judgment and declared the opinions of Pelagius to be
orthodox. These contradictory decisions are still often referred to
by the opponents of papal infallibility. Things were in this state of
confusion, when the wily African bishops, through the influence of Count
Valerius, procured from the emperor an edict denouncing Pelagins as
a heretic; he and his accomplices were condemned to exile and the
forfeiture of their goods. To affirm that death was in the world before
the fall of Adam, was a state crime.

CONDEMNATION OF PELAGIUS. It is very instructive to consider the
principles on which this strange decision was founded. Since the
question was purely philosophical, one might suppose that it would
have been discussed on natural principles; instead of that, theological
considerations alone were adduced. The attentive reader will have
remarked, in Tertullian's statement of the principles of Christianity,
a complete absence of the doctrines of original sin, total depravity,
predestination, grace, and atonement. The intention of Christianity,
as set forth by him, has nothing in common with the plan of salvation
upheld two centuries subsequently. It is to St. Augustine, a
Carthaginian, that we are indebted for the precision of our views on
these important points.

In deciding whether death had been in the world before the fall of Adam,
or whether it was the penalty inflicted on the world for his sin,
the course taken was to ascertain whether the views of Pelagius were
accordant or discordant not with Nature but with the theological
doctrines of St. Augustine. And the result has been such as might
be expected. The doctrine declared to be orthodox by ecclesiastical
authority is overthrown by the unquestionable discoveries of modern
science. Long before a human being had appeared upon earth, millions of
individuals--nay, more, thousands of species and even genera--had died;
those which remain with us are an insignificant fraction of the vast
hosts that have passed away.

A consequence of great importance issued from the decision of the
Pelagian controversy. The book of Genesis had been made the basis of
Christianity. If, in a theological point of view, to its account of the
sin in the garden of Eden, and the transgression and punishment of Adam,
so much weight had been attached, it also in a philosophical point
of view became the grand authority of Patristic science. Astronomy,
geology, geography, anthropology, chronology, and indeed all the various
departments of human knowledge, were made to conform to it.

ST. AUGUSTINE. As the doctrines of St. Augustine have had the effect of
thus placing theology in antagonism with science, it may be interesting
to examine briefly some of the more purely philosophical views of that
great man. For this purpose, we may appropriately select portions of
his study of the first chapter of Genesis, as contained in the eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth books of his "Confessions."

These consist of philosophical discussions, largely interspersed
with rhapsodies. He prays that God will give him to understand the
Scriptures, and will open their meaning to him; he declares that in
them there is nothing superfluous, but that the words have a manifold
meaning.

The face of creation testifies that there has been a Creator; but at
once arises the question, "How and when did he make heaven and earth?
They could not have been made IN heaven and earth, the world could not
have been made IN the world, nor could they have been made when there
was nothing to make them of." The solution of this fundamental inquiry
St. Augustine finds in saying, "Thou spakest, and they were made."

But the difficulty does not end here. St. Augustine goes on to remark
that the syllables thus uttered by God came forth in succession, and
there must have been some created thing to express the words. This
created thing must, therefore, have existed before heaven and earth, and
yet there could have been no corporeal thing before heaven and earth. It
must have been a creature, because the words passed away and came to an
end but we know that "the word of the Lord endureth forever."

Moreover, it is plain that the words thus spoken could not have been
spoken successively, but simultaneously, else there would have been time
and change--succession in its nature implying time; whereas there was
then nothing but eternity and immortality. God knows and says eternally
what takes place in time.

CRITICISM OF ST. AUGUSTINE. St. Augustine then defines, not without
much mysticism, what is meant by the opening words of Genesis: "In
the beginning." He is guided to his conclusion by another scriptural
passage: "How wonderful are thy works, O Lord! in wisdom hast thou made
them all." This "wisdom" is "the beginning," and in that beginning the
Lord created the heaven and the earth.

"But," he adds, "some one may ask, 'What was God doing before he made
the heaven and the earth? for, if at any particular moment he began
to employ himself, that means time, not eternity. In eternity nothing
transpires--the whole is present.'" In answering this question, he
cannot forbear one of those touches of rhetoric for which he was so
celebrated: "I will not answer this question by saying that he was
preparing hell for priers into his mysteries. I say that, before God
made heaven and earth, he did not make any thing, for no creature could
be made before any creature was made. Time itself is a creature, and
hence it could not possibly exist before creation.

"What, then, is time? The past is not, the future is not, the
present--who can tell what it is, unless it be that which has no
duration between two nonentities? There is no such thing as 'a long
time,' or 'a short time,' for there are no such things as the past and
the future. They have no existence, except in the soul."

The style in which St. Augustine conveyed his ideas is that of a
rhapsodical conversation with God. His works are an incoherent dream.
That the reader may appreciate this remark, I might copy almost at
random any of his paragraphs. The following is from the twelfth book:

"This then, is what I conceive, O my God, when I hear thy Scripture
saying, In the beginning God made heaven and earth: and the earth was
invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep, and not
mentioning what day thou createdst them; this is what I conceive,
that because of the heaven of heavens--that intellectual heaven, whose
intelligences know all at once, not in part, not darkly, not through a
glass, but as a whole, in manifestation, face to face; not this thing
now, and that thing anon; but (as I said) know all at once, without any
succession of times; and because of the earth, invisible and without
form, without any succession of times, which succession presents 'this
thing now, that thing anon;' because, where there is no form, there
is no distinction of things; it is, then, on account of these two, a
primitive formed, and a primitive formless; the one, heaven, but the
heaven of heavens; the other, earth, but the earth movable and without
form; because of these two do I conceive, did thy Scripture say without
mention of days, In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
For, forthwith it subjoined what earth it spake of; and also in that the
firmament is recorded to be created the second day, and called heaven,
it conveys to us of which heaven he before spake, without mention of
days.

"Wondrous depth of thy words! whose surface behold! is before us,
inviting to little ones; yet are they a wondrous depth, O my God, a
wondrous depth! It is awful to look therein; an awfulness of honor, and
a trembling of love. The enemies thereof I hate vehemently; O that thou
wouldst slay them with thy two-edged sword, that they might no longer be
enemies to it: for so do I love to have them slain unto themselves, that
they may live unto thee."

As an example of the hermeneutical manner in which St. Augustine
unfolded the concealed facts of the Scriptures, I may cite the following
from the thirteenth book of the "Confessions;" his object is to show
that the doctrine of the Trinity is contained in the Mosaic narrative of
the creation:

"Lo, now the Trinity appears unto me in a glass darkly, which is thou my
God, because thou, O Father, in him who is the beginning of our wisdom,
which is thy wisdom, born of thyself, equal unto thee and coeternal,
that is, in thy Son, createdst heaven and earth. Much now have we said
of the heaven of heavens, and of the earth invisible and without form,
and of the darksome deep, in reference to the wandering instability of
its spiritual deformity, unless it had been converted unto him, from
whom it had its then degree of life, and by his enlightening became a
beauteous life, and the heaven of that heaven, which was afterward
set between water and water. And under the name of God, I now held the
Father, who made these things; and under the name of the beginning, the
Son, in whom he made these things; and believing, as I did, my God as
the Trinity, I searched further in his holy words, and lo! thy Spirit
moved upon the waters. Behold the Trinity, my God!--Father, and Son, and
Holy Ghost Creator of all creation."

That I might convey to my reader a just impression of the character of
St. Augustine's philosophical writings, I have, in the two quotations
here given, substituted for my own translation that of the Rev. Dr.
Pusey, as contained in Vol. I. of the "Library of Fathers of the Holy
Catholic Church," published at Oxford, 1840.

Considering the eminent authority which has been attributed to the
writings of St. Augustine by the religious world for nearly fifteen
centuries, it is proper to speak of them with respect. And indeed it
is not necessary to do otherwise. The paragraphs here quoted criticise
themselves. No one did more than this Father to bring science and
religion into antagonism; it was mainly he who diverted the Bible
from its true office--a guide to purity of life--and placed it in the
perilous position of being the arbiter of human knowledge, an audacious
tyranny over the mind of man. The example once set, there was no want of
followers; the works of the great Greek philosophers were stigmatized
as profane; the transcendently glorious achievements of the Museum of
Alexandria were hidden from sight by a cloud of ignorance, mysticism,
and unintelligible jargon, out of which there too often flashed the
destroying lightnings of ecclesiastical vengeance.


A divine revelation of science admits of no improvement, no change, no
advance. It discourages as needless, and indeed as presumptuous, all new
discovery, considering it as an unlawful prying into things which it was
the intention of God to conceal.

What, then, is that sacred, that revealed science, declared by the
Fathers to be the sum of all knowledge?

It likened all phenomena, natural and spiritual, to human acts. It saw
in the Almighty, the Eternal, only a gigantic man.

THE PATRISTIC PHILOSOPHY. As to the earth, it affirmed that it is a flat
surface, over which the sky is spread like a dome, or, as St. Augustine
tells us, is stretched like a skin. In this the sun and moon and stars
move, so that they may give light by day and by night to man. The earth
was made of matter created by God out of nothing, and, with all the
tribes of animals and plants inhabiting it, was finished in six days.
Above the sky or firmament is heaven; in the dark and fiery space
beneath the earth is hell. The earth is the central and most important
body of the universe, all other things being intended for and
subservient to it.

As to man, he was made out of the dust of the earth. At first he was
alone, but subsequently woman was formed from one of his ribs. He is the
greatest and choicest of the works of God. He was placed in a paradise
near the banks of the Euphrates, and was very wise and very pure; but,
having tasted of the forbidden fruit, and thereby broken the commandment
given to him, he was condemned to labor and to death.

The descendants of the first man, undeterred by his punishment, pursued
such a career of wickedness that it became necessary to destroy them. A
deluge, therefore, flooded the face of the earth, and rose over the tops
of the mountains. Having accomplished its purpose, the water was dried
up by a wind.

From this catastrophe Noah and his three sons, with their wives, were
saved in an ark. Of these sons, Shem remained in Asia and repeopled it.
Ham peopled Africa; Japhet, Europe. As the Fathers were not acquainted
with the existence of America, they did not provide an ancestor for its
people.

Let us listen to what some of these authorities say in support of their
assertions. Thus Lactantius, referring to the heretical doctrine of the
globular form of the earth, remarks: "Is it possible that men can be so
absurd as to believe that the crops and the trees on the other side of
the earth hang downward, and that men have their feet higher than their
heads? If you ask them how they defend these monstrosities, how things
do not fall away from the earth on that side, they reply that the nature
of things is such that heavy bodies tend toward the centre, like the
spokes of a wheel, while light bodies, as clouds, smoke, fire, tend from
the centre to the heavens on all sides. Now, I am really at a loss what
to say of those who, when they have once gone wrong, steadily persevere
in their folly, and defend one absurd opinion by another." On the
question of the antipodes, St. Augustine asserts that "it is impossible
there should be inhabitants on the opposite side of the earth, since
no such race is recorded by Scripture among the descendants of Adam."
Perhaps, however, the most unanswerable argument against the sphericity
of the earth was this, that "in the day of judgment, men on the other
side of a globe could not see the Lord descending through the air."

It is unnecessary for me to say any thing respecting the introduction of
death into the world, the continual interventions of spiritual agencies
in the course of events, the offices of angels and devils, the expected
conflagration of the earth, the tower of Babel, the confusion of
tongues, the dispersion of mankind, the interpretation of natural
phenomena, as eclipses, the rainbow, etc. Above all, I abstain from
commenting on the Patristic conceptions of the Almighty; they are too
anthropomorphic, and wanting in sublimity.

Perhaps, however, I may quote from Cosmas Indicopleustes the views
that were entertained in the sixth century. He wrote a work entitled
"Christian Topography," the chief intent of which was to confute the
heretical opinion of the globular form of the earth, and the pagan
assertion that there is a temperate zone on the southern side of the
torrid. He affirms that, according to the true orthodox system of
geography, the earth is a quadrangular plane, extending four hundred
days' journey east and west, and exactly half as much north and south;
that it is inclosed by mountains, on which the sky rests; that one on
the north side, huger than the others, by intercepting the rays of the
sun, produces night; and that the plane of the earth is not set exactly
horizontally, but with a little inclination from the north: hence the
Euphrates, Tigris, and other rivers, running southward, are rapid; but
the Nile, having to run up-hill, has necessarily a very slow current.

The Venerable Bede, writing in the seventh century, tells us that "the
creation was accomplished in six days, and that the earth is its centre
and its primary object. The heaven is of a fiery and subtile nature,
round, and equidistant in every part, as a canopy from the centre of the
earth. It turns round every day with ineffable rapidity, only moderated
by the resistance of the seven planets, three above the sun--Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars--then the sun; three below--Venus, Mercury, the moon. The
stars go round in their fixed courses, the northern perform the shortest
circle. The highest heaven has its proper limit; it contains the angelic
virtues who descend upon earth, assume ethereal bodies, perform human
functions, and return. The heaven is tempered with glacial waters, lest
it should be set on fire. The inferior heaven is called the firmament,
because it separates the superincumbent waters from the waters below.
The firmamental waters are lower than the spiritual heaven, higher than
all corporeal beings, reserved, some say, for a second deluge; others,
more truly, to temper the fire of the fixed stars."

Was it for this preposterous scheme--this product of ignorance and
audacity--that the works of the Greek philosophers were to be given
up? It was none too soon that the great critics who appeared at the
Reformation, by comparing the works of these writers with one another,
brought them to their proper level, and taught us to look upon them all
with contempt.

Of this presumptuous system, the strangest part was its logic, the
nature of its proofs. It relied upon miracle-evidence. A fact was
supposed to be demonstrated by an astounding illustration of something
else! An Arabian writer, referring to this, says: "If a conjurer should
say to me, 'Three are more than ten, and in proof of it I will change
this stick into a serpent,' I might be surprised at his legerdemain,
but I certainly should not admit his assertion." Yet, for more than
a thousand years, such was the accepted logic, and all over Europe
propositions equally absurd were accepted on equally ridiculous proof.

Since the party that had become dominant in the empire could not furnish
works capable of intellectual competition with those of the great pagan
authors, and since it was impossible for it to accept a position of
inferiority, there arose a political necessity for the discouragement,
and even persecution, of profane learning. The persecution of the
Platonists under Valentinian was due to that necessity. They were
accused of magic, and many of them were put to death. The profession
of philosophy had become dangerous--it was a state crime. In its stead
there arose a passion for the marvelous, a spirit of superstition. Egypt
exchanged the great men, who had made her Museum immortal, for bands of
solitary monks and sequestered virgins, with which she was overrun.



