CHAPTER VIII.

     CONFLICT RESPECTING THE CRITERION OF TRUTH.

     Ancient philosophy declares that man has no means of
     ascertaining the truth.

     Differences of belief arise among the early Christians--An
     ineffectual attempt is made to remedy them by Councils.--
     Miracle and ordeal proof introduced.

     The papacy resorts to auricular confession and the
     Inquisition.--It perpetrates frightful atrocities for the
     suppression of differences of opinion.

     Effect of the discovery of the Pandects of Justinian and
     development of the canon law on the nature of evidence.--It
     becomes more scientific.

     The Reformation establishes the rights of individual
     reason.--Catholicism asserts that the criterion of truth is
     in the Church. It restrains the reading of books by the
     Index Expurgatorius, and combats dissent by such means as
     the massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve.

     Examination of the authenticity of the Pentateuch as the
     Protestant criterion.--Spurious character of those books.

     For Science the criterion of truth is to be found in the
     revelations of Nature: for the Protestant, it is in the
     Scriptures; for the Catholic, in an infallible Pope.


"WHAT is truth?" was the passionate demand of a Roman procurator on one
of the most momentous occasions in history. And the Divine Person who
stood before him, to whom the interrogation was addressed, made no
reply--unless, indeed, silence contained the reply.

Often and vainly had that demand been made before--often and vainly has
it been made since. No one has yet given a satisfactory answer.

When, at the dawn of science in Greece, the ancient religion was
disappearing like a mist at sunrise, the pious and thoughtful men of
that country were thrown into a condition of intellectual despair.
Anaxagoras plaintively exclaims, "Nothing can be known, nothing can be
learned, nothing can be certain, sense is limited, intellect is weak,
life is short." Xenophanes tells us that it is impossible for us to be
certain even when we utter the truth. Parmenides declares that the
very constitution of man prevents him from ascertaining absolute truth.
Empedocles affirms that all philosophical and religious systems must
be unreliable, because we have no criterion by which to test them.
Democritus asserts that even things that are true cannot impart
certainty to us; that the final result of human inquiry is the discovery
that man is incapable of absolute knowledge; that, even if the truth be
in his possession, he cannot be certain of it. Pyrrho bids us reflect
on the necessity of suspending our judgment of things, since we have no
criterion of truth; so deep a distrust did he impart to his followers,
that they were in the habit of saying, "We assert nothing; no, not even
that we assert nothing." Epicurus taught his disciples that truth can
never be determined by reason. Arcesilaus, denying both intellectual and
sensuous knowledge, publicly avowed that he knew nothing, not even his
own ignorance! The general conclusion to which Greek philosophy came was
this--that, in view of the contradiction of the evidence of the
senses, we cannot distinguish the true from the false; and such is the
imperfection of reason, that we cannot affirm the correctness of any
philosophical deduction.

It might be supposed that a revelation from God to man would come with
such force and clearness as to settle all uncertainties and overwhelm
all opposition. A Greek philosopher, less despairing than others, had
ventured to affirm that the coexistence of two forms of faith, both
claiming to be revealed by the omnipotent God, proves that neither of
them is true. But let us remember that it is difficult for men to come
to the same conclusion as regards even material and visible things,
unless they stand at the same point of view. If discord and distrust
were the condition of philosophy three hundred years before the birth
of Christ, discord and distrust were the condition of religion three
hundred years after his death. This is what Hilary, the Bishop of
Poictiers, in his well-known passage written about the time of the
Nicene Council, says:

"It is a thing equally deplorable and dangerous that there are, as many
creeds as opinions among men, as many doctrines as inclinations, and as
many sources of blasphemy as there are faults among us, because we make
creeds arbitrarily and explain them as arbitrarily. Every year, nay,
every moon, we make new creeds to describe invisible mysteries; we
repent of what we have done; we defend those who repent; we anathematize
those whom we defend; we condemn either the doctrines of others in
ourselves, or our own in that of others; and, reciprocally tearing each
other to pieces, we have been the cause of each other's ruin."

These are not mere words; but the import of this self-accusation can
be realized fully only by such as are familiar with the ecclesiastical
history of those times. As soon as the first fervor of Christianity as a
system of benevolence had declined, dissensions appeared. Ecclesiastical
historians assert that "as early as the second century began the contest
between faith and reason, religion and philosophy, piety and genius." To
compose these dissensions, to obtain some authoritative expression, some
criterion of truth, assemblies for consultation were resorted to, which
eventually took the form of councils. For a long time they had nothing
more than an advisory authority; but, when, in the fourth century,
Christianity had attained to imperial rule, their dictates became
compulsory, being enforced by the civil power. By this the whole face
of the Church was changed. Oecumenical councils--parliaments of
Christianity--consisting of delegates from all the churches in the
world, were summoned by the authority of the emperor; he presided either
personally or nominally in them--composed all differences, and was, in
fact, the Pope of Christendom. Mosheim, the historian, to whom I have
more particularly referred above, speaking of these times, remarks
that "there was nothing to exclude the ignorant from ecclesiastical
preferment; the savage and illiterate party, who looked on all kinds
of learning, particularly philosophy, as pernicious to piety, was
increasing;" and, accordingly, "the disputes carried on in the Council
of Nicea offered a remarkable example of the greatest ignorance and
utter confusion of ideas, particularly in the language and explanations
of those who approved of the decisions of that council." Vast as its
influence has been, "the ancient critics are neither agreed concerning
the time nor place in which it was assembled, the number of those who
sat in it, nor the bishop who presided. No authentic acts of its famous
sentence have been committed to writing, or, at least, none have been
transmitted to our times." The Church had now become what, in the
language of modern politicians, would be called "a confederated
republic." The will of the council was determined by a majority vote,
and, to secure that, all manner of intrigues and impositions were
resorted to; the influence of court females, bribery, and violence, were
not spared. The Council of Nicea had scarcely adjourned,--when it was
plain to all impartial men that, as a method of establishing a criterion
of truth in religious matters, such councils were a total failure. The
minority had no rights which the majority need respect. The protest of
many good men, that a mere majority vote given by delegates, whose right
to vote had never been examined and authorized, could not be received
as ascertaining absolute truth, was passed over with contempt, and the
consequence was, that council was assembled against council, and their
jarring and contradictory decrees spread perplexity and confusion
throughout the Christian world. In the fourth century alone there were
thirteen councils adverse to Arius, fifteen in his favor, and seventeen
for the semi-Arians--in all, forty-five. Minorities were perpetually
attempting to use the weapon which majorities had abused.

The impartial ecclesiastical historian above quoted, moreover, says
that "two monstrous and calamitous errors were adopted in this fourth
century: 1. That it was an act of virtue to deceive and lie when, by
that means, the interests of the Church might be promoted. 2. That
errors in religion, when maintained and adhered to after proper
admonition, were punishable with civil penalties and corporal tortures."

Not without astonishment can we look back at what, in those times, were
popularly regarded as criteria of truth. Doctrines were considered
as established by the number of martyrs who had professed them, by
miracles, by the confession of demons, of lunatics, or of persons
possessed of evil spirits: thus, St. Ambrose, in his disputes with the
Arians, produced men possessed by devils, who, on the approach of the
relics of certain martyrs, acknowledged, with loud cries, that the
Nicean doctrine of the three persons of the Godhead was true. But
the Arians charged him with suborning these infernal witnesses with a
weighty bribe. Already, ordeal tribunals were making their appearance.
During the following six centuries they were held as a final resort for
establishing guilt or innocence, under the forms of trial by cold water,
by duel, by the fire, by the cross.

What an utter ignorance of the nature of evidence and its laws have we
here! An accused man sinks or swims when thrown into a pond of water;
he is burnt or escapes unharmed when he holds a piece of red-hot iron
in his hand; a champion whom he has hired is vanquished or vanquishes in
single fight; he can keep his arms outstretched like a cross, or fails
to do so longer than his accuser, and his innocence or guilt of some
imputed crime is established! Are these criteria of truth?

Is it surprising that all Europe was filled with imposture miracles
during those ages?--miracles that are a disgrace to the common-sense of
man!

But the inevitable day came at length. Assertions and doctrines based
upon such preposterous evidence were involved in the discredit that fell
upon the evidence itself. As the thirteenth century is approached, we
find unbelief in all directions setting in. First, it is plainly seen
among the monastic orders, then it spreads rapidly among the common
people. Books, such as "The Everlasting Gospel," appear among the
former; sects, such as the Catharists, Waldenses, Petrobrussians, arise
among the latter. They agreed in this, "that the public and established
religion was a motley system of errors and superstitions, and that the
dominion which the pope had usurped over Christians was unlawful and
tyrannical; that the claim put forth by Rome, that the Bishop of Rome is
the supreme lord of the universe, and that neither princes nor bishops,
civil governors nor ecclesiastical rulers, have any lawful power in
church or state but what they receive from him, is utterly without
foundation, and a usurpation of the rights of man."

To withstand this flood of impiety, the papal government established two
institutions: 1. The Inquisition; 2. Auricular confession--the latter as
a means of detection, the former as a tribunal for punishment.

In general terms, the commission of the Inquisition was, to extirpate
religious dissent by terrorism, and surround heresy with the most
horrible associations; this necessarily implied the power of determining
what constitutes heresy. The criterion of truth was thus in possession
of this tribunal, which was charged "to discover and bring to judgment
heretics lurking in towns, houses, cellars, woods, caves, and fields."
With such savage alacrity did it carry out its object of protecting the
interests of religion, that between 1481 and 1808 it had punished three
hundred and forty thousand persons, and of these nearly thirty-two
thousand had been burnt! In its earlier days, when public opinion could
find no means of protesting against its atrocities, "it often put to
death, without appeal, on the very day that they were accused, nobles,
clerks, monks, hermits, and lay persons of every rank." In whatever
direction thoughtful men looked, the air was full of fearful shadows. No
one could indulge in freedom of thought without expecting punishment. So
dreadful were the proceedings of the Inquisition, that the exclamation
of Pagliarici was the exclamation of thousands: "It is hardly possible
for a man to be a Christian, and die in his bed."

The Inquisition destroyed the sectaries of Southern France in the
thirteenth century. Its unscrupulous atrocities extirpated Protestantism
in Italy and Spain. Nor did it confine itself to religious affairs; it
engaged in the suppression of political discontent. Nicolas Eymeric, who
was inquisitor-general of the kingdom of Aragon for nearly fifty years,
and who died in 1399, has left a frightful statement of its conduct and
appalling cruelties in his "Directorium Inquisitorum."

This disgrace of Christianity, and indeed of the human race, had
different constitutions in different countries. The papal Inquisition
continued the tyranny, and eventually superseded the old episcopal
inquisitions. The authority of the bishops was unceremoniously put aside
by the officers of the pope.

By the action of the fourth Lateran Council, A.D. 1215, the power of
the Inquisition was frightfully increased, the necessity of private
confession to a priest--auricular confession--being at that time
formally established. This, so far as domestic life was concerned, gave
omnipresence and omniscience to the Inquisition. Not a man was safe.
In the hands of the priest, who, at the confessional, could extract or
extort from them their most secret thoughts, his wife and his servants
were turned into spies. Summoned before the dread tribunal, he was
simply informed that he lay under strong suspicions of heresy. No
accuser was named; but the thumb-screw, the stretching-rope, the boot
and wedge, or other enginery of torture, soon supplied that defect, and,
innocent or guilty, he accused himself!

Notwithstanding all this power, the Inquisition failed of its purpose.
When the heretic could no longer confront it, he evaded it. A dismal
disbelief stealthily pervaded all Europe,--a denial of Providence,
of the immortality of the soul, of human free-will, and that man can
possibly resist the absolute necessity, the destiny which envelops him.
Ideas such as these were cherished in silence by multitudes of persons
driven to them by the tyrannical acts of ecclesiasticism. In spite of
persecution, the Waldenses still survived to propagate their declaration
that the Roman Church, since Constantine, had degenerated from its
purity and sanctity; to protest against the sale of indulgences, which
they said had nearly abolished prayer, fasting, alms; to affirm that it
was utterly useless to pray for the souls of the dead, since they must
already have gone either to heaven or hell. Though it was generally
believed that philosophy or science was pernicious to the interests of
Christianity or true piety, the Mohammedan literature then prevailing
in Spain was making converts among all classes of society. We see very
plainly its influence in many of the sects that then arose; thus, "the
Brethren and Sisters of the Free. Spirit" held that "the universe came
by emanation from God, and would finally return to him by absorption;
that rational souls are so many portions of the Supreme Deity; and that
the universe, considered as one great whole, is God." These are ideas
that can only be entertained in an advanced intellectual condition. Of
this sect it is said that many suffered burning with unclouded serenity,
with triumphant feelings of cheerfulness and joy. Their orthodox enemies
accused them of gratifying their passions at midnight assemblages in
darkened rooms, to which both sexes in a condition of nudity repaired. A
similar accusation, as is well known, was brought against the primitive
Christians by the fashionable society of Rome.

The influences of the Averroistic philosophy were apparent in many of
these sects. That Mohammedan system, considered from a Christian point
of view, led to the heretical belief that the end of the precepts of
Christianity is the union of the soul with the Supreme Being; that God
and Nature have the same relations to each other as the soul and the
body; that there is but one individual intelligence; and that one soul
performs all the spiritual and rational functions in all the human race.
When, subsequently, toward the time of the Reformation, the Italian
Averroists were required by the Inquisition to give an account of
themselves, they attempted to show that there is a wide distinction
between philosophical and religious truth; that things may be
philosophically true, and yet theologically false--an exculpatory device
condemned at length by the Lateran Council in the time of Leo X.

But, in spite of auricular confession, and the Inquisition, these
heretical tendencies survived. It has been truly said that, at the
epoch of the Reformation, there lay concealed, in many parts of Europe,
persons who entertained the most virulent enmity against Christianity.
In this pernicious class were many Aristotelians, such as Pomponatius;
many philosophers and wits, such as Bodin, Rabelais, Montaigne; many
Italians, as Leo X., Bembo, Bruno.

Miracle-evidence began to fall into discredit during the eleventh and
twelfth centuries. The sarcasms of the Hispano-Moorish philosophers
had forcibly drawn the attention of many of the more enlightened
ecclesiastics to its illusory nature. The discovery of the Pandects
of Justinian, at Amalfi, in 1130, doubtless exerted a very powerful
influence in promoting the study of Roman jurisprudence, and
disseminating better notions as to the character of legal or
philosophical evidence. Hallam has cast some doubt on the well-known
story of this discovery, but he admits that the celebrated copy in the
Laurentian library, at Florence, is the only one containing the entire
fifty books. Twenty years subsequently, the monk Gratian collected
together the various papal edicts, the canons of councils, the
declarations of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, in a volume
called "The Decretum," considered as the earliest authority in canon
law. In the next century Gregory IX. published five books of Decretals,
and Boniface VIII. subsequently added a sixth. To these followed the
Clementine Constitutions, a seventh book of Decretals, and "A Book of
Institutes," published together, by Gregory XIII., in 1580, under the
title of "Corpus Juris Canonici." The canon law had gradually gained
enormous power through the control it had obtained over wills, the
guardianship of orphans, marriages, and divorces.

The rejection of miracle-evidence, and the substitution of legal
evidence in its stead, accelerated the approach of the Reformation. No
longer was it possible to admit the requirement which, in former days,
Anselm, the Archbishop of Canterbury, in his treatise, "Cur Deus Homo,"
had enforced, that we must first believe without examination, and
may afterward endeavor to understand what we have thus believed. When
Cajetan said to Luther, "Thou must believe that one single drop of
Christ's blood is sufficient to redeem the whole human race, and the
remaining quantity that was shed in the garden and on the cross was left
as a legacy to the pope, to be a treasure from which indulgences were
to be drawn," the soul of the sturdy German monk revolted against such
a monstrous assertion, nor would he have believed it though a thousand
miracles had been worked in its support. This shameful practice of
selling indulgences for the commission of sin originated among the
bishops, who, when they had need of money for their private pleasures,
obtained it in that way. Abbots and monks, to whom this gainful commerce
was denied, raised funds by carrying about relics in solemn procession,
and charging a fee for touching them. The popes, in their pecuniary
straits, perceiving how lucrative the practice might become, deprived
the bishops of the right of making such sales, and appropriated it to
themselves, establishing agencies, chiefly among the mendicant orders,
for the traffic. Among these orders there was a sharp competition, each
boasting of the superior value of its indulgences through its greater
influence at the court of heaven, its familiar connection with the
Virgin Mary and the saints in glory. Even against Luther himself, who
had been an Augustinian monk, a calumny was circulated that he was
first alienated from the Church by a traffic of this kind having been
conferred on the Dominicans, instead of on his own order, at the time
when Leo X. was raising funds by this means for building St. Peter's, at
Rome, A.D. 1517. and there is reason to think that Leo himself, in the
earlier stages of the Reformation, attached weight to that allegation.

Indulgences were thus the immediate inciting cause of the Reformation,
but very soon there came into light the real principle that was
animating the controversy. It lay in the question, Does the Bible owe
its authenticity to the Church? or does the Church owe her authenticity
to the Bible? Where is the criterion of truth?

It is not necessary for me here to relate the well known particulars of
that controversy, the desolating wars and scenes of blood to which it
gave rise: how Luther posted on the door of the cathedral of Wittemberg
ninety-five theses, and was summoned to Rome to answer for his offense;
how he appealed from the pope, ill-informed at the time, to the pope
when he should have been better instructed; how he was condemned as a
heretic, and thereupon appealed to a general council; how, through the
disputes about purgatory, transubstantiation, auricular confession,
absolution, the fundamental idea which lay at the bottom of the whole
movement came into relief, the right of individual judgment; how Luther
was now excommunicated, A.D. 1520, and in defiance burnt the bull of
excommunication and the volumes of the canon law, which he denounced as
aiming at the subversion of all civil government, and the exaltation of
the papacy; how by this skillful manoeuvre he brought over many of the
German princes to his views; how, summoned before the Imperial Diet at
Worms, he refused to retract, and, while he was bidden in the castle of
Wartburg, his doctrines were spreading, and a reformation under Zwingli
broke out in Switzerland; how the principle of sectarian decomposition
embedded in the movement gave rise to rivalries and dissensions between
the Germans and the Swiss, and even divided the latter among themselves
under the leadership of Zwingli and of Calvin; how the Conference of
Marburg, the Diet of Spires, and that at Augsburg, failed to compose
the troubles, and eventually the German Reformation assumed a political
organization at Smalcalde. The quarrels between the Lutherans and the
Calvinists gave hopes to Rome that she might recover her losses.

Leo was not slow to discern that the Lutheran Reformation was something
more serious than a squabble among some monks about the profits of
indulgence-sales, and the papacy set itself seriously at work to
overcome the revolters. It instigated the frightful wars that for so
many years desolated Europe, and left animosities which neither the
Treaty of Westphalia, nor the Council of Trent after eighteen years of
debate, could compose. No one can read without a shudder the attempts
that were made to extend the Inquisition in foreign countries. All
Europe, Catholic and Protestant, was horror-stricken at the Huguenot
massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve (A.D. 1572). For perfidy and atrocity
it has no equal in the annals of the world.

The desperate attempt in which the papacy had been engaged to put down
its opponents by instigating civil wars, massacres, and assassinations,
proved to be altogether abortive. Nor had the Council of Trent any
better result. Ostensibly summoned to correct, illustrate, and fix with
perspicacity the doctrine of the Church, to restore the vigor of
its discipline, and to reform the lives of its ministers, it was so
manipulated that a large majority of its members were Italians, and
under the influence of the pope. Hence the Protestants could not
possibly accept its decisions.

The issue of the Reformation was the acceptance by all the Protestant
Churches of the dogma that the Bible is a sufficient guide for every
Christian man. Tradition was rejected, and the right of private
interpretation assured. It was thought that the criterion of truth had
at length been obtained.

The authority thus imputed to the Scriptures was not restricted
to matters of a purely religious or moral kind; it extended over
philosophical facts and to the interpretation of Nature. Many went as
far as in the old times Epiphanius had done: he believed that the Bible
contained a complete system of mineralogy! The Reformers would tolerate
no science that was not in accordance with Genesis. Among them there
were many who maintained that religion and piety could never flourish
unless separated from learning and science. The fatal maxim that the
Bible contained the sum and substance of all knowledge, useful or
possible to man--a maxim employed with such pernicious effect of old by
Tertullian and by St. Augustine, and which had so often been enforced
by papal authority--was still strictly insisted upon. The leaders of
the Reformation, Luther and Melanchthon, were determined to banish
philosophy from the Church. Luther declared that the study of Aristotle
is wholly useless; his vilification of that Greek philosopher knew no
bounds. He is, says Luther, "truly a devil, a horrid calumniator, a
wicked sycophant, a prince of darkness, a real Apollyon, a beast, a
most horrid impostor on mankind, one in whom there is scarcely any
philosophy, a public and professed liar, a goat, a complete epicure,
this twice execrable Aristotle." The schoolmen were, so Luther said,
"locusts, caterpillars, frogs, lice." He entertained an abhorrence
for them. These opinions, though not so emphatically expressed, were
entertained by Calvin. So far as science is concerned, nothing is owed
to the Reformation. The Procrustean bed of the Pentateuch was still
before her.

In the annals of Christianity the most ill-omened day is that in which
she separated herself from science. She compelled Origen, at that time
(A.D. 231) its chief representative and supporter in the Church, to
abandon his charge in Alexandria, and retire to Caesarea. In vain
through many subsequent centuries did her leading men spend themselves
in--as the phrase then went--"drawing forth the internal juice and
marrow of the Scriptures for the explaining of things." Universal
history from the third to the sixteenth century shows with what result.
The dark ages owe their darkness to this fatal policy. Here and there,
it is true, there were great men, such as Frederick II. and Alphonso X.,
who, standing at a very elevated and general point of view, had detected
the value of learning to civilization, and, in the midst of the dreary
prospect that ecclesiasticism had created around them, had recognized
that science alone can improve the social condition of man.

The infliction of the death-punishment for difference of opinion was
still resorted to. When Calvin caused Servetus to be burnt at Geneva, it
was obvious to every one that the spirit of persecution was unimpaired.
The offense of that philosopher lay in his belief. This was, that the
genuine doctrines of Christianity had been lost even before the time of
the Council of Nicea; that the Holy Ghost animates the whole system of
Nature, like a soul of the world, and that, with the Christ, it will
be absorbed, at the end of all things, into the substance of the Deity,
from which they had emanated. For this he was roasted to death over a
slow fire. Was there any distinction between this Protestant auto-da-fe
and the Catholic one of Vanini, who was burnt at Toulouse, by the
Inquisition, in 1629, for his "Dialogues concerning Nature?"

The invention of printing, the dissemination of books, had introduced
a class of dangers which the persecution of the Inquisition could not
reach. In 1559, Pope Paul IV. instituted the Congregation of the Index
Expurgatorius. "Its duty is to examine books and manuscripts intended
for publication, and to decide whether the people may be permitted to
read them; to correct those books of which the errors are not numerous,
and which contain certain useful and salutary truths, so as to bring
them into harmony with the doctrines of the Church; to condemn those
of which the principles are heretical and pernicious; and to grant the
peculiar privilege of perusing heretical books to certain persons.
This congregation, which is sometimes held in presence of the pope, but
generally in the palace of the Cardinal-president, has a more extensive
jurisdiction than that of the Inquisition, as it not only takes
cognizance of those books that contain doctrines contrary to the Roman
Catholic faith, but of those that concern the duties of morality, the
discipline of the Church, the interests of society. Its name is derived
from the alphabetical tables or indexes of heretical books and authors
composed by its appointment."

The Index Expurgatorius of prohibited books at first indicated
those works which it was unlawful to read; but, on this being found
insufficient, whatever was not permitted was prohibited--an audacious
attempt to prevent all knowledge, except such as suited the purposes of
the Church, from reaching the people.

The two rival divisions of the Christian Church--Protestant and
Catholic--were thus in accord on one point: to tolerate no science
except such as they considered to be agreeable to the Scriptures. The
Catholic, being in possession of centralized power, could make its
decisions respected wherever its sway was acknowledged, and enforce the
monitions of the Index Expurgatorius; the Protestant, whose influence
was diffused among many foci in different nations, could not act in such
a direct and resolute manner. Its mode of procedure was, by raising a
theological odium against an offender, to put him under a social ban--a
course perhaps not less effectual than the other.

As we have seen in former chapters, an antagonism between religion and
science had existed from the earliest days of Christianity. On every
occasion permitting its display it may be detected through successive
centuries. We witness it in the downfall of the Alexandrian Museum, in
the cases of Erigena and Wiclif, in the contemptuous rejection by the
heretics of the thirteenth century of the Scriptural account of the
Creation; but it was not until the epoch of Copernicus, Kepler, and
Galileo, that the efforts of Science to burst from the thraldom in which
she was fettered became uncontrollable. In all countries the political
power of the Church had greatly declined; her leading men perceived
that the cloudy foundation on which she had stood was dissolving away.
Repressive measures against her antagonists, in old times resorted
to with effect, could be no longer advantageously employed. To her
interests the burning of a philosopher here and there did more harm than
good. In her great conflict with astronomy, a conflict in which Galileo
stands as the central figure, she received an utter overthrow; and, as
we have seen, when the immortal work of Newton was printed, she could
offer no resistance, though Leibnitz affirmed, in the face of Europe,
that "Newton had robbed the Deity of some of his most excellent
attributes, and had sapped the foundation of natural religion."

From the time of Newton to our own time, the divergence of science from
the dogmas of the Church has continually increased. The Church declared
that the earth is the central and most important body in the universe;
that the sun and moon and stars are tributary to it. On these points
she was worsted by astronomy. She affirmed that a universal deluge had
covered the earth; that the only surviving animals were such as had
been saved in an ark. In this her error was established by geology. She
taught that there was a first man, who, some six or eight thousand years
ago, was suddenly created or called into existence in a condition of
physical and moral perfection, and from that condition he fell. But
anthropology has shown that human beings existed far back in geological
time, and in a savage state but little better than that of the brute.

Many good and well-meaning men have attempted to reconcile the
statements of Genesis with the discoveries of science, but it is in
vain. The divergence has increased so much, that it has become an
absolute opposition. One of the antagonists must give way.

May we not, then, be permitted to examine the authenticity of this book,
which, since the second century, has been put forth as the criterion of
scientific truth? To maintain itself in a position so exalted, it must
challenge human criticism.

In the early Christian ages, many of the most eminent Fathers of the
Church had serious doubts respecting the authorship of the entire
Pentateuch. I have not space, in the limited compass of these pages, to
present in detail the facts and arguments that were then and have since
been adduced. The literature of the subject is now very extensive. I
may, however, refer the reader to the work of the pious and learned Dean
Prideaux, on "The Old and New Testament connected," a work which is one
of the literary ornaments of the last century. He will also find the
subject more recently and exhaustively discussed by Bishop Colenso. The
following paragraphs will convey a sufficiently distinct impression of
the present state of the controversy:

The Pentateuch is affirmed to have been written by Moses, under the
influence of divine inspiration. Considered thus, as a record vouchsafed
and dictated by the Almighty, it commands not only scientific but
universal consent.

But here, in the first place, it may be demanded, Who or what is it that
has put forth this great claim in its behalf?

Not the work itself. It nowhere claims the authorship of one man, or
makes the impious declaration that it is the writing of Almighty God.

Not until after the second century was there any such extravagant
demand on human credulity. It originated, not among the higher ranks of
Christian philosophers, but among the more fervid Fathers of the Church,
whose own writings prove them to have been unlearned and uncritical
persons.

Every age, from the second century to our times, has offered men of
great ability, both Christian and Jewish, who have altogether repudiated
these claims. Their decision has been founded upon the intrinsic
evidence of the books themselves. These furnish plain indications of at
least two distinct authors, who have been respectively termed Elohistic
and Jehovistic. Hupfeld maintains that the Jehovistic narrative bears
marks of having been a second original record, wholly independent of the
Elohistic. The two sources from which the narratives have been derived
are, in many respects, contradictory of each other. Moreover, it is
asserted that the books of the Pentateuch are never ascribed to Moses
in the inscriptions of Hebrew manuscripts, or in printed copies of the
Hebrew Bible, nor are they styled "Books of Moses" in the Septuagint or
Vulgate, but only in modern translations.

It is clear that they cannot be imputed to the sole authorship of Moses,
since they record his death. It is clear that they were not written
until many hundred years after that event, since they contain references
to facts which did not occur until after the establishment of the
government of kings among the Jews.

No man may dare to impute them to the inspiration of Almighty God--their
inconsistencies, incongruities, contradictions, and impossibilities, as
exposed by many learned and pious moderns, both German and English,
are so great. It is the decision of these critics that Genesis is a
narrative based upon legends; that Exodus is not historically true; that
the whole Pentateuch is unhistoric and non-Mosaic; it contains the most
extraordinary contradictions and impossibilities, sufficient to involve
the credibility of the whole--imperfections so many and so conspicuous
that they would destroy the authenticity of any modern historical work.

Hengstenberg, in his "Dissertations on the Genuineness of the
Pentateuch," says: "It is the unavoidable fate of a spurious historical
work of any length to be involved in contradictions. This must be the
case to a very great extent with the Pentateuch, if it be not genuine.
If the Pentateuch is spurious, its histories and laws have been
fabricated in successive portions, and were committed to writing in the
course of many centuries by different individuals. From such a mode of
origination, a mass of contradictions is inseparable, and the improving
hand of a later editor could never be capable of entirely obliterating
them."

To the above conclusions I may add that we are expressly told by Ezra
(Esdras ii. 14) that he himself, aided by five other persons, wrote
these books in the space of forty days. He says that at the time of the
Babylonian captivity the ancient sacred writings of the Jews were burnt,
and gives a particular detail of the circumstances under which these
were composed. He sets forth that he undertook to write all that had
been done in the world since the beginning. It may be said that the
books of Esdras are apocryphal, but in return it may be demanded, Has
that conclusion been reached on evidence that will withstand modern
criticism? In the early ages of Christianity, when the story of the fall
of man was not considered as essential to the Christian system, and the
doctrine of the atonement had not attained that precision which Anselm
eventually gave it, it was very generally admitted by the Fathers of the
Church that Ezra probably did so compose the Pentateuch. Thus St. Jerome
says, "Sive Mosem dicere volueris auctorem Pentateuchi, sive Esdram
ejusdem instauratorem operis, non recuso." Clemens Alexandrinus
says that when these books had been destroyed in the captivity of
Nebuchadnezzar, Esdras, having become inspired prophetically, reproduced
them. Irenaeus says the same.

The incidents contained in Genesis, from the first to the tenth chapters
inclusive (chapters which, in their bearing upon science, are of more
importance than other portions of the Pentateuch), have been obviously
compiled from short, fragmentary legends of various authorship. To the
critical eye they all, however, present peculiarities which demonstrate
that they were written on the banks of the Euphrates, and not in the
Desert of Arabia. They contain many Chaldaisms. An Egyptian would not
speak of the Mediterranean Sea as being west of him, an Assyrian would.
Their scenery and machinery, if such expressions may with propriety be
used, are altogether Assyrian, not Egyptian. They were such records as
one might expect to meet with in the cuneiform impressions of the
tile libraries of the Mesopotamian kings. It is affirmed that one such
legend, that of the Deluge, has already been exhumed, and it is not
beyond the bounds of probability that the remainder may in like manner
be obtained.

From such Assyrian sources, the legends of the creation of the earth and
heaven, the garden of Eden, the making of man from clay, and of woman
from one of his ribs, the temptation by the serpent, the naming of
animals, the cherubim and flaming sword, the Deluge and the ark, the
drying up of the waters by the wind, the building of the Tower of
Babel, and the confusion of tongues, were obtained by Ezra. He commences
abruptly the proper history of the Jews in the eleventh chapter. At that
point his universal history ceases; he occupies himself with the story
of one family, the descendants of Shem.

It is of this restriction that the Duke of Argyll, in his book on
"Primeval Man," very graphically says:

In the genealogy of the family of Shem we have a list of names which are
names, and nothing more to us. It is a genealogy which neither does, nor
pretends to do, more than to trace the order of succession among a few
families only, out of the millions then already existing in the world.
Nothing but this order of succession is given, nor is it at all certain
that this order is consecutive or complete. Nothing is told us of all
that lay behind that curtain of thick darkness, in front of which
these names are made to pass; and yet there are, as it were, momentary
liftings, through which we have glimpses of great movements which were
going on, and had been long going on beyond. No shapes are distinctly
seen. Even the direction of those movements can only be guessed. But
voices are heard which are "as the voices of many waters." I agree in
the opinion of Hupfeld, that "the discovery that the Pentateuch is put
together out of various sources, or original documents, is beyond
all doubt not only one of the most important and most pregnant with
consequences for the interpretation of the historical books of the Old
Testament, or rather for the whole of theology and history, but it is
also one of the most certain discoveries which have been made in
the domain of criticism and the history of literature. Whatever the
anticritical party may bring forward to the contrary, it will maintain
itself, and not retrograde again through any thing, so long as there
exists such a thing as criticism; and it will not be easy for a reader
upon the stage of culture on which we stand in the present day, if he
goes to the examination unprejudiced, and with an uncorrupted power of
appreciating the truth, to be able to ward off its influence."

What then? shall we give up these books? Does not the admission that the
narrative of the fall in Eden is legendary carry with it the surrender
of that most solemn and sacred of Christian doctrines, the atonement?

Let us reflect on this! Christianity, in its earliest days, when it was
converting and conquering the world, knew little or nothing about that
doctrine. We have seen that, in his "Apology," Tertullian did not
think it worth his while to mention it. It originated among the Gnostic
heretics. It was not admitted by the Alexandrian theological school. It
was never prominently advanced by the Fathers. It was not brought into
its present commanding position until the time of Anselm Philo Judaeus
speaks of the story of the fall as symbolical; Origen regarded it as an
allegory. Perhaps some of the Protestant churches may, with reason, be
accused of inconsistency, since in part they consider it as mythical, in
part real. But, if, with them, we admit that the serpent is symbolical
of Satan, does not that cast an air of allegory over the whole
narrative?

It is to be regretted that the Christian Church has burdened itself with
the defense of these books, and voluntarily made itself answerable for
their manifest contradictions and errors. Their vindication, if it
were possible, should have been resigned to the Jews, among whom they
originated, and by whom they have been transmitted to us. Still more, it
is to be deeply regretted that the Pentateuch, a production so imperfect
as to be unable to stand the touch of modern criticism, should be put
forth as the arbiter of science. Let it be remembered that the exposure
of the true character of these books has been made, not by captious
enemies, but by pious and learned churchmen, some of them of the highest
dignity.

While thus the Protestant churches have insisted on the acknowledgment
of the Scriptures as the criterion of truth, the Catholic has, in our
own times, declared the infallibility of the pope. It may be said that
this infallibility applies only to moral or religious things; but where
shall the line of separation be drawn? Onmiscience cannot be limited
to a restricted group of questions; in its very nature it implies the
knowledge of all, and infallibility means omniscience.

Doubtless, if the fundamental principles of Italian Christianity be
admitted, their logical issue is an infallible pope. There is no need to
dwell on the unphilosophical nature of this conception; it is destroyed
by an examination of the political history of the papacy, and the
biography of the popes. The former exhibits all the errors and mistakes
to which institutions of a confessedly human character have been found
liable; the latter is only too frequently a story of sin and shame.

It was not possible that the authoritative promulgation of the dogma of
papal infallibility should meet among enlightened Catholics universal
acceptance. Serious and wide-spread dissent has been produced. A
doctrine so revolting to common-sense could not find any other result.
There are many who affirm that, if infallibility exists anywhere, it is
in oecumenical councils, and yet such councils have not always agreed
with each other. There are also many who remember that councils
have deposed popes, and have passed judgment on their clamors and
contentions. Not without reason do Protestants demand, What proof can
be given that infallibility exists in the Church at all? what proof is
there that the Church has ever been fairly or justly represented in
any council? and why should the truth be ascertained by the vote of a
majority rather than by that of a minority? How often it has happened
that one man, standing at the right point of view, has descried the
truth, and, after having been denounced and persecuted by all others,
they have eventually been constrained to adopt his declarations! Of many
great discoveries, has not this been the history?

It is not for Science to compose these contesting claims; it is not for
her to determine whether the criterion of truth for the religious man
shall be found in the Bible, or in the oecumenical council, or in the
pope. She only asks the right, which she so willingly accords to others,
of adopting a criterion of her own. If she regards unhistorical
legends with disdain; if she considers the vote of a majority in the
ascertainment of truth with supreme indifference; if she leaves the
claim of infallibility in any human being to be vindicated by the stern
logic of coming events--the cold impassiveness which in these matters
she maintains is what she displays toward her own doctrines. Without
hesitation she would give up the theories of gravitation or undulations,
if she found that they were irreconcilable with facts. For her the
volume of inspiration is the book of Nature, of which the open scroll
is ever spread forth before the eyes of every man. Confronting all, it
needs no societies for its dissemination. Infinite in extent, eternal
in duration, human ambition and human fanaticism have never been able
to tamper with it. On the earth it is illustrated by all that is
magnificent and beautiful, on the heavens its letters are suns and
worlds.



