
HISTORY OF THE CONFLICT BETWEEN RELIGION AND SCIENCE

By John William Draper, M. D., LL. D.

PROFESSOR IN THE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK,

     AUTHOR OF A TREATISE ON HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY, HISTORY OF THE
     INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT OF EUROPE, HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN
     CIVIL WAR, AND OF MANY EXPERIMENTAL MEMOIRS ON CHEMICAL AND
     OTHER SCIENTIFIC SUBJECTS




PREFACE.

WHOEVER has had an opportunity of becoming acquainted with the mental
condition of the intelligent classes in Europe and America, must have
perceived that there is a great and rapidly-increasing departure from
the public religious faith, and that, while among the more frank this
divergence is not concealed, there is a far more extensive and far more
dangerous secession, private and unacknowledged.

So wide-spread and so powerful is this secession, that it can neither be
treated with contempt nor with punishment. It cannot be extinguished by
derision, by vituperation, or by force. The time is rapidly approaching
when it will give rise to serious political results.

Ecclesiastical spirit no longer inspires the policy of the world.
Military fervor in behalf of faith has disappeared. Its only souvenirs
are the marble effigies of crusading knights, reposing in the silent
crypts of churches on their tombs.

That a crisis is impending is shown by the attitude of the great powers
toward the papacy. The papacy represents the ideas and aspirations
of two-thirds of the population of Europe. It insists on a political
supremacy in accordance with its claims to a divine origin and mission,
and a restoration of the mediaeval order of things, loudly declaring
that it will accept no reconciliation with modern civilization.

The antagonism we thus witness between Religion and Science is the
continuation of a struggle that commenced when Christianity began
to attain political power. A divine revelation must necessarily be
intolerant of contradiction; it must repudiate all improvement in
itself, and view with disdain that arising from the progressive
intellectual development of man. But our opinions on every subject are
continually liable to modification, from the irresistible advance of
human knowledge.

Can we exaggerate the importance of a contention in which every
thoughtful person must take part whether he will or not? In a matter so
solemn as that of religion, all men, whose temporal interests are not
involved in existing institutions, earnestly desire to find the truth.
They seek information as to the subjects in dispute, and as to the
conduct of the disputants.

The history of Science is not a mere record of isolated discoveries; it
is a narrative of the conflict of two contending powers, the expansive
force of the human intellect on one side, and the compression arising
from traditionary faith and human interests on the other.

No one has hitherto treated the subject from this point of view. Yet
from this point it presents itself to us as a living issue--in fact, as
the most important of all living issues.

A few years ago, it was the politic and therefore the proper course to
abstain from all allusion to this controversy, and to keep it as far as
possible in the background. The tranquillity of society depends so
much on the stability of its religious convictions, that no one can
be justified in wantonly disturbing them. But faith is in its nature
unchangeable, stationary; Science is in its nature progressive; and
eventually a divergence between them, impossible to conceal, must take
place. It then becomes the duty of those whose lives have made them
familiar with both modes of thought, to present modestly, but
firmly, their views; to compare the antagonistic pretensions calmly,
impartially, philosophically. History shows that, if this be not done,
social misfortunes, disastrous and enduring, will ensue. When the old
mythological religion of Europe broke down under the weight of its own
inconsistencies, neither the Roman emperors nor the philosophers of
those times did any thing adequate for the guidance of public opinion.
They left religious affairs to take their chance, and accordingly those
affairs fell into the hands of ignorant and infuriated ecclesiastics,
parasites, eunuchs, and slaves.

The intellectual night which settled on Europe, in consequence of that
great neglect of duty, is passing away; we live in the daybreak of
better things. Society is anxiously expecting light, to see in what
direction it is drifting. It plainly discerns that the track along which
the voyage of civilization has thus far been made, has been left; and
that a new departure, on all unknown sea, has been taken.

Though deeply impressed with such thoughts, I should not have presumed
to write this book, or to intrude on the public the ideas it presents,
had I not made the facts with which it deals a subject of long and
earnest meditation. And I have gathered a strong incentive to undertake
this duty from the circumstance that a "History of the Intellectual
Development of Europe," published by me several years ago, which has
passed through many editions in America, and has been reprinted in
numerous European languages, English, French, German, Russian, Polish,
Servian, etc., is everywhere received with favor.

In collecting and arranging the materials for the volumes I published
under the title of "A History of the American Civil War," a work of very
great labor, I had become accustomed to the comparison of conflicting
statements, the adjustment of conflicting claims. The approval with
which that book has been received by the American public, a critical
judge of the events considered, has inspired me with additional
confidence. I had also devoted much attention to the experimental
investigation of natural phenomena, and had published many well-known
memoirs on such subjects. And perhaps no one can give himself to these
pursuits, and spend a large part of his life in the public teaching of
science, without partaking of that love of impartiality and truth which
Philosophy incites. She inspires us with a desire to dedicate our days
to the good of our race, so that in the fading light of life's evening
we may not, on looking back, be forced to acknowledge how unsubstantial
and useless are the objects that we have pursued.

Though I have spared no pains in the composition of this book, I am
very sensible how unequal it is to the subject, to do justice to which
a knowledge of science, history, theology, politics, is required; every
page should be alive with intelligence and glistening with facts. But
then I have remembered that this is only as it were the preface, or
forerunner, of a body of literature, which the events and wants of our
times will call forth. We have come to the brink of a great intellectual
change. Much of the frivolous reading of the present will be supplanted
by a thoughtful and austere literature, vivified by endangered
interests, and made fervid by ecclesiastical passion.

What I have sought to do is, to present a clear and impartial statement
of the views and acts of the two contending parties. In one sense I have
tried to identify myself with each, so as to comprehend thoroughly their
motives; but in another and higher sense I have endeavored to stand
aloof, and relate with impartiality their actions.

I therefore trust that those, who may be disposed to criticise this
book, will bear in mind that its object is not to advocate the views
and pretensions of either party, but to explain clearly, and without
shrinking those of both. In the management of each chapter I have
usually set forth the orthodox view first, and then followed it with
that of its opponents.

In thus treating the subject it has not been necessary to pay much
regard to more moderate or intermediate opinions, for, though they may
be intrinsically of great value, in conflicts of this kind it is not
with the moderates but with the extremists that the impartial reader is
mainly concerned. Their movements determine the issue.

For this reason I have had little to say respecting the two great
Christian confessions, the Protestant and Greek Churches. As to the
latter, it has never, since the restoration of science, arrayed itself
in opposition to the advancement of knowledge. On the contrary, it has
always met it with welcome. It has observed a reverential attitude to
truth, from whatever quarter it might come. Recognizing the apparent
discrepancies between its interpretations of revealed truth and the
discoveries of science, it has always expected that satisfactory
explanations and reconciliations would ensue, and in this it has not
been disappointed. It would have been well for modern civilization if
the Roman Church had done the same.

In speaking of Christianity, reference is generally made to the
Roman Church, partly because its adherents compose the majority of
Christendom, partly because its demands are the most pretentious, and
partly because it has commonly sought to enforce those demands by
the civil power. None of the Protestant Churches has ever occupied a
position so imperious--none has ever had such wide-spread political
influence. For the most part they have been averse to constraint, and
except in very few instances their opposition has not passed beyond the
exciting of theological odium.

As to Science, she has never sought to ally herself to civil power. She
has never attempted to throw odium or inflict social ruin on any human
being. She has never subjected any one to mental torment, physical
torture, least of all to death, for the purpose of upholding or
promoting her ideas. She presents herself unstained by cruelties and
crimes. But in the Vatican--we have only to recall the Inquisition--the
hands that are now raised in appeals to the Most Merciful are crimsoned.
They have been steeped in blood!

There are two modes of historical composition, the artistic and the
scientific. The former implies that men give origin to events; it
therefore selects some prominent individual, pictures him under
a fanciful form, and makes him the hero of a romance. The latter,
insisting that human affairs present an unbroken chain, in which each
fact is the offspring of some preceding fact, and the parent of some
subsequent fact, declares that men do not control events, but that
events control men. The former gives origin to compositions, which,
however much they may interest or delight us, are but a grade above
novels; the latter is austere, perhaps even repulsive, for it sternly
impresses us with a conviction of the irresistible dominion of law, and
the insignificance of human exertions. In a subject so solemn as that to
which this book is devoted, the romantic and the popular are altogether
out of place. He who presumes to treat of it must fix his eyes
steadfastly on that chain of destiny which universal history displays;
he must turn with disdain from the phantom impostures of pontiffs and
statesmen and kings.

If any thing were needed to show us the untrustworthiness of artistic
historical compositions, our personal experience would furnish it. How
often do our most intimate friends fail to perceive the real motives of
our every-day actions; how frequently they misinterpret our intentions!
If this be the case in what is passing before our eyes, may we not
be satisfied that it is impossible to comprehend justly the doings of
persons who lived many years ago, and whom we have never seen.

In selecting and arranging the topics now to be presented, I have been
guided in part by "the Confession" of the late Vatican Council, and in
part by the order of events in history. Not without interest will the
reader remark that the subjects offer themselves to us now as they did
to the old philosophers of Greece. We still deal with the same questions
about which they disputed. What is God? What is the soul? What is the
world? How is it governed? Have we any standard or criterion of truth?
And the thoughtful reader will earnestly ask, "Are our solutions of
these problems any better than theirs?"

The general argument of this book, then, is as follows:

I first direct attention to the origin of modern science as
distinguished from ancient, by depending on observation, experiment,
and mathematical discussion, instead of mere speculation, and shall show
that it was a consequence of the Macedonian campaigns, which brought
Asia and Europe into contact. A brief sketch of those campaigns, and of
the Museum of Alexandria, illustrates its character.

Then with brevity I recall the well-known origin of Christianity, and
show its advance to the attainment of imperial power, the transformation
it underwent by its incorporation with paganism, the existing religion
of the Roman Empire. A clear conception of its incompatibility with
science caused it to suppress forcibly the Schools of Alexandria. It was
constrained to this by the political necessities of its position.

The parties to the conflict thus placed, I next relate the story of
their first open struggle; it is the first or Southern Reformation. The
point in dispute had respect to the nature of God. It involved the rise
of Mohammedanism. Its result was, that much of Asia and Africa, with the
historic cities Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Carthage, were wrenched from
Christendom, and the doctrine of the Unity of God established in the
larger portion of what had been the Roman Empire.

This political event was followed by the restoration of science, the
establishment of colleges, schools, libraries, throughout the dominions
of the Arabians. Those conquerors, pressing forward rapidly in their
intellectual development, rejected the anthropomorphic ideas of the
nature of God remaining in their popular belief, and accepted other more
philosophical ones, akin to those that had long previously been attained
to in India. The result of this was a second conflict, that respecting
the nature of the soul. Under the designation of Averroism, there came
into prominence the theories of Emanation and Absorption. At the
close of the middle ages the Inquisition succeeded in excluding those
doctrines from Europe, and now the Vatican Council has formally and
solemnly anathematized them.

Meantime, through the cultivation of astronomy, geography, and other
sciences, correct views had been gained as to the position and relations
of the earth, and as to the structure of the world; and since Religion,
resting itself on what was assumed to be the proper interpretation
of the Scriptures, insisted that the earth is the central and most
important part of the universe, a third conflict broke out. In this
Galileo led the way on the part of Science. Its issue was the overthrow
of the Church on the question in dispute. Subsequently a subordinate
controversy arose respecting the age of the world, the Church insisting
that it is only about six thousand years old. In this she was again
overthrown The light of history and of science had been gradually
spreading over Europe. In the sixteenth century the prestige of Roman
Christianity was greatly diminished by the intellectual reverses it
had experienced, and also by its political and moral condition. It was
clearly seen by many pious men that Religion was not accountable for
the false position in which she was found, but that the misfortune was
directly traceable to the alliance she had of old contracted with Roman
paganism. The obvious remedy, therefore, was a return to primitive
purity. Thus arose the fourth conflict, known to us as the
Reformation--the second or Northern Reformation. The special form it
assumed was a contest respecting the standard or criterion of
truth, whether it is to be found in the Church or in the Bible. The
determination of this involved a settlement of the rights of reason, or
intellectual freedom. Luther, who is the conspicuous man of the epoch,
carried into effect his intention with no inconsiderable success; and at
the close of the struggle it was found that Northern Europe was lost to
Roman Christianity.

We are now in the midst of a controversy respecting the mode of
government of the world, whether it be by incessant divine intervention,
or by the operation of primordial and unchangeable law. The intellectual
movement of Christendom has reached that point which Arabism had
attained to in the tenth and eleventh centuries; and doctrines which
were then discussed are presenting themselves again for review; such are
those of Evolution, Creation, Development.

Offered under these general titles, I think it will be found that all
the essential points of this great controversy are included. By grouping
under these comprehensive heads the facts to be considered, and dealing
with each group separately, we shall doubtless acquire clear views of
their inter-connection and their historical succession.

I have treated of these conflicts as nearly as I conveniently could in
their proper chronological order, and, for the sake of completeness,
have added chapters on--

An examination of what Latin Christianity has done for modern
civilization.

A corresponding examination of what Science has done.

The attitude of Roman Christianity in the impending conflict, as defined
by the Vatican Council.

The attention of many truth-seeking persons has been so exclusively
given to the details of sectarian dissensions, that the long strife, to
the history of which these pages are devoted, is popularly but little
known. Having tried to keep steadfastly in view the determination to
write this work in an impartial spirit, to speak with respect of the
contending parties, but never to conceal the truth, I commit it to the
considerate judgment of the thoughtful reader.

                              JOHN WILLIAM DRAPER

UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK, December, 1873.





HISTORY OF THE CONFLICT BETWEEN RELIGION AND SCIENCE.



CHAPTER I.

     THE ORIGIN OF SCIENCE.

     Religious condition of the Greeks in the fourth century
     before Christ.--Their invasion of the Persian Empire brings
     them in contact with new aspects of Nature, and familiarizes
     them with new religious systems.--The military,
     engineering, and scientific activity, stimulated by the
     Macedonian campaigns, leads to the establishment in
     Alexandria of an institute, the Museum, for the cultivation
     of knowledge by experiment, observation, and mathematical
     discussion.--It is the origin of Science.

GREEK MYTHOLOGY. No spectacle can be presented to the thoughtful
mind more solemn, more mournful, than that of the dying of an ancient
religion, which in its day has given consolation to many generations of
men.

Four centuries before the birth of Christ, Greece was fast outgrowing
her ancient faith. Her philosophers, in their studies of the world, had
been profoundly impressed with the contrast between the majesty of the
operations of Nature and the worthlessness of the divinities of Olympus.
Her historians, considering the orderly course of political affairs,
the manifest uniformity in the acts of men, and that there was no event
occurring before their eyes for which they could not find an obvious
cause in some preceding event, began to suspect that the miracles and
celestial interventions, with which the old annals were filled, were
only fictions. They demanded, when the age of the supernatural had
ceased, why oracles had become mute, and why there were now no more
prodigies in the world.

Traditions, descending from immemorial antiquity, and formerly accepted
by pious men as unquestionable truths, had filled the islands of
the Mediterranean and the conterminous countries with supernatural
wonders--enchantresses, sorcerers, giants, ogres, harpies, gorgons,
centaurs, cyclops. The azure vault was the floor of heaven; there Zeus,
surrounded by the gods with their wives and mistresses, held his court,
engaged in pursuits like those of men, and not refraining from acts of
human passion and crime.

A sea-coast broken by numerous indentations, an archipelago with some of
the most lovely islands in the world, inspired the Greeks with a taste
for maritime life, for geographical discovery, and colonization.
Their ships wandered all over the Black and Mediterranean Seas. The
time-honored wonders that had been glorified in the "Odyssey," and
sacred in public faith, were found to have no existence. As a better
knowledge of Nature was obtained, the sky was shown to be an illusion;
it was discovered that there is no Olympus, nothing above but space and
stars. With the vanishing of their habitation, the gods disappeared,
both those of the Ionian type of Homer and those of the Doric of Hesiod.

EFFECTS OF DISCOVERY AND CRITICISM. But this did not take place without
resistance. At first, the public, and particularly its religious
portion, denounced the rising doubts as atheism. They despoiled some
of the offenders of their goods, exiled others; some they put to death.
They asserted that what had been believed by pious men in the old times,
and had stood the test of ages, must necessarily be true. Then, as the
opposing evidence became irresistible, they were content to admit that
these marvels were allegories under which the wisdom of the ancients had
concealed many sacred and mysterious things. They tried to reconcile,
what now in their misgivings they feared might be myths, with their
advancing intellectual state. But their efforts were in vain, for there
are predestined phases through which on such an occasion public opinion
must pass. What it has received with veneration it begins to doubt, then
it offers new interpretations, then subsides into dissent, and ends with
a rejection of the whole as a mere fable.

In their secession the philosophers and historians were followed by
the poets. Euripides incurred the odium of heresy. Aeschylus narrowly
escaped being stoned to death for blasphemy. But the frantic efforts
of those who are interested in supporting delusions must always end in
defeat. The demoralization resistlessly extended through every branch of
literature, until at length it reached the common people.

THE PERSIAN EMPIRE. Greek philosophical criticism had lent its aid to
Greek philosophical discovery in this destruction of the national faith.
It sustained by many arguments the wide-spreading unbelief. It compared
the doctrines of the different schools with each other, and showed from
their contradictions that man has no criterion of truth; that, since his
ideas of what is good and what is evil differ according to the country
in which he lives, they can have no foundation in Nature, but must be
altogether the result of education; that right and wrong are nothing
more than fictions created by society for its own purposes. In Athens,
some of the more advanced classes had reached such a pass that they not
only denied the unseen, the supernatural, they even affirmed that the
world is only a day-dream, a phantasm, and that nothing at all exists.

The topographical configuration of Greece gave an impress to her
political condition. It divided her people into distinct communities
having conflicting interests, and made them incapable of centralization.
Incessant domestic wars between the rival states checked her
advancement. She was poor, her leading men had become corrupt. They were
ever ready to barter patriotic considerations for foreign gold, to sell
themselves for Persian bribes. Possessing a perception of the beautiful
as manifested in sculpture and architecture to a degree never
attained elsewhere either before or since, Greece had lost a practical
appreciation of the Good and the True.

While European Greece, full of ideas of liberty and independence,
rejected the sovereignty of Persia, Asiatic Greece acknowledged it
without reluctance. At that time the Persian Empire in territorial
extent was equal to half of modern Europe. It touched the waters of
the Mediterranean, the Aegean, the Black, the Caspian, the Indian, the
Persian, the Red Seas. Through its territories there flowed six of the
grandest rivers in the world--the Euphrates, the Tigris, the Indus, the
Jaxartes, the Oxus, the Nile, each more than a thousand miles in length.
Its surface reached from thirteen hundred feet below the sea-level to
twenty thousand feet above. It yielded, therefore, every agricultural
product. Its mineral wealth was boundless. It inherited the prestige of
the Median, the Babylonian, the Assyrian, the Chaldean Empires, whose
annals reached back through more than twenty centuries.

THE PERSIAN EMPIRE. Persia had always looked upon European Greece as
politically insignificant, for it had scarcely half the territorial
extent of one of her satrapies. Her expeditions for compelling its
obedience had, however, taught her the military qualities of its people.
In her forces were incorporated Greek mercenaries, esteemed the very
best of her troops. She did not hesitate sometimes to give the command
of her armies to Greek generals, of her fleets to Greek captains. In the
political convulsions through which she had passed, Greek soldiers had
often been used by her contending chiefs. These military operations were
attended by a momentous result. They revealed, to the quick eye of
these warlike mercenaries, the political weakness of the empire and
the possibility of reaching its centre. After the death of Cyrus on the
battle-field of Cunaxa, it was demonstrated, by the immortal retreat of
the ten thousand under Xenophon, that a Greek army could force its way
to and from the heart of Persia.

That reverence for the military abilities of Asiatic generals, so
profoundly impressed on the Greeks by such engineering exploits as the
bridging of the Hellespont, and the cutting of the isthmus at Mount
Athos by Xerxes, had been obliterated at Salamis, Platea, Mycale. To
plunder rich Persian provinces had become an irresistible temptation.
Such was the expedition of Agesilaus, the Spartan king, whose brilliant
successes were, however, checked by the Persian government resorting to
its time-proved policy of bribing the neighbors of Sparta to attack her.
"I have been conquered by thirty thousand Persian archers," bitterly
exclaimed Agesilaus, as he re-embarked, alluding to the Persian coin,
the Daric, which was stamped with the image of an archer.

THE INVASION OF PERSIA BY GREECE. At length Philip, the King of Macedon,
projected a renewal of these attempts, under a far more formidable
organization, and with a grander object. He managed to have himself
appointed captain-general of all Greece not for the purpose of a mere
foray into the Asiatic satrapies, but for the overthrow of the Persian
dynasty in the very centre of its power. Assassinated while his
preparations were incomplete, he was succeeded by his son Alexander,
then a youth. A general assembly of Greeks at Corinth had unanimously
elected him in his father's stead. There were some disturbances in
Illyria; Alexander had to march his army as far north as the Danube to
quell them. During his absence the Thebans with some others conspired
against him. On his return he took Thebes by assault. He massacred
six thousand of its inhabitants, sold thirty thousand for slaves, and
utterly demolished the city. The military wisdom of this severity was
apparent in his Asiatic campaign. He was not troubled by any revolt in
his rear.

THE MACEDONIAN CAMPAIGN. In the spring B.C. 334 Alexander crossed the
Hellespont into Asia. His army consisted of thirty-four thousand foot
and four thousand horse. He had with him only seventy talents in money.
He marched directly on the Persian army, which, vastly exceeding him in
strength, was holding the line of the Granicus. He forced the passage of
the river, routed the enemy, and the possession of all Asia Minor, with
its treasures, was the fruit of the victory. The remainder of that
year he spent in the military organization of the conquered provinces.
Meantime Darius, the Persian king, had advanced an army of six hundred
thousand men to prevent the passage of the Macedonians into Syria. In
a battle that ensued among the mountain-defiles at Issus, the Persians
were again overthrown. So great was the slaughter that Alexander, and
Ptolemy, one of his generals, crossed over a ravine choked with dead
bodies. It was estimated that the Persian loss was not less than ninety
thousand foot and ten thousand horse. The royal pavilion fell into the
conqueror's hands, and with it the wife and several of the children of
Darius. Syria was thus added to the Greek conquests. In Damascus were
found many of the concubines of Darius and his chief officers, together
with a vast treasure.

Before venturing into the plains of Mesopotamia for the final struggle,
Alexander, to secure his rear and preserve his communications with the
sea, marched southward down the Mediterranean coast, reducing the cities
in his way. In his speech before the council of war after Issus, he told
his generals that they must not pursue Darius with Tyre unsubdued, and
Persia in possession of Egypt and Cyprus, for, if Persia should regain
her seaports, she would transfer the war into Greece, and that it was
absolutely necessary for him to be sovereign at sea. With Cyprus and
Egypt in his possession he felt no solicitude about Greece. The siege
of Tyre cost him more than half a year. In revenge for this delay,
he crucified, it is said, two thousand of his prisoners. Jerusalem
voluntarily surrendered, and therefore was treated leniently: but the
passage of the Macedonian army into Egypt being obstructed at Gaza, the
Persian governor of which, Betis, made a most obstinate defense, that
place, after a siege of two months, was carried by assault, ten thousand
of its men were massacred, and the rest, with their wives and children,
sold into slavery. Betis himself was dragged alive round the city at the
chariot-wheels of the conqueror. There was now no further obstacle. The
Egyptians, who detested the Persian rule, received their invader with
open arms. He organized the country in his own interest, intrusting
all its military commands to Macedonian officers, and leaving the civil
government in the hands of native Egyptians.

CONQUEST OF EGYPT. While preparations for the final campaign were being
made, he undertook a journey to the temple of Jupiter Ammon, which was
situated in an oasis of the Libyan Desert, at a distance of two hundred
miles. The oracle declared him to be a son of that god who, under
the form of a serpent, had beguiled Olympias, his mother. Immaculate
conceptions and celestial descents were so currently received in those
days, that whoever had greatly distinguished himself in the affairs of
men was thought to be of supernatural lineage. Even in Rome, centuries
later, no one could with safety have denied that the city owed its
founder, Romulus, to an accidental meeting of the god Mars with the
virgin Rhea Sylvia, as she went with her pitcher for water to the
spring. The Egyptian disciples of Plato would have looked with anger on
those who rejected the legend that Perictione, the mother of that
great philosopher, a pure virgin, had suffered an immaculate conception
through the influences of Apollo, and that the god had declared to
Ariston, to whom she was betrothed, the parentage of the child. When
Alexander issued his letters, orders, and decrees, styling himself "King
Alexander, the son of Jupiter Ammon," they came to the inhabitants of
Egypt and Syria with an authority that now can hardly be realized. The
free-thinking Greeks, however, put on such a supernatural pedigree its
proper value. Olympias, who, of course, better than all others knew the
facts of the case, used jestingly to say, that "she wished Alexander
would cease from incessantly embroiling her with Jupiter's wife."
Arrian, the historian of the Macedonian expedition, observes, "I cannot
condemn him for endeavoring to draw his subjects into the belief of his
divine origin, nor can I be induced to think it any great crime, for it
is very reasonable to imagine that he intended no more by it than merely
to procure the greater authority among his soldiers."

GREEK CONQUEST OF PERSIA. All things being thus secured in his rear,
Alexander, having returned into Syria, directed the march of his army,
now consisting of fifty thousand veterans, eastward. After crossing the
Euphrates, he kept close to the Masian hills, to avoid the intense heat
of the more southerly Mesopotamian plains; more abundant forage could
also thus be procured for the cavalry. On the left bank of the Tigris,
near Arbela, he encountered the great army of eleven hundred thousand
men brought up by Darius from Babylon. The death of the Persian monarch,
which soon followed the defeat he suffered, left the Macedonian general
master of all the countries from the Danube to the Indus. Eventually he
extended his conquest to the Ganges. The treasures he seized are almost
beyond belief. At Susa alone he found--so Arrian says--fifty thousand
talents in money.

EVENTS OF THE CAMPAIGNS. The modern military student cannot look
upon these wonderful campaigns without admiration. The passage of the
Hellespont; the forcing of the Granicus; the winter spent in a political
organization of conquered Asia Minor; the march of the right wing and
centre of the army along the Syrian Mediterranean coast; the engineering
difficulties overcome at the siege of Tyre; the storming of Gaza; the
isolation of Persia from Greece; the absolute exclusion of her navy from
the Mediterranean; the check on all her attempts at intriguing with
or bribing Athenians or Spartans, heretofore so often resorted to with
success; the submission of Egypt; another winter spent in the political
organization of that venerable country; the convergence of the whole
army from the Black and Red Seas toward the nitre-covered plains of
Mesopotamia in the ensuing spring; the passage of the Euphrates fringed
with its weeping-willows at the broken bridge of Thapsacus; the crossing
of the Tigris; the nocturnal reconnaissance before the great and
memorable battle of Arbela; the oblique movement on the field; the
piercing of the enemy's centre--a manoeuvre destined to be repeated
many centuries subsequently at Austerlitz; the energetic pursuit of
the Persian monarch; these are exploits not surpassed by any soldier of
later times.

A prodigious stimulus was thus given to Greek intellectual activity.
There were men who had marched with the Macedonian army from the Danube
to the Nile, from the Nile to the Ganges. They had felt the hyperborean
blasts of the countries beyond the Black Sea, the simooms and
sand-tempests of the Egyptian deserts. They had seen the Pyramids which
had already stood for twenty centuries, the hieroglyph-covered obelisks
of Luxor, avenues of silent and mysterious sphinxes, colossi of monarchs
who reigned in the morning of the world. In the halls of Esar-haddon
they had stood before the thrones of grim old Assyrian kings, guarded by
winged bulls. In Babylon there still remained its walls, once more than
sixty miles in compass, and, after the ravages of three centuries and
three conquerors, still more than eighty feet in height; there were
still the ruins of the temple of cloud encompassed Bel, on its top was
planted the observatory wherein the weird Chaldean astronomers had held
nocturnal communion with the stars; still there were vestiges of the two
palaces with their hanging gardens in which were great trees growing in
mid-air, and the wreck of the hydraulic machinery that had supplied
them with water from the river. Into the artificial lake with its vast
apparatus of aqueducts and sluices the melted snows of the Armenian
mountains found their way, and were confined in their course through
the city by the embankments of the Euphrates. Most wonderful of all,
perhaps, was the tunnel under the river-bed.

EFFECT ON THE GREEK ARMY. If Chaldea, Assyria, Babylon, presented
stupendous and venerable antiquities reaching far back into the night of
time, Persia was not without her wonders of a later date. The pillared
halls of Persepolis were filled with miracles of art--carvings,
sculptures, enamels, alabaster libraries, obelisks, sphinxes, colossal
bulls. Ecbatana, the cool summer retreat of the Persian kings, was
defended by seven encircling walls of hewn and polished blocks, the
interior ones in succession of increasing height, and of different
colors, in astrological accordance with the seven planets. The palace
was roofed with silver tiles, its beams were plated with gold. At
midnight, in its halls the sunlight was rivaled by many a row of naphtha
cressets. A paradise--that luxury of the monarchs of the East--was
planted in the midst of the city. The Persian Empire, from the
Hellespont to the Indus, was truly the garden of the world.

EFFECTS ON THE GREEK ARMY. I have devoted a few pages to the story of
these marvelous campaigns, for the military talent they fostered led
to the establishment of the mathematical and practical schools of
Alexandria, the true origin of science. We trace back all our exact
knowledge to the Macedonian campaigns. Humboldt has well observed that
an introduction to new and grand objects of Nature enlarges the human
mind. The soldiers of Alexander and the hosts of his camp-followers
encountered at every march unexpected and picturesque scenery. Of all
men, the Greeks were the most observant, the most readily and profoundly
impressed. Here there were interminable sandy plains, there mountains
whose peaks were lost above the clouds. In the deserts were mirages,
on the hill-sides shadows of fleeting clouds sweeping over the forests.
They were in a land of amber-colored date-palms and cypresses, of
tamarisks, green myrtles, and oleanders. At Arbela they had fought
against Indian elephants; in the thickets of the Caspian they had roused
from his lair the lurking royal tiger. They had seen animals which,
compared with those of Europe, were not only strange, but colossal--the
rhinoceros, the hippopotamus, the camel, the crocodiles of the Nile
and the Ganges. They had encountered men of many complexions and many
costumes: the swarthy Syrian, the olive-colored Persian, the black
African. Even of Alexander himself it is related that on his death-bed
he caused his admiral, Nearchus, to sit by his side, and found
consolation in listening to the adventures of that sailor--the story of
his voyage from the Indus up the Persian Gulf. The conqueror had seen
with astonishment the ebbing and flowing of the tides. He had built
ships for the exploration of the Caspian, supposing that it and
the Black Sea might be gulfs of a great ocean, such as Nearchus had
discovered the Persian and Red Seas to be. He had formed a resolution
that his fleet should attempt the circumnavigation of Africa, and come
into the Mediterranean through the Pillars of Hercules--a feat which, it
was affirmed, had once been accomplished by the Pharaohs.

INTELLECTUAL CONDITION OF PERSIA. Not only her greatest soldiers, but
also her greatest philosophers, found in the conquered empire much that
might excite the admiration of Greece. Callisthenes obtained in Babylon
a series of Chaldean astronomical observations ranging back through
1,903 years; these he sent to Aristotle. Perhaps, since they were on
burnt bricks, duplicates of them may be recovered by modern research
in the clay libraries of the Assyrian kings. Ptolemy, the Egyptian
astronomer, possessed a Babylonian record of eclipses, going back
747 years before our era. Long-continued and close observations were
necessary, before some of these astronomical results that have reached
our times could have been ascertained. Thus the Babylonians had fixed
the length of a tropical year within twenty-five seconds of the truth;
their estimate of the sidereal year was barely two minutes in excess.
They had detected the precession of the equinoxes. They knew the causes
of eclipses, and, by the aid of their cycle called Saros, could predict
them. Their estimate of the value of that cycle, which is more than
6,585 days, was within nineteen and a half minutes of the truth.

INTELLECTUAL CONDITION OF PERSIA. Such facts furnish incontrovertible
proof of the patience and skill with which astronomy had been cultivated
in Mesopotamia, and that, with very inadequate instrumental means, it
had reached no inconsiderable perfection. These old observers had made
a catalogue of the stars, had divided the zodiac into twelve signs; they
had parted the day into twelve hours, the night into twelve. They had,
as Aristotle says, for a long time devoted themselves to observations of
star-occultations by the moon. They had correct views of the structure
of the solar system, and knew the order of the emplacement of the
planets. They constructed sundials, clepsydras, astrolabes, gnomons.

Not without interest do we still look on specimens of their method of
printing. Upon a revolving roller they engraved, in cuneiform letters,
their records, and, running this over plastic clay formed into blocks,
produced ineffaceable proofs. From their tile-libraries we are still
to reap a literary and historical harvest. They were not without some
knowledge of optics. The convex lens found at Nimroud shows that they
were not unacquainted with magnifying instruments. In arithmetic they
had detected the value of position in the digits, though they missed the
grand Indian invention of the cipher.

What a spectacle for the conquering Greeks, who, up to this time, had
neither experimented nor observed! They had contented themselves with
mere meditation and useless speculation.

ITS RELIGIOUS CONDITION. But Greek intellectual development, due thus
in part to a more extended view of Nature, was powerfully aided by the
knowledge then acquired of the religion of the conquered country. The
idolatry of Greece had always been a horror to Persia, who, in her
invasions, had never failed to destroy the temples and insult the fanes
of the bestial gods. The impunity with which these sacrileges had
been perpetrated had made a profound impression, and did no little to
undermine Hellenic faith. But now the worshiper of the vile Olympian
divinities, whose obscene lives must have been shocking to every
pious man, was brought in contact with a grand, a solemn, a consistent
religious system having its foundation on a philosophical basis. Persia,
as is the case with all empires of long duration, had passed through
many changes of religion. She had followed the Monotheism of Zoroaster;
had then accepted Dualism, and exchanged that for Magianism. At the time
of the Macedonian expedition, she recognized one universal Intelligence,
the Creator, Preserver, and Governor of all things, the most holy
essence of truth, the giver of all good. He was not to be represented by
any image, or any graven form. And, since, in every thing here below, we
see the resultant of two opposing forces, under him were two coequal and
coeternal principles, represented by the imagery of Light and Darkness.
These principles are in never-ending conflict. The world is their
battle-ground, man is their prize.

In the old legends of Dualism, the Evil Spirit was said to have sent
a serpent to ruin the paradise which the Good Spirit had made. These
legends became known to the Jews during their Babylonian captivity.

The existence of a principle of evil is the necessary incident of the
existence of a principle of good, as a shadow is the necessary incident
of the presence of light. In this manner could be explained the
occurrence of evil in a world, the maker and ruler of which is supremely
good. Each of the personified principles of light and darkness, Ormuzd
and Ahriman, had his subordinate angels, his counselors, his armies. It
is the duty of a good man to cultivate truth, purity, and industry. He
may look forward, when this life is over, to a life in another world,
and trust to a resurrection of the body, the immortality of the soul,
and a conscious future existence.

In the later years of the empire, the principles of Magianism had
gradually prevailed more and more over those of Zoroaster. Magianism was
essentially a worship of the elements. Of these, fire was considered as
the most worthy representative of the Supreme Being. On altars erected,
not in temples, but under the blue canopy of the sky, perpetual fires
were kept burning, and the rising sun was regarded as the noblest object
of human adoration. In the society of Asia, nothing is visible but the
monarch; in the expanse of heaven, all objects vanish in presence of the
sun.

DEATH OF ALEXANDER. Prematurely cut off in the midst of many great
projects Alexander died at Babylon before he had completed his
thirty-third year (B.C. 323). There was a suspicion that he had been
poisoned. His temper had become so unbridled, his passion so ferocious,
that his generals and even his intimate friends lived in continual
dread. Clitus, one of the latter, he in a moment of fury had stabbed to
the heart. Callisthenes, the intermedium between himself and Aristotle,
he had caused to be hanged, or, as was positively asserted by some who
knew the facts, had had him put upon the rack and then crucified. It
may have been in self-defense that the conspirators resolved on his
assassination. But surely it was a calumny to associate the name of
Aristotle with this transaction. He would have rather borne the worst
that Alexander could inflict, than have joined in the perpetration of so
great a crime.

A scene of confusion and bloodshed lasting many years ensued, nor did it
cease even after the Macedonian generals had divided the empire. Among
its vicissitudes one incident mainly claims our attention. Ptolemy, who
was a son of King Philip by Arsinoe, a beautiful concubine, and who
in his boyhood had been driven into exile with Alexander, when they
incurred their father's displeasure, who had been Alexander's comrade
in many of his battles and all his campaigns, became governor and
eventually king of Egypt.

FOUNDATION OF ALEXANDER. At the siege of Rhodes, Ptolemy had been of
such signal service to its citizens that in gratitude they paid divine
honors to him, and saluted him with the title of Soter (the Savior).
By that designation--Ptolemy Soter--he is distinguished from succeeding
kings of the Macedonian dynasty in Egypt.

He established his seat of government not in any of the old capitals
of the country, but in Alexandria. At the time of the expedition to
the temple of Jupiter Ammon, the Macedonian conqueror had caused the
foundations of that city to be laid, foreseeing that it might be
made the commercial entrepot between Asia and Europe. It is to be
particularly remarked that not only did Alexander himself deport many
Jews from Palestine to people the city, and not only did Ptolemy Soter
bring one hundred thousand more after his siege of Jerusalem, but
Philadelphus, his successor, redeemed from slavery one hundred and
ninety-eight thousand of that people, paying their Egyptian owners a
just money equivalent for each. To all these Jews the same privileges
were accorded as to the Macedonians. In consequence of this considerate
treatment, vast numbers of their compatriots and many Syrians
voluntarily came into Egypt. To them the designation of Hellenistical
Jews was given. In like manner, tempted by the benign government of
Soter, multitudes of Greeks sought refuge in the country, and the
invasions of Perdiccas and Antigonus showed that Greek soldiers would
desert from other Macedonian generals to join is armies.

The population of Alexandria was therefore of three distinct
nationalities: 1. Native Egyptians 2. Greeks; 3. Jews--a fact that has
left an impress on the religious faith of modern Europe.

Greek architects and Greek engineers had made Alexandria the most
beautiful city of the ancient world. They had filled it with magnificent
palaces, temples, theatres. In its centre, at the intersection of its
two grand avenues, which crossed each other at right angles, and in the
midst of gardens, fountains, obelisks, stood the mausoleum, in
which, embalmed after the manner of the Egyptians, rested the body of
Alexander. In a funereal journey of two years it had been brought with
great pomp from Babylon. At first the coffin was of pure gold, but
this having led to a violation of the tomb, it was replaced by one of
alabaster. But not these, not even the great light-house, Pharos, built
of blocks of white marble and so high that the fire continually burning
on its top could be seen many miles off at sea--the Pharos counted
as one of the seven wonders of the world--it is not these magnificent
achievements of architecture that arrest our attention; the true, the
most glorious monument of the Macedonian kings of Egypt is the Museum.
Its influences will last when even the Pyramids have passed away.

THE ALEXANDRIAN MUSEUM. The Alexandrian Museum was commenced by Ptolemy
Soter, and was completed by his son Ptolemy Philadelphus. It was
situated in the Bruchion, the aristocratic quarter of the city,
adjoining the king's palace. Built of marble, it was surrounded with
a piazza, in which the residents might walk and converse together. Its
sculptured apartments contained the Philadelphian library, and were
crowded with the choicest statues and pictures. This library eventually
comprised four hundred thousand volumes. In the course of time, probably
on account of inadequate accommodation for so many books, an additional
library was established in the adjacent quarter Rhacotis, and placed
in the Serapion or temple of Serapis. The number of volumes in this
library, which was called the Daughter of that in the Museum, was
eventually three hundred thousand. There were, therefore, seven hundred
thousand volumes in these royal collections.

Alexandria was not merely the capital of Egypt, it was the intellectual
metropolis of the world. Here it was truly said the Genius of the East
met the Genius of the West, and this Paris of antiquity became a focus
of fashionable dissipation and universal skepticism. In the allurements
of its bewitching society even the Jews forgot their patriotism. They
abandoned the language of their forefathers, and adopted Greek.

In the establishment of the Museum, Ptolemy Soter and his son
Philadelphus had three objects in view: 1. The perpetuation of such
knowledge as was then in the world; 2. Its increase; 3. Its diffusion.

1. For the perpetuation of knowledge. Orders were given to the chief
librarian to buy at the king's expense whatever books he could. A body
of transcribers was maintained in the Museum, whose duty it was to make
correct copies of such works as their owners were not disposed to sell.
Any books brought by foreigners into Egypt were taken at once to the
Museum, and, when correct copies had been made, the transcript was given
to the owner, and the original placed in the library. Often a very large
pecuniary indemnity was paid. Thus it is said of Ptolemy Euergetes
that, having obtained from Athens the works of Euripides, Sophocles,
and Aeschylus, he sent to their owners transcripts, together with about
fifteen thousand dollars, as an indemnity. On his return from the Syrian
expedition he carried back in triumph all the Egyptian monuments from
Ecbatana and Susa, which Cambyses and other invaders had removed from
Egypt. These he replaced in their original seats, or added as adornments
to his museums. When works were translated as well as transcribed, sums
which we should consider as almost incredible were paid, as was the
case with the Septuagint translation of the Bible, ordered by Ptolemy
Philadelphus.

2. For the increase of knowledge. One of the chief objects of the Museum
was that of serving as the home of a body of men who devoted themselves
to study, and were lodged and maintained at the king's expense.
Occasionally he himself sat at their table. Anecdotes connected with
those festive occasions have descended to our times. In the original
organization of the Museum the residents were divided into four
faculties--literature; mathematics, astronomy, medicine. Minor branches
were appropriately classified under one of these general heads; thus
natural history was considered to be a branch of medicine. An officer of
very great distinction presided over the establishment, and had general
charge of its interests. Demetrius Phalareus, perhaps the most learned
man of his age, who had been governor of Athens for many years, was the
first so appointed. Under him was the librarian, an office sometimes
held by men whose names have descended to our times, as Eratosthenes,
and Apollonius Rhodius.

ORGANIZATION OF THE MUSEUM. In connection with the Museum were a
botanical and a zoological garden. These gardens, as their names import,
were for the purpose of facilitating the study of plants and animals.
There was also an astronomical observatory containing armillary spheres,
globes, solstitial and equatorial armils, astrolabes, parallactic
rules, and other apparatus then in use, the graduation on the divided
instruments being into degrees and sixths. On the floor of this
observatory a meridian line was drawn. The want of correct means of
measuring time and temperature was severely felt; the clepsydra of
Ctesibius answered very imperfectly for the former, the hydrometer
floating in a cup of water for the latter; it measured variations of
temperature by variations of density. Philadelphus, who toward the close
of his life was haunted with an intolerable dread of death, devoted much
of his time to the discovery of an elixir. For such pursuits the Museum
was provided with a chemical laboratory. In spite of the prejudices of
the age, and especially in spite of Egyptian prejudices, there was
in connection with the medical department an anatomical room for the
dissection, not only of the dead, but actually of the living, who for
crimes had been condemned.

3. For the diffusion of knowledge. In the Museum was given, by lectures,
conversation, or other appropriate methods instruction in all the
various departments of human knowledge. There flocked to this great
intellectual centre, students from all countries. It is said that at one
time not fewer than fourteen thousand were in attendance. Subsequently
even the Christian church received from it some of the most eminent of
its Fathers, as Clemens Alexandrinus, Origen, Athanasius.

The library in the Museum was burnt during the siege of Alexandria by
Julius Caesar. To make amends for this great loss, that collected
by Eumenes, King of Pergamus, was presented by Mark Antony to Queen
Cleopatra. Originally it was founded as a rival to that of the
Ptolemies. It was added to the collection in the Serapion.

SCIENTIFIC SCHOOL OF THE MUSEUM. It remains now to describe briefly the
philosophical basis of the Museum, and some of its contributions to the
stock of human knowledge.

In memory of the illustrious founder of this most noble institution--an
institution which antiquity delighted to call "The divine school of
Alexandria"--we must mention in the first rank his "History of the
Campaigns of Alexander." Great as a soldier and as a sovereign, Ptolemy
Soter added to his glory by being an author. Time, which has not been
able to destroy the memory of our obligations to him, has dealt unjustly
by his work. It is not now extant.

As might be expected from the friendship that existed between Alexander,
Ptolemy, and Aristotle, the Aristotelian philosophy was the intellectual
corner-stone on which the Museum rested. King Philip had committed the
education of Alexander to Aristotle, and during the Persian campaigns
the conqueror contributed materially, not only in money, but otherwise,
toward the "Natural History" then in preparation.

The essential principle of the Aristotelian philosophy was, to rise
from the study of particulars to a knowledge of general principles or
universals, advancing to them by induction. The induction is the
more certain as the facts on which it is based are more numerous; its
correctness is established if it should enable us to predict other facts
until then unknown. This system implies endless toil in the collection
of facts, both by experiment and observation; it implies also a close
meditation on them. It is, therefore, essentially a method of labor
and of reason, not a method of imagination. The failures that Aristotle
himself so often exhibits are no proof of its unreliability, but
rather of its trustworthiness. They are failures arising from want of a
sufficiency of facts.

ETHICAL SCHOOL OF THE MUSEUM. Some of the general results at which
Aristotle arrived are very grand. Thus, he concluded that every thing is
ready to burst into life, and that the various organic forms presented
to us by Nature are those which existing conditions permit. Should
the conditions change, the forms will also change. Hence there is an
unbroken chain from the simple element through plants and animals up to
man, the different groups merging by insensible shades into each other.

The inductive philosophy thus established by Aristotle is a method of
great power. To it all the modern advances in science are due. In
its most improved form it rises by inductions from phenomena to their
causes, and then, imitating the method of the Academy, it descends by
deductions from those causes to the detail of phenomena.

While thus the Scientific School of Alexandria was founded on the maxims
of one great Athenian philosopher, the Ethical School was founded on the
maxims of another, for Zeno, though a Cypriote or Phoenician, had for
many years been established at Athens. His disciples took the name of
Stoics. His doctrines long survived him, and, in times when there was no
other consolation for man, offered a support in the hour of trial, and
an unwavering guide in the vicissitudes of life, not only to illustrious
Greeks, but also to many of the great philosophers, statesmen, generals,
and emperors of Rome.

THE PRINCIPLES OF STOICISM. The aim of Zeno was, to furnish a guide
for the daily practice of life, to make men virtuous. He insisted that
education is the true foundation of virtue, for, if we know what is
good, we shall incline to do it. We must trust to sense, to furnish the
data of knowledge, and reason will suitably combine them. In this the
affinity of Zeno to Aristotle is plainly seen. Every appetite, lust,
desire, springs from imperfect knowledge. Our nature is imposed upon
us by Fate, but we must learn to control our passions, and live free,
intelligent, virtuous, in all things in accordance with reason. Our
existence should be intellectual, we should survey with equanimity all
pleasures and all pains. We should never forget that we are freemen, not
the slaves of society. "I possess," said the Stoic, "a treasure which
not all the world can rob me of--no one can deprive me of death." We
should remember that Nature in her operations aims at the universal, and
never spares individuals, but uses them as means for the accomplishment
of her ends. It is, therefore, for us to submit to Destiny, cultivating,
as the things necessary to virtue, knowledge, temperance, fortitude,
justice. We must remember that every thing around us is in mutation;
decay follows reproduction, and reproduction decay, and that it is
useless to repine at death in a world where every thing is dying. As a
cataract shows from year to year an invariable shape, though the water
composing it is perpetually changing, so the aspect of Nature is nothing
more than a flow of matter presenting an impermanent form. The universe,
considered as a whole, is unchangeable. Nothing is eternal but
space, atoms, force. The forms of Nature that we see are essentially
transitory, they must all pass away.

STOICISM IN THE MUSEUM. We must bear in mind that the majority of men
are imperfectly educated, and hence we must not needlessly offend the
religious ideas of our age. It is enough for us ourselves to know that,
though there is a Supreme Power, there is no Supreme Being. There is an
invisible principle, but not a personal God, to whom it would be not
so much blasphemy as absurdity to impute the form, the sentiments, the
passions of man. All revelation is, necessarily, a mere fiction. That
which men call chance is only the effect of an unknown cause. Even of
chances there is a law. There is no such thing as Providence, for Nature
proceeds under irresistible laws, and in this respect the universe is
only a vast automatic engine. The vital force which pervades the world
is what the illiterate call God. The modifications through which all
things are running take place in an irresistible way, and hence it may
be said that the progress of the world is, under Destiny, like a seed,
it can evolve only in a predetermined mode.

The soul of man is a spark of the vital flame, the general vital
principle. Like heat, it passes from one to another, and is finally
reabsorbed or reunited in the universal principle from which it came.
Hence we must not expect annihilation, but reunion; and, as the tired
man looks forward to the insensibility of sleep, so the philosopher,
weary of the world, should look forward to the tranquillity of
extinction. Of these things, however, we should think doubtingly, since
the mind can produce no certain knowledge from its internal resources
alone. It is unphilosophical to inquire into first causes; we must deal
only with phenomena. Above all, we must never forget that man cannot
ascertain absolute truth, and that the final result of human inquiry
into the matter is, that we are incapable of perfect knowledge; that,
even if the truth be in our possession, we cannot be sure of it.

What, then, remains for us? Is it not this--the acquisition of
knowledge, the cultivation of virtue and of friendship, the observance
of faith and truth, an unrepining submission to whatever befalls us, a
life led in accordance with reason?

PLATONISM IN THE MUSEUM. But, though the Alexandrian Museum was
especially intended for the cultivation of the Aristotelian philosophy,
it must not be supposed that other systems were excluded. Platonism was
not only carried to its full development, but in the end it supplanted
Peripateticism, and through the New Academy left a permanent impress on
Christianity. The philosophical method of Plato was the inverse of that
of Aristotle. Its starting-point was universals, the very existence of
which was a matter of faith, and from these it descended to particulars,
or details. Aristotle, on the contrary, rose from particulars to
universals, advancing to them by inductions.

Plato, therefore, trusted to the imagination, Aristotle to reason.
The former descended from the decomposition of a primitive idea into
particulars, the latter united particulars into a general conception.
Hence the method of Plato was capable of quickly producing what seemed
to be splendid, though in reality unsubstantial results; that of
Aristotle was more tardy in its operation, but much more solid. It
implied endless labor in the collection of facts, a tedious resort
to experiment and observation, the application of demonstration. The
philosophy of Plato is a gorgeous castle in the air; that of Aristotle
a solid structure, laboriously, and with many failures, founded on the
solid rock.

An appeal to the imagination is much more alluring than the employment
of reason. In the intellectual decline of Alexandria, indolent methods
were preferred to laborious observation and severe mental exercise. The
schools of Neo-Platonism were crowded with speculative mystics, such
as Ammonius Saccas and Plotinus. These took the place of the severe
geometers of the old Museum.

PHYSICAL SCIENCE IN THE MUSEUM. The Alexandrian school offers the first
example of that system which, in the hands of modern physicists, has
led to such wonderful results. It rejected imagination, and made its
theories the expression of facts obtained by experiment and observation,
aided by mathematical discussion. It enforced the principle that the
true method of studying Nature is by experimental interrogation. The
researches of Archimedes in specific gravity, and the works of
Ptolemy on optics, resemble our present investigations in experimental
philosophy, and stand in striking contrast with the speculative vagaries
of the older writers. Laplace says that the only observation which the
history of astronomy offers us, made by the Greeks before the school
of Alexandria, is that of the summer solstice of the year B.C. 432.
by Meton and Euctemon. We have, for the first time, in that school,
a combined system of observations made with instruments for the
measurement of angles, and calculated by trigonometrical methods.
Astronomy then took a form which subsequent ages could only perfect.


It does not accord with the compass or the intention of this work to
give a detailed account of the contributions of the Alexandrian Museum
to the stock of human knowledge. It is sufficient that the reader should
obtain a general impression of their character. For particulars, I
may refer him to the sixth chapter of my "History of the Intellectual
Development of Europe."

EUCLID--ARCHIMEDES. It has just been remarked that the Stoical
philosophy doubted whether the mind can ascertain absolute truth. While
Zeno was indulging in such doubts, Euclid was preparing his great work,
destined to challenge contradiction from the whole human race. After
more than twenty-two centuries it still survives, a model of accuracy,
perspicuity, and a standard of exact demonstration. This great geometer
not only wrote on other mathematical topics, such as Conic Sections and
Prisms, but there are imputed to him treatises on Harmonics and Optics,
the latter subject being discussed on the hypothesis of rays issuing
from the eye to the object.

With the Alexandrian mathematicians and physicists must be classed
Archimedes, though he eventually resided in Sicily. Among his
mathematical works were two books on the Sphere and Cylinder, in
which he gave the demonstration that the solid content of a sphere is
two-thirds that of its circumscribing cylinder. So highly did he esteem
this, that he directed the diagram to be engraved on his tombstone. He
also treated of the quadrature of the circle and of the parabola; he
wrote on Conoids and Spheroids, and on the spiral that bears his name,
the genesis of which was suggested to him by his friend Conon the
Alexandrian. As a mathematician, Europe produced no equal to him for
nearly two thousand years. In physical science he laid the foundation
of hydrostatics; invented a method for the determination of specific
gravities; discussed the equilibrium of floating bodies; discovered the
true theory of the lever, and invented a screw, which still bears
his name, for raising the water of the Nile. To him also are to be
attributed the endless screw, and a peculiar form of burning-mirror, by
which, at the siege of Syracuse, it is said that he set the Roman fleet
on fire.

ERATOSTHENES--APOLLONIUS--HIPPARCHUS. Eratosthenes, who at one time had
charge of the library, was the author of many important works. Among
them may be mentioned his determination of the interval between
the tropics, and an attempt to ascertain the size of the earth. He
considered the articulation and expansion of continents, the position
of mountain-chains, the action of clouds, the geological submersion of
lands, the elevation of ancient sea-beds, the opening of the Dardanelles
and the straits of Gibraltar, and the relations of the Euxine Sea.
He composed a complete system of the earth, in three books--physical,
mathematical, historical--accompanied by a map of all the parts then
known. It is only of late years that the fragments remaining of his
"Chronicles of the Theban Kings" have been justly appreciated. For
many centuries they were thrown into discredit by the authority of our
existing absurd theological chronology.

It is unnecessary to adduce the arguments relied upon by the
Alexandrians to prove the globular form of the earth. They had correct
ideas respecting the doctrine of the sphere, its poles, axis, equator,
arctic and antarctic circles, equinoctial points, solstices, the
distribution of climates, etc. I cannot do more than merely allude to
the treatises on Conic Sections and on Maxima and Minima by Apollonius,
who is said to have been the first to introduce the words ellipse and
hyperbola. In like manner I must pass the astronomical observations
of Alistyllus and Timocharis. It was to those of the latter on Spica
Virginis that Hipparchus was indebted for his great discovery of the
precession of the eqninoxes. Hipparchus also determined the first
inequality of the moon, the equation of the centre. He adopted the
theory of epicycles and eccentrics, a geometrical conception for the
purpose of resolving the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies on the
principle of circular movement. He also undertook to make a catalogue
of the stars by the method of alineations--that is, by indicating those
that are in the same apparent straight line. The number of stars so
catalogued was 1,080. If he thus attempted to depict the aspect of
the sky, he endeavored to do the same for the surface of the earth, by
marking the position of towns and other places by lines of latitude and
longitude. He was the first to construct tables of the sun and moon.

THE SYNTAXIS OF PTOLEMY. In the midst of such a brilliant constellation
of geometers, astronomers, physicists, conspicuously shines forth
Ptolemy, the author of the great work, "Syntaxis," "a Treatise on the
Mathematical Construction of the Heavens." It maintained its ground
for nearly fifteen hundred years, and indeed was only displaced by the
immortal "Principia" of Newton. It commences with the doctrine that the
earth is globular and fixed in space, it describes the construction of a
table of chords, and instruments for observing the solstices, it deduces
the obliquity of the ecliptic, it finds terrestrial latitudes by the
gnomon, describes climates, shows how ordinary may be converted into
sidereal time, gives reasons for preferring the tropical to the sidereal
year, furnishes the solar theory on the principle of the sun's orbit
being a simple eccentric, explains the equation of time, advances to the
discussion of the motions of the moon, treats of the first inequality,
of her eclipses, and the motion of her nodes. It then gives Ptolemy's
own great discovery--that which has made his name immortal--the
discovery of the moon's evection or second inequality, reducing it to
the epicyclic theory. It attempts the determination of the distances of
the sun and moon from the earth--with, however, only partial success. It
considers the precession of the equinoxes, the discovery of Hipparchus,
the full period of which is twenty-five thousand years. It gives a
catalogue of 1,022 stars, treats of the nature of the milky-way, and
discusses in the most masterly manner the motions of the planets. This
point constitutes another of Ptolemy's claims to scientific fame. His
determination of the planetary orbits was accomplished by comparing
his own observations with those of former astronomers, among them the
observations of Timocharis on the planet Venus.

INVENTION OF THE STEAM-ENGINE. In the Museum of Alexandria, Ctesibius
invented the fire-engine. His pupil, Hero, improved it by giving it two
cylinders. There, too, the first steam-engine worked. This also was the
invention of Hero, and was a reaction engine, on the principle of
the eolipile. The silence of the halls of Serapis was broken by the
water-clocks of Ctesibius and Apollonius, which drop by drop measured
time. When the Roman calendar had fallen into such confusion that it
had become absolutely necessary to rectify it, Julius Caesar brought
Sosigenes the astronomer from Alexandria. By his advice the lunar year
was abolished, the civil year regulated entirely by the sun, and the
Julian calendar introduced.

The Macedonian rulers of Egypt have been blamed for the manner in which
they dealt with the religious sentiment of their time. They prostituted
it to the purpose of state-craft, finding in it a means of governing
their lower classes. To the intelligent they gave philosophy.

POLICY OF THE PTOLEMIES. But doubtless they defended this policy by the
experience gathered in those great campaigns which had made the Greeks
the foremost nation of the world. They had seen the mythological
conceptions of their ancestral country dwindle into fables; the wonders
with which the old poets adorned the Mediterranean had been discovered
to be baseless illusions. From Olympus its divinities had disappeared;
indeed, Olympus itself had proved to be a phantom of the imagination.
Hades had lost its terrors; no place could be found for it.

From the woods and grottoes and rivers of Asia Minor the local gods and
goddesses had departed; even their devotees began to doubt whether they
had ever been there. If still the Syrian damsels lamented, in their
amorous ditties, the fate of Adonis, it was only as a recollection, not
as a reality. Again and again had Persia changed her national faith. For
the revelation of Zoroaster she had substituted Dualism; then under new
political influences she had adopted Magianism. She had worshiped fire,
and kept her altars burning on mountain-tops. She had adored the sun.
When Alexander came, she was fast falling into pantheism.

On a country to which in its political extremity the indigenous gods
have been found unable to give any protection, a change of faith is
impending. The venerable divinities of Egypt, to whose glory obelisks
had been raised and temples dedicated, had again and again submitted
to the sword of a foreign conqueror. In the land of the Pyramids, the
Colossi, the Sphinx, the images of the gods had ceased to represent
living realities. They had ceased to be objects of faith. Others of more
recent birth were needful, and Serapis confronted Osiris. In the shops
and streets of Alexandria there were thousands of Jews who had forgotten
the God that had made his habitation behind the veil of the temple.

Tradition, revelation, time, all had lost their influence. The
traditions of European mythology, the revelations of Asia, the
time-consecrated dogmas of Egypt, all had passed or were fast passing
away. And the Ptolemies recognized how ephemeral are forms of faith.

But the Ptolemies also recognized that there is something more durable
than forms of faith, which, like the organic forms of geological ages,
once gone, are clean gone forever, and have no restoration, no return.
They recognized that within this world of transient delusions and
unrealities there is a world of eternal truth.

That world is not to be discovered through the vain traditions that
have brought down to us the opinions of men who lived in the morning of
civilization, nor in the dreams of mystics who thought that they were
inspired. It is to be discovered by the investigations of geometry,
and by the practical interrogation of Nature. These confer on humanity
solid, and innumerable, and inestimable blessings.

The day will never come when any one of the propositions of Euclid will
be denied; no one henceforth will call in question the globular shape of
the earth, as recognized by Eratosthenes; the world will not permit
the great physical inventions and discoveries made in Alexandria and
Syracuse to be forgotten. The names of Hipparchus, of Apollonius, of
Ptolemy, of Archimedes, will be mentioned with reverence by men of every
religious profession, as long as there are men to speak.

THE MUSEUM AND MODERN SCIENCE. The Museum of Alexandria was thus
the birthplace of modern science. It is true that, long before its
establishment, astronomical observations had been made in China and
Mesopotamia; the mathematics also had been cultivated with a certain
degree of success in India. But in none of these countries had
investigation assumed a connected and consistent form; in none was
physical experimentation resorted to. The characteristic feature of
Alexandrian, as of modern science, is, that it did not restrict itself
to observation, but relied on a practical interrogation of Nature.



