CHAPTER IX.

     CONTROVERSY RESPECTING THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNIVERSE.

     There are two conceptions of the government of the world: 1.
     By Providence; 2. By Law.--The former maintained by the
     priesthood.--Sketch of the introduction of the latter.

     Kepler discovers the laws that preside over the solar
     system.--His works are denounced by papal authority.--The
     foundations of mechanical philosophy are laid by Da Vinci.--
     Galileo discovers the fundamental laws of Dynamics.--Newton
     applies them to the movements of the celestial bodies, and
     shows that the solar system is governed by mathematical
     necessity.--Herschel extends that conclusion to the
     universe.--The nebular hypothesis.--Theological exceptions
     to it.

     Evidences of the control of law in the construction of the
     earth, and in the development of the animal and plant
     series.--They arose by Evolution, not by Creation.

     The reign of law is exhibited by the historic career of
     human societies, and in the case of individual man.

     Partial adoption of this view by some of the Reformed
     Churches.


Two interpretations may be given of the mode of government of the world.
It may be by incessant divine interventions, or by the operation of
unvarying law.

To the adoption of the former a priesthood will always incline, since
it must desire to be considered as standing between the prayer of the
votary and the providential act. Its importance is magnified by the
power it claims of determining what that act shall be. In the pre
Christian (Roman) religion, the grand office of the priesthood was the
discovery of future events by oracles, omens, or an inspection of the
entrails of animals, and by the offering of sacrifices to propitiate the
gods. In the later, the Christian times, a higher power was claimed; the
clergy asserting that, by their intercessions, they could regulate the
course of affairs, avert dangers, secure benefits, work miracles, and
even change the order of Nature.

Not without reason, therefore, did they look upon the doctrine of
government by unvarying law with disfavor. It seemed to depreciate
their dignity, to lessen their importance. To them there was something
shocking in a God who cannot be swayed by human entreaty, a cold,
passionless divinity--something frightful in fatalism, destiny.

But the orderly movement of the heavens could not fail in all ages to
make a deep impression on thoughtful observers--the rising and setting
of the sun; the increasing or diminishing light of the day; the waxing
and waning of the moon; the return of the seasons in their proper
courses; the measured march of the wandering planets in the sky--what
are all these, and a thousand such, but manifestations of an orderly and
unchanging procession of events? The faith of early observers in this
interpretation may perhaps have been shaken by the occurrence of such a
phenomenon as an eclipse, a sudden and mysterious breach of the ordinary
course of natural events; but it would be resumed in tenfold strength as
soon as the discovery was made that eclipses themselves recur, and may
be predicted.

Astronomical predictions of all kinds depend upon the admission of this
fact--that there never has been and never will be any intervention in
the operation of natural laws. The scientific philosopher affirms that
the condition of the world at any given moment is the direct result
of its condition in the preceding moment, and the direct cause of its
condition in the subsequent moment. Law and chance are only different
names for mechanical necessity.

About fifty years after the death of Copernicus, John Kepler, a native
of Wurtemberg, who had adopted the heliocentric theory, and who was
deeply impressed with the belief that relationships exist in the
revolutions of the planetary bodies round the sun, and that these if
correctly examined would reveal the laws under which those movements
take place, devoted himself to the study of the distances, times, and
velocities of the planets, and the form of their orbits. His method
was, to submit the observations to which he had access, such as those
of Tycho Brahe, to computations based first on one and then on another
hypothesis, rejecting the hypothesis if he found that the calculations
did not accord with the observations. The incredible labor he had
undergone (he says, "I considered, and I computed, until I almost went
mad") was at length rewarded, and in 1609 he published his book, "On the
Motions of the Planet Mars." In this he had attempted to reconcile the
movements of that planet to the hypothesis of eccentrics and epicycles,
but eventually discovered that the orbit of a planet is not a circle but
an ellipse, the sun being in one of the foci, and that the areas swept
over by a line drawn from the planet to the sun are proportional to the
times. These constitute what are now known as the first and second laws
of Kepler. Eight years subsequently, he was rewarded by the discovery
of a third law, defining the relation between the mean distances of the
planets from the sun and the times of their revolutions; "the squares of
the periodic times are proportional to the cubes of the distances." In
"An Epitome of the Copernican System," published in 1618, he announced
this law, and showed that it holds good for the satellites of Jupiter as
regards their primary. Hence it was inferred that the laws which preside
over the grand movements of the solar system preside also over the less
movements of its constituent parts.

The conception of law which is unmistakably conveyed by Kepler's
discoveries, and the evidence they gave in support of the heliocentric
as against the geocentric theory, could not fail to incur the
reprehension of the Roman authorities. The congregation of the Index,
therefore, when they denounced the Copernican system as utterly contrary
to the Holy Scriptures, prohibited Kepler's "Epitome" of that system. It
was on this occasion that Kepler submitted his celebrated remonstrance:
"Eighty years have elapsed during which the doctrines of Copernicus
regarding the movement of the earth and the immobility of the sun have
been promulgated without hinderance, because it was deemed allowable to
dispute concerning natural things, and to elucidate the works of God,
and now that new testimony is discovered in proof of the truth of those
doctrines--testimony which was not known to the spiritual judges--ye
would prohibit the promulgation of the true system of the structure of
the universe."

None of Kepler's contemporaries believed the law of the areas, nor was
it accepted until the publication of the "Principia" of Newton. In fact,
no one in those times understood the philosophical meaning of Kepler's
laws. He himself did not foresee what they must inevitably lead to. His
mistakes showed how far he was from perceiving their result. Thus he
thought that each planet is the seat of an intelligent principle, and
that there is a relation between the magnitudes of the orbits of the
five principal planets and the five regular solids of geometry. At first
he inclined to believe that the orbit of Mars is oval, nor was it until
after a wearisome study that he detected the grand truth, its elliptical
form. An idea of the incorruptibility of the celestial objects had
led to the adoption of the Aristotelian doctrine of the perfection of
circular motions, and to the belief that there were none but circular
motions in the heavens. He bitterly complains of this as having been a
fatal "thief of his time." His philosophical daring is illustrated in
his breaking through this time-honored tradition.

In some most important particulars Kepler anticipated Newton. He was the
first to give clear ideas respecting gravity. He says every particle of
matter will rest until it is disturbed by some other particle--that the
earth attracts a stone more than the stone attracts the earth, and that
bodies move to each other in proportion to their masses; that the earth
would ascend to the moon one-fifty-fourth of the distance, and the moon
would move toward the earth the other fifty-three. He affirms that the
moon's attraction causes the tides, and that the planets must impress
irregularities on the moon's motions.

The progress of astronomy is obviously divisible into three periods:

1. The period of observation of the apparent motions of the heavenly
bodies.

2. The period of discovery of their real motions, and particularly of
the laws of the planetary revolutions; this was signally illustrated by
Copernicus and Kepler.

3. The period of the ascertainment of the causes of those laws. It was
the epoch of Newton.

The passage of the second into the third period depended on the
development of the Dynamical branch of mechanics, which had been in
a stagnant condition from the time of Archimedes or the Alexandrian
School.

In Christian Europe there had not been a cultivator of mechanical
philosophy until Leonardo da Vinci, who was born A.D. 1452. To him, and
not to Lord Bacon, must be attributed the renaissance of science. Bacon
was not only ignorant of mathematics, but depreciated its application
to physical inquiries. He contemptuously rejected the Copernican system,
alleging absurd objections to it. While Galileo was on the brink of
his great telescopic discoveries, Bacon was publishing doubts as to
the utility of instruments in scientific investigations. To ascribe the
inductive method to him is to ignore history. His fanciful philosophical
suggestions have never been of the slightest practical use. No one has
ever thought of employing them. Except among English readers, his name
is almost unknown.

To Da Vinci I shall have occasion to allude more particularly on a
subsequent page. Of his works still remaining in manuscript, two volumes
are at Milan, and one in Paris, carried there by Napoleon. After an
interval of about seventy years, Da Vinci was followed by the Dutch
engineer, Stevinus, whose work on the principles of equilibrium was
published in 1586. Six years afterward appeared Galileo's treatise on
mechanics.

To this great Italian is due the establishment of the three fundamental
laws of dynamics, known as the Laws of Motion.

The consequences of the establishment of these laws were very important.

It had been supposed that continuous movements, such, for instance, as
those of the celestial bodies, could only be maintained by a perpetual
consumption and perpetual application of force, but the first of
Galileo's laws declared that every body will persevere in its state of
rest, or of uniform motion in a right line, until it is compelled to
change that state by disturbing forces. A clear perception of this
fundamental principle is essential to a comprehension of the elementary
facts of physical astronomy. Since all the motions that we witness
taking place on the surface of the earth soon come to an end, we are
led to infer that rest is the natural condition of things. We have made,
then, a very great advance when we have become satisfied that a body is
equally indifferent to rest as to motion, and that it equally perseveres
in either state until disturbing forces are applied. Such disturbing
forces in the case of common movements are friction and the resistance
of the air. When no such resistances exist, movement must be perpetual,
as is the case with the heavenly bodies, which are moving in a void.

Forces, no matter what their difference of magnitude may be, will exert
their full influence conjointly, each as though the other did not exist.
Thus, when a ball is suffered to drop from the mouth of a cannon, it
falls to the ground in a certain interval of time through the influence
of gravity upon it. If, then, it be fired from the cannon, though now
it may be projected some thousands of feet in a second, the effect
of gravity upon it will be precisely the same as before. In the
intermingling of forces there is no deterioration; each produces its own
specific effect.

In the latter half of the seventeenth century, through the works of
Borelli, Hooke, and Huyghens, it had become plain that circular motions
could be accounted for by the laws of Galileo. Borelli, treating of the
motions of Jupiter's satellites, shows how a circular movement may arise
under the influence of a central force. Hooke exhibited the inflection
of a direct motion into a circular by a supervening central attraction.

The year 1687 presents, not only an epoch in European science, but also
in the intellectual development of man. It is marked by the publication
of the "Principia" of Newton, an incomparable, an immortal work.

On the principle that all bodies attract each other with forces directly
as their masses, and inversely as the squares of their distances, Newton
showed that all the movements of the celestial bodies may be accounted
for, and that Kepler's laws might all have been predicted--the elliptic
motions--the described areas the relation of the times and distances. As
we have seen, Newton's contemporaries had perceived how circular motions
could be explained; that was a special case, but Newton furnished the
solution of the general problem, containing all special cases of motion
in circles, ellipses, parabolas, hyperbolas--that is, in all the conic
sections.

The Alexandrian mathematicians had shown that the direction of movement
of falling bodies is toward the centre of the earth. Newton proved that
this must necessarily be the case, the general effect of the attraction
of all the particles of a sphere being the same as if they were all
concentrated in its centre. To this central force, thus determining the
fall of bodies, the designation of gravity was given. Up to this time,
no one, except Kepler, had considered how far its influence reached. It
seemed to Newton possible that it might extend as far as the moon, and
be the force that deflects her from a rectilinear path, and makes her
revolve in her orbit round the earth. It was easy to compute, on the
principle of the law of inverse squares, whether the earth's attraction
was sufficient to produce the observed effect. Employing the measures
of the size of the earth accessible at the time, Newton found that the
moon's deflection was only thirteen feet in a minute; whereas, if his
hypothesis of gravitation were true, it should be fifteen feet. But in
1669 Picard, as we have seen, executed the measurement of a degree more
carefully than had previously been done; this changed the estimate of
the magnitude of the earth, and, therefore, of the distance of the moon;
and, Newton's attention having been directed to it by some discussions
that took place at the Royal Society in 1679, he obtained Picard's
results, went home, took out his old papers, and resumed his
calculations. As they drew to a close, he became so much agitated
that he was obliged to desire a friend to finish them. The expected
coincidence was established. It was proved that the moon is retained
in her orbit and made to revolve round the earth by the force of
terrestrial gravity. The genii of Kepler had given place to the vortices
of Descartes, and these in their turn to the central force of Newton.

In like manner the earth, and each of the planets, are made to move
in an elliptic orbit round the sun by his attractive force, and
perturbations arise by reason of the disturbing action of the planetary
masses on one another. Knowing the masses and the distances, these
disturbances may be computed. Later astronomers have even succeeded with
the inverse problem, that is, knowing the perturbations or disturbances,
to find the place and the mass of the disturbing body. Thus, from the
deviations of Uranus from his theoretical position, the discovery of
Neptune was accomplished.

Newton's merit consisted in this, that he applied the laws of dynamics
to the movements of the celestial bodies, and insisted that scientific
theories must be substantiated by the agreement of observations with
calculations.

When Kepler announced his three laws, they were received with
condemnation by the spiritual authorities, not because of any error they
were supposed to present or to contain, but partly because they gave
support to the Copernican system, and partly because it was judged
inexpedient to admit the prevalence of law of any kind as opposed to
providential intervention. The world was regarded as the theatre in
which the divine will was daily displayed; it was considered derogatory
to the majesty of God that that will should be fettered in any way. The
power of the clergy was chiefly manifested in the influence the were
alleged to possess in changing his arbitrary determinations. It was thus
that they could abate the baleful action of comets, secure fine weather
or rain, prevent eclipses, and, arresting the course of Nature, work all
manner of miracles; it was thus that the shadow had been made to go back
on the dial, and the sun and the moon stopped in mid-career.

In the century preceding the epoch of Newton, a great religious and
political revolution had taken place--the Reformation. Though its
effect had not been the securing of complete liberty for thought, it had
weakened many of the old ecclesiastical bonds. In the reformed countries
there was no power to express a condemnation of Newton's works, and
among the clergy there was no disposition to give themselves any concern
about the matter. At first the attention of the Protestant was engrossed
by the movements of his great enemy the Catholic, and when that source
of disquietude ceased, and the inevitable partitions of the Reformation
arose, that attention was fastened upon the rival and antagonistic
Churches. The Lutheran, the Calvinist, the Episcopalian, the
Presbyterian, had something more urgent on hand than Newton's
mathematical demonstrations.

So, uncondemned, and indeed unobserved, in this clamor of fighting
sects, Newton's grand theory solidly established itself. Its
philosophical significance was infinitely more momentous than the dogmas
that these persons were quarreling about. It not only accepted the
heliocentric theory and the laws discovered by Kepler, but it proved
that, no matter what might be the weight of opposing ecclesiastical
authority, the sun MUST be the centre of our system, and that Kepler's
laws are the result of a mathematical necessity. It is impossible that
they should be other than they are.

But what is the meaning of all this? Plainly that the solar system
is not interrupted by providential interventions, but is under the
government of irreversible law--law that is itself the issue of
mathematical necessity.

The telescopic observations of Herschel I. satisfied him that there are
very many double stars--double not merely because they are accidentally
in the same line of view, but because they are connected physically,
revolving round each other. These observations were continued and
greatly extended by Herschel II. The elements of the elliptic orbit of
the double star zeta of the Great Bear were determined by Savary, its
period being fifty-eight and one-quarter years; those of another, sigma
Coronae, were determined by Hind, its period being more than seven
hundred and thirty-six years. The orbital movement of these double suns
in ellipses compels us to admit that the law of gravitation holds good
far beyond the boundaries of the solar system; indeed, as far as the
telescope can reach, it demonstrates the reign of law. D'Alembert, in
the Introduction to the Encyclopaedia, says: "The universe is but a
single fact; it is only one great truth."

Shall we, then, conclude that the solar and the starry systems have been
called into existence by God, and that he has then imposed upon them by
his arbitrary will laws under the control of which it was his pleasure
that their movements should be made?

Or are there reasons for believing that these several systems came into
existence not by such an arbitrary fiat, but through the operation of
law?

The following are some peculiarities displayed by the solar system as
enumerated by Laplace. All the planets and their satellites move in
ellipses of such small eccentricity that they are nearly circles. All
the planets move in the same direction and nearly in the same plane. The
movements of the satellites are in the same direction as those of the
planets. The movements of rotation of the sun, of the planets, and the
satellites, are in the same direction as their orbital motions, and in
planes little different.

It is impossible that so many coincidences could be the result of
chance! Is it not plain that there must have been a common tie among
all these bodies, that they are only parts of what must once have been a
single mass?

But if we admit that the substance of which the solar system consists
once existed in a nebulous condition, and was in rotation, all the above
peculiarities follow as necessary mechanical consequences. Nay, more,
the formation of planets, the formation of satellites and of asteroids,
is accounted for. We see why the outer planets and satellites are larger
than the interior ones; why the larger planets rotate rapidly, and the
small ones slowly; why of the satellites the outer planets have more,
the inner fewer. We are furnished with indications of the time of
revolution of the planets in their orbits, and of the satellites in
theirs; we perceive the mode of formation of Saturn's rings. We find an
explanation of the physical condition of the sun, and the transitions of
condition through which the earth and moon have passed, as indicated by
their geology.

But two exceptions to the above peculiarities have been noted; they are
in the cases of Uranus and Neptune.

The existence of such a nebulous mass once admitted, all the rest
follows as a matter of necessity. Is there not, however, a most serious
objection in the way? Is not this to exclude Almighty God from the
worlds he has made?

First, we must be satisfied whether there is any solid evidence for
admitting the existence of such a nebulous mass.

The nebular hypothesis rests primarily on the telescopic discovery made
by Herschel I., that there are scattered here and there in the heavens
pale, gleaming patches of light, a few of which are large enough to be
visible to the naked eye. Of these, many may be resolved by a sufficient
telescopic power into a congeries of stars, but some, such as the great
nebula in Orion, have resisted the best instruments hitherto made.

It was asserted by those who were indisposed to accept the nebular
hypothesis, that the non-resolution was due to imperfection in the
telescopes used. In these instruments two distinct functions may be
observed: their light-gathering power depends on the diameter of their
object mirror or lens, their defining power depends on the exquisite
correctness of their optical surfaces. Grand instruments may possess
the former quality in perfection by reason of their size, but the latter
very imperfectly, either through want of original configuration, or
distortion arising from flexure through their own weight. But, unless an
instrument be perfect in this respect, as well as adequate in the other,
it may fail to decompose a nebula into discrete points.

Fortunately, however, other means for the settlement of this question
are available. In 1846, it was discovered by the author of this book
that the spectrum of an ignited solid is continuous--that is, has
neither dark nor bright lines. Fraunhofer had previously made known that
the spectrum of ignited gases is discontinuous. Here, then, is the means
of determining whether the light emitted by a given nebula comes from an
incandescent gas, or from a congeries of ignited solids, stars, or
suns. If its spectrum be discontinuous, it is a true nebula or gas; if
continuous, a congeries of stars.

In 1864, Mr. Huggins made this examination in the case of a nebula in
the constellation Draco. It proved to be gaseous.

Subsequent observations have shown that, of sixty nebulae examined,
nineteen give discontinuous or gaseous spectra--the remainder continuous
ones.

It may, therefore, be admitted that physical evidence has at length
been obtained, demonstrating the existence of vast masses of matter in a
gaseous condition, and at a temperature of incandescence. The hypothesis
of Laplace has thus a firm basis. In such a nebular mass, cooling by
radiation is a necessary incident, and condensation and rotation the
inevitable results. There must be a separation of rings all lying in
one plane, a generation of planets and satellites all rotating alike,
a central sun and engirdling globes. From a chaotic mass, through the
operation of natural laws, an organized system has been produced. An
integration of matter into worlds has taken place through a decline of
heat.

If such be the cosmogony of the solar system, such the genesis of the
planetary worlds, we are constrained to extend our views of the dominion
of law, and to recognize its agency in the creation as well as in the
conservation of the innumerable orbs that throng the universe.

But, again, it may be asked: "Is there not something profoundly impious
in this? Are we not excluding Almighty God from the world he has made?"

We have often witnessed the formation of a cloud in a serene sky. A hazy
point, barely perceptible--a little wreath of mist--increases in volume,
and becomes darker and denser, until it obscures a large portion of the
heavens. It throws itself into fantastic shapes, it gathers a glory
from the sun, is borne onward by the wind, and, perhaps, as it gradually
came, so it gradually disappears, melting away in the untroubled air.

Now, we say that the little vesicles of which this cloud was composed
arose from the condensation of water-vapor preexisting in the
atmosphere, through reduction of temperature; we show how they assumed
the form they present. We assign optical reasons for the brightness
or blackness of the cloud; we explain, on mechanical principles, its
drifting before the wind; for its disappearance we account on
the principles of chemistry. It never occurs to us to invoke the
interposition of the Almighty in the production and fashioning of this
fugitive form. We explain all the facts connected with it by physical
laws, and perhaps should reverentially hesitate to call into operation
the finger of God.

But the universe is nothing more than such a cloud--a cloud of suns and
worlds. Supremely grand though it may seem to us, to the Infinite and
Eternal Intellect it is no more than a fleeting mist. If there be a
multiplicity of worlds in infinite space, there is also a succession of
worlds in infinite time. As one after another cloud replaces cloud in
the skies, so this starry system, the universe, is the successor of
countless others that have preceded it--the predecessor of countless
others that will follow. There is an unceasing metamorphosis, a sequence
of events, without beginning or end.

If, on physical principles, we account for minor meteorological
incidents, mists and clouds, is it not permissible for us to appeal to
the same principle in the origin of world-systems and universes, which
are only clouds on a space-scale somewhat larger, mists on a time-scale
somewhat less transient? Can any man place the line which bounds
the physical on one side, the supernatural on the other? Do not our
estimates of the extent and the duration of things depend altogether
on our point of view? Were we set in the midst of the great nebula
of Orion, how transcendently magnificent the scene! The vast
transformations, the condensations of a fiery mist into worlds, might
seem worthy of the immediate presence, the supervision of God; here, at
our distant station, where millions of miles are inappreciable to our
eyes, and suns seem no bigger than motes in the air, that nebula is more
insignificant than the faintest cloud. Galileo, in his description of
the constellation of Orion, did not think it worth while so much as to
mention it. The most rigorous theologian of those days would have seen
nothing to blame in imputing its origin to secondary causes, nothing
irreligious in failing to invoke the arbitrary interference of God in
its metamorphoses. If such be the conclusion to which we come respecting
it, what would be the conclusion to which an Intelligence seated in it
might come respecting us? It occupies an extent of space millions of
times greater than that of our solar system; we are invisible from it,
and therefore absolutely insignificant. Would such an Intelligence think
it necessary to require for our origin and maintenance the immediate
intervention of God?


From the solar system let us descend to what is still more
insignificant--a little portion of it; let us descend to our own earth.
In the lapse of time it has experienced great changes. Have these been
due to incessant divine interventions, or to the continuous operation of
unfailing law? The aspect of Nature perpetually varies under our eyes,
still more grandly and strikingly has it altered in geological
times. But the laws guiding those changes never exhibit the slightest
variation. In the midst of immense vicissitudes they are immutable.
The present order of things is only a link in a vast connected chain
reaching back to an incalculable past, and forward to an infinite
future.

There is evidence, geological and astronomical, that the temperature of
the earth and her satellite was in the remote past very much higher than
it is now. A decline so slow as to be imperceptible at short intervals,
but manifest enough in the course of many ages, has occurred. The heat
has been lost by radiation into space.

The cooling of a mass of any kind, no matter whether large or small, is
not discontinuous; it does not go on by fits and starts; it takes
place under the operation of a mathematical law, though for such mighty
changes as are here contemplated neither the formula of Newton, nor that
of Dulong and Petit, may apply. It signifies nothing that periods of
partial decline, glacial periods, or others of temporary elevation, have
been intercalated; it signifies nothing whether these variations may
have arisen from topographical variations, as those of level, or from
periodicities in the radiation of the sun. A periodical sun would act as
a mere perturbation in the gradual decline of heat. The perturbations of
the planetary motions are a confirmation, not a disproof, of gravity.

Now, such a decline of temperature must have been attended by
innumerable changes of a physical character in our globe. Her dimensions
must have diminished through contraction, the length of her day must
have lessened, her surface must have collapsed, and fractures taken
place along the lines of least resistance; the density of the sea must
have increased, its volume must have become less; the constitution of
the atmosphere must have varied, especially in the amount of water-vapor
and carbonic acid that it contained; the barometric pressure must have
declined.

These changes, and very many more that might be mentioned, must have
taken place not in a discontinuous but in an orderly manner, since the
master-fact, the decline of heat, that was causing them, was itself
following a mathematical law.

But not alone did lifeless Nature submit to these inevitable mutations;
living Nature was also simultaneously affected.

An organic form of any kind, vegetable or animal, will remain unchanged
only so long as the environment in which it is placed remains unchanged.
Should an alteration in the environment occur, the organism will either
be modified or destroyed.

Destruction is more likely to happen as the change in the environment
is more sudden; modification or transformation is more possible as that
change is more gradual.

Since it is demonstrably certain that lifeless Nature has in the lapse
of ages undergone vast modifications; since the crust of the earth, and
the sea, and the atmosphere, are no longer such as they once were; since
the distribution of the land and the ocean and all manner of physical
conditions have varied; since there have been such grand changes in
the environment of living things on the surface of our planet--it
necessarily follows that organic Nature must have passed through
destructions and transformations in correspondence thereto.

That such extinctions, such modifications, have taken place, how
copious, how convincing, is the evidence!

Here, again, we must observe that, since the disturbing agency
was itself following a mathematical law, these its results must be
considered as following that law too.

Such considerations, then, plainly force upon us the conclusion that
the organic progress of the world has been guided by the operation of
immutable law--not determined by discontinuous, disconnected, arbitrary
interventions of God. They incline us to view favorably the idea of
transmutations of one form into another, rather than that of sudden
creations.

Creation implies an abrupt appearance, transformation a gradual change.

In this manner is presented to our contemplation the great theory of
Evolution. Every organic being has a place in a chain of events. It is
not an isolated, a capricious fact, but an unavoidable phenomenon. It
has its place in that vast, orderly concourse which has successively
risen in the past, has introduced the present, and is preparing the way
for a predestined future. From point to point in this vast progression
there has been a gradual, a definite, a continuous unfolding, a
resistless order of evolution. But in the midst of these mighty changes
stand forth immutable the laws that are dominating over all.

If we examine the introduction of any type of life in the animal series,
we find that it is in accordance with transformation, not with creation.
Its beginning is under an imperfect form in the midst of other forms,
of which the time is nearly complete, and which are passing into
extinction. By degrees, one species after another in succession more and
more perfect arises, until, after many ages, a culmination is reached.
From that there is, in like manner, a long, a gradual decline.

Thus, though the mammal type of life is the characteristic of the
Tertiary and post-Tertiary periods, it does not suddenly make its
appearance without premonition in those periods. Far back, in the
Secondary, we find it under imperfect forms, struggling, as it were, to
make good a foothold. At length it gains a predominance under higher and
better models.

So, too, of reptiles, the characteristic type of life of the Secondary
period. As we see in a dissolving view, out of the fading outlines of
a scene that is passing away, the dim form of a new one emerging, which
gradually gains strength, reaches its culmination, and then melts
away in some other that is displacing it, so reptile-life doubtfully,
appears, reaches its culmination, and gradually declines. In all this
there is nothing abrupt; the changes shade into each other by insensible
degrees.

How could it be otherwise? The hot-blooded animals could not exist in
an atmosphere so laden with carbonic acid as was that of the primitive
times. But the removal of that noxious ingredient from the air by the
leaves of plants under the influence of sunlight, the enveloping of its
carbon in the earth under the form of coal, the disengagement of its
oxygen, permitted their life. As the atmosphere was thus modified,
the sea was involved in the change; it surrendered a large part of its
carbonic acid, and the limestone hitherto held in solution by it was
deposited in the solid form. For every equivalent of carbon buried in
the earth, there was an equivalent of carbonate of lime separated from
the sea--not necessarily in an amorphous condition, most frequently
under an organic form. The sunshine kept up its work day by day, but
there were demanded myriads of days for the work to be completed. It was
a slow passage from a noxious to a purified atmosphere, and an equally
slow passage from a cold-blooded to a hot-blooded type of life. But the
physical changes were taking place under the control of law, and the
organic transformations were not sudden or arbitrary providential acts.
They were the immediate, the inevitable consequences of the physical
changes, and therefore, like them, the necessary issue of law.

For a more detailed consideration of this subject, I may refer the
reader to Chapters I, II., VII, of the second book of my "Treatise on
Human Physiology," published in 1856.


Is the world, then, governed by law or by providential interventions,
abruptly breaking the proper sequence of events?

To complete our view of this question, we turn finally to what, in one
sense, is the most insignificant, in another the most important, case
that can be considered. Do human societies, in their historic career,
exhibit the marks of a predetermined progress in an unavoidable track?
Is there any evidence that the life of nations is under the control of
immutable law?

May we conclude that, in society, as in the individual man, parts never
spring from nothing, but are evolved or developed from parts that are
already in existence?

If any one should object to or deride the doctrine of the evolution
or successive development of the animated forms which constitute that
unbroken organic chain reaching from the beginning of life on the globe
to the present times, let him reflect that he has himself passed through
modifications the counterpart of those he disputes. For nine months
his type of life was aquatic, and during that time he assumed, in
succession, many distinct but correlated forms. At birth his type of
life became aerial; he began respiring the atmospheric air; new elements
of food were supplied to him; the mode of his nutrition changed; but
as yet he could see nothing, hear nothing, notice nothing. By degrees
conscious existence was assumed; he became aware that there is an
external world. In due time organs adapted to another change of food,
the teeth, appeared, and a change of food ensued. He then passed through
the stages of childhood and youth, his bodily form developing, and with
it his intellectual powers. At about fifteen years, in consequence of
the evolution which special parts of his system had attained, his moral
character changed. New ideas, new passions, influenced him. And that
that was the cause, and this the effect, is demonstrated when, by the
skill of the surgeon, those parts have been interfered with. Nor does
the development, the metamorphosis, end here; it requires many years
for the body to reach its full perfection, many years for the mind. A
culmination is at length reached, and then there is a decline. I need
not picture its mournful incidents--the corporeal, the intellectual
enfeeblement. Perhaps there is little exaggeration in saying that in
less than a century every human being on the face of the globe, if not
cut off in an untimely manner, has passed through all these changes.

Is there for each of us a providential intervention as we thus pass
from stage to stage of life? or shall we not rather believe that the
countless myriads of human beings who have peopled the earth have been
under the guidance of an unchanging, a universal law?

But individuals are the elementary constituents of communities--nations.
They maintain therein a relation like that which the particles of the
body maintain to the body itself. These, introduced into it, commence
and complete their function; they die, and are dismissed.

Like the individual, the nation comes into existence without its own
knowledge, and dies without its own consent, often against its own will.
National life differs in no particular from individual, except in this,
that it is spread over a longer span, but no nation can escape its
inevitable term. Each, if its history be well considered, shows its
time of infancy, its time of youth, its time of maturity, its time of
decline, if its phases of life be completed.

In the phases of existence of all, so far as those phases are
completed, there are common characteristics, and, as like accordances in
individuals point out that all are living under a reign of law, we
are justified in inferring that the course of nations, and indeed the
progress of humanity, does not take place in a chance or random way,
that supernatural interventions never break the chain of historic acts,
that every historic event has its warrant in some preceding event, and
gives warrant to others that are to follow..

But this conclusion is the essential principle of Stoicism--that Grecian
philosophical system which, as I have already said, offered a support in
their hour of trial and an unwavering guide in the vicissitudes of
life, not only to many illustrious Greeks, but also to some of the great
philosophers, statesmen, generals, and emperors of Rome; a system which
excluded chance from every thing, and asserted the direction of all
events by irresistible necessity, to the promotion of perfect good; a
system of earnestness, sternness, austerity, virtue--a protest in favor
of the common-sense of mankind. And perhaps we shall not dissent from
the remark of Montesquieu, who affirms that the destruction of the
Stoics was a great calamity to the human race; for they alone made great
citizens, great men.

To the principle of government by law, Latin Christianity, in its papal
form, is in absolute contradiction. The history of this branch of
the Christian Church is almost a diary of miracles and supernatural
interventions. These show that the supplications of holy men have often
arrested the course of Nature--if, indeed, there be any such course;
that images and pictures have worked wonders; that bones, hairs, and
other sacred relics, have wrought miracles. The criterion or proof of
the authenticity of many of these objects is, not an unchallengeable
record of their origin and history, but an exhibition of their
miracle-working powers.

Is not that a strange logic which finds proof of an asserted fact in an
inexplicable illustration of something else?

Even in the darkest ages intelligent Christian men must have had
misgivings as to these alleged providential or miraculous interventions.
There is a solemn grandeur in the orderly progress of Nature which
profoundly impresses us; and such is the character of continuity in the
events of our individual life that we instinctively doubt the occurrence
of the supernatural in that of our neighbor. The intelligent man knows
well that, for his personal behoof, the course of Nature has never been
checked; for him no miracle has ever been worked; he attributes justly
every event of his life to some antecedent event; this he looks upon
as the cause, that as the consequence. When it is affirmed that, in his
neighbor's behalf, such grand interventions have been vouchsafed, he
cannot do otherwise than believe that his neighbor is either deceived,
or practising deception.

As might, then, have been anticipated, the Catholic doctrine of
miraculous intervention received a rude shock at the time of the
Reformation, when predestination and election were upheld by some of the
greatest theologians, and accepted by some of the greatest Protestant
Churches. With stoical austerity Calvin declares: "We were elected from
eternity, before the foundation of the world, from no merit of our own,
but according to the purpose of the divine pleasure." In affirming this,
Calvin was resting on the belief that God has from all eternity decreed
whatever comes to pass. Thus, after the lapse of many ages, were again
emerging into prominence the ideas of the Basilidians wad Valentinians,
Christian sects of the second century, whose Gnostical views led to the
engraftment of the great doctrine of the Trinity upon Christianity. They
asserted that all the actions of men are necessary, that even faith is
a natural gift, to which men are forcibly determined, and must therefore
be saved, though their lives be ever so irregular. From the Supreme God
all things proceeded. Thus, also, came into prominence the views which
were developed by Augustine in his work, "De dono perseverantiae." These
were: that God, by his arbitrary will, has selected certain persons
without respect to foreseen faith or good works, and has infallibly
ordained to bestow upon them eternal happiness; other persons, in like
manner, he has condemned to eternal reprobation. The Sublapsarians
believed that "God permitted the fall of Adam;" the Supralapsarians that
"he predestinated it, with all its pernicious consequences, from all
eternity, and that our first parents had no liberty from the beginning."
In this, these sectarians disregarded the remark of St. Augustine:
"Nefas est dicere Deum aliquid nisi bonum predestinare."

Is it true, then, that "predestination to eternal happiness is the
everlasting purpose of God, whereby, before the foundations of the world
were laid, he hath constantly decreed by his council, secret to us,
to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he hath chosen out of
mankind?" Is it true that of the human family there are some who, in
view of no fault of their own, Almighty God has condemned to unending
torture, eternal misery?

In 1595 the Lambeth Articles asserted that "God from eternity hath
predestinated certain men unto life; certain he hath reprobated." In
1618 the Synod of Dort decided in favor of this view. It condemned the
remonstrants against it, and treated them with such severity, that many
of them had to flee to foreign countries. Even in the Church of England,
as is manifested by its seventeenth Article of Faith, these doctrines
have found favor.

Probably there was no point which brought down from the Catholics on the
Protestants severer condemnation than this, their partial acceptance
of the government of the world by law. In all Reformed Europe miracles
ceased. But, with the cessation of shrine-cure, relic-cure, great
pecuniary profits ended. Indeed, as is well known, it was the sale
of indulgences that provoked the Reformation--indulgences which are
essentially a permit from God for the practice of sin, conditioned on
the payment of a certain sum of money to the priest.

Philosophically, the Reformation implied a protest against the Catholic
doctrine of incessant divine intervention in human affairs, invoked by
sacerdotal agency; but this protest was far from being fully made by
all the Reforming Churches. The evidence in behalf of government by law,
which has of late years been offered by science, is received by many of
them with suspicion, perhaps with dislike; sentiments which, however,
must eventually give way before the hourly-increasing weight of
evidence.

Shall we not, then, conclude with Cicero, who, quoted by Lactantius,
says: "One eternal and immutable law embraces all things and all times?"



