CHAPTER X.

     LATIN CHRISTIANITY IN RELATION TO MODERN CIVILIZATION.

     For more than a thousand years Latin Christianity controlled
     the intelligence of Europe, and is responsible for the
     result.

     That result is manifested by the condition of the city of
     Rome at the Reformation, and by the condition of the
     Continent of Europe in domestic and social life.--European
     nations suffered under the coexistence of a dual government,
     a spiritual and a temporal.--They were immersed in
     ignorance, superstition, discomfort.--Explanation of the
     failure of Catholicism--Political history of the papacy: it
     was transmuted from a spiritual confederacy into an absolute
     monarchy.--Action of the College of Cardinals and the Curia--
     Demoralization that ensued from the necessity of raising
     large revenues.

     The advantages accruing to Europe during the Catholic rule
     arose not from direct intention, but were incidental.

     The general result is, that the political influence of
     Catholicism was prejudicial to modern civilization.


LATIN Christianity is responsible for the condition and progress of
Europe from the fourth to the sixteenth century. We have now to examine
how it discharged its trust.

It will be convenient to limit to the case of Europe what has here to
be presented, though, from the claim of the papacy to superhuman origin,
and its demand for universal obedience, it should strictly be held to
account for the condition of all mankind. Its inefficacy against the
great and venerable religions of Southern and Eastern Asia would furnish
an important and instructive theme for consideration, and lead us to
the conclusion that it has impressed itself only where Roman imperial
influences have prevailed; a political conclusion which, however, it
contemptuously rejects.

Doubtless at the inception of the Reformation there were many persons
who compared the existing social condition with what it had been in
ancient times. Morals had not changed, intelligence had not advanced,
society had little improved. From the Eternal City itself its splendors
had vanished. The marble streets, of which Augustus had once boasted,
had disappeared. Temples, broken columns, and the long, arcaded vistas
of gigantic aqueducts bestriding the desolate Campagna, presented a
mournful scene. From the uses to which they had been respectively put,
the Capitol had been known as Goats' Hill, and the site of the Roman
Forum, whence laws had been issued to the world, as Cows' Field. The
palace of the Caesars was hidden by mounds of earth, crested with
flowering shrubs. The baths of Caracalla, with their porticoes, gardens,
reservoirs, had long ago become useless through the destruction of their
supplying aqueducts. On the ruins of that grand edifice, "flowery glades
and thickets of odoriferous trees extended in ever-winding labyrinths
upon immense platforms, and dizzy arches suspended in the air." Of
the Coliseum, the most colossal of Roman ruins, only about one-third
remained. Once capable of accommodating nearly ninety thousand
spectators, it had, in succession, been turned into a fortress in the
middle ages, and then into a stone-quarry to furnish material for the
palaces of degenerate Roman princes. Some of the popes had occupied it
as a woollen-mill, some as a saltpetre factory; some had planned the
conversion of its magnificent arcades into shops for tradesmen. The iron
clamps which bound its stones together had been stolen. The walls were
fissured and falling. Even in our own times botanical works have been
composed on the plants which have made this noble wreck their home. "The
Flora of the Coliseum" contains four hundred and twenty species.
Among the ruins of classical buildings might be seen broken columns,
cypresses, and mouldy frescoes, dropping from the walls. Even the
vegetable world participated in the melancholy change: the myrtle, which
once flourished on the Aventine, had nearly become extinct; the laurel,
which once gave its leaves to encircle the brows of emperors, had been
replaced by ivy--the companion of death.

But perhaps it may be said the popes were not responsible for all this.
Let it be remembered that in less than one hundred and forty years the
city had been successively taken by Alaric, Genseric, Rieimer, Vitiges,
Totila; that many of its great edifices had been converted into
defensive works. The aqueducts were destroyed by Vitiges, who ruined the
Campagna; the palace of the Caesars was ravaged by Totila; then there
had been the Lombard sieges; then Robert Guiscard and his Normans had
burnt the city from the Antonine Column to the Flaminian Gate, from
the Lateran to the Capitol; then it was sacked and mutilated by the
Constable Bourbon; again and again it was flooded by inundations of the
Tiber and shattered by earthquakes. We must, however, bear in mind the
accusation of Machiavelli, who says, in his "History of Florence," that
nearly all the barbarian invasions of Italy were by the invitations of
the pontiffs, who called in those hordes! It was not the Goth, nor
the Vandal, nor the Norman, nor the Saracen, but the popes and their
nephews, who produced the dilapidation of Rome! Lime-kilns had been fed
from the ruins, classical buildings had become stone-quarries for the
palaces of Italian princes, and churches were decorated from the old
temples.

Churches decorated from the temples! It is for this and such as this
that the popes must be held responsible. Superb Corinthian columns bad
been chiseled into images of the saints. Magnificent Egyptian obelisks
had been dishonored by papal inscriptions. The Septizonium of Severus
had been demolished to furnish materials for the building of St.
Peter's; the bronze roof of the Pantheon had been melted into columns to
ornament the apostle's tomb.

The great bell of Viterbo, in the tower of the Capitol, had announced
the death of many a pope, and still desecration of the buildings
and demoralization of the people went on. Papal Rome manifested no
consideration, but rather hatred, for classical Rome, The pontiffs had
been subordinates of the Byzantine sovereigns, then lieutenants of the
Frankish kings, then arbiters of Europe; their government had changed as
much as those of any of the surrounding nations; there had been complete
metamorphoses in its maxims, objects, claims. In one point only it had
never changed--intolerance. Claiming to be the centre of the religious
life of Europe, it steadfastly refused to recognize any religious
existence outside of itself, yet both in a political and theological
sense it was rotten to the core. Erasmus and Luther heard with amazement
the blasphemies and witnessed with a shudder the atheism of the city.

The historian Ranke, to whom I am indebted for many of these facts,
has depicted in a very graphic manner the demoralization of the great
metropolis. The popes were, for the most part, at their election, aged
men. Power was, therefore, incessantly passing into new hands. Every
election was a revolution in prospects and expectations. In a community
where all might rise, where all might aspire to all, it necessarily
followed that every man was occupied in thrusting some other into the
background. Though the population of the city at the inception of the
Reformation had sunk to eighty thousand, there were vast crowds of
placemen, and still greater ones of aspirants for place. The
successful occupant of the pontificate had thousands of offices to give
away--offices from many of which the incumbents had been remorselessly
ejected; many had been created for the purpose of sale. The integrity
and capacity of an applicant were never inquired into; the points
considered were, what services has he rendered or can he render to the
party? how much can he pay for the preferment? An American reader can
thoroughly realize this state of things. At every presidential election
he witnesses similar acts. The election of a pope by the Conclave is not
unlike the nomination of an American president by a convention. In both
cases there are many offices to give away.

William of Malmesbury says that in his day the Romans made a sale of
whatever was righteous and sacred for gold. After his time there was
no improvement; the Church degenerated into an instrument for the
exploitation of money. Vast sums were collected in Italy; vast sums
were drawn under all manner of pretenses from surrounding and reluctant
countries. Of these the most nefarious was the sale of indulgences
for the perpetration of sin. Italian religion had become the art of
plundering the people.

For more than a thousand years the sovereign pontiffs had been rulers
of the city. True, it had witnessed many scenes of devastation for which
they were not responsible; but they were responsible for this, that they
had never made any vigorous, any persistent effort for its material, its
moral improvement. Instead of being in these respects an exemplar for
the imitation of the world, it became an exemplar of a condition that
ought to be shunned. Things steadily went on from bad to worse, until
at the epoch of the Reformation no pious stranger could visit it without
being shocked.

The papacy, repudiating science as absolutely incompatible with its
pretensions, had in later years addressed itself to the encouragement of
art. But music and painting, though they may be exquisite adornments
of life, contain no living force that can develop a weak nation into a
strong one; nothing that can permanently assure the material well-being
or happiness of communities; and hence at the time of the Reformation,
to one who thoughtfully considered her condition, Rome had lost all
living energy. She was no longer the arbiter of the physical or the
religious progress of the world. For the progressive maxims of the
republic and the empire, she had substituted the stationary maxims of
the papacy. She had the appearance of piety and the possession of art.
In this she resembled one of those friar-corpses which we still see in
their brown cowls in the vaults of the Cappuccini, with a breviary or
some withered flowers in its hands.

From this view of the Eternal City, this survey of what Latin
Christianity had done for Rome itself, let us turn to the whole European
Continent. Let us try to determine the true value of the system that was
guiding society; let us judge it by its fruits.

The condition of nations as to their well-being is most precisely
represented by the variations of their population. Forms of government
have very little influence on population, but policy may control it
completely.

It has been very satisfactorily shown by authors who have given
attention to the subject, that the variations of population depend
upon the interbalancing of the generative force of society and the
resistances to life.

By the generative force of society is meant that instinct which
manifests itself in the multiplication of the race. To some extent it
depends on climate; but, since the climate of Europe did not sensibly
change between the fourth and the sixteenth centuries, we may regard
this force as having been, on that continent, during the period under
consideration, invariable.

By the resistances to life is meant whatever tends to make individual
existence more difficult of support. Among such may be enumerated
insufficient food, inadequate clothing, imperfect shelter.

It is also known that, if the resistances become inappreciable, the
generative force will double a population in twenty-five years.

The resistances operate in two modes: 1. Physically; since they diminish
the number of births, and shorten the term of the life of all. 2.
Intellectually; since, in a moral, and particularly in a religious
community, they postpone marriage, by causing individuals to decline
its responsibilities until they feel that they are competent to meet
the charges and cares of a family. Hence the explanation of a
long-recognized fact, that the number of marriages during a given period
has a connection with the price of food.

The increase of population keeps pace with the increase of food; and,
indeed, such being the power of the generative force, it overpasses the
means of subsistence, establishing a constant pressure upon them. Under
these circumstances, it necessarily happens that a certain amount of
destitution must occur. Individuals have come into existence who must be
starved.

As illustrations of the variations that have occurred in the population
of different countries, may be mentioned the immense diminution of that
of Italy in consequence of the wars of Justinian; the depopulation of
North Africa in consequence of theological quarrels; its restoration
through the establishment of Mohammedanism; the increase of that of all
Europe through the feudal system, when estates became more valuable in
proportion to the number of retainers they could supply. The crusades
caused a sensible diminution, not only through the enormous army losses,
but also by reason of the withdrawal of so many able-bodied men
from marriage-life. Similar variations have occurred on the American
Continent. The population of Mexico was very quickly diminished by two
million through the rapacity and atrocious cruelty of the Spaniards, who
drove the civilized Indians to despair. The same happened in Peru.

The population of England at the Norman conquest was about two million.
In five hundred years it had scarcely doubled. It may be supposed that
this stationary condition was to some extent induced by the papal policy
of the enforcement of celibacy in the clergy. The "legal generative
force" was doubtless affected by that policy, the "actual generative
force" was not. For those who have made this subject their study have
long ago been satisfied that public celibacy is private wickedness. This
mainly determined the laity, as well as the government in England, to
suppress the monasteries. It was openly asserted that there were one
hundred thousand women in England made dissolute by the clergy.

In my history of the "American Civil War," I have presented some
reflections on this point, which I will take the liberty of quoting
here: "What, then, does this stationary condition of the population
mean? It means, food obtained with hardship, insufficient clothing,
personal uncleanness, cabins that could not keep out the weather,
the destructive effects of cold and heat, miasm, want of sanitary
provisions, absence of physicians, uselessness of shrine-cure, the
deceptiveness of miracles, in which society was putting its trust; or,
to sum up a long catalogue of sorrows, wants, and sufferings, in one
term--it means a high death-rate.

"But more; it means deficient births. And what does that point out?
Marriage postponed, licentious life, private wickedness, demoralized
society.

"To an American, who lives in a country that was yesterday an
interminable and impenetrable desert, but which to-day is filling with
a population doubling itself every twenty-five years at the prescribed
rate, this awful waste of actual and contingent life cannot but be a
most surprising fact. His curiosity will lead him to inquire what kind
of system that could have been which was pretending to guide and
develop society, but which must be held responsible for this prodigious
destruction, excelling, in its insidious result, war, pestilence, and
famine combined; insidious, for men were actually believing that it
secured their highest temporal interests. How different now! In England,
the same geographical surface is sustaining ten times the population
of that day, and sending forth its emigrating swarms. Let him, who looks
back, with veneration on the past, settle in his own mind what such a
system could have been worth."

These variations in the population of Europe have been attended with
changes in distribution. The centre of population has passed northward
since the establishment of Christianity in the Roman Empire. It
has since passed westward, in consequence of the development of
manufacturing industry.


We may now examine somewhat more minutely the character of the
resistances which thus, for a thousand years, kept the population of
Europe stationary. The surface of the Continent was for the most
part covered with pathless forests; here and there it was dotted with
monasteries and towns. In the lowlands and along the river-courses were
fens, sometimes hundreds of miles in extent, exhaling their pestiferous
miasms, and spreading agues far and wide. In Paris and London, the
houses were of wood daubed with clay, and thatched with straw or reeds.
They had no windows, and, until the invention of the saw-mill, very
few had wooden floors. The luxury of a carpet was unknown; some straw,
scattered in the room, supplied its place. There were no chimneys; the
smoke of the ill-fed, cheerless fire escaped through a hole in the roof.
In such habitations there was scarcely any protection from the weather.
No attempt was made at drainage, but the putrefying garbage and rubbish
were simply thrown out of the door. Men, women, and children, slept
in the same apartment; not unfrequently, domestic animals were their
companions; in such a confusion of the family, it was impossible that
modesty or morality could be maintained. The bed was usually a bag of
straw, a wooden log served as a pillow. Personal cleanliness was utterly
unknown; great officers of state, even dignitaries so high as the
Archbishop of Canterbury, swarmed with vermin; such, it is related, was
the condition of Thomas a Becket, the antagonist of an English king. To
conceal personal impurity, perfumes were necessarily and profusely
used. The citizen clothed himself in leather, a garment which, with its
ever-accumulating impurity, might last for many years. He was considered
to be in circumstances of ease, if he could procure fresh meat once
a week for his dinner. The streets had no sewers; they were without
pavement or lamps. After nightfall, the chamber-shatters were thrown
open, and slops unceremoniously emptied down, to the discomfiture of the
wayfarer tracking his path through the narrow streets, with his dismal
lantern in his hand.

Aeneas Sylvius, who afterward became Pope Pius II., and was therefore a
very competent and impartial writer, has left us a graphic account of
a journey he made to the British Islands, about 1430. He describes the
houses of the peasantry as constructed of stones put together without
mortar; the roofs were of turf, a stiffened bull's-hide served for a
door. The food consisted of coarse vegetable products, such as peas,
and even the bark of trees. In some places they were unacquainted with
bread.

Cabins of reeds plastered with mud, houses of wattled stakes,
chimneyless peat-fires from which there was scarcely an escape for the
smoke, dens of physical and moral pollution swarming with vermin, wisps
of straw twisted round the limbs to keep off the cold, the ague-stricken
peasant, with no help except shrine-cure! How was it possible that the
population could increase? Shall we, then, wonder that, in the famine of
1030, human flesh was cooked and sold; or that, in that of 1258, fifteen
thousand persons died of hunger in London? Shall we wonder that, in some
of the invasions of the plague, the deaths were so frightfully numerous
that the living could hardly bury the dead? By that of 1348, which came
from the East along the lines of commercial travel, and spread all over
Europe, one-third of the population of France was destroyed.

Such was the condition of the peasantry, and of the common inhabitants
of cities. Not much better was that of the nobles. William of
Malmesbury, speaking of the degraded manners of the Anglo-Saxons, says:
"Their nobles, devoted to gluttony and voluptuousness, never visited the
church, but the matins and the mass were read over to them by a hurrying
priest in their bedchambers, before they rose, themselves not listening.
The common people were a prey to the more powerful; their property was
seized, their bodies dragged away to distant countries; their maidens
were either thrown into a brothel, or sold for slaves. Drinking day
and night was the general pursuit; vices, the companions of inebriety,
followed, effeminating the manly mind." The baronial castles were dens
of robbers. The Saxon chronicler records how men and women were caught
and dragged into those strongholds, hung up by their thumbs or feet,
fire applied to them, knotted strings twisted round their heads, and
many other torments inflicted to extort ransom.

All over Europe, the great and profitable political offices were filled
by ecclesiastics. In every country there was a dual government: 1.
That of a local kind, represented by a temporal sovereign; 2. That of
a foreign kind, acknowledging the authority of the pope, This Roman
influence was, in the nature of things, superior to the local; it
expressed the sovereign will of one man over all the nations of
the continent conjointly, and gathered overwhelming power from its
compactness and unity. The local influence was necessarily of a feeble
nature, since it was commonly weakened by the rivalries of conterminous
states, and the dissensions dexterously provoked by its competitor. On
not a single occasion could the various European states form a coalition
against their common antagonist. Whenever a question arose, they were
skillfully taken in detail, and commonly mastered. The ostensible
object of papal intrusion was to secure for the different peoples moral
well-being; the real object was to obtain large revenues, and give
support to vast bodies of ecclesiastics. The revenues thus abstracted
were not infrequently many times greater than those passing into the
treasury of the local power. Thus, on the occasion of Innocent IV.
demanding provision to be made for three hundred additional Italian
clergy by the Church of England, and that one of his nephews--a mere
boy--should have a stall in Lincoln Cathedral, it was found that the sum
already annually abstracted by foreign ecclesiastics from England was
thrice that which went into the coffers of the king.

While thus the higher clergy secured every political appointment
worth having, and abbots vied with counts in the herds of slaves
they possessed--some, it is said, owned not fewer than twenty
thousand--begging friars pervaded society in all directions, picking
up a share of what still remained to the poor. There was a vast body of
non-producers, living in idleness and owning a foreign allegiance, who
were subsisting on the fruits of the toil of the laborers. It could not
be otherwise than that small farms should be unceasingly merged into
the larger estates; that the poor should steadily become poorer; that
society, far from improving, should exhibit a continually increasing
demoralization. Outside the monastic institutions no attempt at
intellectual advancement was made; indeed, so far as the laity were
concerned, the influence of the Church was directed to an opposite
result, for the maxim universally received was, that "ignorance is the
mother of devotion."

The settled practice of republican and imperial Rome was to have swift
communication with all her outlying provinces, by means of substantial
bridges and roads. One of the prime duties of the legions was to
construct them and keep them in repair. By this, her military authority
was assured. But the dominion of papal Rome, depending upon a different
principle, had no exigencies of that kind, and this duty accordingly
was left for the local powers to neglect. And so, in all directions,
the roads were almost impassable for a large part of the year. A common
means of transportation was in clumsy carts drawn by oxen, going at the
most but three or four miles an hour. Where boat-conveyance along
rivers could not be had, pack-horses and mules were resorted to for
the transportation of merchandise, an adequate means for the slender
commerce of the times. When large bodies of men had to be moved, the
difficulties became almost insuperable. Of this, perhaps, one of the
best illustrations may be found in the story of the march of the first
Crusaders. These restraints upon intercommunication tended powerfully to
promote the general benighted condition. Journeys by individuals could
not be undertaken without much risk, for there was scarcely a moor or a
forest that had not its highwaymen.

An illiterate condition everywhere prevailing, gave opportunity for the
development of superstition. Europe was full of disgraceful miracles. On
all the roads pilgrims were wending their way to the shrines of saints,
renowned for the cures they had wrought. It had always been the policy
of the Church to discourage the physician and his art; he interfered too
much with the gifts and profits of the shrines. Time has brought this
once lucrative imposture to its proper value. How many shrines are there
now in successful operation in Europe?

For patients too sick to move or be moved, there were no remedies except
those of a ghostly kind--the Pater-noster or the Ave. For the prevention
of diseases, prayers were put up in the churches, but no sanitary
measures were resorted to. From cities reeking with putrefying filth
it was thought that the plague might be stayed by the prayers of the
priests, by them rain and dry weather might be secured, and deliverance
obtained from the baleful influences of eclipses and comets. But when
Halley's comet came, in 1456, so tremendous was its apparition that
it was necessary for the pope himself to interfere. He exorcised and
expelled it from the skies. It slunk away into the abysses of space,
terror-stricken by the maledictions of Calixtus III., and did not
venture back for seventy-five years!

The physical value of shrine-cures and ghostly remedies is measured
by the death-rate. In those days it was, probably, about one in
twenty-three, under the present more material practice it is about one
in forty.

The moral condition of Europe was signally illustrated when syphilis was
introduced from the West Indies by the companions of Columbus. It spread
with wonderful rapidity; all ranks of persons, from the Holy Father Leo
X. to the beggar by the wayside, contracting the shameful disease. Many
excused their misfortune by declaring that it was an epidemic proceeding
from a certain malignity in the constitution of the air, but in truth
its spread was due to a certain infirmity in the constitution of man--an
infirmity which had not been removed by the spiritual guidance under
which he had been living.

To the medical efficacy of shrines must be added that of special relics.
These were sometimes of the most extraordinary kind. There were several
abbeys that possessed our Savior's crown of thorns. Eleven had the
lance that had pierced his side. If any person was adventurous enough
to suggest that these could not all be authentic, he would have been
denounced as an atheist. During the holy wars the Templar-Knights had
driven a profitable commerce by bringing from Jerusalem to the Crusading
armies bottles of the milk of the Blessed Virgin, which they sold for
enormous sums; these bottles were preserved with pious care in many of
the great religious establishments. But perhaps none of these impostures
surpassed in audacity that offered by a monastery in Jerusalem, which
presented to the beholder one of the fingers of the Holy Ghost! Modern
society has silently rendered its verdict on these scandalous objects.
Though they once nourished the piety of thousands of earnest people,
they are now considered too vile to have a place in any public museum.

How shall we account for the great failure we thus detect in the
guardianship of the Church over Europe? This is not the result that
must have occurred had there been in Rome an unremitting care for the
spiritual and material prosperity of the continent, had the universal
pastor, the successor of Peter, occupied himself with singleness of
purpose for the holiness and happiness of his flock.

The explanation is not difficult to find. It is contained in a story
of sin and shame. I prefer, therefore, in the following paragraphs, to
offer explanatory facts derived from Catholic authors, and, indeed, to
present them as nearly as I can in the words of those writers.


The story I am about to relate is a narrative of the transformation of a
confederacy into an absolute monarchy.

In the early times every church, without prejudice to its agreement with
the Church universal in all essential points, managed its own affairs
with perfect freedom and independence, maintaining its own traditional
usages and discipline, all questions not concerning the whole Church, or
of primary importance, being settled on the spot.

Until the beginning of the ninth century, there was no change in the
constitution of the Roman Church. But about 845 the Isidorian Decretals
were fabricated in the west of Gaul--a forgery containing about one
hundred pretended decrees of the early popes, together with certain
spurious writings of other church dignitaries and acts of synods. This
forgery produced an immense extension of the papal power, it displaced
the old system of church government, divesting it of the republican
attributes it had possessed, and transforming it into an absolute
monarchy. It brought the bishops into subjection to Rome, and made the
pontiff the supreme judge of the clergy of the whole Christian world. It
prepared the way for the great attempt, subsequently made by Hildebrand,
to convert the states of Europe into a theocratic priest-kingdom, with
the pope at its head.

Gregory VII., the author of this great attempt, saw that his plans
would be best carried out through the agency of synods. He, therefore,
restricted the right of holding them to the popes and their legates. To
aid in the matter, a new system of church law was devised by Anselm
of Lucca, partly from the old Isidorian forgeries, and partly from new
inventions. To establish the supremacy of Rome, not only had a new
civil and a new canon law to be produced, a new history had also to
be invented. This furnished needful instances of the deposition
and excommunication of kings, and proved that they had always been
subordinate to the popes. The decretal letters of the popes were put on
a par with Scripture. At length it came to be received, throughout
the West, that the popes had been, from the beginning of Christianity,
legislators for the whole Church. As absolute sovereigns in later times
cannot endure representative assemblies, so the papacy, when it wished
to become absolute, found that the synods of particular national
churches must be put an end to, and those only under the immediate
control of the pontiff permitted. This, in itself, constituted a great
revolution.

Another fiction concocted in Rome in the eighth century led to important
consequences. It feigned that the Emperor Constantine, in gratitude for
his cure from leprosy, and baptism by Pope Sylvester, had bestowed
Italy and the Western provinces on the pope, and that, in token of his
subordination, he had served the pope as his groom, and led his horse
some distance. This forgery was intended to work on the Frankish kings,
to impress them with a correct idea of their inferiority, and to show
that, in the territorial concessions they made to the Church, they were
not giving but only restoring what rightfully belonged to it.

The most potent instrument of the new papal system was Gratian's
Decretum, which was issued about the middle of the twelfth century. It
was a mass of fabrications. It made the whole Christian world, through
the papacy, the domain of the Italian clergy. It inculcated that it is
lawful to constrain men to goodness, to torture and execute heretics,
and to confiscate their property; that to kill an excommunicated person
is not murder; that the pope, in his unlimited superiority to all law,
stands on an equality with the Son of God!

As the new system of centralization developed, maxims, that in the olden
times would have been held to be shocking, were boldly avowed--the whole
Church is the property of the pope to do with as he will; what is simony
in others is not simony in him; he is above all law, and can be called
to account by none; whoever disobeys him must be put to death; every
baptized man is his subject, and must for life remain so, whether he
will or not. Up to the end of the twelfth century, the popes were the
vicars of Peter; after Innocent III. they were the vicars of Christ.

But an absolute sovereign has need of revenues, and to this the popes
were no exception. The institution of legates was brought in from
Hildebrand's time. Sometimes their duty was to visit churches, sometimes
they were sent on special business, but always invested with unlimited
powers to bring back money over the Alps. And since the pope could not
only make laws, but could suspend their operation, a legislation was
introduced in view to the purchase of dispensations. Monasteries were
exempted from episcopal jurisdiction on payment of a tribute to Rome.
The pope had now become "the universal bishop;" he had a concurrent
jurisdiction in all the dioceses, and could bring any cases before
his own courts. His relation to the bishops was that of an absolute
sovereign to his officials. A bishop could resign only by his
permission, and sees vacated by resignation lapsed to him. Appeals to
him were encouraged in every way for the sake of the dispensations;
thousands of processes came before the Curia, bringing a rich harvest to
Rome. Often when there were disputing claimants to benefices, the
pope would oust them all, and appoint a creature of his own. Often the
candidates had to waste years in Rome, and either died there, or carried
back a vivid impression of the dominant corruption. Germany suffered
more than other countries from these appeals and processes, and hence
of all countries was best prepared for the Reformation. During the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the popes made gigantic strides in
the acquisition of power. Instead of recommending their favorites for
benefices, now they issued mandates. Their Italian partisans must
be rewarded; nothing could be done to satisfy their clamors, but to
provide for them in foreign countries. Shoals of contesting claimants
died in Rome; and, when death took place in that city, the Pope claimed
the right of giving away the benefices. At length it was affirmed that
he had the right of disposing of all church-offices without distinction,
and that the oath of obedience of a bishop to him implied political as
well as ecclesiastical subjection. In countries having a dual government
this increased the power of the spiritual element prodigiously.

Rights of every kind were remorselessly overthrown to complete this
centralization. In this the mendicant orders were most efficient aids.
It was the pope and those orders on one side, the bishops and the
parochial clergy on the other. The Roman court had seized the rights
of synods, metropolitans, bishops, national churches. Incessantly
interfered with by the legates, the bishops lost all desire to
discipline their dioceses; incessantly interfered with by the begging
monks, the parish priest had become powerless in his own village; his
pastoral influence was utterly destroyed by the papal indulgences and
absolutions they sold. The money was carried off to Rome.

Pecuniary necessities urged many of the popes to resort to such petty
expedients as to require from a prince, a bishop, or a grand-master, who
had a cause pending in the court, a present of a golden cup filled
with ducats. Such necessities also gave origin to jubilees. Sixtus IV.
established whole colleges, and sold the places at three or four hundred
ducats. Innocent VIII. pawned the papal tiara. Of Leo X. it was said
that he squandered the revenues of three popes, he wasted the savings
of his predecessor, he spent his own income, he anticipated that of his
successor, he created twenty-one hundred and fifty new offices and sold
them; they were considered to be a good investment, as they produced
twelve per cent. The interest was extorted from Catholic countries.
Nowhere in Europe could capital be so well invested as at Rome. Large
sums were raised by the foreclosing of mortgages, and not only by the
sale but the resale of offices. Men were promoted, for the purpose of
selling their offices again.

Though against the papal theory, which denounced usurious practices,
an immense papal banking system had sprung up, in connection with the
Curia, and sums at usurious interest were advanced to prelates,
place-hunters, and litigants. The papal bankers were privileged; all
others were under the ban. The Curia had discovered that it was for their
interest to have ecclesiastics all over Europe in their debt. They could
make them pliant, and excommunicate them for non-payment of interest.
In 1327 it was reckoned that half the Christian world was under
excommunication: bishops were excommunicated because they could not
meet the extortions of legates; and persons were excommunicated,
under various pretenses, to compel them to purchase absolution at an
exorbitant price. The ecclesiastical revenues of all Europe were flowing
into Rome, a sink of corruption, simony, usury, bribery, extortion. The
popes, since 1066, when the great centralizing movement began, had no
time to pay attention to the internal affairs of their own special
flock in the city of Rome. There were thousands of foreign cases, each
bringing in money. "Whenever," says the Bishop Alvaro Pelayo, "I entered
the apartments of the Roman court clergy, I found them occupied in
counting up the gold-coin, which lay about the rooms in heaps." Every
opportunity of extending the jurisdiction of the Curia was welcome.
Exemptions were so managed that fresh grants were constantly necessary.
Bishops were privileged against cathedral chapters, chapters against
their bishops; bishops, convents, and individuals, against the
extortions of legates.

The two pillars on which the papal system now rested were the College of
Cardinals and the Curia. The cardinals, in 1059, had become electors of
the popes. Up to that time elections were made by the whole body of the
Roman clergy, and the concurrence of the magistrates and citizens
was necessary. But Nicolas II. restricted elections to the College of
Cardinals by a two-thirds vote, and gave to the German emperor the
right of confirmation. For almost two centuries there was a struggle
for mastery between the cardinal oligarchy and papal absolutism. The
cardinals were willing enough that the pope should be absolute in his
foreign rule, but they never failed to attempt, before giving him
their votes, to bind him to accord to them a recognized share in the
government. After his election, and before his consecration, he swore
to observe certain capitulations, such as a participation of revenues
between himself and the cardinals; an obligation that he would not
remove them, but would permit them to assemble twice a year to discuss
whether he had kept his oath. Repeatedly the popes broke their oath. On
one side, the cardinals wanted a larger share in the church government
and emoluments; on the other, the popes refused to surrender revenues or
power. The cardinals wanted to be conspicuous in pomp and extravagance,
and for this vast sums were requisite. In one instance, not fewer than
five hundred benefices were held by one of them; their friends and
retainers must be supplied, their families enriched. It was affirmed
that the whole revenues of France were insufficient to meet their
expenditures. In their rivalries it sometimes happened that no pope
was elected for several years. It seemed as if they wanted to show how
easily the Church could get on without the Vicar of Christ.

Toward the close of the eleventh century the Roman Church became the
Roman court. In place of the Christian sheep gently following their
shepherd in the holy precincts of the city, there had arisen a
chancery of writers, notaries, tax-gatherers, where transactions about
privileges, dispensations, exemptions, were carried on; and suitors
went with petitions from door to door. Rome was a rallying-point for
place-hunters of every nation. In presence of the enormous mass of
business-processes, graces, indulgences, absolutions, commands, and
decisions, addressed to all parts of Europe and Asia, the functions
of the local church sank into insignificance. Several hundred persons,
whose home was the Curia, were required. Their aim was to rise in it by
enlarging the profits of the papal treasury. The whole Christian
world had become tributary to it. Here every vestige of religion had
disappeared; its members were busy with politics, litigations, and
processes; not a word could be heard about spiritual concerns. Every
stroke of the pen had its price. Benefices, dispensations, licenses,
absolutions, indulgences, privileges, were bought and sold like
merchandise. The suitor had to bribe every one, from the doorkeeper
to the pope, or his case was lost. Poor men could neither attain
preferment, nor hope for it; and the result was, that every cleric felt
he had a right to follow the example he had seen at Rome, and that
he might make profits out of his spiritual ministries and sacraments,
having bought the right to do so at Rome, and having no other way to
pay off his debt. The transference of power from Italians to Frenchmen,
through the removal of the Curia to Avignon, produced no change--only
the Italians felt that the enrichment of Italian families had slipped
out of their grasp. They had learned to consider the papacy as their
appanage, and that they, under the Christian dispensation, were God's
chosen people, as the Jews had been under the Mosaic.

At the end of the thirteenth century a new kingdom was discovered,
capable of yielding immense revenues. This was Purgatory. It was shown
that the pope could empty it by his indulgences. In this there was no
need of hypocrisy. Things were done openly. The original germ of the
apostolic primacy had now expanded into a colossal monarchy.

NEED OF A GENERAL COUNCIL. The Inquisition had made the papal system
irresistible. All opposition must be punished with death by fire. A mere
thought, without having betrayed itself by outward sign, was considered
as guilt. As time went on, this practice of the Inquisition became
more and more atrocious. Torture was resorted to on mere suspicion.
The accused was not allowed to know the name of his accuser. He was
not permitted to have any legal adviser. There was no appeal. The
Inquisition was ordered not to lean to pity. No recantation was of
avail. The innocent family of the accused was deprived of its
property by confiscation; half went to the papal treasury, half to the
inquisitors. Life only, said Innocent III., was to be left to the sons
of misbelievers, and that merely as an act of mercy. The consequence
was, that popes, such as Nicolas III., enriched their families through
plunder acquired by this tribunal. Inquisitors did the same habitually.

The struggle between the French and Italians for the possession of the
papacy inevitably led to the schism of the fourteenth century. For more
than forty years two rival popes were now anathematizing each other,
two rival Curias were squeezing the nations for money. Eventually, there
were three obediences, and triple revenues to be extorted. Nobody, now,
could guarantee the validity of the sacraments, for nobody could be
sure which was the true pope. Men were thus compelled to think for
themselves. They could not find who was the legitimate thinker for them.
They began to see that the Church must rid herself of the curialistic
chains, and resort to a General Council. That attempt was again and
again made, the intention being to raise the Council into a Parliament
of Christendom, and make the pope its chief executive officer. But the
vast interests that had grown out of the corruption of ages could not
so easily be overcome; the Curia again recovered its ascendency, and
ecclesiastical trading was resumed. The Germans, who had never been
permitted to share in the Curia, took the leading part in these attempts
at reform. As things went on from bad to worse, even they at last found
out that all hope of reforming the Church by means of councils was
delusive. Erasmus exclaimed, "If Christ does not deliver his people
from this multiform ecclesiastical tyranny, the tyranny of the Turk will
become less intolerable." Cardinals' hats were now sold, and under Leo
X. ecclesiastical and religious offices were actually put up to auction.
The maxim of life had become, interest first, honor afterward. Among
the officials, there was not one who could be honest in the dark, and
virtuous without a witness. The violet-colored velvet cloaks and white
ermine capes of the cardinals were truly a cover for wickedness.

The unity of the Church, and therefore its power, required the use of
Latin as a sacred language. Through this, Rome had stood in an attitude
strictly European, and was enabled to maintain a general international
relation. It gave her far more power than her asserted celestial
authority, and, much as she claims to have done, she is open to
condemnation that, with such a signal advantage in her hands, never
again to be enjoyed by any successor, she did not accomplish much
more. Had not the sovereign pontiffs been so completely occupied with
maintaining their emoluments and temporalities in Italy, they might have
made the whole continent advance like one man. Their officials could
pass without difficulty into every nation, and communicate without
embarrassment with each other, from Ireland to Bohemia, from Italy to
Scotland. The possession of a common tongue gave them the administration
of international affairs with intelligent allies everywhere, speaking
the same language.

Not without cause was the hatred manifested by Rome to the restoration
of Greek and introduction of Hebrew, and the alarm with which she
perceived the modern languages forming out of the vulgar dialects.
Not without reason did the Faculty of Theology in Paris re-echo the
sentiment that, was prevalent in the time of Ximenes, "What will
become of religion if the study of Greek and Hebrew be permitted?" The
prevalence of Latin was the condition of her power; its deterioration,
the measure of her decay; its disuse, the signal of her limitation to
a little principality in Italy. In fact, the development of European
languages was the instrument of her overthrow. They formed an effectual
communication between the mendicant friars and the illiterate populace,
and there was not one of them that did not display in its earliest
productions a sovereign contempt for her.

The rise of the many-tongued European literature was therefore
coincident with the decline of papal Christianity; European literature
was impossible under Catholic rule. A grand, a solemn, an imposing
religious unity enforced the literary unity which is implied in the use
of a single tongue.

While thus the possession of a universal language so signally secured
her power, the real secret of much of the influence of the Church lay
in the control she had so skillfully obtained over domestic life. Her
influence diminished as that declined. Coincident with this was her
displacement in the guidance of international relations by diplomacy.

CATHOLICITY AND CIVILIZATION. In the old times of Roman domination the
encampments of the legions in the provinces had always proved to be foci
of civilization. The industry and order exhibited in them presented an
example not lost on the surrounding barbarians of Britain, Gaul, and
Germany. And, though it was no part of their duty to occupy themselves
actively in the betterment of the conquered tribes, but rather to keep
them in a depressed condition that aided in maintaining subjection,
a steady improvement both in the individual and social condition took
place.

Under the ecclesiastical domination of Rome similar effects occurred. In
the open country the monastery replaced the legionary encampment; in the
village or town, the church was a centre of light. A powerful effect
was produced by the elegant luxury of the former, and by the sacred and
solemn monitions of the latter.

In extolling the papal system for what it did in the organization of the
family, the definition of civil policy, the construction of the states
of Europe, our praise must be limited by the recollection that the chief
object of ecclesiastical policy was the aggrandizement of the Church,
not the promotion of civilization. The benefit obtained by the laity was
not through any special intention, but incidental or collateral.

There was no far-reaching, no persistent plan to ameliorate the physical
condition of the nations. Nothing was done to favor their intellectual
development; indeed, on the contrary, it was the settled policy to keep
them not merely illiterate, but ignorant. Century after century passed
away, and left the peasantry but little better than the cattle in the
fields. Intercommunication and locomotion, which tend so powerfully to
expand the ideas, received no encouragement; the majority of men died
without ever having ventured out of the neighborhood in which they were
born. For them there was no hope of personal improvement, none of the
bettering of their lot; there were no comprehensive schemes for the
avoidance of individual want, none for the resistance of famines.
Pestilences were permitted to stalk forth unchecked, or at best opposed
only by mummeries. Bad food, wretched clothing, inadequate shelter, were
suffered to produce their result, and at the end of a thousand years the
population of Europe had not doubled.

If policy may be held accountable as much for the births it prevents as
for the deaths it occasions, what a great responsibility there is here!

In this investigation of the influence of Catholicism, we must carefully
keep separate what it did for the people and what it did for itself.
When we think of the stately monastery, an embodiment of luxury, with
its closely-mown lawns, its gardens and bowers, its fountains and many
murmuring streams, we must connect it not with the ague-stricken peasant
dying without help in the fens, but with the abbot, his ambling palfrey,
his hawk and hounds, his well-stocked cellar and larder. He is part of
a system that has its centre of authority in Italy.. To that his
allegiance is due. For its behoof are all his acts. When we survey, as
still we may, the magnificent churches and cathedrals of those
times, miracles of architectural skill--the only real miracles of
Catholicism--when in imagination we restore the transcendently
imposing, the noble services of which they were once the scene, the
dim, religious-light streaming in through the many-colored windows, the
sounds of voices not inferior in their melody to those of heaven,
the priests in their sacred vestments, and above all the prostrate
worshipers listening to litanies and prayers in a foreign and unknown
tongue, shall we not ask ourselves, Was all this for the sake of those
worshipers, or for the glory of the great, the overshadowing authority
at Rome?

But perhaps some one may say, Are there not limits to human
exertion--things which no political system, no human power, no matter
how excellent its intention, can accomplish? Men cannot be raised from
barbarism, a continent cannot be civilized, in a day!

The Catholic power is not, however, to be tried by any such standard.
It scornfully rejected and still rejects a human origin. It claims to
be accredited supernaturally. The sovereign pontiff is the Vicar of God
upon earth. Infallible in judgment, it is given to him to accomplish
all things by miracle if need be. He had exercised an autocratic tyranny
over the intellect of Europe for more than a thousand years; and, though
on some occasions he had encountered the resistances of disobedient
princes, these, in the aggregate, were of so little moment, that the
physical, the political power of the continent may be affirmed to have
been at his disposal.

Such facts as have been presented in this chapter were, doubtless,
well weighed by the Protestant Reformers of the sixteenth century, and
brought them to the conclusion that Catholicism had altogether failed in
its mission; that it had become a vast system of delusion and imposture,
and that a restoration of true Christianity could only be accomplished
by returning to the faith and practices of the primitive times. This was
no decision suddenly arrived at; it had long been the opinion of many
religious and learned men. The pious Fratricelli in the middle ages had
loudly expressed their belief that the fatal gift of a Roman emperor had
been the doom of true religion. It wanted nothing more than the voice of
Luther to bring men throughout the north of Europe to the determination
that the worship of the Virgin Mary, the invocation of saints, the
working of miracles, supernatural cures of the sick, the purchase of
indulgences for the perpetration of sin, and all other evil practices,
lucrative to their abettors, which had been fastened on Christianity,
but which were no part of it, should come to an end. Catholicism, as
a system for promoting the well-being of man, had plainly failed in
justifying its alleged origin; its performance had not corresponded to
its great pretensions; and, after an opportunity of more than a
thousand years' duration, it had left the masses of men submitted to
its influences, both as regards physical well-being and intellectual
culture, in a condition far lower than what it ought to have been.



