CHAPTER IV.

     THE RESTORATION OF SCIENCE IN THE SOUTH.

     By the influence of the Nestorians and Jews, the Arabians
     are turned to the cultivation of Science.--They modify
     their views as to the destiny of man, and obtain true
     conceptions respecting the structure of the world.--They
     ascertain the size of the earth, and determine its shape.--
     Their khalifs collect great libraries, patronize every
     department of science and literature, establish astronomical
     observatories.--They develop the mathematical sciences,
     invent algebra, and improve geometry and trigonometry.--They
     collect and translate the old Greek mathematical and
     astronomical works, and adopt the inductive method of
     Aristotle.--They establish many colleges, and, with the aid
     of the Nestorians, organize a public-school system.--They
     introduce the Arabic numerals and arithmetic, and catalogue
     and give names to the stars.--They lay the foundation of
     modern astronomy, chemistry, and physics, and introduce
     great improvements in agriculture and manufactures.


"IN the course of my long life," said the Khalif Ali, "I have often
observed that men are more like the times they live in than they
are like their fathers." This profoundly philosophical remark of the
son-in-law of Mohammed is strictly true; for, though the personal, the
bodily lineaments of a man may indicate his parentage, the constitution
of his mind, and therefore the direction of his thoughts, is determined
by the environment in which he lives.

When Amrou, the lieutenant of the Khalif Omar, conquered Egypt, and
annexed it to the Saracenic Empire, he found in Alexandria a Greek
grammarian, John surnamed Philoponus, or the Labor-lover. Presuming on
the friendship which had arisen between them, the Greek solicited as a
gift the remnant of the great library--a remnant which war and time and
bigotry had spared. Amrou, therefore, sent to the khalif to ascertain
his pleasure. "If," replied the khalif, "the books agree with the Koran,
the Word of God, they are useless, and need not be preserved; if
they disagree with it, they are pernicious. Let them be destroyed."
Accordingly, they were distributed among the baths of Alexandria, and it
is said that six months were barely sufficient to consume them.

Although the fact has been denied, there can be little doubt that Omar
gave this order. The khalif was an illiterate man; his environment
was an environment of fanaticism and ignorance. Omar's act was an
illustration of Ali's remark.

THE ALEXANDRIAN LIBRARY BURNT. But it must not be supposed that the
books which John the Labor-lover coveted were those which constituted
the great library of the Ptolemies, and that of Eumenes, King of
Pergamus. Nearly a thousand years had elapsed since Philadelphus began
his collection. Julius Caesar had burnt more than half; the Patriarchs
of Alexandria had not only permitted but superintended the dispersion
of almost all the rest. Orosius expressly states that he saw the empty
cases or shelves of the library twenty years after Theophilus, the uncle
of St. Cyril, had procured from the Emperor Theodosius a rescript for
its destruction. Even had this once noble collection never endured such
acts of violence, the mere wear and tear, and perhaps, I may add, the
pilfering of a thousand years, would have diminished it sadly.
Though John, as the surname he received indicates, might rejoice in a
superfluity of occupation, we may be certain that the care of a library
of half a million books would transcend even his well-tried powers; and
the cost of preserving and supporting it, that had demanded the ample
resources of the Ptolemies and the Caesars, was beyond the means of a
grammarian. Nor is the time required for its combustion or destruction
any indication of the extent of the collection. Of all articles of
fuel, parchment is, perhaps, the most wretched. Paper and papyrus do
excellently well as kindling-materials, but we may be sure that the
bath-men of Alexandria did not resort to parchment so long as they could
find any thing else, and of parchment a very large portion of these
books was composed.

There can, then, be no more doubt that Omar did order the destruction of
this library, under an impression of its uselessness or its irreligious
tendency, than that the Crusaders burnt the library of Tripoli,
fancifully said to have consisted of three million volumes. The first
apartment entered being found to contain nothing but the Koran, all the
other books were supposed to be the works of the Arabian impostor,
and were consequently committed to the flames. In both cases the story
contains some truth and much exaggeration. Bigotry, however, has often
distinguished itself by such exploits. The Spaniards burnt in Mexico
vast piles of American picture-writings, an irretrievable loss; and
Cardinal Ximenes delivered to the flames, in the squares of Granada,
eighty thousand Arabic manuscripts, many of them translations of
classical authors.

We have seen how engineering talent, stimulated by Alexander's Persian
campaign, led to a wonderful development of pure science under the
Ptolemies; a similar effect may be noted as the result of the Saracenic
military operations.

The friendship contracted by Amrou, the conqueror of Egypt, with John
the Grammarian, indicates how much the Arabian mind was predisposed to
liberal ideas. Its step from the idolatry of the Caaba to the monotheism
of Mohammed prepared it to expatiate in the wide and pleasing fields
of literature and philosophy. There were two influences to which it
was continually exposed. They conspired in determining its path. These
were--1. That of the Nestorians in Syria; 2. That of the Jews in Egypt.

INFLUENCE OF THE NESTORIANS AND JEWS. In the last chapter I have briefly
related the persecution of Nestor and his disciples. They bore testimony
to the oneness of God, through many sufferings and martyrdoms. They
utterly repudiated an Olympus filled with gods and goddesses. "Away from
us a queen of heaven!"

Such being their special views, the Nestorians found no difficulty in
affiliating with their Saracen conquerors, by whom they were treated
not only with the highest respect, but intrusted with some of the most
important offices of the state. Mohammed, in the strongest manner,
prohibited his followers from committing any injuries against them.
Jesuiabbas, their pontiff, concluded treaties both with the Prophet and
with Omar, and subsequently the Khalif Haroun-al-Raschid placed all his
public schools under the superintendence of John Masue, a Nestorian.

To the influence of the Nestorians that of the Jews was added. When
Christianity displayed a tendency to unite itself with paganism, the
conversion of the Jews was arrested; it totally ceased when Trinitarian
ideas were introduced. The cities of Syria and Egypt were full of Jews.
In Alexandria alone, at the time of its capture by Amrou, there were
forty thousand who paid tribute. Centuries of misfortune and persecution
had served only to confirm them in their monotheism, and to strengthen
that implacable hatred of idolatry which they had cherished ever
since the Babylonian captivity. Associated with the Nestorians, they
translated into Syriac many Greek and Latin philosophical works, which
were retranslated into Arabic. While the Nestorian was occupied with
the education of the children of the great Mohammedan families, the Jew
found his way into them in the character of a physician.

FATALISM OF THE ARABIANS. Under these influences the ferocious
fanaticism of the Saracens abated, their manners were polished, their
thoughts elevated. They overran the realms of Philosophy and Science
as quickly as they had overrun the provinces of the Roman Empire. They
abandoned the fallacies of vulgar Mohammedanism, accepting in their
stead scientific truth.

In a world devoted to idolatry, the sword of the Saracen had vindicated
the majesty of God. The doctrine of fatalism, inculcated by the Koran,
had powerfully contributed to that result. "No man can anticipate or
postpone his predetermined end. Death will overtake us even in lofty
towers. From the beginning God hath settled the place in which each man
shall die." In his figurative language the Arab said: "No man can by
flight escape his fate. The Destinies ride their horses by night....
Whether asleep in bed or in the storm of battle, the angel of death will
find thee." "I am convinced," said Ali, to whose wisdom we have already
referred--"I am convinced that the affairs of men go by divine decree,
and not by our administration." The Mussulmen are those who submissively
resign themselves to the will of God. They reconciled fate and free-will
by saying, "The outline is given us, we color the picture of life as we
will." They said that, if we would overcome the laws of Nature, we must
not resist, we must balance them against each other.

This dark doctrine prepared its devotees for the accomplishment of great
things--things such as the Saracens did accomplish. It converted despair
into resignation, and taught men to disdain hope. There was a proverb
among them that "Despair is a freeman, Hope is a slave."

But many of the incidents of war showed plainly that medicines
may assuage pain, that skill may close wounds, that those who are
incontestably dying may be snatched from the grave. The Jewish physician
became a living, an accepted protest against the fatalism of the Koran.
By degrees the sternness of predestination was mitigated, and it was
admitted that in individual life there is an effect due to free-will;
that by his voluntary acts man may within certain limits determine his
own course. But, so far as nations are concerned, since they can yield
no personal accountability to God, they are placed under the control of
immutable law.

In this respect the contrast between the Christian and the Mohammedan
nations was very striking: The Christian was convinced of incessant
providential interventions; he believed that there was no such thing as
law in the government of the world. By prayers and entreaties he might
prevail with God to change the current of affairs, or, if that failed,
he might succeed with Christ, or perhaps with the Virgin Mary, or
through the intercession of the saints, or by the influence of their
relics or bones. If his own supplications were unavailing, he might
obtain his desire through the intervention of his priest, or through
that of the holy men of the Church, and especially if oblations or gifts
of money were added. Christendom believed that she could change the
course of affairs by influencing the conduct of superior beings. Islam
rested in a pious resignation to the unchangeable will of God. The
prayer of the Christian was mainly an earnest intercession for benefits
hoped for, that of the Saracen a devout expression of gratitude for the
past. Both substituted prayer for the ecstatic meditation of India.
To the Christian the progress of the world was an exhibition of
disconnected impulses, of sudden surprises. To the Mohammedan that
progress presented a very different aspect. Every corporeal motion was
due to some preceding motion; every thought to some preceding thought;
every historical event was the offspring of some preceding event; every
human action was the result of some foregone and accomplished action. In
the long annals of our race, nothing has ever been abruptly introduced.
There has been an orderly, an inevitable sequence from event to event.
There is an iron chain of destiny, of which the links are facts; each
stands in its preordained place--not one has ever been disturbed, not
one has ever been removed. Every man came into the world without his own
knowledge, he is to depart from it perhaps against his own wishes. Then
let him calmly fold his hands, and expect the issues of fate.

Coincidently with this change of opinion as to the government of
individual life, there came a change as respects the mechanical
construction of the world. According to the Koran, the earth is a square
plane, edged with vast mountains, which serve the double purpose of
balancing it in its seat, and of sustaining the dome of the sky. Our
devout admiration of the power and wisdom of God should be excited by
the spectacle of this vast crystalline brittle expanse, which has been
safely set in its position without so much as a crack or any other
injury. Above the sky, and resting on it, is heaven, built in seven
stories, the uppermost being the habitation of God, who, under the form
of a gigantic man, sits on a throne, having on either side winged bulls,
like those in the palaces of old Assyrian kings.

THEY MEASURE THE EARTH. These ideas, which indeed are not peculiar to
Mohammedanism, but are entertained by all men in a certain stage of
their intellectual development as religious revelations, were
very quickly exchanged by the more advanced Mohammedans for others
scientifically correct. Yet, as has been the case in Christian
countries, the advance was not made without resistance on the part
of the defenders of revealed truth. Thus when Al-Mamun, having become
acquainted with the globular form of the earth, gave orders to his
mathematicians and astronomers to measure a degree of a great circle
upon it, Takyuddin, one of the most celebrated doctors of divinity
of that time, denounced the wicked khalif, declaring that God would
assuredly punish him for presumptuously interrupting the devotions
of the faithful by encouraging and diffusing a false and atheistical
philosophy among them. Al-Mamun, however, persisted. On the shores of
the Red Sea, in the plains of Shinar, by the aid of an astrolabe, the
elevation of the pole above the horizon was determined at two stations
on the same meridian, exactly one degree apart. The distance between
the two stations was then measured, and found to be two hundred thousand
Hashemite cubits; this gave for the entire circumference of the earth
about twenty-four thousand of our miles, a determination not far
from the truth. But, since the spherical form could not be positively
asserted from one such measurement, the khalif caused another to be made
near Cufa in Mesopotamia. His astronomers divided themselves into two
parties, and, starting from a given point, each party measured an arc
of one degree, the one northward, the other southward. Their result
is given in cubits. If the cubit employed was that known as the royal
cubit, the length of a degree was ascertained within one-third of a mile
of its true value. From these measures the khalif concluded that the
globular form was established.

THEIR PASSION FOR SCIENCE. It is remarkable how quickly the ferocious
fanaticism of the Saracens was transformed into a passion for
intellectual pursuits. At first the Koran was an obstacle to
literature and science. Mohammed had extolled it as the grandest of all
compositions, and had adduced its unapproachable excellence as a proof
of his divine mission. But, in little more than twenty years after his
death, the experience that had been acquired in Syria, Persia, Asia
Minor, Egypt, had produced a striking effect, and Ali the khalif
reigning at that time, avowedly encouraged all kinds of literary
pursuits. Moawyah, the founder of the Ommiade dynasty, who followed in
661, revolutionized the government. It had been elective, he made it
hereditary. He removed its seat from Medina to a more central position
at Damascus, and entered on a career of luxury and magnificence. He
broke the bonds of a stern fanaticism, and put himself forth as a
cultivator and patron of letters. Thirty years had wrought a wonderful
change. A Persian satrap who had occasion to pay homage to Omar, the
second khalif, found him asleep among the beggars on the steps of the
Mosque of Medina; but foreign envoys who had occasion to seek Moawyah,
the sixth khalif, were presented to him in a magnificent palace,
decorated with exquisite arabesques, and adorned with flower-gardens and
fountains.

THEIR LITERATURE. In less than a century after the death of Mohammed,
translations of the chief Greek philosophical authors had been made into
Arabic; poems such as the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey," being considered
to have an irreligious tendency from their mythological allusions, were
rendered into Syriac, to gratify the curiosity of the learned. Almansor,
during his khalifate (A.D. 753-775), transferred the seat of government
to Bagdad, which he converted into a splendid metropolis; he gave much
of his time to the study and promotion of astronomy, and established
schools of medicine and law. His grandson, Haroun-al-Raschid (A.D. 786),
followed his example, and ordered that to every mosque in his dominions
a school should be attached. But the Augustan age of Asiatic learning
was during the khalifate of Al-Mamun (A.D. 813-832). He made Bagdad the
centre of science, collected great libraries, and surrounded himself
with learned men.

The elevated taste thus cultivated continued after the division of the
Saracen Empire by internal dissensions into three parts. The Abasside
dynasty in Asia, the Fatimite in Egypt, and the Ommiade in Spain, became
rivals not merely in politics, but also in letters and science.

THEY ORIGINATE CHEMISTRY. In letters the Saracens embraced every topic
that can amuse or edify the mind. In later times, it was their boast
that they had produced more poets than all other nations combined. In
science their great merit consists in this, that they cultivated it
after the manner of the Alexandrian Greeks, not after the manner of the
European Greeks. They perceived that it can never be advanced by mere
speculation; its only sure progress is by the practical interrogation of
Nature. The essential characteristics of their method are experiment and
observation. Geometry and the mathematical sciences they looked upon
as instruments of reasoning. In their numerous writings on mechanics,
hydrostatics, optics, it is interesting to remark that the solution of
a problem is always obtained by performing an experiment, or by an
instrumental observation. It was this that made them the originators of
chemistry, that led them to the invention of all kinds of apparatus for
distillation, sublimation, fusion, filtration, etc.; that in astronomy
caused them to appeal to divided instruments, as quadrants and
astrolabes; in chemistry, to employ the balance, the theory of which
they were perfectly familiar with; to construct tables of specific
gravities and astronomical tables, as those of Bagdad, Spain, Samarcand;
that produced their great improvements in geometry, trigonometry, the
invention of algebra, and the adoption of the Indian numeration in
arithmetic. Such were the results of their preference of the inductive
method of Aristotle, their declining the reveries of Plato.

THEIR GREAT LIBRARIES. For the establishment and extension of the public
libraries, books were sedulously collected. Thus the khalif Al-Mamun
is reported to have brought into Bagdad hundreds of camel-loads of
manuscripts. In a treaty he made with the Greek emperor, Michael III.,
he stipulated that one of the Constantinople libraries should be given
up to him. Among the treasures he thus acquired was the treatise of
Ptolemy on the mathematical construction of the heavens. He had it
forthwith translated into Arabic, under the title of "Al-magest." The
collections thus acquired sometimes became very large; thus the Fatimite
Library at Cairo contained one hundred thousand volumes, elegantly
transcribed and bound. Among these, there were six thousand five hundred
manuscripts on astronomy and medicine alone. The rules of this library
permitted the lending out of books to students resident at Cairo. It
also contained two globes, one of massive silver and one of brass; the
latter was said to have been constructed by Ptolemy, the former cost
three thousand golden crowns. The great library of the Spanish khalifs
eventually numbered six hundred thousand volumes; its catalogue alone
occupied forty-four. Besides this, there were seventy public libraries
in Andalusia. The collections in the possession of individuals were
sometimes very extensive. A private doctor refused the invitation of a
Sultan of Bokhara because the carriage of his books would have required
four hundred camels.

There was in every great library a department for the copying or
manufacture of translations. Such manufactures were also often an
affair of private enterprise. Honian, a Nestorian physician, had an
establishment of the kind at Bagdad (A.D. 850). He issued versions of
Aristotle, Plato, Hippocrates, Galen, etc. As to original works, it was
the custom of the authorities of colleges to require their professors
to prepare treatises on prescribed topics. Every khalif had his own
historian. Books of romances and tales, such as "The Thousand and One
Arabian Nights' Entertainments," bear testimony to the creative fancy
of the Saracens. Besides these, there were works on all kinds of
subjects--history, jurisprudence, politics, philosophy, biographies not
only of illustrious men, but also of celebrated horses and camels. These
were issued without any censorship or restraint, though, in later times,
works on theology required a license for publication. Books of reference
abounded, geographical, statistical, medical, historical dictionaries,
and even abridgments or condensations of them, as the "Encyclopedic
Dictionary of all the Sciences," by Mohammed Abu Abdallah. Much pride
was taken in the purity and whiteness of the paper, in the skillful
intermixture of variously-colored inks, and in the illumination of
titles by gilding and other adornments.

The Saracen Empire was dotted all over with colleges. They were
established in Mongolia, Tartary, Persia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Egypt,
North Africa, Morocco, Fez, Spain. At one extremity of this vast region,
which far exceeded the Roman Empire in geographical extent, were the
college and astronomical observatory of Samarcand, at the other the
Giralda in Spain. Gibbon, referring to this patronage of learning, says:
"The same royal prerogative was claimed by the independent emirs of the
provinces, and their emulation diffused the taste and the rewards of
science from Samarcand and Bokhara to Fez and Cordova. The vizier of a
sultan consecrated a sum of two hundred thousand pieces of gold to
the foundation of a college at Bagdad, which he endowed with an annual
revenue of fifteen thousand dinars. The fruits of instruction were
communicated, perhaps, at different times, to six thousand disciples
of every degree, from the son of the noble to that of the mechanic; a
sufficient allowance was provided for the indigent scholars, and the
merit or industry of the professors was repaid with adequate stipends.
In every city the productions of Arabic literature were copied and
collected, by the curiosity of the studious and the vanity of the rich."
The superintendence of these schools was committed with noble liberality
sometimes to Nestorians, sometimes to Jews. It mattered not in what
country a man was born, nor what were his religious opinions; his
attainment in learning was the only thing to be considered. The great
Khalif Al-Mamun had declared that "they are the elect of God, his best
and most useful servants, whose lives are devoted to the improvement
of their rational faculties; that the teachers of wisdom are the true
luminaries and legislators of this world, which, without their aid,
would again sink into ignorance and barbarism."

After the example of the medical college of Cairo, other medical
colleges required their students to pass a rigid examination. The
candidate then received authority to enter on the practice of his
profession. The first medical college established in Europe was that
founded by the Saracens at Salerno, in Italy. The first astronomical
observatory was that erected by them at Seville, in Spain.

THE ARABIAN SCIENTIFIC MOVEMENT. It would far transcend the limits of
this book to give an adequate statement of the results of this imposing
scientific movement. The ancient sciences were greatly extended--new
ones were brought into existence. The Indian method of arithmetic was
introduced, a beautiful invention, which expresses all numbers by ten
characters, giving them an absolute value, and a value by position,
and furnishing simple rules for the easy performance of all kinds
of calculations. Algebra, or universal arithmetic--the method of
calculating indeterminate quantities, or investigating the relations
that subsist among quantities of all kinds, whether arithmetical or
geometrical--was developed from the germ that Diophantus had left.
Mohammed Ben Musa furnished the solution of quadratic equations,
Omar Ben Ibra him that of cubic equations. The Saracens also gave to
trigonometry its modern form, substituting sines for chords, which had
been previously used; they elevated it into a separate science.
Musa, above mentioned, was the author of a "Treatise on Spherical
Trigonometry." Al-Baghadadi left one on land-surveying, so excellent,
that by some it has been declared to be a copy of Euclid's lost work on
that subject.

ARABIAN ASTRONOMY. In astronomy, they not only made catalogues, but
maps of the stars visible in their skies, giving to those of the larger
magnitudes the Arabic names they still bear on our celestial globes.
They ascertained, as we have seen, the size of the earth by the
measurement of a degree on her surface, determined the obliquity of
the ecliptic, published corrected tables of the sun and moon fixed
the length of the year, verified the precession of the equinoxes. The
treatise of Albategnius on "The Science of the Stars" is spoken of by
Laplace with respect; he also draws attention to an important fragment
of Ibn-Junis, the astronomer of Hakem, the Khalif of Egypt, A.D. 1000,
as containing a long series of observations from the time of Almansor,
of eclipses, equinoxes, solstices, conjunctions of planets, occultations
of stars--observations which have cast much light on the great
variations of the system of the world. The Arabian astronomers also
devoted themselves to the construction and perfection of astronomical
instruments, to the measurement of time by clocks of various kinds, by
clepsydras and sun-dials. They were the first to introduce, for this
purpose, the use of the pendulum.

In the experimental sciences, they originated chemistry; they discovered
some of its most important reagents--sulphuric acid, nitric acid,
alcohol. They applied that science in the practice of medicine, being
the first to publish pharmacopoeias or dispensatories, and to include in
them mineral preparations. In mechanics, they had determined the laws
of falling bodies, had ideas, by no means indistinct, of the nature of
gravity; they were familiar with the theory of the mechanical powers. In
hydrostatics they constructed the first tables of the specific gravities
of bodies, and wrote treatises on the flotation and sinking of bodies
in water. In optics, they corrected the Greek misconception, that a
ray proceeds from the eye, and touches the object seen, introducing
the hypothesis that the ray passes from the object to the eye. They
understood the phenomena of the reflection and refraction of light.
Alhazen made the great discovery of the curvilinear path of a ray of
light through the atmosphere, and proved that we see the sun and moon
before they have risen, and after they have set.

AGRICULTURE AND MANUFACTURE. The effects of this scientific activity are
plainly perceived in the great improvements that took place in many
of the industrial arts. Agriculture shows it in better methods of
irrigation, the skillful employment of manures, the raising of improved
breeds of cattle, the enactment of wise codes of rural laws, the
introduction of the culture of rice, and that of sugar and coffee. The
manufactures show it in the great extension of the industries of silk,
cotton, wool; in the fabrication of cordova and morocco leather, and
paper; in mining, casting, and various metallurgic operations; in the
making of Toledo blades.

Passionate lovers of poetry and music, they dedicated much of their
leisure time to those elegant pursuits. They taught Europe the game of
chess; they gave it its taste for works of fiction--romances and novels.
In the graver domains of literature they took delight: they had many
admirable compositions on such subjects as the instability of human
greatness; the consequences of irreligion; the reverses of fortune; the
origin, duration, and end of the world. Sometimes, not without surprise,
we meet with ideas which we flatter ourselves have originated in our
own times. Thus our modern doctrines of evolution and development were
taught in their schools. In fact, they carried them much farther than we
are disposed to do, extending them even to inorganic or mineral
things. The fundamental principle of alchemy was the natural process of
development of metalline bodies. "When common people," says Al-Khazini,
writing in the twelfth century, "hear from natural philosophers that
gold is a body which has attained to perfection of maturity, to the
goal of completeness, they firmly believe that it is something which has
gradually come to that perfection by passing through the forms of all
other metallic bodies, so that its gold nature was originally lead,
afterward it became tin, then brass, then silver, and finally reached
the development of gold; not knowing that the natural philosophers mean,
in saying this, only something like what they mean when they speak of
man, and attribute to him a completeness and equilibrium in nature and
constitution--not that man was once a bull, and was changed into an
ass, and afterward into a horse, and after that into an ape, and finally
became a man."



