CHAPTER XII.

     THE IMPENDING CRISIS. INDICATIONS OF THE APPROACH OF A
     RELIGIOUS CRISIS.--THE PREDOMINATING CHRISTIAN CHURCH, THE
     ROMAN, PERCEIVES THIS, AND MAKES PREPARATION FOR IT.--PIUS
     IX CONVOKES AN OECUMENICAL COUNCIL--RELATIONS OF THE
     DIFFERENT EUROPEAN GOVERNMENTS TO THE PAPACY.--RELATIONS OF
     THE CHURCH TO SCIENCE, AS INDICATED BY THE ENCYCLICAL LETTER
     AND THE SYLLABUS.

     Acts of the Vatican Council in relation to the infallibility
     of the pope, and to Science.--Abstract of decisions arrived
     at.

     Controversy between the Prussian Government and the papacy.--
     It is a contest between the State and the Church for
     supremacy--Effect of dual government in Europe--Declaration
     by the Vatican Council of its position as to Science--The
     dogmatic constitution of the Catholic faith.--Its
     definitions respecting God, Revelation, Faith, Reason.--The
     anathemas it pronounces.--Its denunciation of modern
     civilization.

     The Protestant Evangelical Alliance and its acts.

     General review of the foregoing definitions, and acts.--
     Present condition of the controversy, and its future
     prospects.


PREDOMINANCE OF CATHOLICITY. No one who is acquainted with the present
tone of thought in Christendom can hide from himself the fact that an
intellectual, a religious crisis is impending.

In all directions we see the lowering skies, we hear the mutterings
of the coming storm. In Germany, the national party is arraying itself
against the ultramontane; in France, the men of progress are struggling
against the unprogressive, and in their contest the political supremacy
of that great country is wellnigh neutralized or lost. In Italy, Rome
has passed into the hands of an excommunicated king. The sovereign
pontiff, feigning that he is a prisoner, is fulminating from the Vatican
his anathemas, and, in the midst of the most convincing proofs of his
manifold errors, asserting his own infallibility. A Catholic archbishop
with truth declares that the whole civil society of Europe seems to be
withdrawing itself in its public life from Christianity. In England and
America, religious persons perceive with dismay that the intellectual
basis of faith has been undermined by the spirit of the age. They
prepare for the approaching disaster in the best manner they can.

The most serious trial through which society can pass is encountered in
the exuviation of its religious restraints. The history of Greece and
the history of Rome exhibit to us in an impressive manner how great are
the perils. But it is not given to religions to endure forever. They
necessarily undergo transformation with the intellectual development of
man. How many countries are there professing the same religion now that
they did at the birth of Christ?

It is estimated that the entire population of Europe is about three
hundred and one million. Of these, one hundred and eighty-five million
are Roman Catholics, thirty-three million are Greek Catholics. Of
Protestants there are seventy-one million, separated into many sects. Of
Jews, five million; of Mohammedans, seven million.

Of the religious subdivisions of America an accurate numerical statement
cannot be given. The whole of Christian South America is Roman Catholic,
the same may be said of Central America and of Mexico, as also of the
Spanish and French West India possessions. In the United States and
Canada the Protestant population predominates. To Australia the same
remark applies. In India the sparse Christian population sinks into
insignificance in presence of two hundred million Mohammedans and other
Oriental denominations. The Roman Catholic Church is the most widely
diffused and the most powerfully organized of all modern societies. It
is far more a political than a religious combination. Its principle is
that all power is in the clergy, and that for laymen there is only the
privilege of obedience. The republican forms under which the Churches
existed in primitive Christianity have gradually merged into an absolute
centralization, with a man as vice-God at its head. This Church
asserts that the divine commission under which it acts comprises civil
government; that it has a right to use the state for its own purposes,
but that the state has no right to intermeddle with it; that even in
Protestant countries it is not merely a coordinate government, but the
sovereign power. It insists that the state has no rights over any thing
which it declares to be in its domain, and that Protestantism, being
a mere rebellion, has no rights at all; that even in Protestant
communities the Catholic bishop is the only lawful spiritual pastor.

It is plain, therefore, that of professing Christians the vast majority
are Catholic; and such is the authoritative demand of the papacy for
supremacy, that, in any survey of the present religious condition of
Christendom, regard must be mainly had to its acts. Its movements are
guided by the highest intelligence and skill. Catholicism obeys the
orders of one man, and has therefore a unity, a compactness, a power,
which Protestant denominations do not possess. Moreover, it derives
inestimable strength from the souvenirs of the great name of Rome.

Unembarrassed by any hesitating sentiment, the papacy has contemplated
the coming intellectual crisis. It has pronounced its decision, and
occupied what seems to it to be the most advantageous ground.

This definition of position we find in the acts of the late Vatican
Council.

THE OECUMENICAL COUNCIL. Pius IX., by a bull dated June 29, 1868,
convoked an Oecumenical Council, to meet in Rome, on December 8, 1869.
Its sessions ended in July, 1870. Among other matters submitted to its
consideration, two stand forth in conspicuous prominence--they are the
assertion of the infallibility of the Roman pontiff, and the definition
of the relations of religion to science.

But the convocation of the Council was far from meeting with general
approval.

The views of the Oriental Churches were, for the most part, unfavorable.
They affirmed that they saw a desire in the Roman pontiff to set himself
up as the head of Christianity, whereas they recognized the Lord Jesus
Christ alone as the head of the Church. They believed that the Council
would only lead to new quarrels and scandals. The sentiment of these
venerable Churches is well shown by the incident that, when, in
1867, the Nestorian Patriarch Simeon had been invited by the Chaldean
Patriarch to return to Roman Catholic unity, he, in his reply, showed
that there was no prospect for harmonious action between the East and
the West: "You invite me to kiss humbly the slipper of the Bishop of
Rome; but is he not, in every respect, a man like yourself--is his
dignity superior to yours? We will never permit to be introduced into
our holy temples of worship images and statues, which are nothing but
abominable and impure idols. What! shall we attribute to Almighty God a
mother, as you dare to do? Away from us, such blasphemy!"

EXPECTATIONS OF THE PAPACY. Eventually, the patriarchs, archbishops, and
bishops, from all regions of the world, who took part in this Council,
were seven hundred and four.

Rome had seen very plainly that Science was not only rapidly undermining
the dogmas of the papacy, but was gathering great political power. She
recognized that all over Europe there was a fast-spreading secession
among persons of education, and that its true focus was North Germany.

She looked, therefore, with deep interest on the Prusso-Austrian War,
giving to Austria whatever encouragement she could. The battle of Sadowa
was a bitter disappointment to her.

With satisfaction again she looked upon the breaking out of the
Franco-Prussian War, not doubting that its issue would be favorable to
France, and therefore favorable to her. Here, again, she was doomed to
disappointment at Sedan.

Having now no further hope, for many years to come, from external war,
she resolved to see what could be done by internal insurrection, and the
present movement in the German Empire is the result of her machinations.

Had Austria or had France succeeded, Protestantism would have been
overthrown along with Prussia.

But, while these military movements were being carried on, a movement of
a different, an intellectual kind, was engaged in. Its principle was, to
restore the worn-out mediaeval doctrines and practices, carrying them to
an extreme, no matter what the consequences might be.

ENCYCLICAL LETTER AND SYLLABUS. Not only was it asserted that the papacy
has a divine right to participate in the government of all countries,
coordinately with their temporal authorities, but that the supremacy of
Rome in this matter must be recognized; and that in any question between
them the temporal authority must conform itself to her order.

And, since the endangering of her position had been mainly brought about
by the progress of science, she presumed to define its boundaries, and
prescribe limits to its authority. Still more, she undertook to denounce
modern civilization.

These measures were contemplated soon after the return of his Holiness
from Gaeta in 1848, and were undertaken by the advice of the Jesuits,
who, lingering in the hope that God would work the impossible, supposed
that the papacy, in its old age, might be reinvigorated. The organ of
the Curia proclaimed the absolute independence of the Church as regards
the state; the dependence of the bishops on the pope; of the diocesan
clergy on the bishops; the obligation of the Protestants to abandon
their atheism, and return to the fold; the absolute condemnation of all
kinds of toleration. In December, 1854, in an assembly of bishops, the
pope had proclaimed the dogma of the immaculate conception. Ten years
subsequently he put forth the celebrated Encyclical Letter and the
Syllabus.

The Encyclical Letter is dated December 8, 1864. It was drawn up by
learned ecclesiastics, and subsequently debated at the Congregation of
the Holy Office, then forwarded to prelates, and finally gone over by
the pope and cardinals.

ENCYCLICAL LETTER AND SYLLABUS. Many of the clergy objected to its
condemnation of modern civilization. Some of the cardinals were
reluctant to concur in it. The Catholic press accepted it, not, however,
without misgivings and regrets. The Protestant governments put no
obstacle in its way; the Catholic were embarrassed by it. France allowed
the publication only of that portion proclaiming the jubilee; Austria
and Italy permitted its introduction, but withheld their approval.
The political press and legislatures of Catholic countries gave it an
unfavorable reception. Many deplored it as likely to widen the breach
between the Church and modern society. The Italian press regarded it as
determining a war, without truce or armistice, between the papacy and
modern civilization. Even in Spain there were journals that regretted
"the obstinacy and blindness of the court of Rome, in branding and
condemning modern civilization."

It denounces that "most pernicious and insane opinion, that liberty of
conscience and of worship is the right of every man, and that this right
ought, in every well-governed state, to be proclaimed and asserted by
law; and that the will of the people, manifested by public opinion (as
it is called), or by other means, constitutes a supreme law, independent
of all divine and human rights." It denies the right of parents to
educate their children outside the Catholic Church. It denounces "the
impudence" of those who presume to subordinate the authority of the
Church and of the Apostolic See, "conferred upon it by Christ our Lord,
to the judgment of the civil authority." His Holiness commends, to
the venerable brothers to whom the Encyclical is addressed, incessant
prayer, and, "in order that God may accede the more easily to our and
your prayers, let us employ in all confidence, as our mediatrix with
him, the Virgin Mary, mother of God, who sits as a queen upon the
right hand of her only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, in a golden
vestment, clothed around with various adornments. There is nothing she
cannot obtain from him."

CONVOCATION OF THE COUNCIL. Plainly, the principle now avowed by the
papacy must bring it into collision even with governments which had
heretofore maintained amicable relations with it. Great dissatisfaction
was manifested by Russia, and the incidents that ensued drew forth from
his Holiness an allocution (November, 1866) condemnatory of the course
of that government. To this, Russia replied, by declaring the Concordat
of 1867 abrogated.

Undeterred by the result of the battle of Sadowa (July, 1866), though
it was plain that the political condition of Europe was now profoundly
affected, and especially the relations of the papacy, the pope delivered
an allocution (June 27, 1867), confirming the Encyclical and Syllabus.
He announced his intention of convoking an Oecumenical Council.

Accordingly, as we have already mentioned, in the following year (June
29, 1868), a bull was issued convoking that Council. Misunderstandings,
however, had now sprung up with Austria. The Austrian Reichsrath
had adopted laws introducing equality of civil rights for all the
inhabitants of the empire, and restricting the influence of the Church.
This produced on the part of the papal government an expostulation.
Acting as Russia had done, the Austrian Government found it necessary to
abrogate the Concordat of 1855.

In France, as above stated, the publication of the entire Syllabus was
not permitted; but Prussia, desirous of keeping on good terms with the
papacy, did not disallow it. The exacting disposition of the papacy
increased. It was openly declared that the faithful must now sacrifice
to the Church, property, life, and even their intellectual convictions.
The Protestants and the Greeks were invited to tender their submission.

THE VATICAN COUNCIL. On the appointed day, the Council opened. Its
objects were, to translate the Syllabus into practice, to establish the
dogma of papal infallibility, and define the relations of religion to
science. Every preparation had been made that the points determined on
should be carried. The bishops were informed that they were coming to
Rome not to deliberate, but to sanction decrees previously made by
an infallible pope. No idea was entertained of any such thing as
free discussion. The minutes of the meetings were not permitted to be
inspected; the prelates of the opposition were hardly allowed to speak.
On January 22, 1870, a petition, requesting that the infallibility of
the pope should be defined, was presented; an opposition petition of the
minority was offered. Hereupon, the deliberations of the minority were
forbidden, and their publications prohibited. And, though the Curia had
provided a compact majority, it was found expedient to issue an order
that to carry any proposition it was not necessary that the vote should
be near unanimity, a simple majority sufficed. The remonstrances of the
minority were altogether unheeded.

As the Council pressed forward to its object, foreign authorities
became alarmed at its reckless determination. A petition drawn up by the
Archbishop of Vienna, and signed by several cardinals and archbishops,
entreated his Holiness not to submit the dogma of infallibility for
consideration, "because the Church has to sustain at present a struggle
unknown in former times, against men who oppose religion itself as
an institution baneful to human nature, and that it is inopportune
to impose upon Catholic nations, led into temptation by so many
machinations, more dogmas than the Council of Trent proclaimed." It
added that "the definition demanded would furnish fresh arms to
the enemies of religion, to excite against the Catholic Church the
resentment of men avowedly the best." The Austrian prime-minister
addressed a protest to the papal government, warning it against any
steps that might lead to encroachments on the rights of Austria. The
French Government also addressed a note, suggesting that a French bishop
should explain to the Council the condition and the rights of France. To
this the papal government replied that a bishop could not reconcile the
double duties of an ambassador and a Father of the Council. Hereupon,
the French Government, in a very respectful note, remarked that,
to prevent ultra opinions from becoming dogmas, it reckoned on the
moderation of the bishops, and the prudence of the Holy Father; and,
to defend its civil and political laws against the encroachments of the
theocracy, it had counted on public reason and the patriotism of French
Catholics. In these remonstrances the North-German Confederation joined,
seriously pressing them on the consideration of the papal government.

On April 23d, Von Arnim, the Prussian embassador, united with Daru, the
French minister, in suggesting to the Curia the inexpediency of reviving
mediaeval ideas. The minority bishops, thus encouraged, demanded now
that the relations of the spiritual to the secular power should be
determined before the pope's infallibility was discussed, and that it
should be settled whether Christ had conferred on St. Peter and his
successors a power over kings and emperors.

INFALLIBILITY OF THE POPE. No regard was paid to this, not even delay
was consented to. The Jesuits, who were at the bottom of the movement,
carried their measures through the packed assembly with a high hand. The
Council omitted no device to screen itself from popular criticism. Its
proceedings were conducted with the utmost secrecy; all who took part in
them were bound by a solemn oath to observe silence.

On July 13th, the votes were taken. Of 601 votes, 451 were affirmative.
Under the majority rule, the measure was pronounced carried, and, five
days subsequently, the pope proclaimed the dogma of his infallibility.
It has often been remarked that this was the day on which the French
declared war against Prussia. Eight days afterward the French troops
were withdrawn from Rome. Perhaps both the statesman and the philosopher
will admit that an infallible pope would be a great harmonizing element,
if only common-sense could acknowledge him.

Hereupon, the King of Italy addressed an autograph letter to the pope,
setting forth in very respectful terms the necessity that his troops
should advance and occupy positions "indispensable to the security of
his Holiness, and the maintenance of order;" that, while satisfying
the national aspirations, the chief of Catholicity, surrounded by the
devotion of the Italian populations, "might preserve on the banks of the
Tiber a glorious seat, independent of all human sovereignty."

To this his Holiness replied in a brief and caustic letter: "I give
thanks to God, who has permitted your majesty to fill the last days of
my life with bitterness. For the rest, I cannot grant certain requests,
nor conform with certain principles contained in your letter. Again, I
call upon God, and into his hands commit my cause, which is his cause.
I pray God to grant your majesty many graces, to free you from dangers,
and to dispense to you his mercy which you so much need."

THE ITALIAN GOVERNMENT. The Italian troops met with but little
resistance. They occupied Rome on September 20, 1870. A manifesto was
issued, setting forth the details of a plebiscitum, the vote to be by
ballot, the question, "the unification of Italy." Its result showed how
completely the popular mind in Italy is emancipated from theology. In
the Roman provinces the number of votes on the lists was 167,548; the
number who voted, 135,291; the number who voted for annexation, 133,681;
the number who voted against it, 1,507; votes annulled, 103. The
Parliament of Italy ratified the vote of the Roman people for annexation
by a vote of 239 to 20. A royal decree now announced the annexation of
the Papal States to the kingdom of Italy, and a manifesto was issued
indicating the details of the arrangement. It declared that "by these
concessions the Italian Government seeks to prove to Europe that Italy
respects the sovereignty of the pope in conformity with the principle of
a free Church in a free state."

AFFAIRS IN PRUSSIA. In the Prusso-Austrian War it had been the hope of
the papacy, to restore the German Empire under Austria, and make
Germany a Catholic nation. In the Franco-German War the French expected
ultramontane sympathies in Germany. No means were spared to excite
Catholic sentiment against the Protestants. No vilification was spared.
They were spoken of as atheists; they were declared incapable of being
honest men; their sects were pointed out as indicating that their
secession was in a state of dissolution. "The followers of Luther are
the most abandoned men in all Europe." Even the pope himself, presuming
that the whole world had forgotten all history, did not hesitate to say,
"Let the German people understand that no other Church but that of Rome
is the Church of freedom and progress."

Meantime, among the clergy of Germany a party was organized to
remonstrate against, and even resist, the papal usurpation. It protested
against "a man being placed on the throne of God," against a vice-God
of any kind, nor would it yield its scientific convictions to
ecclesiastical authority. Some did not hesitate to accuse the
pope himself of being a heretic. Against these insubordinates
excommunications began to be fulminated, and at length it was demanded
that certain professors and teachers should be removed from their
offices, and infallibilists substituted. With this demand the Prussian
Government declined to comply.

The Prussian Government had earnestly desired to remain on amicable
terms with the papacy; it had no wish to enter on a theological quarrel;
but gradually the conviction was forced upon it that the question was
not a religious but a political one--whether the power of the state
should be used against the state. A teacher in a gymnasium had been
excommunicated; the government, on being required to dismiss him,
refused. The Church authorities denounced this as an attack upon faith.
The emperor sustained his minister. The organ of the infallible party
threatened the emperor with the opposition of all good Catholics, and
told him that, in a contention with the pope, systems of government can
and must change. It was now plain to every one that the question had
become, "Who is to be master in the state, the government or the Roman
Church? It is plainly impossible for men to live under two governments,
one of which declares to be wrong what the other commands. If the
government will not submit to the Roman Church, the two are enemies." A
conflict was thus forced upon Prussia by Rome--a conflict in which the
latter, impelled by her antagonism to modern civilization, is clearly
the aggressor.

ACTION OF THE PRUSSIAN GOVERNMENT. The government, now recognizing its
antagonist, defended itself by abolishing the Catholic department in
the ministry of Public Worship. This was about midsummer, 1871. In
the following November the Imperial Parliament passed a law that
ecclesiastics abusing their office, to the disturbance of the public
peace, should be criminally punished. And, guided by the principle that
the future belongs to him to whom the school belongs, a movement arose
for the purpose of separating the schools from the Church.

THE CHURCH A POLITICAL POWER. The Jesuit party was extending and
strengthening an organization all over Germany, based on the principle
that state legislation in ecclesiastical matters is not binding. Here
was an act of open insurrection. Could the government allow itself to be
intimidated? The Bishop of Ermeland declared that he would not obey the
laws of the state if they touched the Church. The government stopped the
payment of his salary; and, perceiving that there could be no peace
so long as the Jesuits were permitted to remain in the country, their
expulsion was resolved on, and carried into effect. At the close of
1872 his Holiness delivered an allocution, in which he touched on the
"persecution of the Church in the German Empire," and asserted that the
Church alone has a right to fix the limits between its domain and that
of the state--a dangerous and inadmissible principle, since under the
term morals the Church comprises all the relations of men to each other,
and asserts that whatever does not assist her oppresses her. Hereupon, a
few days subsequently (January 9, 1873), four laws were brought forward
by the government: 1. Regulating the means by which a person might
sever his connection with the Church; 2. Restricting the Church in the
exercise of ecclesiastical punishments; 3. Regulating the ecclesiastical
power of discipline, forbidding bodily chastisement, regulating fines
and banishments granting the privilege of an appeal to the Royal Court
of Justice for Ecclesiastical Affairs, the decision of which is final;
4. Ordaining the preliminary education and appointment of priests. They
must have had a satisfactory education, passed a public examination
conducted by the state, and have a knowledge of philosophy, history,
and German literature. Institutions refusing to be superintended by the
state are to be closed.

These laws demonstrate that Germany is resolved that she will no longer
be dictated to nor embarrassed by a few Italian noble families; that she
will be master of her own house. She sees in the conflict, not an affair
of religion or of conscience, but a struggle between the sovereignty
of state legislation and the sovereignty of the Church. She treats the
papacy not in the aspect of a religious, but of a political power, and
is resolved that the declaration of the Prussian Constitution shall be
maintained, that "the exercise of religious freedom must not interfere
with the duties of a citizen toward the community and the state."

DUAL GOVERNMENT IN EUROPE. With truth it is affirmed that the papacy is
administered not oecumenically, not as a universal Church, for all
the nations, but for the benefit of some Italian families. Look at its
composition! It consists of pope, cardinal bishops, cardinal deacons,
who at the present moment are all Italians; cardinal priests, nearly all
Italians; ministers and secretaries of the Sacred Congregation in Rome,
all Italians. France has not given a pope since the middle ages. It
is the same with Austria, Portugal, Spain. In spite of all attempts to
change this system of exclusion, to open the dignities of the Church to
all Catholicism, no foreigner can reach the holy chair. It is recognized
that the Church is a domain given by God to the princely Italian
families. Of fifty-five members of the present College of Cardinals,
forty are Italians--that is, thirty-two beyond their proper share.

The stumbling-block to the progress of Europe has been its dual system
of government. So long as every nation had two sovereigns, a temporal
one at home and a spiritual one in a foreign land--there being different
temporal masters in different nations, but only one foreign master
for all, the pontiff at Rome--how was it possible that history should
present us with any thing more than a narrative of the strifes of these
rival powers? Whoever will reflect on this state of things will see
how it is that those nations which have shaken off the dual form of
government are those which have made the greatest advance. He will
discern what is the cause of the paralysis which has befallen France. On
one hand she wishes to be the leader of Europe, on the other she clings
to a dead past. For the sake of propitiating her ignorant classes, she
enters upon lines of policy which her intelligence must condemn. So
evenly balanced are the two sovereignties under which she lives, that
sometimes one, sometimes the other, prevails; and not unfrequently the
one uses the other as an engine for the accomplishment of its ends.

INTENTIONS OF THE POPE. But this dual system approaches its close. To
the northern nations, less imaginative and less superstitious, it had
long ago become intolerable; they rejected it summarily at the epoch of
the Reformation, notwithstanding the protestations and pretensions
of Rome, Russia, happier than the rest, has never acknowledged the
influence of any foreign spiritual power. She gloried in her attachment
to the ancient Greek rite, and saw in the papacy nothing more than a
troublesome dissenter from the primitive faith. In America the temporal
and the spiritual have been absolutely divorced--the latter is not
permitted to have any thing to do with affairs of state, though in all
other respects liberty is conceded to it. The condition of the New
World also satisfies us that both forms of Christianity, Catholic and
Protestant, have lost their expansive power; neither can pass beyond its
long-established boundary-line--the Catholic republics remain Catholic,
the Protestant Protestant. And among the latter the disposition to
sectarian isolation is disappearing; persons of different denominations
consort without hesitation together. They gather their current opinions
from newspapers, not from the Church.

Pius IX., in the movements we have been considering, has had two objects
in view: 1. The more thorough centralization of the papacy, with a
spiritual autocrat assuming the prerogatives of God at its head; 2.
Control over the intellectual development of the nations professing
Christianity.

The logical consequence of the former of these is political
intervention. He insists that in all cases the temporal must subordinate
itself to the spiritual power; all laws inconsistent with the interests
of the Church must be repealed. They are not binding on the faithful.
In the preceding pages I have briefly related some of the complications
that have already occurred in the attempt to maintain this policy.

THE SYLLABUS. I now come to the consideration of the manner in which the
papacy proposes to establish its intellectual control; how it defines
its relation to its antagonist, Science, and, seeking a restoration
of the mediaeval condition, opposes modern civilization, and denounces
modern society.

The Encyclical and Syllabus present the principles which it was the
object of the Vatican Council to carry into practical effect. The
Syllabus stigmatizes pantheism, naturalism, and absolute rationalism,
denouncing such opinions as that God is the world; that there is no God
other than Nature; that theological matters must be treated in the same
manner as philosophical ones, that the methods and principles by which
the old scholastic doctors cultivated theology are no longer suitable
to the demands of the age and the progress of science; that every man
is free to embrace and profess the religion he may believe to be true,
guided by the light of his reason; that it appertains to the civil
power to define what are the rights and limits in which the Church
may exercise authority; that the Church has not the right of availing
herself of force or any direct or indirect temporal power; that the
Church ought to be separated from the state and the state from the
Church; that it is no longer expedient that the Catholic religion shall
be held as the only religion of the state, to the exclusion of all other
modes of worship; that persons coming to reside in Catholic countries
have a right to the public exercise of their own worship; that the
Roman pontiff can and ought to reconcile himself to, and agree with, the
progress of modern civilization. The Syllabus claims the right of the
Church to control public schools, and denies the right of the state in
that respect; it claims the control over marriage and divorce.

Such of these principles as the Council found expedient at present to
formularize, were set forth by it in "The Dogmatic Constitution of
the Catholic Faith." The essential points of this constitution, more
especially as regards the relations of religion to science, we have now
to examine. It will be understood that the following does not present
the entire document, but only an abstract of what appear to be its more
important parts.

CONSTITUTION OF CATHOLIC FAITH. This definition opens with a severe
review of the principles and consequences of the Protestant Reformation:

"The rejection of the divine authority of the Church to teach, and the
subjection of all things belonging to religion to the judgment of each
individual, have led to the production of many sects, and, as these
differed and disputed with each other, all belief in Christ was
overthrown in the minds of not a few, and the Holy Scriptures began to
be counted as myths and fables. Christianity has been rejected, and
the reign of mere Reason as they call it, or Nature, substituted; many
falling into the abyss of pantheism, materialism, and atheism, and,
repudiating the reasoning nature of man, and every rule of right and
wrong, they are laboring to overthrow the very foundations of human
society. As this impious heresy is spreading everywhere, not a few
Catholics have been inveigled by it. They have confounded human science
and divine faith.

"But the Church, the Mother and Mistress of nations, is ever ready to
strengthen the weak, to take to her bosom those that return, and carry
them on to better things. And, now the bishops of the whole world
being gathered together in this Oecumenical Council, and the Holy Ghost
sitting therein, and judging with us, we have determined to declare from
this chair of St. Peter the saving doctrine of Christ, and proscribe and
condemn the opposing errors.

"OF GOD, THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS.--The Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman
Church believes that there is one true and living God, Creator and
Lord of Heaven and Earth, Almighty, Eternal, Immense, Incomprehensible,
Infinite in understanding and will, and in all perfection. He is
distinct from the world. Of his own most free counsel he made alike out
of nothing two created creatures, a spiritual and a temporal, angelic
and earthly. Afterward he made the human nature, composed of both.
Moreover, God by his providence protects and governs all things,
reaching from end to end mightily, and ordering all things harmoniously.
Every thing is open to his eyes, even things that come to pass by the
free action of his creatures."

"OF REVELATION.--The Holy Mother Church holds that God can be known with
certainty by the natural light of human reason, but that it has also
pleased him to reveal himself and the eternal decrees of his will in a
supernatural way. This supernatural revelation, as declared by the
Holy Council of Trent, is contained in the books of the Old and New
Testament, as enumerated in the decrees of that Council, and as are to
be had in the old Vulgate Latin edition. These are sacred because they
were written under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. They have God for
their author, and as such have been delivered to the Church.

"And, in order to restrain restless spirits, who may give erroneous
explanations, it is decreed--renewing the decision of the Council of
Trent--that no one may interpret the sacred Scriptures contrary to the
sense in which they are interpreted by Holy Mother Church, to whom such
interpretation belongs."

"OF FAITH.--Inasmuch as man depends on God as his Lord, and created
reason is wholly subject to uncreated truth, he is bound when God makes
a revelation to obey it by faith. This faith is a supernatural virtue,
and the beginning of man's salvation who believes revealed things to
be true, not for their intrinsic truth as seen by the natural light
of reason, but for the authority of God in revealing them. But,
nevertheless that faith might be agreeable to reason, God willed to
join miracles and prophecies, which, showing forth his omnipotence and
knowledge, are proofs suited to the understanding of all. Such we have
in Moses and the prophets, and above all in Christ. Now, all those
things are to be believed which are written in the word of God, or
handed down by tradition, which the Church by her teaching has proposed
for belief.

"No one can be justified without this faith, nor shall any one, unless
he persevere therein to the end, attain everlasting life. Hence God,
through his only-begotten Son, has established the Church as the
guardian and teacher of his revealed word. For only to the Catholic
Church do all those signs belong which make evident the credibility of
the Christian faith. Nay, more, the very Church herself, in view of
her wonderful propagation, her eminent holiness, her exhaustless
fruitfulness in all that is good, her Catholic unity, her unshaken
stability, offers a great and evident claim to belief, and an undeniable
proof of her divine mission. Thus the Church shows to her children that
the faith they hold rests on a most solid foundation. Wherefore, totally
unlike is the condition of those who, by the heavenly gift of faith,
have embraced the Catholic truth, and of those who, led by human
opinions, are following, a false religion."

"OF FAITH AND REASON.--Moreover, the Catholic Church has ever held and
now holds that there exists a twofold order of knowledge, each of which
is distinct from the other, both as to its principle and its object. As
to its principle, because in the one we know by natural reason, in the
other by divine faith; as to the object, because, besides those things
which our natural reason can attain, there are proposed to our belief
mysteries hidden in God, which, unless by him revealed, cannot come to
our knowledge.

"Reason, indeed, enlightened by faith, and seeking, with diligence and
godly sobriety, may, by God's gift, come to some understanding, limited
in degree, but most wholesome in its effects, of mysteries, both from
the analogy of things which are naturally known and from the connection
of the mysteries themselves with one another and with man's last end.
But never can reason be rendered capable of thoroughly understanding
mysteries as it does those truths which form its proper object. For
God's mysteries, in their very nature, so far surpass the reach of
created intellect, that, even when taught by revelation and received by
faith, they remain covered by faith itself, as by a veil, and shrouded,
as it were, in darkness as long as in this mortal life.

"But, although faith be above reason, there never can be a real
disagreement between them, since the same God who reveals mysteries and
infuses faith has given man's soul the light of reason, and God cannot
deny himself, nor can one truth ever contradict another. Wherefore the
empty shadow of such contradiction arises chiefly from this, that either
the doctrines of faith are not understood and set forth as the Church
really holds them, or that the vain devices and opinions of men are
mistaken for the dictates of reason. We therefore pronounce false every
assertion which is contrary to the enlightened truth of faith. Moreover,
the Church, which, together with her apostolic office of teaching,
is charged also with the guardianship of the deposits of faith, holds
likewise from God the right and the duty to condemn 'knowledge, falsely
so called,' 'lest any man be cheated by philosophy and vain deceit.'
Hence all the Christian faithful are not only forbidden to defend, as
legitimate conclusions of science, those opinions which are known to
be contrary to the doctrine of faith, especially when condemned by the
Church, but are rather absolutely bound to hold them for errors wearing
the deceitful appearance of truth."

THE VATICAN ANATHEMAS. "Not only is it impossible for faith and reason
ever to contradict each other, but they rather afford each other mutual
assistance. For right reason establishes the foundation of faith, and,
by the aid of its light, cultivates the science of divine things; and
faith, on the other hand, frees and preserves reason from errors, and
enriches it with knowledge of many kinds. So far, then, is the Church
from opposing the culture of human arts and sciences, that she rather
aids and promotes it in many ways. For she is not ignorant of nor does
she despise the advantages which flow from them to the life of man; on
the contrary, she acknowledges that, as they sprang from God, the Lord
of knowledge, so, if they be rightly pursued, they will, through the aid
of his grace, lead to God. Nor does she forbid any of those sciences
the use of its own principles and its own method within its own proper
sphere; but, recognizing this reasonable freedom, she takes care that
they may not, by contradicting God's teaching, fall into errors, or,
overstepping the due limits, invade or throw into confusion the domain
of faith.

"For the doctrine of faith revealed by God has not been proposed, like
some philosophical discovery, to be made perfect by human ingenuity, but
it has been delivered to the spouse of Christ as a divine deposit, to be
faithfully guarded and unerringly set forth. Hence, all tenets of holy
faith are to be explained always according to the sense and meaning of
the Church; nor is it ever lawful to depart therefrom under pretense or
color of a more enlightened explanation. Therefore, as generations and
centuries roll on, let the understanding, knowledge, and wisdom of each
and every one, of individuals and of the whole Church, grow apace and
increase exceedingly, yet only in its kind; that is to say retaining
pure and inviolate the sense and meaning and belief of the same
doctrine."

Among other canons the following were promulgated.

"Let him be anathema--

"Who denies the one true God, Creator and Lord of all things, visible
and invisible.

"Who unblushingly affirms that, besides matter, nothing else exists.

"Who says that the substance or essence of God, and of all things, is
one and the same.

"Who says that finite things, both corporeal and spiritual, or at least
spiritual things, are emanations of the divine substance; or that the
divine essence, by manifestation or development of itself, becomes all
things.

"Who does not acknowledge that the world and all things which it
contains were produced by God out of nothing.

"Who shall say that man can and ought to, of his own efforts, by means
of, constant progress, arrive, at last, at the possession of all truth
and goodness.

"Who shall refuse to receive, for sacred and canonical, the books of
Holy Scripture in their integrity, with all their parts, according as
they were enumerated by the holy Council of Trent, or shall deny that
they are Inspired by God.

"Who shall say that human reason is in such wise independent, that faith
cannot be demanded of it by God.

"Who shall say that divine revelation cannot be rendered credible by
external evidences.

"Who shall say that no miracles can be wrought, or that they can never
be known with certainty, and that the divine origin of Christianity
cannot be proved by them.

"Who shall say that divine revelation includes no mysteries, but that
all the dogmas of faith may be understood and demonstrated by reason
duly cultivated.

"Who shall say that human sciences ought to be pursued in such a spirit
of freedom that one may be allowed to hold as true their assertions,
even when opposed to revealed doctrine.

"Who shall say that it may at any time come to pass, in the progress
of science, that the doctrines set forth by the Church must be taken in
another sense than that in which the Church has ever received and yet
receives them."

THE EVANGELICAL ALLIANCE. The extraordinary and, indeed, it may be said,
arrogant assumptions contained in these decisions were far from being
received with satisfaction by educated Catholics. On the part of the
German universities there was resistance; and, when, at the close of the
year, the decrees of the Vatican Council were generally acquiesced in,
it was not through conviction of their truth, but through a disciplinary
sense of obedience.

By many of the most pious Catholics the entire movement and the results
to which it had led were looked upon with the sincerest sorrow. Pere
Hyacinthe, in a letter to the superior of his order, says: "I protest
against the divorce, as impious as it is insensate, sought to be
effected between the Church, which is our eternal mother, and the
society of the nineteenth century, of which we are the temporal
children, and toward which we have also duties and regards. It is my
most profound conviction that, if France in particular, and the Latin
race in general, are given up to social, moral, and religious anarchy,
the principal cause undoubtedly is not Catholicism itself, but the
manner in which Catholicism has for a long time been understood and
practised."

Notwithstanding his infallibility, which implies omniscience, his
Holiness did not foresee the issue of the Franco-Prussian War. Had the
prophetical talent been vouchsafed to him, he would have detected the
inopportuneness of the acts of his Council. His request to the King of
Prussia for military aid to support his temporal power was denied. The
excommunicated King of Italy, as we have seen, took possession of Rome.
A bitter papal encyclical, strangely contrasting with the courteous
politeness of modern state-papers, was issued, November 1, 1870,
denouncing the acts of the Piedmontese court, "which had followed the
counsel of the sects of perdition." In this his Holiness declares that
he is in captivity, and that he will have no agreement with Belial. He
pronounces the greater excommunication, with censures and penalties,
against his antagonists, and prays for "the intercession of the
immaculate Virgin Mary, mother of God, and that of the blessed apostles
Peter and Paul."

Of the various Protestant denominations, several had associated
themselves, for the purposes of consultation, under the designation of
the Evangelical Alliance. Their last meeting was held in New York, in
the autumn of 1873. Though, in this meeting, were gathered together many
pious representatives of the Reformed Churches, European and American,
it had not the prestige nor the authority of the Great Council that had
just previously closed its sessions in St. Peters, at Rome. It could
not appeal to an unbroken ancestry of far more than a thousand years;
it could not speak with the authority of an equal and, indeed, of
a superior to emperors and kings. While profound intelligence and a
statesmanlike, worldly wisdom gleamed in every thing that the Vatican
Council had done, the Evangelical Alliance met without a clear and
precise view of its objects, without any definitely-marked intentions.
Its wish was to draw into closer union the various Protestant Churches,
but it had no well-grounded hope of accomplishing that desirable result.
It illustrated the necessary working, of the principle on which
those Churches originated. They were founded on dissent and exist by
separation.

Yet in the action of the Evangelical Alliance may be discerned
certain very impressive facts. It averted its eyes from its ancient
antagonist--that antagonist which had so recently loaded the Reformation
with contumely and denunciation--it fastened them, as the Vatican
Council had done, on Science. Under that dreaded name there stood before
it what seemed to be a spectre of uncertain form, of hourly-dilating
proportions, of threatening aspect. Sometimes the Alliance addressed
this stupendous apparition in words of courtesy, sometimes in tones of
denunciation.

THE VATICAN CONSTITUTION CRITICISED. The Alliance failed to perceive
that modern Science is the legitimate sister--indeed, it is the
twin-sister--of the Reformation. They were begotten together and
were born together. It failed to perceive that, though there is an
impossibility of bringing into coalition the many conflicting sects,
they may all find in science a point of connection; and that, not a
distrustful attitude toward it, but a cordial union with it, is their
true policy.

It remains now to offer some reflections on this "Constitution of the
Catholic Faith," as defined by the Vatican Council.

For objects to present themselves under identical relations to different
persons, they must be seen from the same point of view. In the instance
we are now considering, the religious man has his own especial station;
the scientific man another, a very different one. It is not for either
to demand that his co-observer shall admit that the panorama of facts
spread before them is actually such as it appears to him to be.

The Dogmatic Constitution insists on the admission of this postulate,
that the Roman Church acts under a divine commission, specially and
exclusively delivered to it. In virtue of that great authority, it
requires of all men the surrender of their intellectual convictions, and
of all nations the subordination of their civil power.

But a claim so imposing must be substantiated by the most decisive and
unimpeachable credentials; proofs, not only of an implied and indirect
kind, but clear, emphatic, and to the point; proofs that it would be
impossible to call in question.

The Church, however, declares, that she will not submit her claim to
the arbitrament of human reason; she demands that it shall be at once
conceded as an article of faith.

If this be admitted, all bar requirements must necessarily be assented
to, no matter how exorbitant they may be.

With strange inconsistency the Dogmatic Constitution deprecates reason,
affirming that it cannot determine the points under consideration, and
yet submits to it arguments for adjudication. In truth, it might be said
that the whole composition is a passionate plea to Reason to stultify
itself in favor of Roman Christianity.

With points of view so widely asunder, it is impossible that Religion
and Science should accord in their representation of things. Nor can
any conclusion in common be reached, except by an appeal to Reason as a
supreme and final judge.

There are many religions in the world, some of them of more venerable
antiquity, some having far more numerous adherents, than the Roman. How
can a selection be made among them, except by such an appeal to Reason?
Religion and Science must both submit their claims and their dissensions
to its arbitrament.

Against this the Vatican Council protests. It exalts faith to a
superiority over reason; it says that they constitute two separate
orders of knowledge, having respectively for their objects mysteries
and facts. Faith deals with mysteries, reason with facts. Asserting the
dominating superiority of faith, it tries to satisfy the reluctant mind
with miracles and prophecies.

On the other hand, Science turns away from the incomprehensible, and
rests herself on the maxim of Wiclif: "God forceth not a man to believe
that which he cannot understand." In the absence of an exhibition of
satisfactory credentials on the part of her opponent, she considers
whether there be in the history of the papacy, and in the biography of
the popes, any thing that can adequately sustain a divine commission,
any thing that can justify pontifical infallibility, or extort that
unhesitating obedience which is due to the vice-God.

One of the most striking and yet contradictory features of the Dogmatic
Constitution is, the reluctant homage it pays to the intelligence of
man. It presents a definition of the philosophical basis of Catholicism,
but it veils from view the repulsive features of the vulgar faith. It
sets forth the attributes of God, the Creator of all things, in words
fitly designating its sublime conception, but it abstains from affirming
that this most awful and eternal Being was born of an earthly mother,
the wife of a Jewish carpenter, who has since become the queen of
heaven. The God it depicts is not the God of the middle ages, seated
on his golden throne, surrounded by choirs of angels, but the God of
Philosophy. The Constitution has nothing to say about the Trinity,
nothing of the worship due to the Virgin--on the contrary, that is by
implication sternly condemned; nothing about transubstantiation, or
the making of the flesh and blood of God by the priest; nothing of the
invocation of the saints. It bears on its face subordination to the
thought of the age, the impress of the intellectual progress of man.

THE PASSAGE OF EUROPE TO LLAMAISM. Such being the exposition rendered to
us respecting the attributes of God, it next instructs us as to his
mode of government of the world. The Church asserts that she possesses a
supernatural control over all material and moral events. The priesthood,
in its various grades, can determine issues of the future, either by the
exercise of its inherent attributes, or by its influential invocation of
the celestial powers. To the sovereign pontiff it has been given to bind
or loose at his pleasure. It is unlawful to appeal from his judgments
to an Oecumenical Council, as if to an earthly arbiter superior to him.
Powers such as these are consistent with arbitrary rule, but they are
inconsistent with the government of the world by immutable law. Hence
the Dogmatic Constitution plants itself firmly in behalf of incessant
providential interventions; it will not for a moment admit that in
natural things there is an irresistible sequence of events, or in the
affairs of men an unavoidable course of acts.

But has not the order of civilization in all parts of the world been the
same? Does not the growth of society resemble individual growth? Do not
both exhibit to us phases of youth, of maturity, of decrepitude? To
a person who has carefully considered the progressive civilization of
groups of men in regions of the earth far apart, who has observed the
identical forms under which that advancing civilization has manifested
itself, is it not clear that the procedure is determined by law? The
religious ideas of the Incas of Peru and the emperors of Mexico, and the
ceremonials of their court-life, were the same as those in Europe--the
same as those in Asia. The current of thought had been the same. A swarm
of bees carried to some distant land will build its combs and regulate
its social institutions as other unknown swarms would do, and so with
separated and disconnected swarms of men. So invariable is this sequence
of thought and act, that there are philosophers who, transferring the
past example offered by Asiatic history to the case of Europe, would
not hesitate to sustain the proposition--given a bishop of Rome and some
centuries, and you will have an infallible pope: given an infallible
pope and a little more time, and you will have Llamaism--Llamaism to
which Asia has long, ago attained.

As to the origin of corporeal and spiritual things, the Dogmatic
Constitution adds a solemn emphasis to its declarations, by
anathematizing all those who hold the doctrine of emanation, or who
believe that visible Nature is only a manifestation of the Divine
Essence. In this its authors had a task of no ordinary difficulty before
them. They must encounter those formidable ideas, whether old or new,
which in our times are so strongly forcing themselves on thoughtful men.
The doctrine of the conservation and correlation of Force yields as its
logical issue the time-worn Oriental emanation theory; the doctrines of
Evolution and Development strike at that of successive creative acts.
The former rests on the fundamental principle that the quantity of
force in the universe is invariable. Though that quantity can neither be
increased nor diminished, the forms under which Force expresses itself
may be transmuted into each other. As yet this doctrine has not received
complete scientific demonstration, but so numerous and so cogent are the
arguments adduced in its behalf, that it stands in an imposing, almost
in an authoritative attitude. Now, the Asiatic theory of emanation and
absorption is seen to be in harmony with this grand idea. It does not
hold that, at the conception of a human being, a soul is created by
God out of nothing and given to it, but that a portion of the already
existing, the divine, the universal intelligence, is imparted, and, when
life is over, this returns to and is absorbed in the general source from
which it originally came. The authors of the Constitution forbid these
ideas to be held, under pain of eternal punishment.

In like manner they dispose of the doctrines of Evolution and
Development, bluntly insisting that the Church believes in distinct
creative acts. The doctrine that every living form is derived from some
preceding form is scientifically in a much more advanced position than
that concerning Force, and probably may be considered as established,
whatever may become of the additions with which it has recently been
overlaid.

In her condemnation of the Reformation, the Church carries into effect
her ideas of the subordination of reason to faith. In her eyes the
Reformation is an impious heresy, leading to the abyss of pantheism,
materialism, and atheism, and tending to overthrow the very foundations
of human society. She therefore would restrain those "restless spirits"
who, following Luther, have upheld the "right of every man to interpret
the Scriptures for himself." She asserts that it is a wicked error to
admit Protestants to equal political privileges with Catholics, and that
to coerce them and suppress them is a sacred duty; that it is abominable
to permit them to establish educational institutions. Gregory XVI.
denounced freedom of conscience as an insane folly, and the freedom of
the press a pestilent error, which cannot be sufficiently detested.

But how is it possible to recognize an inspired and infallible oracle on
the Tiber, when it is remembered that again and again successive popes
have contradicted each other; that popes have denounced councils, and
councils have denounced popes; that the Bible of Sixtus V. had so many
admitted errors--nearly two thousand--that its own authors had to recall
it? How is it possible for the children of the Church to regard as
"delusive errors" the globular form of the earth, her position as a
planet in the solar system, her rotation on her axis, her movement round
the sun? How can they deny that there are antipodes, and other worlds
than ours? How can they believe that the world was made out of nothing,
completed in a week, finished just as we see it now; that it has
undergone no change, but that its parts have worked so indifferently as
to require incessant interventions?

THE ERRORS OF ECCLESIASTICISM. When Science is thus commanded to
surrender her intellectual convictions, may she not ask the ecclesiastic
to remember the past? The contest respecting the figure of the earth,
and the location of heaven and hell, ended adversely to him. He affirmed
that the earth is an extended plane, and that the sky is a firmament,
the floor of heaven, through which again and again persons have been
seen to ascend. The globular form demonstrated beyond any possibility
of contradiction by astronomical facts, and by the voyage of Magellan's
ship, he then maintained that it is the central body of the universe,
all others being in subordination to it, and it the grand object of
God's regard. Forced from this position, he next affirmed that it is
motionless, the sun and the stars actually revolving, as they apparently
do, around it. The invention of the telescope proved that here again
he was in error. Then he maintained that all the motions of the solar
system are regulated by providential intervention; the "Principia"
of Newton demonstrated that they are due to irresistible law. He then
affirmed that the earth and all the celestial bodies were created about
six thousand years ago, and that in six days the order of Nature was
settled, and plants and animals in their various tribes introduced.
Constrained by the accumulating mass of adverse evidence, he enlarged
his days into periods of indefinite length--only, however, to find that
even this device was inadequate. The six ages, with their six special
creations, could no longer be maintained, when it was discovered that
species, slowly emerged in one age, reached a culmination in a second,
and gradually died out in a third: this overlapping from age to age
would not only have demanded creations, but re-creations also. He
affirmed that there had been a deluge, which covered the whole earth
above the tops of the highest mountains, and that the waters of this
flood were removed by a wind. Correct ideas respecting the dimensions
of the atmosphere, and of the sea, and of the operation of evaporation,
proved how untenable these statements are. Of the progenitors of the
human race, he declared that they had come from their Maker's hand
perfect, both in body and mind, and had subsequently experienced a fall.
He is now considering how best to dispose of the evidence continually
accumulating respecting the savage condition of prehistoric man.

Is it at all surprising that the number of those who hold the opinions
of the Church in light esteem should so rapidly increase? How can that
be received as a trustworthy guide in the invisible, which falls into so
many errors in the visible? How can that give confidence in the moral,
the spiritual, which has so signally failed in the physical? It is not
possible to dispose of these conflicting facts as "empty shadows," "vain
devices," "fictions coming from knowledge falsely so called," "errors
wearing the deceitful appearance of truth," as the Church stigmatizes
them. On the contrary, they are stern witnesses, bearing emphatic
and unimpeachable testimony against the ecclesiastical claim to
infallibility, and fastening a conviction of ignorance and blindness
upon her.

Convicted of so many errors, the papacy makes no attempt at explanation.
It ignores the whole matter Nay, more, relying on the efficacy
of audacity, though confronted by these facts, it lays claim to
infallibility.

SEPARATION OF CATHOLICISM AND CIVILIZATION. But, to the pontiff, no
other rights can be conceded than those he can establish at the bar of
Reason. He cannot claim infallibility in religious affairs, and
decline it in scientific. Infallibility embraces all things. It implies
omniscience. If it holds good for theology, it necessarily holds good
for science. How is it possible to coordinate the infallibility of the
papacy with the well-known errors into which it has fallen?

Does it not, then, become needful to reject the claim of the papacy
to the employment of coercion in the maintenance of its opinions; to
repudiate utterly the declaration that "the Inquisition is an urgent
necessity in view of the unbelief of the present age," and in the name
of human nature to protest loudly against the ferocity and terrorism of
that institution? Has not conscience inalienable rights?

An impassable and hourly-widening gulf intervenes between Catholicism
and the spirit of the age. Catholicism insists that blind faith is
superior to reason; that mysteries are of more importance than facts.
She claims to be the sole interpreter of Nature and revelation, the
supreme arbiter of knowledge; she summarily rejects all modern criticism
of the Scriptures, and orders the Bible to be accepted in accordance
with the views of the theologians of Trent; she openly avows her hatred
of free institutions and constitutional systems, and declares that those
are in damnable error who regard the reconciliation of the pope with
modern civilization as either possible or desirable.

SCIENCE AND PROTESTANTISM. But the spirit of the age demands--is the
human intellect to be subordinated to the Tridentine Fathers, or to the
fancy of illiterate and uncritical persons who wrote in the earlier ages
of the Church? It sees no merit in blind faith, but rather distrusts it.
It looks forward to an improvement in the popular canon of credibility
for a decision between fact and fiction. It does not consider itself
bound to believe fables and falsehoods that have been invented for
ecclesiastical ends. It finds no argument in behalf of their truth, that
traditions and legends have been long-lived; in this respect, those of
the Church are greatly inferior to the fables of paganism. The longevity
of the Church itself is not due to divine protection or intervention,
but to the skill with which it has adapted its policy to existing
circumstances. If antiquity be the criterion of authenticity, the claims
of Buddhism must be respected; it has the superior warrant of many
centuries. There can be no defense of those deliberate falsifications of
history, that concealment of historical facts, of which the Church has
so often taken advantage. In these things the end does not justify the
means.

Then has it in truth come to this, that Roman Christianity and Science
are recognized by their respective adherents as being absolutely
incompatible; they cannot exist together; one must yield to the other;
mankind must make its choice--it cannot have both.

SCIENCE AND FAITH. While such is, perhaps, the issue as regards
Catholicism, a reconciliation of the Reformation with Science is not
only possible, but would easily take place, if the Protestant Churches
would only live up to the maxim taught by Luther, and established by so
many years of war. That maxim is, the right of private interpretation of
the Scriptures. It was the foundation of intellectual liberty. But, if
a personal interpretation of the book of Revelation is permissible,
how can it be denied in the case of the book of Nature? In the
misunderstandings that have taken place, we must ever bear in mind
the infirmities of men. The generations that immediately followed
the Reformation may perhaps be excused for not comprehending the full
significance of their cardinal principle, and for not on all occasions
carrying it into effect. When Calvin caused Servetus, to be burnt, he
was animated, not by the principles of the Reformation, but by those
of Catholicism, from which he had not been able to emancipate himself
completely. And when the clergy of influential Protestant confessions
have stigmatized the investigators of Nature as infidels and atheists,
the same may be said. For Catholicism to reconcile itself to Science,
there are formidable, perhaps insuperable obstacles in the way. For
Protestantism to achieve that great result there are not. In the one
case there is a bitter, a mortal animosity to be overcome; in the other,
a friendship, that misunderstandings have alienated, to be restored.

CIVILIZATION AND RELIGION. But, whatever may be the preparatory
incidents of that great impending intellectual crisis which Christendom
must soon inevitably witness, of this we may rest assured, that the
silent secession from the public faith, which in so ominous a manner
characterizes the present generation, will find at length political
expression. It is not without significance that France reenforces the
ultramontane tendencies of her lower population, by the promotion of
pilgrimages, the perpetration of miracles, the exhibition of celestial
apparitions. Constrained to do this by her destiny, she does it with
a blush. It is not without significance that Germany resolves to rid
herself of the incubus of a dual government, by the exclusion of the
Italian element, and to carry to its completion that Reformation which
three centuries ago she left unfinished. The time approaches when
men must take their choice between quiescent, immobile faith and
ever-advancing Science--faith, with its mediaeval consolations, Science,
which is incessantly scattering its material blessings in the pathway
of life, elevating the lot of man in this world, and unifying the
human race. Its triumphs are solid and enduring. But the glory which
Catholicism might gain from a conflict with material ideas is at the
best only like that of other celestial meteors when they touch the
atmosphere of the earth--transitory and useless.

Though Guizot's affirmation that the Church has always sided with
despotism is only too true, it must be remembered that in the policy
she follows there is much of political necessity. She is urged on by
the pressure of nineteen centuries. But, if the irresistible indicates
itself in her action, the inevitable manifests itself in her life. For
it is with the papacy as with a man. It has passed through the struggles
of infancy, it has displayed the energies of maturity, and, its work
completed, it must sink into the feebleness and querulousness of old
age. Its youth can never be renewed. The influence of its souvenirs
alone will remain. As pagan Rome threw her departing shadow over the
empire and tinctured all its thoughts, so Christian Rome casts her
parting shadow over Europe.

INADMISSIBLE CLAIMS OF CATHOLICISM. Will modern civilization consent to
abandon the career of advancement which has given it so much power and
happiness? Will it consent to retrace its steps to the semi-barbarian
ignorance and superstition of the middle ages? Will it submit to the
dictation of a power, which, claiming divine authority, can present
no adequate credentials of its office; a power which kept Europe in a
stagnant condition for many centuries, ferociously suppressing by the
stake and the sword every attempt at progress; a power that is founded
in a cloud of mysteries; that sets itself above reason and common-sense;
that loudly proclaims the hatred it entertains against liberty of
thought and freedom in civil institutions; that professes its intention
of repressing the one and destroying the other whenever it can find the
opportunity; that denounces as most pernicious and insane the opinion
that liberty of conscience and of worship is the right of every man;
that protests against that right being proclaimed and asserted by law in
every well-governed state; that contemptuously repudiates the principle
that the will of the people, manifested by public opinion (as it is
called) or by other means, shall constitute law; that refuses to every
man any title to opinion in matters of religion, but holds that it is
simply his duty to believe what he is told by the Church, and to obey
her commands; that will not permit any temporal government to define
the rights and prescribe limits to the authority of the Church;
that declares it not only may but will resort to force to discipline
disobedient individuals; that invades the sanctify of private life, by
making, at the confessional, the wife and daughters and servants of one
suspected, spies and informers against him; that tries him without an
accuser, and by torture makes him bear witness against himself; that
denies the right of parents to educate their children outside of its own
Church, and insists that to it alone belongs the supervision of domestic
life and the control of marriages and divorces; that denounces "the
impudence" of those who presume to subordinate the authority of the
Church to the civil authority, or who advocate the separation of the
Church from the state; that absolutely repudiates all toleration, and
affirms that the Catholic religion is entitled to be held as the only
religion in every country, to the exclusion of all other modes of
worship; that requires all laws standing in the way of its interests
to be repealed, and, if that be refused, orders all its followers to
disobey them?

ISSUE OF THE CONFLICT. This power, conscious that it can work no miracle
to serve itself, does not hesitate to disturb society by its intrigues
against governments, and seeks to accomplish its ends by alliances with
despotism.

Claims such as these mean a revolt against modern civilization, an
intention of destroying it, no matter at what social cost. To submit to
them without resistance, men must be slaves indeed!

As to the issue of the coming conflict, can any one doubt? Whatever
is resting on fiction and fraud will be overthrown. Institutions that
organize impostures and spread delusions must show what right they have
to exist. Faith must render an account of herself to Reason. Mysteries
must give place to facts. Religion must relinquish that imperious, that
domineering position which she has so long maintained against Science.
There must be absolute freedom for thought. The ecclesiastic must learn
to keep himself within the domain he has chosen, and cease to tyrannize
over the philosopher, who, conscious of his own strength and the purity
of his motives, will bear such interference no longer. What was
written by Esdras near the willow-fringed rivers of Babylon, more than
twenty-three centuries ago, still holds good: "As for Truth it endureth
and is always strong; it liveth and conquereth for evermore."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Conflict Between
Religion and Science, by John William Draper

