V

"PRACTICAL REASON" OR MORALITY


+(a) The Wise and Reasonable.+

The understanding of the method of science, the understanding of the
mind, is destined to solve all the problems of religion and philosophy,
to explain thoroughly all the great and small riddles, and thus fully to
restore research to its mission of empirically studying details. If we
are aware that it is a law of reason to require some perceptible
material, some cause, for its operation, then the question regarding the
first or general cause becomes superfluous. Human understanding is then
seen to be first and last cause of all concrete causes. If we understand
that it is a law of reason to require for its operation some given
object, some beginning at which to start, then the question of the first
beginning must necessarily become inane. If we understand that reason
derives abstract units out of concrete multiplicities, that it
constructs truth out of phenomena, substance out of attributes, that it
perceives all things as parts of a whole, as individuals of some genus,
as qualities of some object, then the question regarding a "thing
itself," a something which in reality is back of all things, must needs
become irrelevant. In brief, the understanding of the interdependence of
reason reveals the unreasonableness of the demand for independent
reason.

Now, although the main object of metaphysics, the cause of all causes,
the beginning of all beginnings, the nature of things, causes little
inconvenience to modern science, and even though the needs of the
present have overcome the leaning for speculation, this practical
downfall of speculation does not suffice for the solution of its
problems. So long as the theoretical law is not understood, according to
which reason requires some concrete object for its operation, there is
no hope of abandoning objectless thought, this malpractice of
speculative philosophy, which pretends to generate knowledge without
intercourse with objective reality. Our naturalists demonstrate this
very clearly as soon as they turn from their tangible specialties to
abstract things. The dispute over questions of life's wisdom, of
morality, or the quarrel over the wise, good, right, or bad, reveals
that here is the boundary of scientific agreement. The scientific
explorers of the exact sciences abandon every day their inductive method
when dealing with social problems, and stray off into the regions of
speculative philosophy. Just as in physics they believe in imperceptible
physical truths, in "things themselves," so in social matters they
believe in the reasonable, wise, right, or bad, in the sense of "things
themselves," of absolute phases of life, of unconditional conditions. It
is here where the outcome of our studies, of the critique of pure
reason, must be applied.

In recognizing that consciousness, the nature of understanding, the
mental activity in its general form, consists in developing general
concepts out of concrete objects, we circumscribe this insight by
stating that reason develops its understanding out of contradictions.
It is the nature of the mind to perceive, in given phenomena of
different dimensions and different duration, the nature of things by
their semblance, and their semblance by their nature; to distinguish in
wants of various degrees the most essential and necessary from the less
pressing; to measure within a certain circle of magnitudes the large by
the small and the small by the large, or in other words to compare the
contrasts of the world with one another, to harmonize them by
explanation. Common parlance instinctively calls understanding judging;
judging requires a certain standard. Just as surely as we cannot
perceive any objects which are "in themselves" great or small, hard or
soft, clear or dark, just as surely as these terms denote certain
relations and require a certain standard by which their relations can be
determined, even so does reason require a certain standard for the
determination of that which is reasonable.

The fact that we consider certain actions, institutions, conceptions,
maxims of other periods, nations, or persons unreasonable is simply due
to the application of a different standard, because we ignore the
premises, the conditions, which cause another's reason to differ from
our own. Men who differ in their mental estimates, in their
understanding of things, may be likened to the thermometers of Reaumur
and Celsius, one of which designates the boiling point by 80 and the
other by 100. A different standard is the cause of this different
result. On the so-called moral field there is no scientific agreement,
such as we enjoy in some physical matters, because we lack the uniform
standard which natural science has long since found. It is still
attempted to perceive the reasonable, good, right, etc., without
empirical data, by speculative reasoning without experience. Speculation
seeks the cause of all causes, the immeasurable cause; truth "itself,"
the unconditional and standardless truth; the unlimited good, the
unboundedly reasonable, etc. The absence of a standard is the essence of
speculation, and its practice is characterized by unlimited
inconsistency and disagreement. If there are followers of certain
positive religions who agree in the matter of morals, they owe this to
the positive standard which certain dogmas, doctrines and commandments
have given them. But if any one tries to perceive things by "pure"
reason, the dependence of this reason on some standard will be
demonstrated by its "impure," that is to say individual, perceptions.

Sense perception is the standard of truth, or of science in general. The
phenomena of the outside world are the standard of physical truths, and
man with his many wants is the standard of moral truth. The actions of
man are determined by his wants. Thirst teaches him to drink, need to
pray. Wants are regulated in the South by southern conditions, in the
North by northern conditions. Wants rule time and space, nations and
individuals. They induce the savage to hunt and the gourmand to indulge.
Human wants give to reason a standard for judging what is good, right,
bad, reasonable, etc. Whatever satisfies our need is good, the opposite
is bad. The physical feeling of man is the object of moral standards,
the object of "practical reason." The contradictory variety of human
needs is the basis for the contradictory variety of moral standards.
Because a member of a feudal guild prospered in a restricted
competition, and a modern knight of industry in free competition,
because their interests differ, therefore their views differ, and the
one justly considers an institution as unreasonable which the other
regards as reasonable. If the intellect of some person attempts to
define by mere introspection the standard of reasonableness as a general
thing, this person makes himself or herself the standard of humanity. If
reason is credited with the faculty of finding within itself the source
of moral truth, it commits the speculative mistake of attempting to
produce understanding without perceptible objects. The same mistake is
to blame for the idea that man is subordinate to the authority of
reason, for the demand that man submit to the dictates of reason. This
idea transforms man into an attribute of reason, while in reality reason
is an attribute of man.

The question whether man depends on reason or reason on man is similar
to the one whether the citizen exists for the state or the state for the
citizen. In the last and highest instance, the citizen is the primary
fact and the state is modified according to the requirements of the
citizen. But whenever the dominant interests of the citizenship have
acquired the authority in the state, then the citizen is indeed
dependent on the state. This is saying in so many words that man is
guided in minor matters by more important ones. He sacrifices the less
important, minor, particular things to the great, essential, general
things. He subordinates his desire for more individual indulgence to his
fundamental social needs. It is not pure reason, but the reason of a
weak body or of a limited purse which teaches man to renounce the
pleasures of dissipation for the benefit of the general welfare. The
wants of the senses are the material out of which reason fashions moral
truths. To single out the essential need among different physical needs
of various degrees of intensity or extension, to separate the true from
the individual, to develop general concepts, that is the mission of
reason. The difference between the apparently and the truly reasonable
reduces itself to the difference between the special and the general.

We recall that reason requires sense perceptions for its existence and
operation, that it needs some object which it can perceive. Existence is
the condition or premise of all understanding. Just as the understanding
of true existence is the function of natural science, so the
understanding of reasonable existence is the function of wisdom. Reason
in general has the mission of understanding things as they are. As
physical science it has to understand what is true, as wisdom, what is
reasonable. And just as true may be translated by general, so reasonable
may be translated by generally appropriate to need. We saw a while ago
that a sense perception is not true "in itself," but only relatively
true, that it is called true or general only in relation to other
perceptions of lesser importance. In the same way, no human action can
be reasonable or appropriate "in itself," it can be reasonable only in
comparison with some other action which attempts to accomplish the same
purpose in a less practicable, that is an impracticable, form. Just as
the true, the general, is conditioned on the relation to some other
object, on a definite quantity of phenomena, on definite limits, so the
reasonable or practicable is based on definite conditions which make it
reasonable or unreasonable. The end in view is the measure of the
practicable. The practicable can be determined only by some definite
object that is wanted. Once this object is known, then that action is
called reasonable which accomplishes it in the fullest, most general
way, and all other actions appear unreasonable compared to it.

In view of the law which we evolved by our analysis of pure reason and
which showed that all understanding, all thought, is based on some
perceptible object, on some quantity of sense perceptions, it is evident
that everything distinguished by our faculty of distinction is a certain
quantity and that, therefore, all distinctions are only quantitative,
not absolute, only graduated, not irreconcilable. Even the difference
between the reasonable and the unreasonable, or in other words between
that which is momentarily or individually reasonable and that which is
generally reasonable, is merely a quantitative distinction, like all
others, so that the unreasonable may be conditionally reasonable, and
nothing is unreasonable but that which is supposed to be unconditionally
reasonable.

If we understand that reason requires some perceptible object, some
perceptible standard, then we shall no longer try to understand the
absolutely reasonable, the purely reasonable. We shall then limit
ourselves to look for the reasonable, as for all other things, in
concrete objects. The definite, accurate, certain, uniform result of
some understanding depends on the definite formulation of the task, on
the accurate limitation of the perceptible quantity which is to be
understood. If a certain moment, a certain person, a certain class, a
certain nation are given and at the same time an essential need, a
general and predominating purpose, then the question regarding the
reasonable or suitable is easily answered. It is true that we may also
know something of things which are generally reasonable for mankind in
the aggregate, but in that case our standard must be abstract mankind
instead of some concrete part of it. Science may study the anatomical
structure of some concrete body as well as the general type of the human
body, but this again it can do only when it supplies the faculty of
understanding with general instead of individual material. If science
divides the whole human race into four or five races, by establishing a
certain standard of physiognomy, and later on discovers some individuals
or tribes whose characters are so peculiar and rare that they cannot be
classed under any of the established races, the existence of such
exceptions is not a crime against the physical order of the world, but
merely a proof of the inadequacy of our scientific classification. If,
on the other hand, some conventional mode of thought considers a certain
action as universally reasonable or unreasonable and then encounters
opposition in actual life, convention fancies itself exempt from the
work of understanding and assumes to deny civic rights in the moral
order of the world to its opponents. Instead of realizing the limited
applicability of its rules by the existence of opposing practices,
convention seeks to establish an absolute applicability of its rules by
simply ignoring the cause of the opposition. This is a dogmatic
procedure, a negative practice, which ignores facts on the pretense
that they are irrational, but it is not a positive understanding, not an
intelligent knowledge, such as manifests itself by the conciliation of
contradictions.

If our study aims to ascertain what is universally human and reasonable,
and if these predicates are given only to actions which are reasonable
and practicable for all men, at all times, and under all conditions,
then such concepts are absolute, indeterminate, and to that extent
meaningless, indefinite generalities. We are stating such universal and
indeterminate, and therefore unimportant and unpractical concepts, when
we say that physically the whole is greater than a part, or that morally
the good is preferable to the bad. The object of reason is that which is
general, but it is the generality of some concrete object. The practice
of reason deals with individual and concrete objects, with the things
which are the opposite of the general, with special and concrete
knowledge. In order to perceive in physics whether we are dealing with a
part or with the whole object, we must handle definite and concrete
objects or phenomena. If we desire to ascertain what is morally
preferable as good or bad, we must start out with a definite quantity of
human needs. Abstract and general reason, with its socalled eternal and
absolute truths, is a phantasmagoria of ignorance which binds the rights
of the individual with crushing chains. Real and true reason is
individual, it cannot produce any other but individual perceptions, and
these perceptions cannot be generalized to any greater extent than the
general material with which they operate. Only that is universally
reasonable which is acknowledged to be so by all reasons. If the reason
of some time, class, or person is referred to as rational, and if some
other time, class or person considers it irrational; if, for instance,
the Russian noble considers serfdom a rational institution and the
English bourgeois the so-called liberty of his wage worker, both of
these institutions are not absolutely rational, but only relatively,
only in a more or less limited circle.

It is not necessary to state that I do not mean to question the great
importance of our reason by the foregoing remarks. Even though reason
cannot independently, or absolutely, discern the objects of the
speculative introspection, such as the objects of the moral world, the
true, the beautiful, the right, the bad, the reasonable, etc., it
nevertheless is well fitted to distinguish relatively, by means of
concrete sense perceptions, between general and concrete things, between
the object and its manifestation, between fundamental needs and fanciful
appetites. Although we may dispense with the belief in absolute reason
and consequently realize that there can be no absolute peace, still we
may call war an unmitigated evil when comparing it with the peaceful
interests of our time or of our class. Not until we abandon our
fruitless exploring trip after absolute truth, shall we learn to find
that which is true in space and time. It is precisely the consciousness
of the relative applicability of our knowledge which is the strongest
lever of progress. The believers in absolute truth have adopted the
monotonous diagram of "good" men and "rational" institutions as a basis
for their views of life. For this reason they oppose all human and
historical institutions which do not fit into their pattern, but which
reality nevertheless produces without regard to their brains. Absolute
truth is the arch foundation of intolerance. On the other hand tolerance
proceeds from the consciousness of the relative applicability of
"eternal truths." The understanding of pure reason leads to the
realization that the consciousness of the universal interdependence of
reason is the true road toward practical reason.


+(b) Morality and Right.+

The nature of our task limits us to the demonstration that pure reason
is a nonentity, that reason is the sum of all acts of individual
understanding, that it deals only seemingly with pure and general, but
in reality with practical, or concrete, perceptions. We have been
discussing that philosophy which pretends to be the science of pure or
absolute understanding. We found its aim to be idle, inasmuch as the
development of speculative philosophy represents a succession of
disappointments, because its unconditional or absolute systems proved to
be limited in space and time. Our presentation of the matter has
revealed the relative character of so-called eternal truths. We
perceived that reason was dependent on sense perceptions, we found that
any truth required definite limits for its determination. As regards
more especially life's wisdom, we saw that the acquired knowledge of
"pure" reason manifested itself in practice by the dependence of the
wise or the rational upon concrete sense perceptions. If we now apply
this theory to morality as such, we must be able to establish harmony
also in this field, where there is some doubt as to what is right and
wrong, by means of the scientific method.

Pagan morality is different from Christian morality. Feudal morality
differs from modern bourgeois morality as does bravery from solvency. In
brief, we need no detailed illustration to show that different times and
nations have different moralities. We have but to understand that this
change is necessary, a special characteristic of the human race and of
its historical development, and we shall then exchange the belief in
"eternal truths," which every ruling class claims to be identical with
its own selfish laws, for the scientific knowledge that absolute right
is purely a concept which we derive by means of the faculty of thought
from the various successive rights. Right as an absolute concept means
no more and no less than any other general concept, for instance, the
head in general. Every real head is a concrete one and belongs either to
man or to some other animal, it is either long or broad, narrow or wide,
in other words it has special peculiarities. But at the same time, every
concrete head has certain general qualities which are universal in all
heads, for instance the quality of being the superintendent of the body.
Moreover, every head has as many general as individual traits, it is no
more personal than it is common. The faculty of thought abstracts the
general traits from the actual concrete heads and in this way creates
the concept of the absolute head. Just as the absolute head, or _the_
head, is composed of the general qualities of all heads, so the absolute
right stands merely for the general characters of all rights. Both of
these concepts exist merely as ideas, not as objects.

Every real right is a concrete right, it is right only under certain
conditions, at definite periods, for this or that nation. "Thou shalt
not kill," is right in peace, but wrong in war; it is right for the
majority of bourgeois society that wishes to see the outbursts of
passion controlled in the interest of its own predominant needs, but
wrong for the savage who has not arrived at the period where a peaceful
and social life is appreciated, and who therefore would consider the
above commandment as an immoral restriction of his liberty. For the love
of life, murder is a detestable abomination, for revenge it is a sweet
satisfaction. In the same way robbery seems right to the robber, wrong
to the robbed. There can be no question of any absolute wrong in such
cases, only of wrong in a relative sense. An action is wrong in a
general sense only in so far as it is generally disliked. Plain robbery
is wrong in the opinion of the great majority today because our
generation takes more interest in bourgeois affairs of commerce and
industry than in the adventures of the knights of the road.

If there were such a thing as an absolutely right law, dogma, or action,
it would have to serve the welfare of all mankind under all conditions
and at all times. But human welfare is as different as men,
circumstances, and time. What is good for me is bad for another, and the
thing which may be beneficial as a rule may be injurious as an
exception. What promotes some interests in one period may interfere with
them in another. A law which would presume to be absolutely right would
have to be right for every one and at all times. No absolute morality,
no duty, no categorical imperative, no idea of _the_ good, can teach
man what is good, bad, right, or wrong. That is good which corresponds
to our needs, that is bad which is contrary to them. But is there
anything which is absolutely good? Everything and nothing. It is not the
straight timber which is good, nor the crooked. Neither is good, or
either is good, according to whether I need it or not. And since we need
all things, we can see some good in all of them. We are not limited to
any one thing. We are unlimited, universal, and need everything. Our
interests are therefore innumerable, inexpressibly great, and therefore
every law is inadequate, because it always considers only some special
welfare, some special interest. And for this reason no right is right,
or all of them are right, and it is as right to say "Thou shalt not
kill" as it is to say "Thou shalt kill."

The difference between good needs and bad needs, right wants and wrong
wants, like that between truth and error, reasonable and unreasonable,
finds its conciliation in the difference between the concrete and the
general. Reason cannot discover within itself any positive rights or
absolutely moral codes any more than any other speculative truth. It
cannot estimate how essential or unessential a thing is, or classify the
quantity of concrete and general characters, until it has some
perceptible material to work upon. The understanding of the right, or of
the moral, like all understanding, strives to single out the general
characteristics of its object. But the general is only possible within
certain defined limits, it exists only as the general qualities of some
concrete and determined perceptible object. And if any one tries to
represent some maxim, some law, some right in the light of an absolute
maxim, law or right, he forgets this necessary limitation. Absolute
right is merely a meaningless concept, and it does not assume even a
vague meaning until it is understood to stand for the right of mankind
in general. But morality, or the determination of that which is right,
has a practical purpose. Yet, if we accept the general and unconditional
right of mankind as a moral right, we necessarily miss our practical
aim. An act or a line of action which is universally or everywhere right
requires no law for its enforcement, for it will recommend itself. It is
only the determined and limited law, adapted to certain persons,
classes, nations, times, or circumstances, which has any practical
value, and it is so much more practical the more defined, exact, precise
and the less general it is.

The most universal and most widely recognized right or need is in its
quality no more rightful, better, or valuable than the most
insignificant right of the moment, than the momentary need of some
individual. Although we know that the sun is hundreds of thousands of
miles in diameter, we are nevertheless free to see it no larger than a
plate. And though we may acknowledge that some moral law is
theoretically or universally good or holy, we are free in practice to
reject it momentarily, in parts, or individually, as bad and useless.
Even the most sacred right of the most universal extent is valid only
within certain definite limits, and within particular limits an
otherwise very great wrong may be a valid right. It is true that there
is an eternal difference between assumed and true interests, between
passion and reason, between essential, predominating, general,
well-founded needs and inclinations, and accidental, subordinate,
special appetites. But this difference is not one of two separated
worlds, a world of the good and a world of the bad. It is not a
positive, general, continuous, absolute difference, but merely a
relative one. Like the difference between beautiful and homely, it
depends on the individuality of the person who distinguishes. That which
is a true and fundamental need in one case, is a secondary, subordinate,
and wrong desire in another.

_Morality is the aggregate of the most contradictory ethical laws which
serve the common purpose of regulating the conduct of man toward himself
and others in such a way that the future is considered as well as the
present, the one as well as the other, the individual as well as the
genus. The individual man finds himself lacking, inadequate, limited in
many ways. He requires for his complement other people, society, and
must therefore live and let live. The mutual concessions which arise out
of these relative needs are called morality._

The inadequacy of the single individual, the need of association, is the
basis and cause of man's consideration for his neighbor, of morality.
Now since the one who feels this need, man, is necessarily an
individual, it follows that his need must likewise be individual and
more or less intensive. And since my neighbors are necessarily different
from me, it requires different considerations to meet their needs.
Concrete man needs a concrete morality. Just as abstract and meaningless
as the concept of mankind in general is that of absolute morality, and
the ethical laws derived from this vague idea are quite as unpractical
and unsuccessful. Man is a living personality, whose welfare and
purpose is embodied within himself, who has between himself and the
world nothing but his needs as a mediator, who owes no allegiance to any
law whatever from the moment that it contravenes his needs. The moral
duty of an individual never exceeds his interests. The only thing which
exceeds those interests is the _material power_ of the generality over
the individuality.

If we regard it as the function of reason to ascertain that which is
morally right, a uniform scientific result may be produced if we agree
at the outset on the persons, conditions, or limits within which the
universal moral right is to be determined; in other words, we may
accomplish something practical if we drop the idea of absolute right and
search for definite rights applicable to well-defined purposes by
clearly stating our problem. The contradiction in the various standards
of morality, and the many opposing solutions of this contradiction, are
due to a misunderstanding of the problem. To look for right without a
given quantity of sense perceptions, without some definite working
material, is an act of speculative reason which pretends to explore
nature without the use of senses. The attempt to arrive at a positive
determination of morality by pure perception and pure reason is a
manifestation of the philosophical faith in understanding _a priori_.

"It is true," said Macaulay in his History of England, in speaking of
the rebellion against the lawless and cruel government of James II.,
"that to trace the exact boundary between rightful and wrongful
resistance is impossible: but this impossibility arises from the nature
of right and wrong, and is found in every part of ethical science. A
good action is not distinguished from a bad action by marks so plain as
those which distinguish a hexagon from a square. There is a frontier
where virtue and vice fade into each other. Who has ever been able to
define the exact boundary between courage and rashness, between prudence
and cowardice, between frugality and avarice, between liberality and
prodigality? Who has ever been able to say how far mercy to offenders
ought to be carried, and where it ceases to deserve the name of mercy
and becomes a pernicious weakness?"

It is not the impossibility of accurately determining this limit to
which the nature of the difference between right and wrong, in the sense
of Macaulay, is due. It is rather due to the vague thought which
believes in an unlimited right, in absolute virtues and faults, which
has not risen to the understanding that the terms good, brave, right,
and bad are valid always and everywhere only in relation to some
concrete individual who reasons, and that they have no validity in
themselves. Courage is foolhardiness in the eyes of the cautious, and
caution is cowardice in the opinion of the daring. The revolt against
existing governments is always right in the eyes of the rebels, always
wrong in the opinion of the attacked. No action can be absolutely right
or wrong.

The same qualities of man are good or bad, according to his needs and
their uses, according to time and place. Here trickery, slyness, and bad
faith prevail, there loyally, frankness and straightforwardness. Here
compassion and charity serve their purpose and promote welfare, there
ruthless and bloody severity. The quantity, the more or less beneficial
effect of a human quality, determines the difference between virtue and
vice.

Reason can distinguish between right and wrong, virtue and vice, only to
the extent that it can measure the relative quantity of right in any
faculty, rule, or action. No categorical imperative, no ethical code,
can serve as a basis for the real practical right. On the contrary,
ethics finds its justification in the actual righteousness of
perceptible objects. For general reason, frankness is not a better
quality than slyness. Frankness is preferable to slyness only inasmuch
as it is quantitatively, that is to say, more frequently, better, and
more generally appreciated than slyness. It follows that a science of
right can serve as a guide in practice only to the extent that practice
has served as a basis for science. Reason cannot determine the action of
man beforehand, because it can only experience, but not anticipate
reality, because every man, every situation, is new, original, exists
for the first time, and because the possibilities of reason are confined
to understanding _a posteriori_.

Absolute right, or right in itself, is an imagined right, is a
speculative desire. A scientifically universal right requires certain
definite and perceptible premises which form the basis of the
determination of the general. Science is not a dogmatic infallibility
which may say: This or that is right, because it is so understood.
Science requires for its perceptions some external object. It can
perceive right only if it rightly exists. The universal existence is the
material, premise, condition, and cause of science.

From the foregoing follows the postulate that morality must be studied
inductively or scientifically, not speculatively by the method of
traditional philosophy. We must not attempt to study absolute, but only
relative rights, only rights based on certain premises, and only this
can be the moral problem of reason. Thus the belief in a moral order of
the world is dissolved in the consciousness of human freedom. The
understanding of reason, of knowledge, of science, includes the
understanding of the limited validity of all ethical maxims.

Whatever impressed man as salutary, valuable, divine, was exhibited by
him in the tabernacle of faith as the most venerable thing. The Egyptian
worshipped the cat, the Christian venerates the divine providence. So,
when his needs led him to live a well-regulated life, the benefits of
the law inspired him with such a high opinion of its noble origin that
he adopted his own handiwork as a gift of heaven. The invention of the
mouse-trap or other useful appliances pushed the cat out of its exalted
position. Whenever man becomes his own master, takes care of himself,
and provides for himself, then all other providences become useless, and
his own mastership makes all superior tutelage unbearable. Man is a
jealous creature. Ruthlessly he subordinates everything to his own
interests, even God and His commandments. No matter how great or
venerable an authority any code may have acquired by long and faithful
service, as soon as new needs oppose it, they degrade the divine
authority to the ranks of human law and transform ancient right into
modern wrong. The Christian frivolity refused to respect the threat of
physical retribution which the Hebrew had anointed as an authority in
moral questions and revered under the maxim: Eye for eye, tooth for
tooth. The Christian had learned to cherish the blessings of
peacefulness; he carried submissive tolerance into the holy land, and
decorated the vacant tabernacle with the gentle injunction to offer the
left cheek when the right was tired of cuffs. In our times which are
Christian in name, but very anti-Christian in deeds, the long venerated
tolerance has long gone out of use.

Just as every religion has its own peculiar God, so every time has its
own peculiar right. To this extent, religion and morality are in harmony
with the worship of their sanctum. But they become arrogant upstarts
whenever they assume to exceed their natural boundaries, whenever they
attempt to saddle upon all circumstances, under the pretense of offering
something incomparable, absolute, permanent, that which is divine and
right at certain times and under definite conditions; whenever they
proclaim a successful remedy for their own peculiar disease as a
universal patent medicine for all diseases; whenever they overbearingly
forget their descent. A law is originally dictated by some individual
need, and then mankind with its universal needs is supposed to balance
itself on the thin rope of this one rule. Originally that which is
really good is right, and thereafter only some decreed right is supposed
to be really good. That is the unbearable arrogance. Ordained right is
not satisfied to serve as the right of this time, this nation or
country, this class or caste. It wants to dominate the whole world,
wants to be absolute right, just as if a certain pill could be absolute
medicine, could be good for everything. It is the mission of progress to
repulse this assumption, to pluck this peacock feather out of the tail
of the rooster, by leading mankind on beyond the boundaries prescribed
by ordained law, by extending the world for him, by conquering for his
cramped interests a wider liberty. The migration from Palestine to
Europe where the consumption of pork does not cause leprosy emancipates
our natural freedom from a once divine restriction by making it
irrelevant. But progress does not deprive one God of his shoulder straps
for the purpose of decorating some other God with them. That would
merely be an exchange, not an acquirement. Evolution does not drive the
saints of tradition out of the country; it simply retires them from the
wrongfully occupied field of universality into their peculiar
boundaries. Progress picks up the child and then pours the water out of
the bath tub. Though the cat may have lost its aureole and ceased to be
a God, it does not give up catching mice; and though the Jewish rules
for bodily cleanliness at certain definite times have long been
forgotten, a clean body is still highly respected. The present wealth of
civilization is due only to the economical administration of the
acquirements of the past. Evolution is as much conservative as it is
revolutionary, and it finds as much wrong as right in every law.

It is true that the believers in absolute duty scent a difference
between moral and legal right. But their self-interested narrowness does
not permit them to realize that every law is originally moral and that
every special morality is gradually reduced to the level of a mere law.
Their understanding reaches into other times and other classes, but does
not reach their own time and class. The laws of the Chinese and
Samoyeds are understood to refer to the peculiar requirements of those
people. But the rules of bourgeois society are supposed to be far more
sublime. Our present day institutions and moral codes are either
regarded as eternal truths of nature or reason, or as permanent oracular
expressions of a pure conscience. Just as if the barbarian did not have
a barbarian reason; as if the Turk did not have a Turkish conscience and
the Hebrew a Hebrew one; as if man could follow the dictates of some
absolute conscience, instead of the conscience being conditioned on the
man.

Whoever limits the purpose of man to the love and service of God, and to
eternal blessedness hereafter, may devoutly recognize the traditions of
abstract morality as authoritative and guide himself accordingly. But
whoever regards development, education, and blessedness on earth as
man's life purpose, will not think that the questioning of the assumed
superiority of traditional morals is irrelevant. It is only the
consciousness of individual freedom which creates sufficient unconcern
for the rules made by others to permit a brave advance, which
emancipates us from the striving for an illusory absolute ideal, for
some "best world," and which restores us to the definite practical
interests of our time and personality. At the same time we are thus
reconciled with the world as it really is, because we no longer regard
it as the unsuccessful realization of that which ought to be, but rather
as the systematization of that which cannot but be. The world is always
right. Whatever exists, is right and is not fated to be otherwise until
it changes. Wherever there is existence, which is power, there is also
right without any further condition, because it is right in a formative
stage. Weakness has no other right than that of striving for supremacy
and then enforcing a recognition of its long denied needs. The study of
history shows us not only the negative and ridiculous side of the
religions, customs, institutions and ideas of the past, but also their
positive, reasonable and necessary side. It explains to us, for
instance, that the deification of animals was due to an enthusiastic
recognition of their usefulness. And so the study of history shows not
alone the inadequacy of the things of the present, but also demonstrates
that they are the reasonable and necessary conclusions from the premises
of previous stages.


+(c) The Holy.+

In the well-known statement: The end sanctifies the means, the developed
theory of morality finds its practical expression. This maxim, used in
an ambiguous sense, may stand as a common reproach for us and for the
Jesuits. The defenders of the society of Jesus make efforts to prove
that it is a malignant attempt to discredit their clients. We shall not
try to speak for either party to this dispute, but will devote ourselves
to the subject matter itself, and seek to substantiate the truth and
reasonableness of this maxim, to rehabilitate it in the public opinion.

It will be sufficient for the refutation of the most general opposition
to understand that end and means are very relative terms, that all
concrete ends are means and all means are ends. There is no more of a
positive difference between great and small, right and wrong, virtue
and vice, than there is between end and means. Considered as something
integral by itself, every action has its own end and its means are the
various moments of which even the shortest action is composed. Every
concrete action is a means in relation to other actions which aim at the
same common effect. But in themselves actions are neither ends nor
means. Nothing is anything by itself. All being is relative. Things are
what they are only within and by their interrelations. Circumstances
alter cases. In so far as every action is accompanied by other actions,
it is a means, and serves a common end which exceeds its own special
end; but inasmuch as every action is complete in itself it is an end
which includes its own means. We eat in order to live; but so far as we
are living while we are eating, we are living in order to eat. As life
to its functions, so the end is related to its means. Just as life is
simply the sum of all life's functions, so the end is the sum of all its
means. The difference between means and end reduces itself to that
between the concrete and the general. And all abstract differences
reduce themselves to this difference, because the faculty of abstraction
or distinction reduces itself to the faculty of distinguishing between
the concrete and the general. But this distinction presupposes the
existence of some material, some given objects, some circle of sense
perceptions by which it manifests itself. If this circle is found in the
field of actions or functions, in other words, if a previously defined
number of different actions is the object of our study, then we refer to
the general character of these objects as the general end and to every
more or less extended part of them, or to every function, as a means.
Whether any definite action is considered as an end or as a means,
depends on the question whether we consider it as a whole in relation to
its own parts, or as a part of some whole in which it is connected with
other parts, with other actions. From a general point of view which has
all human actions for the object of its study, and encompasses them all,
there exists only one end, viz., the human welfare. This welfare is the
end of all ends, is the final end, is the real, true, universal end
compared to which all special ends are but means.

Now, our claim that the end sanctifies the means can have absolute
validity only in regard to some absolute end. But all concrete ends are
relative and finite. The one and sole absolute end is human welfare, and
it is an end which sanctifies all rules and actions, all means, so long
as they are subservient to it, but which reviles them as soon as they go
their own way without serving it. The human weal is literally and
historically the origin of the holy. That which is hale is holy. At the
same time we must not ignore the fact that the weal, or hale, in
general, the hale which sanctifies all means, is but an abstraction, the
real content of which is as different as are the times, the nations, or
persons which are seeking for their welfare. It must be remembered that
the determination of that which is holy or for the human weal requires
definite conditions, that no action, no means, is holy in itself, that
each one of them is sanctified only by definite relations. It is not
every end which sanctifies the means, but the holy end which sanctifies
its own means. But since every real and concrete end is only relatively
holy, it can sanctify its own means only relatively.

The opposition against our maxim is not so much directed against it, as
against the wrong application of it. Recognition is denied and the
socalled sanctified ends are accorded only limited means, because there
is lurking in the background the consciousness that these ends have only
a relative holiness. On the other hand our defense of the maxim does not
imply that the various nominally holy means and ends are sanctified
because some authority, some scriptural statement, some reason or
conscience, has declared them to be so, but only in so far as they
answer the common end of all ends, the human welfare. Our maxim of ends
does not at all teach that we should sacrifice love and truths to
sanctified faith, but neither does it demand that we should sacrifice
faith for love and truth. It merely states the fact that, whenever some
superior end has been determined by sense perceptions or circumstances,
all means contrary to that end are unholy, and that on the other hand
means which are generally unholy may become temporarily and individually
sanctioned by their relation to some momentary or individual welfare.
Wherever peacefulness is actually in favor as a sanctified means, war is
unholy. When, on the other hand, man seeks his salvation in war, then
murder and incendiarism are holy means. In other words, our reason
requires for a valid determination of that which is sanctified certain
definite material conditions or facts as premises; it cannot determine
_the_ holy in general, not _a priori_, not philosophically in the old
speculative way, but only in concrete cases, _a posteriori_, only
empirically.

If we understand that human welfare is the end of all ends, the ideal
of all means; if we furthermore dispense with all special determinations
of this welfare, with all personal ideas of it, and recognize that it is
different under different circumstances, then we understand at the same
time that no means is sanctified beyond the sanctity of its end. No
means, no action, is positively sanctified or makes for human welfare
under all circumstances. According to circumstances and relations one
and the same means may be good or bad. A thing is good only to the
extent that its results are good, only to the extent that there is good
in its end. Lying and cheating are bad only because they result
injuriously for ourselves, because we do not wish to be lied to or
cheated. But whenever a sanctified end is in question, the deceptive
means used in lying and cheating are called tricks of war. If any one is
firmly rooted in the goodness of chastity because he thinks it was
ordained by God, we cannot discuss the matter with him. But if one
honors virtue for the sake of virtue and abhors vice for the sake of
vice, in other words, for their consequences, he admits that he
sacrifices the lust of the flesh to the end of good health. In short, he
admits that the means are sanctified by the end.

In the Christian conception of the world, the commandments of its
religion are absolutely good for all time, they are considered good
because Christian revelation declares them to be so. This conception
does not know that, for instance, its acme of virtue, the specifically
Christian virtue of abstemiousness, received its value only by contrast
with corrupt heathenish licentiousness, but that it is not a virtue
when compared to reasonable and normal satisfaction of material needs.
It deals with certain means which it calls indiscriminately good without
any relation to their ends, and others which it calls indiscriminately
bad in the same absolute way. And for this reason, it opposes the above
named maxim.

But modern Christianity, modern civilization, has practically long done
away with this faith. It does indeed call the soul the likeness of God
and the body a putrid food for worms; but its deeds prove that it does
not take its religious phrases seriously. It cares little for the better
part of man and directs all its thoughts and actions toward the
satisfaction of the despised body. It employs science and art, and the
products of all climates, for the glorification of the body, clothing it
sumptuously, feeding it luxuriously, caring for it tenderly, resting it
on soft cushions. Although they speak slightingly of this earthly life
in comparison to the eternal life beyond, yet in practice they cling for
six days of the week to the uninterrupted pleasures of this body, while
heaven is hardly considered worthy of careless attention for more than
one short hour on Sundays. With the same thoughtless inconsistency the
socalled Christian world also attacks our maxim with words, while in
practical life it sanctifies the despised means by the end of its own
welfare, going even so far as to demonstrate its inconsistency in its
own life by subsidizing prostitution with state funds. The fact that the
legislative bodies of our representative states keep down the enemies of
their bourgeois order by courtmartials and exile, that they justify this
course by the proverb, "Do unto others as you would that they should do
unto you," in the interest of "public" welfare, or that they defend
their divorce codes by the plea of individual welfare, proves that the
bourgeoisie also believes in the motto: The end sanctifies the means.
And even though the citizens delegate rights to the state which they
deny to themselves, also our opponents cannot but admit that in so doing
the citizens are simply delegating their own rights to the superior
authority of the state.

True, whoever employs lying and cheating in the bourgeois world for the
end of gaining wealth, even though he may make it one of his ends to
give to charity, or whoever steals leather, like Saint Chispinus, for
the purpose of making shoes for poor people, does not sanctify his means
by his end, because the end in that case is not sanctified, or only
nominally so, only in general, but not in the concrete case quoted. For
charity is an end of but inferior holiness which must not be more than a
means compared to the main end of maintaining bourgeois society, and
whenever it contravenes this main purpose, charity loses its character
of a good end. And we have already seen that an end which is sanctified
only under certain circumstances cannot sanctify its means beyond them.
The indispensable condition of all good ends is that they must be
subservient to human welfare, and whether this welfare is secured by
Christian or pagan, by feudal or bourgeois means, it always demands that
the things which are considered unessential and of lesser importance
should be subordinated to the essential and necessary things, while in
the above quoted cases the more salutary honesty and bourgeois
respectability would be sacrificed to the less salutary charity. "The
end sanctifies the means" signifies in other words that in ethics as
well as in economics, the profit must justify the investment of the
capital. Again, if we call the forcible conversion of infidels a good
end, and an arbitrary police measure a bad means, this does not prove
anything against the truth of the maxim, but only testifies to its wrong
application. The means is not sanctified in the case, because the end is
not, because a forced conversion is not a good end, but rather an evil
one resulting in hypocrisy, and because such a conversion does not
deserve this name, or because force is a means which is unworthy of this
term. If it is true that a forcible conversion or wooden iron are
senseless ideas, how is it that people will persist in fighting against
universally recognized truths with such inconsistencies, such inane word
plays, such tricks of rhetoric and sophistry? The means of the Jesuits,
sly tricks and intrigues, poison and murder, appear unholy to us only
because the Jesuitic purpose, for instance that of extending the wealth
and influence and glorifying power of the order, is an inferior end
which may make use of the innocent language of the pulpit, but is not an
absolutely sanctified end, no supreme end, to which we would grant means
that would deprive us of some essential end, for instance of our
personal and public safety. Murder and manslaughter are considered
immoral as individual actions because they are not means to accomplish
our main end, because we incline not toward revenge or
blood-thirstiness, nor toward arbitrariness and the wilful dispensation
of justice by some judge, but toward lawful decisions and the more or
less impartial decrees of the state. But do we not explicitly declare in
favor of the maxim "The end sanctifies the means," when we constitute
ourselves into juries and render dangerous criminals powerless by the
rope and the ax of the executioner?

The same people who boast of having dropped Aristotle, that is to say
the belief in authority, for centuries, and who therefore replaced the
dead traditional truth by living self-gained truth, are found to be
completely at odds with their own development in the above cited cases.
If we listen to the recital of some funny story, which may be told by
even a reliable witness, we nevertheless remain loyal to the principles
of free reason, that is to say we are free to regard as serious and
regrettable any incident which the narrator may consider funny and
ridiculous. People know how to distinguish between a story and the
subjective impression its incidents created on the mind of the narrator,
and which depends more on the personality of the witness than on the
actual facts. But in the matter of good ends and bad means it is
proposed to neglect the distinction between an object and its subjective
end which is otherwise the point of all critique. Such ends as charity,
the conversion of infidels, etc., are thoughtlessly, a priori, called
good and holy, because they once were so under particular conditions,
while now their effect in the cases above cited is just the opposite,
and then people wonder that the unrighteous title carries with it
unrighteous privileges.

Only that end is worthy of the predicate good or holy in practice which
is itself a means, a servant, of the end of all purposes, of welfare.
Whenever man seeks his welfare in bourgeois life, in production and
commerce of commodities, and in the undisturbed enjoyment of his private
property, he clips his long fingers by the commandment: "Thou shalt not
steal." But wherever, as among the Spartans, war is regarded as the
supreme end and craftiness as a necessary quality of a warrior, there
thieving is used as a means of acquiring craftiness and sanctioned as a
means for the main end. To blame the Spartan for being a warrior instead
of a sedate bourgeois would be to ignore the facts of reality, would be
equivalent to overlooking that our brain is not designed to substitute
imaginary pictures for the actual conditions of the world, but is
organized to understand that a period, a nation, an individual is always
that which it can and must be under given circumstances.

It is not from mere individual and unpraiseworthy fondness for the
paradox that we subvert current views by defending the maxim "The end
sanctifies the means," but from a consistent application of the science
of philosophy. Philosophy originated out of the belief in a dualist
contrast between God and the world, between body and soul, between the
flesh and the spirit, between brain and senses, between thinking and
being, between the general and the concrete. The conciliation of this
contrast represents the end, or the aggregate result, of philosophical
research. Philosophy found its dissolution in the understanding that the
divine is worldly and the worldly divine, that the soul is related to
the body, the spirit to the flesh, thinking to being, the intellect to
the senses, in the same way in which the unity is related to the
multiplicity or the general to the concrete. Philosophy began with the
erroneous supposition that the one, as the first thing, was the basis
on which developed the two, three, four, and the entire multiplicity of
things by succession. It has now arrived at the understanding that
truth, or reality, turns this supposition upside down, that the reality
with its multiplicity of forms, perceivable by the senses, is the first
and foremost thing out of which the human brain gradually derived the
conception of unity or generality.

No achievement of science can be compared with the amount of talent and
intellectual energy consumed in harvesting this one little fruit from
the field of speculative philosophy. But neither does any scientific
novelty encounter so many deep-rooted obstacles to its recognition. All
brains unfamiliar with the outcome of philosophy are dominated by the
old belief in the reality of some genuine, true, absolutely universal
panacea, the discovery of which would make all sham, false individual
panaceas impossible. But we, on the other hand, have been taught by the
understanding of the thought process that this coveted panacea is a
product of the brain and that, since it is supposed to be a general and
abstract panacea, it cannot be any real, perceptible, concrete panacea.
In the belief in an absolute difference between true and false welfare,
there is manifested an ignorance of the actual operations of brain work.
Pythagoras made numbers the basis of things. If this Grecian philosopher
could have realized that this basic nature was a thing of the mind, of
the intellect,[2] and that numbers were the basis of reason, the common
or abstract content of all intellectual activity, then we should have
been spared all the disputes which have raged around the various forms
of absolute truth, about "things in themselves."

Space and time are the general forms of reality, or reality exists in
time and space. Consequently all real welfare must be attached to space
and time, and every welfare which exists in these dimensions must be
real. The different welfares, in so far as their beneficent qualities
are concerned, are to be distinguished only by their height and breadth,
by the quantity of their dimensions, by their numeral relations. Every
welfare, whether true or seeming, is perceived by the senses, by
practices of life, not by abstract reason. But practice assigns the most
contradictory things to different people at different times as means to
their welfare. What is welfare in one place, is disaster in another, and
vice versa. Understanding, or reason, has nothing else to do in the
matter than to number these various welfares as they are made real by
sense perceptions in various persons and times, and degrees of
intensity, in the order in which they appear, and thus to distinguish
the small from the great, the essential from the unessential, the
concrete from the general. Reason cannot dictate to us autocratically in
matters of some absolutely true welfare, it can only indicate the most
frequent, most essential, and most universal welfare in a certain
perceived number of welfares. But it must not be forgotten that the
truth of such an understanding, or enumeration, depends on certain
definite premises. It is therefore a vain endeavor to search for the
true and absolute welfare. This search becomes practical and successful
only when it limits itself to the understanding of a definite amount of
welfare of some particular objects. The general welfare can be found
only within definite boundaries. But the various determinations of
welfare agree in this respect, that they all consider it well to
sacrifice the little for the great, the unessential for the essential,
and not vice versa. In so far as this principle is right, it is also
right for us to employ for the good end of a great welfare some small
means in the shape of a small evil and to endure it, and thus we see
once more that the end sanctifies the means.

If people were liberal enough to permit every one to go to heaven in his
or her own way, the opponents of our maxim would be easily convinced of
its truth. But instead of doing this, people follow the usual course of
shortsightedness and make their private standpoint a universal one. They
call their own private welfare the only true welfare, and regard the
welfare of other nations, times and conditions a mistake. So does every
school of art declare its own subjective taste to be objective beauty,
ignoring the fact that unity is but a matter of ideas, of thought, while
reality is full of the most varied forms. The real welfare is manifold
and the true welfare but a subjective choice which, like a funny story,
may make an entirely different impression on others, and be a false
welfare. Even though Kant, or Fichte, or some other particular
philosopher, may discuss at length the purpose of mankind and solve the
problem to his full satisfaction and to that of his audience, we
nevertheless have learned enough today to know that one can define one's
own personal idea of the purpose of mankind by means of abstract
speculation, but that one cannot discover any unknown and hidden object
in this way. Thought, or reason, requires some object, and its work is
that of measuring, of criticising. It may distinguish between true and
false welfare, but will also remember that they have their limits,
remember that it is itself personal and that its distinctions are
likewise personal and cannot be generalized beyond the point where
others receive the same impression of the same object.

Humanity is an idea, while man is always some special person who has his
or her peculiar life in a definite environment and is therefore
subservient to general principles only from motives of self-interest.
The sacrifice of ethics, like that of religion, is only seemingly a
self-denial and serves the ends of reasonable self-interest, an
expenditure with a view to greater gains. A morality worthy of that name
which is not better defined by the term obedience can be exercised only
through the understanding of its worth, of its value for our welfare, of
its usefulness. The variety of political parties is conditioned on the
varieties of the interests concerned, and the difference in the means is
conditioned on the difference in ends. In questions of less importance
even the champions of absolute morality testify to this fact.

Thiers in his history of the French Revolution tells of a peculiar
situation in the year 1796, when the patriots held the public power and
the royalists carried on a revolutionary propaganda. It was then that
the partisans of the revolution, who should have been the champions of
unlimited liberty, demanded coercive measures, while the opposition, who
secretly cared more for a monarchy than for a republic, voted for
unlimited liberty. "To such an extent are parties governed by their
self-interests," comments Thiers, just as if this were an anomaly
instead of being the natural, necessary and inevitable course of the
world. When, on the other hand, it is a question of the fundamental laws
of bourgeois order, then the moral representatives of the ruling classes
are egotistic enough to deny the connection of their material interests
with these laws and to claim that theirs are eternal, metaphysical world
laws, that the pillars of their special class rule are the eternal
pillars of humanity, and that their own means alone are holy ones and
their end the final end of the universe.

It is a disastrous deception, a robbing of human liberty, an attempt to
cause the stagnation of the historical development, if any age or class
thus proclaims its own peculiar purposes and means to be for the
absolute welfare of humanity. Morality originally reflects one's
interests just as fashion reflects one's taste, and finally the action
is moulded after the conceived pattern like the coat in dressing. In
this process, force naturally is exerted for the maintenance and
protection of one's own life and those who resist are subdued. Interest
and duty, though perhaps not entirely synonymous, are certainly closely
related. Both of them are merged in the term welfare. Self-interest
represents more nearly the concrete, immediate, tangible welfare, while
duty concerns itself with the more remote and general welfare of the
future also. While self-interest considers the present tangible metallic
welfare of the purse, duty demands that we keep not only a part of
welfare, but all welfare in mind, that we consider the future as well as
the present, that we remember the spiritual welfare as well as the
physical. Duty thinks also of the heart, of social needs, of the
future, of the spiritual weal, in brief of interest in general and urges
us to renounce the superfluous in order to secure and retain the
necessary. Thus your duty is your self-interest and your self-interest
your duty.

If our ideas are to adapt themselves to truth, or to reality, instead of
reality or truth adapting itself to our notions or thoughts, we must
understand that the mutability of that which is right, holy, moral, is a
natural, necessary and true fact. And we must grant to an individual the
theoretical freedom which cannot be taken from it in practice, we must
admit that it is as free now as it has ever been, that laws must be
adapted to the needs of the social individual and not to the vague,
unreal, and impossible abstractions, such as justice or morality. What
is justice? The embodiment of all that is considered right, an
individual conception, which assumes different forms in different
persons. In reality only individual, definite, concrete rights exist,
and man simply comes along and abstracts from them the idea of justice,
just as he abstracted from different kinds of wood the conception of
wood in general, or from material things the conception of matter. It is
just as far from the truth, to think that material things consist of, or
are by virtue of, abstract matter, although this view is widely spread,
as it is to believe that the moral or bourgeois laws were derived from
the idea of justice.

The ethical loss caused by our realistic, or if you prefer,
materialistic, conception of morality is not so great as it appears. We
need not fear that through this conception social beings will become
lawless cannibals or hermits. Freedom and lawfulness are closely allied
by the need for association which compels us to permit others to live
together with us. If a man is prevented by his conscience or by other
spiritualistic or bourgeois ethics from committing unlawful
actions--unlawful in the wider meaning of the term--he is either not
exposed to very grave temptations, or he has a nature so tame that the
natural or legal punishments fully suffice to keep him within prescribed
bounds. But where these checks are ineffective, morality is likewise
powerless. If it were otherwise, we should have to assume that morality
exerts in secret the same influence on the faithful which is exerted by
public opinion on the faithless. But we know from actual experience that
there are more pious thieves than infidel robbers. That the world, which
attributes so much value for social welfare to morality by word of
mouth, actually shares this view of ours, is proven by the fact that
bourgeois society gives more attention to the penal code and to the
police than to the influence of morality.

Moreover, our fight is not directed against morality, not even against
any special form of it, but only against the arrogance which assumes to
stamp some concrete form of morality with the trade mark of absolute
morality. We recognize that morality is eternally sacred, in so far as
it refers to considerations which a man owes to himself and to his
fellowmen in the interest of their common welfare. But the freedom of
the individual demands that each one should be at liberty to determine
the degree of consideration and the manner of giving it expression.
Under these circumstances it is as inevitable that the ruling powers,
classes or majorities should enforce their special needs under the form
of a prescribed right, as it is that a man's shirt should be closer to
his skin than his coat. But it appears to us not merely very
superfluous, but even detrimental to the energies required for the
progress of the future, that some decreed right should be elevated to
the position of absolute right and transformed into an insuperable
barrier to the advance of humanity.

FOOTNOTE:

[2] Which was gained by the mind's contact with its sense-perceived
multiplicity of the world.--Editor.




Letters on Logic

Especially Democratic-Proletarian Logic

BY JOSEPH DIETZGEN

Translated by Ernest Untermann




Editorial Remark.

The "Letters on Logic," treating on the same subjects as "The Positive
Outcome of Philosophy," were intended by the author to be replaced by
this subsequent work.

We publish, however, both these works in hopes that the reader will
pardon the frequent repetitions on account of the additional light that
other parts of the "Letters on Logic" are apt to impart.




LETTERS ON LOGIC




FIRST LETTER


Dear Eugene:

You have now reached the age at which the students go to the university.
There, according to custom, they register first of all for a course in
logic, whether they choose the study of law, medicine, or theology.
Logic is, so to say, the elementary study in all branches of learning.
Now you know, my dear, that school and life are regarded as two separate
things. I should like to call your attention to their connection. We
live also in school, we are schooled also by life. I should like to
consider your trip across the Atlantic ocean as your first venture in
the high school of life, and assume the role of your professor of logic.

I feel well qualified for this office. Although I am not well up in
Latin and Greek, still I feel competent to guide you to the depths of
logical science better than a German professor trained and installed
according to the most approved pattern. You will admit the possibility
of such a thing. For one who knows little may explain that little with
more ease and efficacy than one who has his head stuffed full of the
prescribed bunch of official wisdom.

You, my son, have been so fortunate as to enjoy a seven years' course in
a German college. And since your teachers, at your departure, gave you
the highest certificate, I may well consider you as qualified not only
to enter the school of life in the United States, but also to listen
intelligently to my lectures on logic.

But in order that my well trained pupil may not look down upon his
self-taught teacher, I appeal to the fact that even the man with the
best all-around education will be a tyro in specialties; and that, on
the other hand, ignorance in many things does not exclude the
possibility of knowing more about a certain specialty than science has
heretofore grasped. Now I claim in this case to have acquired a
knowledge of the subject with which I intend to deal here that surpasses
anything I have been able to find in the professional literature. I
mention this, my dear Eugene, with all due modesty, not for the purpose
of throwing a halo around my personality, but in order to give a certain
authority to my office as teacher and to inspire my pupil with
confidence.

Yes, I value confidence. Although you know me as a democrat who cares
nothing for authority, you shall also learn to know me as a graduate in
dialectics who, though he may empty the bath, still retains his hold on
the child and does not permit it to float off with the water. Children,
and one may say nations in their childhood, cannot do without authority,
and a teacher, whether he instruct children or nations, cannot dispense
with a certain confidence-inspiring air. The pupil must believe in the
wisdom of his teacher, in order that he may approach the master with the
necessary attention and willingness to learn. Later on the understanding
of the subject makes all authority superfluous. Thus a thing so sublime
as authority is subject to the destructive tendencies of time, to the
historical process.

Hitherto mankind has often been tempted by preconceived notions to
idolize vain things. It has been attempted to shield not only authority
in general, but, what is still worse, this or that throne or altar,
against the attacks of time. The relation between the perishable and the
imperishable has always been subject to much misunderstanding. Now since
logic is that science which aims to set the intellect aright, we shall
have to touch occasionally on the general misconception of time and
eternity.

The most famous expounders of logic are reproached for their cumbrous
style and their obscure mode of explanation. Even masters of languages
have complained in my hearing about the foreign terms used by that
branch of science, terms which even they could not understand. Much of
the blame for this condition of things may fall on the difficulties of
the subject, which have baffled all elucidation for thousands of years.
Some of the blame also falls on the bad habit of using learned
vernacular. But the greatest fault lies with the mental laziness of the
students. Nothing can be learned without mental exertion. If you are
concerned in your further development, you will recognize the Christian
word as to the curse of work as untrue. Work cannot be descended from
sin, for it is a blessing. You will have experienced in yourself how
elated one feels after successful physical or mental work.

The things which science yields without exertion can be at most
axiomatic commonplaces.

I assume that you are quite willing to perform the necessary mental
labor, and I promise you that I shall do my best to make this study easy
for you. I do this so much more readily, as I frankly confess that these
letters to my son are written with the intention of making them
accessible to a wider circle of readers by means of the press.

Before concluding, let me say a word about my aim of speaking especially
of democratic-proletarian logic. You will think or say: Logic may be a
subject worthy of study, but a special democratic-proletarian logic can
surely treat of nothing but party matters. But just as the special
accomplishments in this or that line, the special advances of this or
that nation, are at the same time general advances, progress of
civilization, so the ideas of proletarian logic are not party ideas, but
conclusions of logic in general. You may reply: Even though the special
thought of a Chinaman may be quite consistent and logical, still we
would not call it Chinese logic. That would be quite true, but it does
not meet my point.

The thought on which the proletarian demands are based, the idea of the
equality of all human beings, this ultimate proletarian idea, if I may
say so, is fully backed up by the deeper insight into the tortuous
problem of logic. Now, since this idea dominates mankind, it certainly
has more right than any Chinese idea. Furthermore, industrial
development has leveled, simplified, cleared all social conditions to
such an extent that it becomes ever easier to penetrate with sober eyes
into the secrets of logic. Finally, my logic deserves its proletarian
qualification for the reason that it requires for its understanding the
overcoming of all prejudices by which the capitalist world is held
together.

The cause of the people is not a party matter, but the general object of
all science.

The people's cause as the ultimate object, and logic as the most
elementary and most abstract science, as ultimate science, are as
intimately connected as plants and botany, or as laws and the legal
profession. So are the interests of democracy and the proletariat
intimately connected. The fact that this has not been well recognized in
the United States so far, is more a proof of the lucky condition of that
country than of the scientific knowledge of its democracy. The spreading
primeval forests and prairies offered innumerable homesteads to the poor
and they obscured the antagonism between capitalists and wage workers,
between capitalist and proletarian democracy. But you still lack the
knowledge of proletarian economics which would enable you to recognize
without a doubt that it is precisely on the republican ground of America
that capitalism makes giant strides and reveals ever more clearly its
twofold task of first enslaving the people for the purpose of freeing
them in due time.




SECOND LETTER


Dear Eugene:

Having written the first letter by way of introduction, I now am ready
for a gradual approach to my subject.

Logic aims to instruct the human mind as to its own nature and
processes; it will lay bare the interior working of our mind for our
guidance. The object of the study of logic is thought, its nature, and
its proper classification.

The human brain performs the function of thinking as involuntarily as
the chest the function of breathing. However, we can, by our will, stop
breathing for a while, and accelerate or retard the breathing movements.
In the same way, the will can control the thoughts. We may choose any
object as the subject matter of our thought, and yet we may quickly
convince ourselves that the power of our will and the freedom of the
mind are not any greater than the freedom of the chest in breathing.

While logic undertakes to assign the proper position to our brain, still
it has to remember that nature has already assigned that position.

It is with logic as it is with other sciences. They draw wisdom from the
mysterious source of plain experience. Agriculture, e. g., aims to teach
the farmer how to cultivate the soil; but fields were tilled long before
any agricultural college had begun its lectures. In the same way human
beings think without ever having heard of logic. But by practice they
improve their innate faculty of thought, they make progress, they
gradually learn to make better use of it. Finally, just as the farmer
arrives at the science of agriculture, so the thinker arrives at logic,
acquires a clear consciousness of his faculty of thought and a
professional dexterity in applying it.

I have two purposes in mind in saying this. Firstly, you must not expect
too much from this science, for you cannot set contrary brains to rights
by any logic. Secondly, you must not think too little of it, by
regarding the matter as mere scholastic word-mongery and useless
hairsplitting. In daily life, as well as in all sciences, we never
operate without the help of thought, but only with it, hence an
understanding of the nature of the processes of thought is of eminent
value.

Logic has its history like all sciences. Aristotle, whom Marx calls the
"Grecian giant of thought," is universally recognized as its founder.

After the classic culture of antiquity had been buried by barbarism, the
name of Bacon of Verulam rose with the beginning of modern times as a
philosophical light of the first order. His most famous work is entitled
"Novum Organon." By the new organ he meant a new method of research
which should be founded on experience, instead of the subtleties of the
purely introspective method hitherto in vogue. After him, Descartes, or
Cartesius, as he called himself in literature, wrote his still famous
work, "About Methods." I furthermore recall Immanuel Kant's "Critique of
Reason," Johann Gottlieb Fichte's "Theory of Science," and finally
Hegel, of whom the biographer said that he was as famous in the
scientific world as Napoleon in the political.

Hegel calls his chief work "Logic," and bases his whole system on the
"dialectic method." You have only to look at the titles of these
philosophical masterpieces in order to recognize that they all treat of
the same subject which we are making our special study, viz., the light
of understanding. The great philosophers of all times have searched for
the true method, the method of truth, for the way in which understanding
and reason arrive at science.

I merely wish to indicate that this subject has its famous history, but
I do not care to enter more deeply into it. I will not speak of the
oppression and persecution, which was inaugurated by religious
fanaticism. I will not enumerate the various events that led to a
greater and greater light from generation to generation. The attempt to
trace this history would entangle us in many disputed questions and
errors which would only increase the difficulties of this study for the
beginner.

If a teacher of technology were to instruct you on steam engines and, to
explain their first incomplete invention, trace their further
development historically from improvement to improvement, until he
should arrive at the height of perfection attained in their present day
construction, he would also be advancing on a path, but on a tedious
one. I shall endeavor to show my subject at the outset in the very
clearest light which has ever been thrown on it by the help of the
nations of all times. If I succeed in this, it will be easy in the
future, in the reading of any author, to separate the chaff from the
wheat.

I can afford to dispense with quotations and proofs from others in
trying to make my case and demonstrating the positive product of social
culture, for we are dealing with the most universal and omnipresent
object,--one which enters into every spoken or written sentence with its
own body. If anybody tells of far off times or wonderful things, he must
quote witnesses. Now, much of what I have to say for my case may sound
wonderful, because it runs counter to the popular prejudice, but the
only witness required to prove the truth of my statements is the clear
brain of my pupil, who has only to examine his own experience without
preconceived notions, in order to find proofs on every hand.

It is surprising in the first place, that such a near at hand object has
not been understood long ago and that so much still remains to be
explained and to be taught after thousands of years of study. But you
know that just as the small things are often great, and great things
small, so the nearest things are often hidden and the hidden things
nearest.

I promised you in the first sentences of this letter, dear Eugene, that
I would now pass from introduction to subject matter. But since I have
really continued to move around the outer edge of the subject instead of
entering into its midst, you might become impatient, and so I will
justify my method. It is a peculiarity of this subject matter that it
exposes me to this charge. It is a peculiarity of thought that it never
stays with itself, but always digresses to other things. The thought is
the plank to which I should stick, but it is the nature of this plank
never to stick. Thinking is a thing full of contradictions, a
dialectical secret.

Now I know that here I am saying something which it is very hard for you
to understand. But look here, has it not always been so? When you began
declining Latin words in the sixth class, you were unable at once to
grasp the full meaning of declension. You knew what you were doing, and
yet you did not entirely understand it. Only after penetrating more
deeply into the construction of the language did the meaning and purpose
of the beginning become clear to you. In the same way, you now must try
to digest as much as you can of what I say, and after you have gone more
deeply into this matter, you will fully understand me from beginning to
end. In taking lessons from an author, on an unknown subject, I have
always followed the method of first getting a superficial view of the
subject, of glancing over its many pages and chapters, in order to
return to the beginning and acquire a thorough knowledge by repeated
study. With the growing familiarity with the subject the ability to
understand it grew, and at the conclusion the thing became clear to me.
This is the only correct method I can recommend to you.

In conclusion let me say for to-day in passing that the recommendation
of the correct method for studying logic is not only an introduction,
but, as I have already said, the subject matter of science itself.




THIRD LETTER


Dear Eugene:

My task of teaching logic requires two things: a logician and a teacher.

The last named capacity requires that I should clothe the subject in an
attractive way. Permit me, therefore, to combine the didactic style with
that of the story teller, and to relate at this point an episode from a
novel of Gustav zu Putlitz:

The organist of a certain village is lying on his deathbed. His last
strength has been spent on the previous day in playing a hymn, and after
its conclusion he was carried from the church in an unconscious state.
He had played his masterpiece, but at the same time his last piece. A
despised stage girl had accompanied him with a voice like that of a
nightingale. But neither she nor the organ player had earned any
applause from the stupid villagers.

The old man looked around in his room, his eyes were first riveted on
his faithful piano, his friend and companion through life. He extended
his hand, but it sank down exhausted. He had not had the intention to
touch the piano anyway. It was only like stretching out one's hand for a
friend far away. Then he looked through the window trying to recollect
what time of the day it was. And when he had taken in the situation, he
turned to the girl kneeling at his feet.

"Poor child," he began, "you were deeply disappointed yesterday. I felt
very much hurt, when I first heard of it, but after that everything
became clear to me while I heard the music all night, until a short
while ago. Rejoice, my girl, at being reviled, for it is done for the
sake of that sacred music, and it is an ecstasy, a blessing, to be
martyred for one's music which is well worth all injuries. I did not
fare any better all my life, and if I thank God for all the good he has
done me until this hour, I also thank him first and most fervently for
the gift of music which he bestowed on the world, and which he revealed
to me most wonderfully in my most painful hours.

"For my music I have starved and suffered all my life, and my gain was
delicious, my reward celestial for this poor perishable stake.

"My father was an organist in a little town of Eastern Frisia. His
father had held the same position in the same church, and, I think, so
did the father of his father follow music for a profession. Music has
been the heirloom of our family for generations. True, it was the only
heirloom, but I have cherished it and held its flag aloft all my life.
When God calls me away, I shall leave nothing behind but that old piano
and the sheet music which I wrote myself, for in all other respects I
have always been poor. I might have done differently, and my wife has
often upbraided me for it, but she does not understand the blessing of
music. I do not blame her for that, for it was not her fault that God
closed her ear to music as he did the ears of many others. Poor people,
how cold and dreary must be their lives when music does not scatter
blossoms in their path and bathe their temples in light. But there will
come a time when their ears will be opened, and God will compensate them
in heaven for what they missed here below.

"We who love music have tasted a part of eternal bliss here below, for
harmony which dissolves all chords is eternal life and its wings are
fanning us in this terrestrial life----

"Do you see, I know it well, and no one besides me, how it is when the
soul prepares to leave the perishable body and enter the song of the
spheres--

"You do not understand me, my girl, but do not worry, you also will
understand some day. I will only tell you this much, and it shall be a
consolation to you when the world treats you roughly hereafter. All of
us, whether rich or poor, whether reclining on soft silken cushions or
on hard straw, all of us enter life with the celestial melodies in our
hearts. The beating of time goes with us as long as we are breathing. It
is the beating of the heart in our breast. We may seem to lose the
melody, even the measured step of time seems to become confused by our
passion, but in the blessed hours we always find our melody anew, and
then we feel at home in the path of our life."

Thus the old organist idolized his music.

But it is not alone the harmony of music which has such a power over the
mind. The harmony of colors, every art and science, has the same power.
Even the most common craft, and the most prosaic of all prose, the chase
after the dollar, may take possession of a man's soul and prostrate him
in adoration before its idol. True, not every one is so sentimentally
inclined, and even the sentimentalist is so only in especially
sentimental moments. Furthermore it cannot be denied that artists,
inventors, and explorers are worshipping the most worthy and most
adorable objects. And I admit that no great success can be accomplished
without putting your whole soul into some great aim.

Nevertheless you should know that anything which may take possession of
one's soul shares its sublimity with all other things, and is for this
reason at the same time something ordinary. Without such a dialectic
clarification of our consciousness all adoration is idol worship.

The actual experience, then, that anything and everything may serve as
an idol should clearly convince you that no one thing, but only the
universe is the true God, is truth and life.

Now, is this logic or is it theology?

It is both. At closer range you will notice that all great logicians
occupy themselves a great deal with God and deity, and that on the other
hand all honest theologians are trying to base their faith on some
logical order. Logic is by its whole nature metaphysical.[3]

There exists a class of logicians who attempt to deny the inevitable
connection between the celestial region and the tangible universe. Some
of them do so from excessive religious delicacy of feeling, in order to
protect the sublime from the disintegrating effects of critique. Others
have such an antipathy against the religious abuses that they do not
wish to hear any more about religion. Both classes adhere to the
so-called formal logic.

These adherents of formal logic may be compared to a maker of porcelain
dishes who would contend that he was simply paying attention to the form
of his dishes, pots, and vases, but that he did not have anything to do
with the raw material, while it is evident that he is compelled to form
the body in trying to embody forms. These things can be separated by
words only, but not by actions. In the same way as body and form, the
finite and infinite or so-called celestial spheres, the physical and the
metaphysical, are inseparable.

Logic analyzes thought. But it analyzes thought as it is in reality, and
therefore it unavoidably searches for truth. And whether this truth is
found above or below, or anywhere, is a question which just as
inevitably brings the logician into contact with the theologian. To
think of avoiding such a meeting from considerations of sympathy or
antipathy, would be a rude lack of consideration for science.

Metaphysical logic which aims to extend its field to eternity, which
looks for logical order even in heaven, and seeks to solve even the
so-called last questions of all knowledge, differs in a distinct way
from formal logic, which selects a restricted field for its research and
confines itself to investigating the logical order of the socalled
physical world. This difference is worthy of your special attention,
because in it there is hidden the kernel of our whole correspondence.

It is quite a practical method to set a limit for one's investigations,
not to fly into clouds, not to undertake anything that cannot be
accomplished. Yet you must not forget that practical boundaries are not
theoretical boundaries, that they are not invariable boundaries for you,
or for others. Although you cannot fly to heaven and will give up the
idea of flying machines from considerations of practical expediency, yet
you will not wish to deny to man the theoretical freedom of infinite
striving even in the matter of airships, and you will not be so small as
to give up the idea of the capacity for our race for metaphysical, or in
other words, infinite development.

FOOTNOTE:

[3] In the sense of: mental and physical world embracing,
all-embracing.--Editor.




FOURTH LETTER


Dear Eugene:

In my first letter I acquainted you with my purpose, in the second I
lifted the subject on my finger tips, so to say, to show it for a brief
moment; in the third I showed that its color had inevitably a religious
shade. Now, to continue, permit me to introduce another point to your
consideration.

The great cause of the working class has hitherto always been the beast
of burden of a small and exclusive minority. This is most evident in the
slave states of antiquity, in Egypt, Greece, Rome. Likewise in the
feudal and guild systems of the middle ages the oppression of the mass
of the people is sufficiently apparent. At present this condition of
things is more visible in Eastern Europe, in Russia, Turkey, Bulgaria,
Hungary, Eastern Prussia, etc., than in the industrial countries of the
West. In the United States of America it is most obscured, so that there
the people hardly realize their enslaved condition. In America, many of
the upper ten thousand have made their way from the bottom up, and it
happens more frequently than in Europe that the captains of industry
laid their foundation by hard work. The shortsighted observers then
easily forget out of sympathy for the hard beginning that there is
sharper's practice at the end, and they indulge in the idle hope that
every hard working beast of burden might transform itself into a happy
millionaire by thrift and smartness.

You will probably ask: What has that to do with logic or the art of
reasoning? Patience! You will admit that the emancipation of the nations
from beastly toil, misery and suffering is the highest goal of the human
mind. Nor will you deny that the thought is the most essential
instrument for reaching this high goal. The accomplishments of thought
are visible in the results of civilization. The proletariat of the
present, also that of Russia, Turkey, East Prussia, participates in
these accomplishments of thought. It participates not alone in the sense
that its brains are better educated and cultured, but also that its
food, clothing, and shelter have become more civilized through the
progressive deeds of intellect.

You see, then, that the people's cause is connected with the faculty of
thought, and the nature of the latter may be illustrated as well by the
example of the development of civilization. The complicated network of
wheels in a watch may also serve to demonstrate the nature of that which
language designates by many names, such as spirit, intellect, faculty of
knowledge, reason, etc. Only it must be remembered that this mysterious
something cannot be shown by itself, but only in connection with other
things, whether they be the history of civilization or a watch. There
will then be no contradiction in finding that the intellectual life
appears more powerful and magnificent through the clockwork of the
history of civilization than through any miniature product of thought.

In searching for the connection of things, one generally seeks to
recognize the manner or the degree of the connection. But we, in this
case, disregard the question as to how the things of this world are
related to one another and to thought, and we simply make a note of the
fact of the interdependence of thought and being, of nature and mind.
This fact of the universal interconnection of things contradicts the
untrained prejudice. The uncultivated brain nurses the illusion that the
earth, the trees on it, and the clouds and the sun above them are
separate things. But it requires a better training of reason to
understand that the earth, the tree, the clouds, and the sun, can be
what they are only in the universal interconnection. I remember reading
an article from Fichte, in a German school reader, which clearly showed
that the disarrangement of an insignificant object during the process of
thinking causes us to disarrange the whole history of the world in our
thoughts. It is well known that one unfamiliar with political economy
overlooks the fact that the business men not only carry on their trading
for their private benefit, but are also members of the process of social
production. It is overlooked that all labor, aside from being individual
activity, is at the same time an organic part of social labor. And just
as ignorance of economics overlooks the industrial interdependence, so
ignorance of logic overlooks the cosmic interrelations.

Here is a drop of water. Look how different it is according to the
different things with which it is connected. It cannot be what it is
without a certain temperature. According to changes in temperature, it
will assume either the form of ice or of steam. In fat the drop remains
compact, in salt it divides infinitely, runs downhill in general and
uphill in a loaf of sugar. According to the specific gravity of a
certain fluid, with which it may come into contact, it either floats on
the surface or sinks. Without a connection with the earth, its
temperature and gravitation, this drop and all others would disappear in
the fathomless abyss and have no existence. Thus the forms of things
change according to their connections, and they are what they are only
as parts of the universal interrelation.

What is true of a drop of water, is true of all things, all forces and
substances, even of our thoughts. The human mind lives and works only in
connection with the rest of the material universe--and the recognition
of the organic unity of all things is the fulcrum of my logic.

Old line metaphysical logic was so enamored of its object that the
descent, the kinship, and the connection with the common things of this
world seemed too ordinary for the exquisite spirit. That logic was
transcendental, and therefore its chosen object likewise had to be in
touch with a transcendental world. And though it was scientific enough
to regard the tale of the creation of the first soul by the breath of
God as a fable, it was nevertheless so prejudiced in favor of the
extraordinary nature of the intellect that it did not abandon, for
thousands of years, the hope of finding in that intellect a source which
would reveal transcendental matters. Formal logic now entirely discards
this hope of a fantastical world, but at the same time it misunderstands
the natural connection between the spirit and the common world. It
isolates the instrument of thought and leaves the question undecided
whether this instrument has a natural, supernatural, or no connection at
all. It overlooks that just as logic is real, so reality is logical, and
does not see that the back door which leads to illogical heaven by way
of faith deserves the disdain of science.

Thought, intellect, are really existing, and their existence is a
uniform part of the universal existence. That is the cardinal point of
sober logic.

The fact that the thoughts are of the same worldly substance as the
other parts of the universe, that they are parts of common nature and
not a transcendental essence, has already been expressed by Cartesius in
the famous words: "_Cogito, ergo sum_," I think, therefore I am.

The fact of my thinking, says the philosopher, proves my existence. In
order to come to an absolute conviction on the nature of truth and
error, he sets out by doubting everything. And then he says that he
cannot doubt the existence of his thoughts. He thus placed the spirit on
the basis of real life, delivered it of its transcendentalism, and that
constitutes his everlasting merit.

However, not alone Cartesius, but also your own experience testifies to
the inseparable connection between thinking and being. Have not your
thoughts been connected always and everywhere with some worldly or real
object? If you attempt to isolate thought in order to ponder over it,
you can only do so because that thought has been experienced by you and
therefore was in every instance attached to some worldly object. True,
you have thought of Greek gods, brownies, and mermaids. But you, an
amateur in painting, are familiar enough with that part of the mind
which is called imagination in order to admit that even this eccentric
part of the mind does not only act, and therefore, exist in reality, but
also derives all its products from reality, so that even its most
fantastical vagaries and illusions are still real pictures, reflections
of reality.

But how is it that I require such a multitude of words in order to state
over and over again that the thought has a real existence and is a
uniform part of the universe? Simply because from time immemorial the
confusion in matters of logic is so great that the human spirit is in
the same breath exalted to heaven, and yet its thoughts regarded as
nothing real, nothing true. This is made plain by the fact that a sharp
distinction is commonly made between that which is real and that which
is only imagined, and this difference is exaggerated to such an extent
that it appears as if the idea, which indeed is only in the brain, has
no real existence at all.

In order that you may understand the interrelations of the things of the
universe, I must warn you against this exaggeration and prove that the
intellect has a real existence which is connected with the universe or
reality. Botany, which occupies itself with plants, does not only teach
us to divide them into classes, orders, and families, but it also does
more by showing us what place in the entire realm of nature is occupied
by the vegetable kingdom, by pointing out the differences which
distinguish the plants from the inorganic mineral kingdom or the organic
animal kingdom. Formal logic similarly dissects the spirit into its
parts, makes distinctions between conceptions, ideas, judgments,
conclusions, divides these into subdivisions, classifies conceptions
according to species, separates abstract and concrete thought, knows
many varieties of judgments, registers three, four, or more modes of
conclusion. But at the same time this formal logic recoils from touching
on the question as to how the universal spirit is related to the
universe, what role it plays in the general existence, whether it is
part and parcel of nature or transcendental. And yet this is the most
interesting part, the part which logically connects the intellect and
the science of the intellect with all other sciences and things.

Logic must teach us how to distinguish. It is not a question, however,
of distinguishing sheet iron from gold, or a greyhound from a pug-dog,
for this is done by special lines of knowledge. Logic must rather
enlighten us about that part of the faculty of distinguishing which is
generally required in all branches of knowledge, whereby truth and
error, imagination and reality are recognized. To this end I feel
impelled to advise you not to overlook that even error and imagination
belong to the one infinite and absolutely coherent reality. For the
purpose of distinguishing true imagination from actual reality, it must
be remembered that just as rye bread and cream puffs agree in belonging
to the general category of baker's products, so imagination and truth,
thought and reality, are two different kinds of the same nature.

To sum up the contents of this letter, let me point out that its
beginning shows the connection of the intellect with the development of
the people, while its conclusion explains the wider connection of the
mind with the universal existence.




FIFTH LETTER


A man not trained in logical thinking is handicapped by the absence of a
monistic method of thought. Monistic is synonymous with systematic,
logical, or uniform.

If we call a cream puff a tidbit and rye bread a food without
remembering that every food is a tidbit and every tidbit food, and if we
ignore the fact that both of them, in spite of their difference, belong
to the same category and are, therefore, related, then we lack logic.
And logic is lacking whenever the fact is ignored that all things
without exception: substances, forces, or qualities of the world, are
chips of the same block, finite parts of the infinite, which is the only
truth and reality.

That insects, fishes, birds, and mammals form one and the same animal
kingdom, is an old story which has long been patched up by the logical
instinct. Darwin did not only enrich the natural sciences, but also
perform an invaluable service for logic. In proving how amphibia
developed into birds, he bored a hole into the hitherto fixed order of
classification. He brought motion, life, spirit into the zoological
swamp.

In case you should not be familiar enough with Darwin's work to
understand my allusions, I will enter a little more deeply into the
matter in a few sentences. The zoologists knew well enough that all
species of animals belonged to the animal kingdom; but this
classification was a mechanical affair. Now the "Origin of Species,"
which demonstrates that the zoological classification is not constant
but variable, which outlines the actual transition from one species of
animals to another, reveals at the same time that this alignment of all
animal species in one kingdom is not only a logical mechanism, but also
a fact of actual existence. This classification of all animals from the
minutest to the most gigantic in one kingdom appeared before the time of
Darwin as an order which had been accomplished by thought alone, while
after him it was known as an order of nature.

What the zoologists did to the animal kingdom, must be done by the
logician to existence in general, to the cosmos. It must be shown that
the whole world, all forms of its existence, including the spirit, are
logically or monistically connected, related, welded together.

A certain narrow materialism thinks that everything is done and said
when the inter-connection between thought and brain is pointed out. A
good many things may still be discovered by the help of the dissecting
knife, microscope, and experiment; but this does not make the function
of logic superfluous. True, thought and brain are connected, just as
intimately as the brain is related to the blood, the blood with oxygen,
etc.; but moreover thought is connected quite as intimately with all
other things as all physical objects are.

That the apple is not alone dependent on the stem which attaches it to
the tree, but also on sunshine and rain, that these things are not
one-sidedly but universally connected, this is what logic wants to teach
you particularly in regard to the spirit, the thought.

If a traveler in Africa had to report a new animal species, he would not
make special mention of the fact of its existence, because that is
obvious. And though he were to relate things about the most abnormal
existence, we should still know that this abnormality is only a
deviation in degree which does not overstep the bounds of existence in
general. But the human intellect is a greater novelty than the most
wonderful animal species of the interior of Africa.

You know my sharpwitted friend Englaender. When I told him that I was
writing articles on the human mind, he advised me not to bother my head
about it. He said that this was a subject no man knew anything about.
And when the learned Mr. Hinze, whom you also know, wanted to prove the
inevitability of religious faith and the inadequacy of all science, he
always asked the pathetic question: What is consciousness? And he used
to take on an expression, as if he had presented a book with seven
seals. Now I don't want to class the professors of logic with such men.
But it is a fact that the great multitude, among them many scientists,
are quite unfamiliar with the truth that the existence of the blue sky
and of the green trees is a uniform part of the same generality with the
existence of our intellect.

For this reason it is necessary to prove that the intellect exists in
the same way that all other things do. For it is denied and
misunderstood, not only by those who regard the spirit as a being of a
transcendental nature, but also by those who admit the existence of the
true contents of an ideological concept, but not of thought itself. In
short, the matter is so obscure that I feel sure that you will likewise
be as yet in doubt whether there are not two kinds of ideological
concepts, one of them real, the other unreal.

For two thousand years logic has proclaimed the sentence that thought is
a form to be filled with real contents. True thought "must coincide with
reality." It is true that there is a germ of sense in this statement,
but it is misunderstood. The central point of logic is overlooked. Every
thought must not only have a real content, but it is also necessary, in
order to distinguish true thoughts or perceptions from untrue, to
realize that thought is always and everywhere a part of reality and
truth, even when it contains the most singular imaginations and errors.

Just as the domestic cat and the panther are different species of cats
and yet belong to the same genus of cats, so true and false thoughts, in
spite of all their differences, are of the same genus. For truth is so
great that it comprises absolutely everything. Truth, reality, the
world, the all, the infinite and the absolute are synonymous
expressions. A clear conception of truth is indispensable for the
understanding of logic. And in the last analysis it is simply using
different words for the same thing, when I base the quintessence of
logic, its fulcrum, cardinal, salient, or distinctive point on the
spirit intimately united to nature or on the concept of a uniform world,
truth, or reality. I cannot give you a clearer view of truth than by
quoting at this place the famous words of Lessing: "If God were to offer
me the ever active striving for truth in his left hand and truth in his
right hand, I should grasp his left and say: Father, keep truth, it is
for you alone." This statement is somewhat highflown and mystical, and
Lessing was no doubt somewhat embarrassed by mystical thinking. Still
there is a sober truth in these words, which is quite clear and to the
point.

"Truth itself" is the universe, the infinite and inexhaustible. Every
part of it is a finite part of the infinite and is, therefore, finite
and infinite, perishable and imperishable at the same time. Every part
is a separate part and connected inseparably with the whole. The human
mind, among others, is such a part.

The universal existence, or truth, is the inexhaustible object of the
human mind. The fact that in the study of logic the human mind has
itself for an object must be explained to the student by pointing out
that in this case the subject and the object are both things like all
other things, in other words, are a part of truth, a part of natural
existence.

"Truth itself" cannot be wholly conceived by the human brain, but in
parts. For this reason we possess only the ever active striving for
truth; for this reason, furthermore, the conception or knowledge can
never be completely identical with reality, but can be only a part of
it.

Now permit me to say a few words which do not sound as would those
spoken on the throne of logic, but which are expressed in popular
language. If you conceive some real object, whether a church steeple or
a thimble, then this object exists twice, viz., in reality and in
conception. On the other hand, a certain creation of imagination has
only a simple fantastical existence. Such a popular way of thinking is
undoubtedly correct. It is incorrect only when the fact is universally
ignored that all modes of existence belong to the same genus, the same
as a domestic cat and a panther, so that the existence of a thing in our
brains, and outside of them in the heavens, on earth, and in all places
has a logical meaning only when it is the same existence in spite of all
multiplicity. An existence not partaking of the general nature of all
existence would be an illogical, nonsensical, thing.

Now, I think you will have no difficulty in understanding me when I say
that a church steeple in imagination and the same church steeple in
reality are not two church steeples, but that imagination and reality
are forms of the same existence.

Ancient logic ordered a medal and had stamped on its face: The thought
must be identical with the reality. We now stamp on its reverse side:
(1) The thought is itself a part of reality and (2) the reality outside
of thought is too voluminous and cannot enter thought even with its
smallest particle. What good, under these circumstances, is the old
inscription, especially since it does not teach us at all how the
identity between thought and its real object is to be attained, known,
or measured?

If you, my dear Eugene, should become confused by these statements
instead of enlightened, you should have patience and consider that a
thing which is to be illuminated by logic must, of course, be first
obscure. I believe that I have served you in some way by simply raising
a doubt in your mind as to the soundness of the popular way of speaking
and if I thus have convinced you of the confusion and inadequacy of the
plausible idea of the identity of thought and reality.

True, a thought must agree with its object just as a portrait should.
But what good will it do a painter to have his special attention called
to this fact?

Have you ever seen a portrait or a copy that did not agree in some
respect with the original? I am convinced that this has never been your
experience any more than a portrait which was a complete likeness of its
object. Your experience will be sufficiently cultivated to know that it
can always be a question only of a more or less. I would seriously
recommend to you to reflect on the relativeness of all equality,
similarity, and identity. By far the greater part of humanity is in this
respect barbarously thoughtless. It is very difficult to grasp for the
logically untrained brain that two drops of water or twins are only
relatively alike or unlike, just as are man and woman, negro and white
man, and that all existence is just as alike as it is unlike.

It is with the thinker as it is with the painter. They both search for a
likeness of reality and truth. In painting as in understanding there are
excellent pictures and bad ones. In this respect one may make a
distinction between true and false thoughts, but you must also know that
even the unsuccessful portrait has some likeness, and that even the most
accurate likeness is yet far from being in perfect harmony and identical
with its object.

Reality, truth, universal nature, stands in the pulpit and preaches: "I
am the Lord, thy God. Thou shalt not make any graven image to worship
it." You must have a far too sublime conception of truth to entertain
the idea that any painter or thinker might encompass it fully within the
limit of a picture, no matter how good a likeness it may be.

Now, that we have recognized the human mind as a part of actual reality
and truth, we see at the same time that undivided reality, the sum of
all that is, represents absolute truth which comprises everything. In
their capacity of parts of the universe, true and false thoughts, good
and bad men, heaven and hell, and all other things, are all pieces of
the same cloth, bombs of the same caliber.




SIXTH LETTER


My Dear Son:

After the third letter had acquainted you with the fact that the subject
of logic has a certain religious flavor, the two subsequent letters
endeavored to show that the logical subject is interconnected with the
universal existence of the world, that the faculty of thought is an
inseparable part of actual truth. In the vernacular of theology my last
two letters have represented the human mind as a part of the living true
God.

Christianity teaches: God is a spirit and who would worship him must
worship in spirit and in truth.

And logic teaches: The spirit is a part of universal existence. Whoever
worships the spirit, is an idolator, for he worships a part and
misunderstands the whole truth. Truth itself is identical with the
universal existence, with the world, and all things are simply forms,
phenomena, predicates, attributes, passing expressions of it. The
universal existence may be called divine because it is infinite, being
the alpha and omega which comprises all things as special truths. The
intellect is such a limited part among other special parts of divine
truth, and the latter is frequently called world without any bombastic
emphasis.

Undoubtedly, every science, profession and trade can say the same thing
of its object. The blue sky and the green trees are divine parts.
Everything is interrelated and connected. If that were a good reason for
not making any subdivisions, every part and description would become
endlessly tiresome.

However, the specialty of logic is the cosmic sum of all truths, because
it aims at a general elucidation of the nature of the human brain. This
purpose is not so well served by an accumulation of other knowledge as
by the general understanding of truth.

Logic, which seeks to enlighten the mind for the purpose of scientific
thinking, does not so much treat of true conceptions as of the general
and absolute conception of truth which is inseparably linked to the
infinite universal life.

If you wish to think scientifically, you will first of all strive after
clear ideas. And yet your head may be quite clear in regard to everyday
things, without getting any nearer to general clearness. Nor is such
clearness obtainable by the accumulation of mere special knowledge, for
even if you were to grow in wisdom to the end of your days, nevertheless
the fountain of wisdom, the universe, is inexhaustible and your brain
will remain imperfectly informed or unclear as before. Yea, even the
smallest part of the world is so inexhaustible that the most talented
can never acquire all the knowledge necessary to understand entirely
even the most minute object. The strongest microscope cannot see all
there is to see in a drop of water, and the wisest man can never learn
all there is to shoemaking.

You can see by all this that the scientific use of our intellect is
furthered by special knowledge only in the corresponding details. For
this reason it does not satisfy us to have some logicians tell us how
many kinds of concepts, judgments and conclusions are contained in our
intellect. These are special details of logic. But the thing of first
importance for the student of logic is the elucidation of the universal
concept of truth, not the accumulation of special truths.

Special truths enlighten the intellect. But the understanding that all
specialties are connected with one another by one monad or unit which is
truth itself gives us a certain general enlightenment which certainly
does not render any special research unnecessary, or take the place of
it, but which may well serve as the foundation of all research, which
may therefore be called a fundamental assistance.

I may remark in passing that the understanding of logical science is
rendered especially difficult by the fact that the unpracticed
understands all terms and concepts only in their narrow popular meaning,
while the subject matter leads up continually into the widest fields.

When I speak of parts of the world, you must not think merely of
geographical parts, but you must think farther until you arrive at the
insight that stars and bricks, matter and force, in short all parts of
the world are world parts.

The logical difficulty may be principally traced to the lack of
familiarity with the comprehensive categories. It will be clear to you
that thinking and being, phenomenon and truth, etc., are conceptions of
the widest scope. So you may have some difficulty in distinguishing
between concepts of truth, and true concepts. And yet this is the same
as making a distinction between the general class of herbs and its
individual species. The mere intercourse with such comprehensive
concepts as truth, existence, universe, is an excellent school of
intellectual enlightenment.

Perhaps you may object to the deviation of a science devoted to the
special study of the faculty of thought into such fields as existence or
truth. But a logic confined to an analysis of the faculty of
understanding would be narrow compared to one representing this faculty
of understanding at work in real life. If the science of the eye were to
treat only of the various parts of the eye without considering the
things outside connected with its function, the light, the objects, in
short, the vision of the eye, it would be more an anatomy of the eye
than a general science of the eye. At all events a science which
represents not alone the subjective faculty of vision, but also the
living activity of the eye, the objective field of vision inseparable
from the subjective faculty, is a far more comprehensive instruction, a
higher enlightenment of the human brain.

In my opinion, logic should not so much treat of the analysis of the
intellectual subject as of the purpose and object of the faculty of
thought, its culture, which is not accomplished by the intellect itself,
but by its connection with the world of truth, its interrelation with
the universal existence.

What can a logic accomplish which divides thought into analytical and
synthetical thoughts, which speaks of inductive and deductive
understanding and of a dozen other kinds, but which finally declines to
meet the question of the relation of thought and understanding to truth,
and fails to indicate what and where is divine truth and how we may
arrive at it?

Pilate, the typical sceptic, shrugs his shoulders; the clergymen make a
mystery of divine truth; the natural sciences care only for the true
conceptions, but naught for the concept of truth; and then the special
science of understanding, formal logic, tries to refer its task to
philosophy or world wisdom.

I have already pointed out that the titles of the principal works on
philosophy indicate that the whole world wisdom turns around the
question: How can our brain be enlightened, how can it arrive at truth?
The naturalists answer that this can be accomplished by special studies,
and they are frequently opposed to philosophical research which makes
general truth its main object, and belittle it. You will readily see
that this is a mistake when you consider that, to illustrate, a machine
or an organism as a whole is still something more than a mere sum of its
parts.

No matter how well you may know each single part, yet you will not
understand the whole machine or organism by this means alone. The
universe is not an aggregation of unorganized parts, but a living
process which must be understood not only in its parts but also as a
whole. We may pass for the moment the question whether the Milky Way may
be dissolved into stars, and whether the stars may become globes like
our Earth which may develop plants, animals, and intelligent beings. The
thing which is evident is that there is a process of development, that
all nature takes part in this movement, that the universe is a whole
without end, composed of an infinite number of parts; a coming and
going, an eternal transformation, which is always identical with itself
and always the same world. What all this would be without our eyes and
ears and without the intellect by means of which we use eyes and ears,
what the world "in itself" is, that is a senseless and transcendental
speculation.

The science of logic must deal only with the actual world which is
inseparable from us and from our thoughts.

This world which we hear, see, smell, in which we live and breathe, is
the world of truth or the true world. That is a fact. Must I prove this?
And how is a fact proven? How do we prove that a peach is a delicious
fruit? One goes and eats it. In the same way, you may now go and enjoy
life, of course in a rational manner, and I am convinced that your own
love of life will tell you that it is proof positive of the truth of the
world, of its actuality.

But even in the midst of this actual world there is present an
inconsistent element, a human race with a confused logic. This race has
been led by various depressing and saddening circumstances to blacken
the delicious truth of this world and to look for a transcendental truth
in philosophical metaphysics or religious fantasmagorias, both of which
are parts of the same stew. The philosophers of misery who make of the
world of truth a vain shadow and a miserable vale of sorrow must needs
be convinced by logic that the living world is the only true one.

Well, that is not so difficult. But there is a danger of getting into a
vicious circle of errors, imitating a snake biting its own tail. I have
to prove logically that the world and truth are one and the same thing,
before we have come to an agreement as to what is logical truth or true
logic. Nevertheless, nature has assisted us. The logic of nature is the
true logic by the help of which we can agree. Nothing more is required
than a somewhat trained brain.

Take two men having a dispute about truth. One of them says it is one
thing, the other that it is something else. So they are arguing about
that which is. This last word is a form of the verb to be. Hence in
arguing whether the remote nebula in the heavens is a brick or a star, a
male or a female, one is always discussing some form of existence. All
disputes turn around forms of existence, but existence itself is an
undisputable truth.

Have I now still to prove that all existence is of the same category?
Are there any stones that do not belong to the category of stones, or
any kind of wood which is iron? What would become of reason and
language, if such a thing were to be considered? And yet, much that is
being said by opponents is of such a nature.

If I have succeeded in convincing you that the universe is the truth,
there still remains the special question: What place shall we assign to
fantastic ideas, error, and untruth? If the universe is the truth, then
everything would be true, and hence it seems contradictory that error
and untruth should have a place in truth or in the world. Of this more
anon. I shall only point out in passing that untruth may without any
contradiction belong to truth, just as weeds are a negation of herbs and
still at the same time herbs.

In conclusion I call your attention to the eminently proletarian
character of the science of truth. It gives to the working class the
logical justification to renounce all clerical and mystic control and to
look for salvation in this same world in which divine truth is living.




SEVENTH LETTER


The philologists distinguish carefully between a science of language and
a science of languages. The latter teaches Egyptian, Assyrian, Hebrew,
Greek, Latin, English, French, etc., while the former treats of the
general characteristics common to all languages, of language itself.

Philosophical logic stands in the same relation to other sciences. The
latter make us acquainted with special truths, while logic treats of
truth in general. Those overintelligent people who claim that truth is
merely a collective term for many truths do not see the woods for trees.
Herder, Wilhelm von Humboldt, Max Mueller, Steinthal, etc., have many
things to say about the science of language of which the linguists with
many languages never dream.

The science of language, aside from its many amenities, is also burdened
with a difficult problem which it cannot solve without the help of
logic. This problem is the point of differentiation where babbling and
word-mongery cease and intelligent speech begins. For human speech has a
certain meaning, and even the cries of the animals are not without
sense. The sparrows know how to converse together, the rooster calls
his flock together, the dog knows how to announce that a stranger
enters his master's home. Not alone the jokers, but serious thinkers
speak of animal language, of a sign language, and maintain that speech
does not alone consist of words, but also of inarticulate sounds and
gestures. Poets endow even the storm, the thunder and the winds with
speech. We wish to clear this confusion and ascertain what language is
and where it begins. Languages, as is well known, have their beginning
at the Tower of Babel. But in order to get close to language, we must
look for a beginning of things either in God or in logic.

You know the old question: Which was first, the egg or the hen? But only
a frivolous mind overlooks the serious side of this question and turns
it into a mere joke. The question of beginning and end is an eminently
logical one, and an unequivocal and clear answer to it would bring light
not alone into the science of language, but also into the human brain.

Let us, therefore, follow up the problem of the "origin of language" a
little farther. When our forefathers dealt with this question, they
thought that a God had given speech to man or some genius had invented
it. They thought of a beginning in time. The modern thinkers speculate
more deeply. They have found out that language is not a fixed thing, but
fluid, and has risen from low beginnings to a great perfection. We can
no more find its temporal beginning by looking backward than we can see
its end by looking ahead. For this reason we no longer look for its
temporal, but for its ideological beginning. (Steinthal.) We should like
to have a fixed mark where we might say: Up to this point that which
resembles speech is only roaring, exclamation, noise, and here is the
beginning of the well articulated sound which deserves the name of
"spoken word."

But there is still another factor which complicates the question
further. Some say: It is not only the sound, the word, which constitutes
speech, but the connected sentence; there must be sense and reason mixed
with it. And this applies to the speaker and to the listener. Language
presupposes reason.

Then, again, intellect is not a fixed thing, but a fluid process which
develops in, from, and by speech. So it appears on one side as if the
mind produces language, and on the other, as if language produces the
mind, the reason. Where, then, is the beginning and end, and how can we
bring order into these relations?

For us, who are studying the mind, not the language, the conclusion
follows that it is not alone the word, but also the sound, the tone, the
gesture, that all things have a meaning and speak a language. We find
mind wherever we penetrate with our mind. Not alone language, but the
world is connected with the mind, with the thought. But the connection
with language may well serve as an illustration by which the connection
of the cosmic mind may be demonstrated and the human brain illuminated.

Language shares the honor with the mind of being extolled, even in this
sober century, if not to the skies, at least far out of the general
connection of common things. For this reason, we must emphasize in the
case of language as in that of the mind, that they exist, that they are
part and parcel of the universal existence. At this point I wish to give
you a vivid illustration of the unity of all being by pointing out that
it is indubitably established by the existence of one single name which
is sufficient to designate _All_. True, language employs many names for
this unity of the world, but that is a luxury. It is logical and
necessary for the intellect to have _one_ name for the _All_, because
everything is not only infinitely variegated, but also infinitely one,
or a unit. There are many different waters, but all water partakes of
the general nature of water. Unless that nature is present, there is no
water and the name of water does not apply. In the same way there are
many kinds of oil; olive oil, kerosene oil, castor oil, etc., and each
kind has its own subdivisions. But everything that has a common name is
a unit.

Kindly observe, now, that the names of things form just such circles as
the water does after being struck by a stone. Just as the name water, so
the name oil indicates a ring. Then the name fluid constitutes another
and wider ring which includes both oil and water. Then the name matter
draws a still wider circle and includes solids as well as fluids, and
finally the name being, or _All_, includes mind and matter, all matter
and force, including heaven and hell, in one sole ring, in one unit.

On the basis of this universal unity, from which it becomes apparent
that high and low, dry and fluid, in short the whole universe is made of
the same substance, any fantastic thinker can prove that human and
animal language is one, for otherwise one could not refer to both of
them as language. He may then justly contend that speech, producing a
sound, is a noise, that speech and noise are one. Speech is sound and
sound speaks. In this way language would have no beginning and no end.
In the last analysis it would be one with all things, and all things
would be one with it. In this way the whole universe would become an
inexplicable, incomprehensible, inexpressible mixture of speech.

And yet it is an old story that man's insight grows the more he
magnifies a thing. The more excessively we exaggerate a thing, the
plainer become its boundaries. Language indeed requires one single name
for _All_, but it also requires an infinite number of names in order to
specify the parts of _All_. Inasmuch as language claims to be only a
part of existence, this part has to be bounded, and you should in this
connection remember the unlimited freedom of man in drawing such
boundaries. Words are not merely empty words, but names of cosmic parts,
of cosmic rings of undulation. Language, or rather the mind connected
with language, wishes to bound the infinite by the help of language. The
instinctive popular use of language does this in a haphazard way.
Conscious science proceeds in an exact manner. Just as it has determined
on the field of temperature what should be called hot and what warm, so
it is at liberty on the field of sounds to determine where the name of
language begins or ceases. The end of the discussion of language is
therefore this: That which has already been done to horse power has not
yet been done to the concept of language; it has been somewhat fixed by
common usage, but only insufficiently. And so the moral of this tale is
that the things of this world, even mind and language, are connected and
intermingling undulations of the same stream, which has neither
beginning nor end.

Let me say it once more clearly and without circumlocution: The logic
which I teach and the thought which is its object are parts of the
world, of the infinite, and every part being a piece of the infinite is
likewise infinite. Every part partakes of the nature of the infinite.
Hence you must not expect that I should exhaust my infinite subject. I
confine myself to the logical chapter of "the One and the Many." I
simply wish to make it plain that without any contradiction the whole
multiplicity of existence is of the same nature, and that this oneness
of nature subdivides into manifold forms. The world is interconnected
and this interconnection is subdivided into departments. It adds to the
general enlightenment of the human brain to recognize this in regard to
language, to mind, to all parts of the universe.

I repeat, then: One may think logically without having attended any
lectures on logic, just as one may raise potatoes without a scientific
knowledge of agriculture. It was possible to invent the thermometer, to
clearly distinguish between sounds and colors, and a hundred other
things, without having explained the faculty of discrimination. But the
most abstract distinctions, such as beginning and end, word and meaning,
body and soul, man and animal, matter and force, truth and error,
presuppose for their explanation a logical explanation of their
interconnection with our intellect.




EIGHTH LETTER


Dear Eugene:

Logic is going through the same experience as economics. The economists
of the capitalist era talk solely of the means and ways by which profit
and surplus value may be increased. They discuss only its relative size,
its increase or decrease. But the thing itself, its origin and descent,
is not discussed. It is passed in silence that profit is extracted from
labor power by paying less for a day's work than is produced by it. The
gentlemen talk only of the "wealth of nations," but not of their
poverty. And though this was due to ignorance in the beginning, it has
later become sheer roguery.

The formal logicians are as ignorant as they are roguish, when they
persist in discussing the intellect or thought in the traditional manner
as if they were isolated things, while ignoring the necessary connection
of the object of the logical study with the world of experiences. This
interconnection leads to an explanation of truth and error, of sense and
nonsense, of god and idols, and this is very inopportune for the
professors. For this reason this unwelcome problem is handed over to the
mystical departments, to metaphysics and religion, so that these
venerable pillars of official wisdom may continue their services to the
ruling classes.

I have already stated in my letters that the kernel of my discussion
turns on the distinction between formal and what I call proletarian
logic. The formal logicians treat the intellect as a thing "in itself,"
while I express in many different ways the fact that the intellect does
not exist by itself, but is interconnected with all things and with the
universe.

That intellect has indeed a transcendental leaning, which seeks vent by
trying to exclude now music, now language, now itself, now some other
fetich from the universal interrelation. But the science of the mind
teaches that the brain watching its own activity finds out that all
affirmations and negations, assertions and contradictions, belong to the
one omnipotent world mechanism, which keeps them stored within itself
and which is actually truth and life. Inasmuch as the human brain is of
the same nature as this automatic universal being and interconnected
with it, logic is at the same time religion, metaphysics, and world
wisdom.[4]

Formal logic teaches that our intellect must keep all things apart, but
does not teach that it must also connect them. This logic is right in
one way and yet does not arrive at the goal of a clear world philosophy,
because it permits the transcendental leaning to exaggerate the
differences and distinctions. It overlooks the paradoxical or
dialectical nature of things which are not only separated but also
connected. What must be understood is that, generally speaking, the
classification of the universe is only a formality. We are, indeed,
justified in distinguishing between above and Below, right and left,
beginning and end, gold and sheet metal, good and bad, but we must also
enlighten ourselves as to how multiplicity can be a unity, the variable
constant, and the constant variable. Formal logic has a wrong name. It
is not formal, but transcendental. It shares the common prejudice that
there are absolutely contradictory things or irreconcilable opposites,
that there are essential differences which have no connection, no bridge
between them, nothing in common. It teaches that contradictions cannot
exist, and contradicts itself by clinging to the belief that there are
irreconcilable contradictions. It teaches that a thing which contradicts
itself is inconceivable, is not true, and thus reveals that it is not
well informed on the formality of contradictions, on the true
conciliation of contradictions, and on universal truth. Gold is not
sheet iron, that is true enough. Whoever calls gold sheet metal or
sheet metal gold, contradicts himself. In the actual world both things
are separated. Yet they are not separated to such extent that gold and
sheet iron do not partake of the same nature, of the nature of all
metal. Gold and sheet iron are unlike metals, but they have the same
metallic likeness. That like things are different and different things
alike, that it is everywhere only a question of the degree of
difference, of formal differences, this is overlooked by "formal" logic
and by all who seek truth in any logical diagram or fetich, instead of
in the eternal, omnipresent existence of the inseparable universe.

Our logic deals with truth or with the universe, which contains the most
sublime gods and the meanest deviltry, in other words, which contains
everything. In the world truth there is contained error, pretense, lies,
just as death also lives in it. In other words, error, pretense, lies,
death are only phenomena, formalities, passing trifles or things which
are nothing compared to the one thing, that thing of all things, which
is being, truth, life.

The understanding of the one living world truth is so greatly aggravated
by the so-called contradictions which it contains. We find for instance
that where one thing ends another begins. The end of the one is the
beginning of another. Every beginning is at the same time an end. Both
are contained in one another, and yet in our minds beginning and end are
separated. We find the beginning and the end everywhere and nowhere. Or
look into space. You do not see any boundary, and yet your vision
reaches only a certain distance. Your vision is bounded and yet there is
no boundary to be seen. Or look at life. Death soon arrives, and yet a
closer look shows that death is not really death, for "a new life arises
from the ruins." The world proves to be the eternal life which does not
know death. It is a contradiction to say that death lives, but this
contradiction can be solved by the understanding that the difference
between life and death, however great, is still a formal one, a
difference which like all other differences is reduced to relative
insignificance by the infinite cosmic life.

There exists a widely diffused school, if this term may be applied to
the unschooled, that preaches patience in the matter of the
systematization of our thoughts or the enlightenment of our intellect,
and though it no longer hopes for a mysterious revelation, yet founds
its faith on natural science which has explained so many things to us
and which is finally supposed to throw light on the "last questions of
all knowledge." But I can easily convince you that the new countries,
plants, animals. Esquimaux, that may be discovered on polar expeditions,
or the inventions which Edison may perhaps make on the field of
electricity, or the experiences which future astronomers may gather in
regard to suns, moons, and comets, while they may add valuable
contributions to science and life, will yet do little toward a correct
general employment of our intellect or to a universal enlightenment of
the human brain. On the other hand, an enlightenment as to the nature
and meaning of contradictions will spread light to the remotest corners
of imagination, into the heavens and eternity, into the existence of the
whole, the unity and difference of all things.

The most drastic, and perhaps the most instructive, illustration of the
correct meaning of contradictions is given by the contrast between
truth and untruth. These two poles are perhaps more widely separated
than the North Pole and the South Pole, and yet they are as intimately
connected as these two. The commonplace logic will hardly listen to the
demonstration of the unity of such apparently wide opposites as truth
and untruth. Therefore you will pardon me, if I illustrate this example
by others, for instance by the contrast between day and night. Take it
that the day lasts twelve hours and the night likewise. Day and night
are opposites. Where there is day cannot be any night, and yet day and
night constitute one single day of twenty-four hours, in which they both
dwell harmoniously. It is the same with truth and untruth. The world is
the truth, and error, pretense, and lies are embodied in it, are parts
of the actual world, just as night is a part of day without confusing
logic. We may honestly speak of genuine pretense and true lies, without
any contradiction. Just as unreason has still some reason left, so
untruth still lives inevitably in truth, because the latter is
all-embracing, is the universe.

"Contradictions cannot exist." But confused brains full of
contradictions nevertheless exist. Knives without handles and blades,
two mountains without a valley between them, and other nonsense, exist
as a phrase. There are two kinds of contradictions: Senseless ones and
very sensible ones. Yea, the whole world[5] is an infinite and
inexhaustible contradiction, which contains innumerable sensible
statements and misstatements, which never disappear and yet may be
solved harmoniously by the help of time and reason.

From this it follows that the formal criteria of truth which are on
everybody's tongue, such as the identity of thought with its object, and
the absence of all contradictions, do not furnish a basis at all for the
analysis of truth and cannot define it, except in an ignorant and
roguish way.

Since the prophet Daniel scattered ashes in the temple and unmasked the
servants of Baal, other idol worshippers have continued to stimulate the
people to daily sacrifices, in order to steal the victuals at night.
This continual rascality and its repeated exposure has blunted the
desire of the people to serve truth, so that a great many have become
frivolous and indifferent. This rascally logic, not to mention
ignorance, encourages the frivolous and indifferent in their godless
departure from truth. In the pulpit and in the garb of science it
preaches the vanity and inadequacy of research. This is preached not as
a dogma, but as a logical science, and thus the senseless contradiction
is committed of trying to prove truly by the help of the intellect that
the intellect is too limited to grasp the truth and prove it.

In its historical course logical research once arrived at such a result
in good faith. This happened in the famous "Critique of Reason" of
Immanuel Kant. Our shrewd friends of darkness now seek to utilize the
fame of this work, to which it is entitled on account of its great
contribution toward the elucidation of cosmic truth, for the purpose of
preventing on the strength of it a progress of enlightenment beyond the
standpoint of Kant.

By the way, Kant has demonstrated that the truth in general is as much a
matter of experience as the brain with which we search for it. He has
shown beyond a doubt that our eyes and ears are inseparably connected
with our mind and with the whole cosmic truth. But the persistent spirit
of transcendentalism, or what is the same thing, the traditional belief
in the transcendental spirit, has led him to grant a mysterious
existence alongside of or above the human mind, alongside of or above
the cosmic truth, to an incomprehensible monster spirit and to a
fantastical hyper-truth.

The Kantian critique of reason did not understand the universality of
truth. It still affirmed the existence of two worlds and two truths
without any unity. And as it is the curse of the evil deed to generate
more evil, it produced two intellects. (1) The poor little subservient
intellect of man, and (2) the enormous and abnormal intellect of the
_Lord_, who is supposed to understand the incomprehensible and to untie
the most senseless contradictions like so many knots.

The truth which is the universe, the cosmic or universal truth, will
reveal to you the absurdity of abnormal humility which is contained in
the dualistic doctrine of the two minds. Of course, the philosopher Kant
had a greater intellect than Peter Simple. But nevertheless all
intellects partake of the nature of the general intellect, and no
intellect can step above or below this general nature without losing
sense or reason. One cannot speak of another, higher, faculty of thought
than that acquired by man through experience without dropping from logic
to absurdity. No doubt the animal world possesses something similar to
intellect. No doubt, also, the animal mind may be separated from the
human mind by some special name, for instance "instinct." No doubt,
furthermore, our reason is strengthened by culture from generation to
generation. But that anywhere and at any time there should come into
existence a faculty of thought which would stand outside of the cosmic
interconnection, that is an absurd conception and a senseless thing.
Just as necessarily as all water has one and the same nature, that of
being wet, just so necessarily every intelligence and every thought
partakes of the general nature of thought and must logically be a part,
a particular part, of the one universal and empirical world.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] Religion denotes here as much as conception of the world and
explanation of its last questions; and metaphysics stands here for
everything conceivable, which meaning embraces more than the mere
tangible.--EDITOR.

[5] When we consider its many parts as such.--EDITOR.




NINTH LETTER


Repetition, my dear Eugene, is the mother of all study.

Logic aims to teach you the proper use of the intellect, not only in
this or that branch of study, but in the general branch of truth. Its
result is the following precept: In all things always remember the
universal interrelation.

In order to illustrate this statement a little, let me point out that in
the period of scholasticism thinking was practiced without any
interconnection with the rest of the world, merely by brown study. The
present age of natural sciences then cultivated a better method. But the
method of the natural sciences has not succeeded so far in being applied
to the field of law, morals, politics, psychology, and philosophy,
because the logical understanding of the total interrelation of the
indivisible world truth was lacking, because the concept of truth was
enveloped in darkness, and because the privileged classes have a great
interest in maintaining darkness.

For this reason, the true method of reasoning still requires many
explanations. The socialist, for instance, is charged with inciting the
people, with promising more than he can keep and with sowing strife in
the hearts of men. Those who make this charge in the commonplace sense,
tear two things, viz., peace and strife, out of their due connection. As
a matter of fact, peace and strife must always dwell together. A nation
whose peace were not intermingled with a certain strife, would be a
nation of sluggards. Thanks to the strife in their breasts, the nations
are progressive and stirring. Motion is the essence of the world, and
national motion is inconceivable without the striving of men. For the
sake of development and culture, nations must always demand more than
they can immediately attain. On the other hand, striving of this sort is
not sufficient. One must not demand more than one can obtain, nor
promise more than one can give. For this reason the logical socialist
must know that even in the future society the trees will not grow into
the clouds, and that the peace for which we hope and strive will always
be mixed with strife. The music of the future, although more harmonious
than the music of the present, will nevertheless be eternally marred by
disharmony. There is nothing perfect in the world, because only the
whole universe is perfect, because the universe alone is perfectness
itself.

Eternal peace, as the warriors may justly claim, is an illusion, so long
as we think of peace in a transcendental way and as being separated from
strife. But the sons of the war god who would like to continue the
thunder of cannons and the rattle of sabers eternally, are no less the
victims of illusion, if not something worse. Eternal is only war in
peace and peace in war, although that may seem senseless to the
logicians of the old school. Thus even the inevitable war will become
more peaceful and humane in the course of time. The barbarian form of
war, of which the Prussians are masters, is not destined to last
forever, unless we speak of the illogical eternity of the preacher which
opens its doors by leaving the temporal world. In defending the social
war, I wish to have it understood that neither the conceptions nor the
things called war and peace are separated by a Chinese wall.

Everything is interconnected and interdependent. It is true that strife
and animosities may be exaggerated, and so may peace. But whatever blame
attaches to this, refers only to the exaggeration. It is not the
animosity, but the excessive animosity which deserves censure. By
recognizing the logical interconnection between peace and strife, the
dispute of the parties is rendered saner. There is then no longer a
question of a yawning chasm between satisfaction and dissatisfaction,
but of something about which an agreement is possible, viz., how much
there is of either.

As peace and war in the human breast, so all variety intermingles in the
cosmic unit. In the novel "_Homo Sum_," by Ebers, the monk Paulus, who
tasted the delights of the preliminary celestial ecstasy when
castigating his body, says: "I truly believe that it is just as
difficult on this globe to find pain without joy as joy without pain."
And Till Eulenspiegel, that type of a practical joker, showed an
understanding of dialectics when he lightened the difficulty of
ascending a mountain by the reflection that the descent on the other
side would be so much easier. Logic is no more senseless in teaching
that all things, even the most opposite, are of the same substance than
it is in showing that night belongs to day and weeds to herbs.

In order that these petty illustrations may not confuse your mind, it
should be remembered that the essential point is the elucidation of the
great contradiction between mind and matter, between thinking and being,
which includes all petty contradictions.

In order to think in accordance with logical consistency, you must not
regard a thing as something independent, but consider everything as
fluid particles of the same substance, which is the thing of all things,
the world, the truth, and life.

Our logic is therefore the science of truth. This truth is neither above
nor below, neither in Jerusalem nor in Jericho, neither in the spirit
nor in the flesh, but everywhere.

Our logic is the science of understanding. It teaches that you must not
search for understanding by cudgeling your brain, but only in connection
with experience, with the interrelation of things.

Since man in his experience also meets errors, science was dominated for
centuries by the question whether truth and experience are not two
different things, whether all our experience is only an illusion of our
senses. Cartesius replied to this: "No; the belief in a perfect, true
being cannot admit of such a delusion." By substituting the concept of
truth for the concept of God, we are certain that the world of
experience is not a ghost, but the most actual reality.

Although the great Kant called the cosmic truth a phenomenon, because he
could not divest his mind of transcendental faith, of the faith in a
transcendental truth, still we know today that all distinctions which
are ever made constitute but a nibbling at the universal unit. As
necessarily as all variety in baking produces bakery wares, just as
necessarily heaven and earth, and everything connected with them, are
parts of the indivisible truth which is also called nature, cosmos,
universe, God, and experience. Language gives to its darling truth many
different pet names, just as a happy mother calls her heart's treasure
by a thousand endearing terms.

Feuerbach reasons in this fashion: "If God is not a personal being
different from nature and man, then he is an entirely superfluous
being.... The use of the word God which is always combined with the
conception of a separate being, is a disturbing and confusing abuse. Why
do you want to be a theist, if you are a naturalist, or a naturalist if
you are a theist? Away with this contradiction! Where God is confounded
with nature, or nature with God, there is neither God nor nature, but a
mystical amphibious hermaphrodite."

Feuerbach is right. The name of God is much abused. But truth is also
blasphemed by negation and frivolousness. The sober understanding that
God, truth, nature, are various names for the same thing permits us to
play with them without despairing of the matter. Indeed, this play of
words serves to make the subject clear.

But logic demands that we recognize truth as the absolute, as the power,
the force, and the glory, which comprises all logical and illogical
distinctions, together with the things to be distinguished, even the
faculty of distinguishing itself.

Such an understanding of the absolute, such world wisdom, will not make
you conceited, because it makes you conscious of the fact that your
understanding has grasped celestial truth which at the same time is
terrestrial, only in a very general way. You possess nothing but a
definition of truth. And without denying that definitions are valuable
and instructive, I, at the same time, point out that you know very
little about astronomy when you know that it is the science of the
stars. No matter, therefore, how clearly I may have defined truth, we
require for its complete understanding all the details of science, and
that is too much for me, for you, and for any individual human being.

Just as our vision never exhausts the visible, because the eye sees an
object but does not fully penetrate it, just so can the intellect never
fully understand and fathom the absolute all, the truth, or God. But we
can understand and fathom individual truths, parts of the universal
truth. What understanding grasps is not the truth itself, but yet it is
true understanding.




TENTH LETTER


Dear Eugene:

My previous lectures instructed you as to the very trivial fact that the
thought is a part of the world. In proceeding from the part to the
whole, I passed logically from the mouth of the river to its source. The
universe is the maternal womb of the intellect as of all things.

It occurs to me that you or some teacher of logic might accuse my
letters of lack of logic. It may seem that these lectures fail to
present the subject matter in a strictly systematized form. You will,
please, excuse this in part with the fact that they appear in the form
of letters. This form demands that the contents should be logically
arranged and rounded off in each letter. It should furthermore serve as
an excuse for any defect, that my subject is not a finished one, not
perfectly elaborated by others before me. I am here not merely a
lecturer, but also an explorer on a field which, though much
investigated, yet is still rather obscure.

The conclusion of my last letter explained that the use of the term God
for the universe has much to recommend it and much to disqualify it. But
it is easily apparent that the universe with its absolute qualities is
closely related to that infinite being of whom Jakob Boehme, the
philosophical shoemaker, said: "He is neither the light nor the
darkness, neither love nor anger, but the eternal One.... Hence all
forces are merely one sole force."

That nothing exists outside of the universe, that everything is
contained in the All, that the All, with all real and imagined beings,
is everything, that it is neither sweet nor sour, neither great nor
small, but just everything and all, this statement is as obvious as the
often and long repeated statement of identity: A equals A.

The All is omnipotent, omnipresent, all-wise. This last term might be
questioned, since the universe is not a dummy with a monster head and
giant brain. For this very reason it was considered inappropriate to
apply the name of God to the universe, because that creates the
impression of a personal being. The All thinks only by means of human
brains, and for this reason omniscience cannot be anything but common
human knowledge. Of course, you, I, and every other man, are very
limited in our knowledge. But still we may indulge in the hope that the
things which we do not know are known by other men or will be discovered
by future generations, so that the collective human mind will know
everything that is knowable. We cannot see everything that is visible;
there are animals that can see even better than we can. But since even
the most intelligent animal is supposed to lack the highest degree of
intelligence, reason and science, there is no one who knows anything
except the human race. Mankind is omniscient. But since all our science
is derived only from the world, mankind is only the formal bearer of
intelligence, and it belongs to the fountain of all things, to eternal
nature. Our wisdom is the wisdom of nature, is world wisdom. Although
there may be inhabitants of the moon and of other stars who may know
things which are unknown to us, still that is in the first place a mere
speculation of little value, and in the second place universal
omniscience or the omniscient universe would not in the least be
affected thereby. It is a reasonable use of the language to regard human
wisdom as the only and omniscient wisdom, just as all natural and wet
water is called water without any further modification. I believe in the
statement of Protagoras: "Man is the measure of all things." Whoever
uses a different measure, uses a superhuman, transcendental measure.[6]

Hence, when I call the cosmic essence of all existence omnipotent, you
will not think of a senseless magic power which forges knives without
handles and blades, nor will you read any transcendental meaning into my
use of the term omniscience.

Omniscience belongs obviously under the head of logic, because the organ
of science and wisdom is the object of the study of logic. And it must
now be stated that the human mind does not only exceed the animal mind
by far, but is also the _non plus ultra_ of all minds. But it must be
retained that this mind can only be whatever it is in connection with
the divine universe which I may also be permitted to call worldly deity.
This name is fitting because it is a means of understanding that in the
first place no monster mind rules the world, and in the second place the
natural universe is not a mere sum of all things, but truth and life.

Of course, the identification of the universe with the religious God is
only a comparison, and comparisons are lame. Still we may compare the
sun with an eternal lamp or the moon with a candle, or the German prime
minister with a butler.

Logic shall teach you that everything which may be distinguished by the
faculty of understanding is of the same kind, everything is of common
clay, but the whole is sublimely elevated above all that is commonplace.
Mere frivolous atheism, as created by the free-thinkers, is not
sufficient. A bare denial of God always creates some other idol worship.
The positive understanding of the divine world truth is an indispensable
requirement for the radical extermination of all idol worship.

Logic must begin with the sublime, infinite, absolute. All logical,
consistent or interconnected thinking must take its departure from it.
The so-called scientific research after temporal causes, after the egg
from which the chicken was hatched, after the hen from which the egg
came, after the kindred organisms which developed the hen by natural
selection and adaption according to Darwin, this is a very valuable
research without which we can never understand the world process. But
nevertheless, such research must not satisfy the thinking man. Logic
demands from everybody that he or she should search for the highest, for
the cause of all causes. Whoever feels the desire to bring logical order
into his consciousness, must know that the finite and infinite, the
relative and the absolute, the special truths and the one general truth,
are contained in one another.

Logical thought as demanded by science means nothing but to be aware of
the final cause, the absolute foundation of all thought. This foundation
is the universe, an attribute of which is the external and internal
human head. The thousand year old dispute between the materialists and
the idealists turns on the question whether the spirit is material or
the world spiritual. Our answer is plain and clear: They both belong
together, they together make up the one thing, the thing of all things.
Mind and matter are two attributes of the same substance. They may be
compared the same as fish and flesh, the former being called very
appropriately by some African tribes "water flesh." In this way, matter
and mind are two kinds of meat of a different and yet of the same
nature.

I remember reading in a satirical paper the question: "What is a
gentleman? Answer: A gentleman is a loafer with money, and a loafer is a
gentleman without money." Just as these two types of men are essentially
alike and differ only in the small matter of money, so you should
remember that there are no essential differences, that all differences
are merely matters of attributes and qualities of the same absolute
world substance. To distinguish correctly and logically, that is the
point which logic is aiming to teach us. To make distinctions is the
function which is also called perceiving, knowing, understanding,
comprehending. When you consider that this function is innate in man,
and that man together with his faculty of understanding is innate in
nature, then you recognize all distinctions and the distinguished
objects as attributes of the undistinguished One, of the absolute,
compared to which all things are only relative things, in other words,
attributes.

I am endeavoring to make clear to you that logical thinking requires the
awakening of the consciousness of the one supreme general nature. And
you must not think of this sum of all existence in the stupid way in
which people used to think of the animal kingdom before Darwin, but
regard the world as a living organic unit, from which the faculty of
understanding has blossomed the same as all other things. In the logic
of the narrow-minded, all animal species are widely separated, without
any living interconnection, while Darwin has demonstrated the uniform
process, the intermingling life in multiform creation. The illustration
of this famous zoologist of the transition from one species to another
may serve as an example of the logical transitions in the world process,
in which all differences are but undulations. All our classifications
must always remember the undivided basis on which they are resting.

We have shown that the intellect divides the universal nature,
classifies and analyzes it, and we have learned of the universal nature
that it not only furnishes to the intellect the material for its work,
but also that the world comprises within its general process the
intellectual process, that the intellectual movement is a specialization
of the natural movement.

The world is not only the object, but also the subject of understanding,
it understands, it dissects its own multiplicity by means of the human
intellect. Our wisdom is world wisdom in a two-fold sense: The world is
that which is being understood, classified, analyzed, and at the same
time it is that which, by the help of our intellect, practices
understanding, classification, etc. When I call the human mind the
cosmic mind, the mind of the supreme being, I wish to have it understood
that there is nothing mysterious about this, that I merely intend to
show that thought or intelligence can only operate in the universal
cosmic interconnection, that it is not an abnormal and transcendental
thing, but a thing like all other things.

You must not conceive of the spirit as the producer of truth, as a
little god, but only as a means. The true god, the divine truth, has our
intellect for an attribute. The latter does not produce truth, but only
the understanding of truth. It produces only pictures of truth which are
all more or less perfect. Of course, it is not at all immaterial whether
we produce a more or less faithful, a true or a false picture of truth,
but still this is, at present and for us here, a secondary matter. The
main thing is to know that truth, or nature, is far above all pictures,
and still consists of parts, of forms, which together constitute the
whole.

FOOTNOTE:

[6] Please note the additional explanation on page 77.--EDITOR.




ELEVENTH LETTER


Dear Eugene:

Johannes Scherr relates in the "Gartenlaube," a German family paper, in
an article entitled "Mahomet and His Work," that insane doctrinarians
are searching for people without religion. This has not succeeded, it is
said, although the spark of religious feeling is glowing very dimly in
peoples that are close to the animal. But nevertheless, he continues,
the expressions of religious feeling mark the boundary line where the
beast ceases and man begins. For just as in the higher stages of
civilization religion means the consciousness of the finite of being one
with the infinite, so in the lower stages of civilization the indefinite
impulse is felt by man to connect his special nature with the universal
nature and bring them into harmony. This is idealism, the idealistic
need. It is obvious that, and why, the people have always and everywhere
sought and found satisfaction for their idealistic longings in religion.
But, adds the shrewd observer, I must remark that I do not refer to the
shifting population when I say "people," for sad to relate, that
population is torn away from all connection with natural conditions. I
refer to the "settled, the permanent, the true people."

This quotation shows that a champion of the "true people" is in conflict
with true logic. In dividing a population into shifting and settled
people, one should retain as a basis the logical consciousness that all
classes of people are embraced by one class; furthermore, that human,
monkey, ant, and other nations are parts of the one and the same nation;
until finally man and animal, real and imaginary, with all religious and
godless things, are ultimately fused in the world unit and can never be
"torn away from all connection with natural conditions."

All distinctions must logically be based on the consciousness of the
absolute and universal unity, of the interconnection of all things. For
this reason some pious people, with their God in whom everything is
living and has its being, have more logic than some freethinkers of the
class of Johannes Scherr who have no coherence in their method of
thought. The faithful think more logically than the narrowly skeptical,
for they begin and end with God. But still they cannot think quite
logically, because they cannot establish any logical connection between
their eternally perfect Lord and evil, the devil, disease, misery, sin,
in short all the sufferings and vanities here below.

The unit of nature, the infinite, is the quintessence of logic. Neither
natural science in the narrow sense of the word, nor metaphysics, nor
formal logic, can give any clue as to the nature of this thing of
things. This can be done only by a science of understanding which
recognizes matter and mind and all opposites and contradictions as
formalities of the universe. How can a man who is out of touch with the
mass of the shifting population feel that he is one with the universe?
Whoever regards any special class as the true people, has no
understanding either of the common people or of the absolute universe.

Proletarian logic teaches not only the equality of all human beings, but
universal equality. And mark well, this universal equality does not
conflict with variety any more than a variety of pots and jugs conflicts
with the unity of vessels, or the manifold forms of bretzels and rolls
with the unity of bakery ware.

The enemies of democratic development, in attacking the idea of freedom
and equality, point to the manifoldness of nature, the individual
differences of men, the distinctions between weak and strong, wise and
fools, men and women, and consider it tyranny to attempt to equalize
that which nature has made different. They cannot understand that like
things may be different and different things alike. They are blinded by
their class logic which sees only the differences, but not the unity,
not the transfusion of all classes.

Class logic teaches that contradictory things cannot exist. According to
it, a thing cannot be genuine and false at the same time. This class
logic has a narrow conception of existence. It has only observed that
there are many different things in nature, but has overlooked the fact
that all these things have also a general nature. We, on the other hand,
recognize that every thing, every person, is a part of the infinite
world and partakes of its general nature, is eternal and perishable,
true and untrue, great and small, one sided and manyfold, in short
contradictory.

Before and after Socrates, philosophy and religion have searched for the
genuine, right, good, true, and beautiful, but have reached no
harmonious results. But it cannot be denied that in the course of the
centuries the problem has become clearer and clearer. The great names of
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Bacon, Cartesius, Spinoza,
Leibniz, Kant, Hegel, are milestones on the highway of this progress.
The evolution is apparent, but the interrelation between the
intellectual and physical, and especially between intellectual and
economic evolution, is much ignored. The bridge between mind and body
was not found, and philosophical evolution has been regarded up to our
day as a purely mental process accomplished by one or two dozen of
famous brains. I wish to point out to you now, that proletarian logic is
the continuation of the preceding research after the genuine, true,
good, and beautiful. It teaches how to conceive of these ideals
logically, and it has not so much proceeded from any one talented
brain, but is rather the product of the entire cosmic process.

Philosophical brains have developed the science of logical thought only
to the extent that the material development of the world has stimulated
them to do so. You must regard the human brains only as secondary levers
of the universal lever which is not only genuine, true, good, and
beautiful, but truth, goodness, and beauty itself, or the world and the
absolute.

The understanding of the absolute which is called "good Lord," and then
again "the bad world," in other words the selfsufficient cosmos, is very
inconvenient to the wisdom of the professors, and they are attempting to
assign it to a special study which they call "metaphysics." This
division of labor is not introduced for the purpose of making research
more productive, but of surrounding this study by mysterious darkness.
The professors who lecture to the young people on formal logic set aside
the ancient research after the true, the good, the beautiful, and try to
place these ideals outside of the light of science in order to be able
to preserve them unchanged in the tabernacle of faith.

This charge may seem unjust, because the learned gentlemen reserved a
corner for the true, the good, and the beautiful in their metaphysical
department. But there is something peculiar about this. The great Kant
has asked the plain question: "Is metaphysics practicable as a science?"
Answer: No! The transcendental truth, etc., sought by metaphysics, and
named God, freedom, immortality in Christian language, cannot be found
by any reason. But being a child of his time, the great philosopher
makes a small concession to the transcendental.

He teaches: Although transcendental truth cannot be located
scientifically, still the religious faith in its existence is wholesome.
We, in our time, think more soberly about this theory of salvation and
accept the elimination of all transcendentalism from science. While the
spokesmen of the "true people" would like to hide their exalted truth,
freedom, and immortality behind the curtains of temples, we throw the
full daylight of logic on the absolute truth, goodness, and beauty of
the material world.

Logic as the science of correct thought cannot be restricted to any one
object, it cannot exclude any object, whether terrestrial or heavenly,
from its sphere. The great lights of present day learning do not wish to
subordinate the intellect as the object of the logical department, and
absolute truth as the object of the metaphysical department, to one
another, but to co-ordinate them side by side.

But two co-ordinated things which are not subordinated to a third higher
thing lack logic, and the brain which is satisfied by such a condition
suffers from disorder. Logical truth must inevitably be a part of
absolute truth, and it is our duty to remove absolute truth from the
field of metaphysics, of transcendentalism, and to transfer it to the
sober world which forms an inseparable unit with the human mind.

So much for the proletarian duty to continue the research after the
true, the good, and the beautiful which was the object of the
philosophers before and after Socrates. But remember that I am referring
only to the truly good, beautiful, etc., which is contained in the
universal truth of all true specifications. The question of the
ethically good, the esthetically beautiful and the absolutely perfect is
as necessarily contained in the question of the universal truth as red,
blue, and green in the rainbow, of course only in an abstract sense.

Our logic which has for its object the truth of the universe, is the
science of the understanding of the universe, a science of universal
understanding or conception of the world. It teaches that the
interrelation of all things is truth and life, is the genuine, right,
good, and beautiful. All the sublime moving the heart of man, all the
sweet stirring his breast, is the universal nature or the universe. But
the vexing question still remains: What about the negative, the ugly,
the evil, what about error, pretense, standstill, disease, death, and
the devil?

True, the world is vain, evil, ugly. But these are merely accidental
phenomena, only forms and appendages of the world. Its eternity, truth,
goodness, beauty, is substantial, existing, positive. Its negative is
like the darkness which serves to make the light more brilliant, so that
it may overcome the dark and shine so much more brightly.

The spokesmen of the ruling classes are not open for such a sublime
optimism, because they have the pessimistic duty of perpetuating misery
and servitude.




TWELFTH LETTER


Logic, the science of correct thought, demands in the first place true,
or in other words, reasonable thought. Logic deals with reason and
truth.

These two things have been endowed with a mysterious nature, while they
obviously belong to the entire universe and its tangible nature. Reason
and truth are not separated from the other things, are not things in
themselves. There is no such thing. Philosophers who have looked for
them in the depths of the human brain with their hands over their eyes
and engaged in brown study, were on the wrong road. Proletarian logic
differs from conventional logic in that it does not look for reason and
truth behind the curtains of temples, nor in the brains of the learned,
but it discovers them in the actual interconnection of all things and
processes of nature.

Preachers, professors, judges, and politicians are the leaders of "the
wise men of Gotham," and since we have all passed our youth among them,
we find it difficult to get rid of their confused logic.

We owe much of our better insight to the famous philosophers. These men
had many an eccentric notion, but on the whole they were reasonable
fellows who followed the doctrine of the unreliability of the senses and
the faith in the hidden truth and reason more in a theoretical than in a
practical way. In practice they operated with open eyes and ears. Thus
correct logic, although confused by queer notions, has been handed down
to us from generation to generation. Preachers, professors, judges, and
politicians cling to the confused notions, while we take the liberty to
discard them.

Now we recognize not only that reason and truth are connected with the
world, but also that the universe is the supreme reason and truth, is
that being which religion and philosophy have long been looking for, the
most perfect being, which Plato called the true, good and beautiful,
Kant God, freedom, and immortality, and Hegel the absolute.

If he is an atheist who denies that perfection can be found in any
individual, then I am an atheist. And if he is a believer in God who has
the faith in the "most perfect being" with which not alone the
theologists, but also Cartesius and Spinoza have occupied themselves so
much, then I am one of the true children of God.

The abuse of sublime feelings and exalted ideas has filled many hearts
with disgust, so that they care no longer for any unctuous sermons. The
mere flavor of religion is odious to them. Nevertheless I assure you
that we shall never get rid of idol worship, unless we understand the
supreme being, reason or truth, in its true nature.

"Understand" is a mysterious word. To bring light into the mystery of
understanding by a clear theory of understanding, is an integral part of
the science of thought, of logic.

Permit me to compare the faculty of understanding with a photographic
apparatus, by the help of which you strive to obtain a picture of the
cosmic truth. Then you will see at a glance that in this way we can
obtain but a dim picture of the whole. The object appears boundless, too
infinitely great and sublime to permit of copying. And yet we can
approach it. Although we cannot get a true picture of universal truth,
yet we can obtain clear pictures of individual truths, in other words,
we can picture the infinite in its parts. By the help of your
intellect, you can grasp the infinite by means of limitation.

Absolute truth appears to us in relative phenomena. The perfect being is
composed of imperfect parts. A "wise man of Gotham" may regard this as a
senseless contradiction. But we can separate the arms, legs, head, and
trunk from one another, and so separated they will be mere parts of a
corpse, while connected they certainly possess the chance of vitality.
Life is composed of the dead, the most perfect being is composed of
imperfect parts. In the universal truth everything is contained. It is
the perfect being, it includes the whole existence, even the imperfect.
The false, the ugly, the evil, the nasty are involved in the true, the
good, the beautiful. The universal existence is the absolute truth, the
whole is composed of relativities, of parts, of phenomena. Our
understanding, our instrument of thought, is likewise an imperfect part
of the perfect being. Our intellect produces only a dim, imperfect
picture of the absolute, but it reproduces true pictures of its parts,
although pictures only.

There are good and bad, adequate and inadequate, true and false thoughts
and understanding. But there are no absolutely true thoughts. All our
conceptions and ideas are imperfect pictures of the most perfect being
which is inexhaustible in great things as in small things, as a whole
and in parts. Every part of nature is a natural part of the infinite.

I repeat: All parts or things of this world have, apart from their
imperfect nature as parts, also the world nature of the absolute being.
They are imperfect perfections. Our intellect is no exception. The human
mind is the only mind having the name of reason, and is the most
perfect reason which can possibly exist. In the same way, the water of
this earth is the non plus ultra of all water. The belief in another and
different mind, in a monster mind, belongs to the same transcendental
category as the belief in a celestial river without the nature of water
flowing around the castle of Zion. Even the most perfect mind is nothing
else, and cannot be anything else, but an imperfect part of the absolute
world being.

The first thing a student of correct thought has to learn is to
distinguish true thought from false thought, and for this purpose he
must know above all that distinction must not be exaggerated. All
differences can only be relative. The bad and the good pictures belong
to the same family, and all families finally belong to the absolute, are
individuals of the universe.

For the purpose of distinguishing true thoughts from false, it should be
remembered that the true thought is only a part of the truth, a part
which does not exaggerate its own importance, but subordinates itself to
the absolute.

The following illustration may explain this. Although astronomy teaches
that the earth revolves daily around its axis and that the sun is
standing still, it nevertheless knows that the fixed state of the sun is
only a relative truth, so that from a higher point of view both the
earth and the sun are revolving. The consciousness of its relative truth
alone makes the statement of the sun's standstill true. Again, when the
farmer sees that the earth is fixed and that the sun is moving every day
from East to West, he is mistaken only so far as he regards his
standpoint as the whole truth, his farmers' knowledge for absolute
knowledge. The knowledge of the absolute alone enables you to
distinguish correctly between truth and error. Whoever sees the sun
turning around the earth with the consciousness that this revolution is
but a partial truth is not in error, but sees truly. The knowledge of
the absolute truth clears up error and instructs us as to the method of
correct thought. This thought makes us apt, humble, and tolerant in
judging.

The "wisest of men" was very proud of his modesty in knowing that he
knew nothing. His example may well be recommended to-day. Although we
have learned a great deal, we know very little compared to the
inexhaustible fountain of all wisdom, good mother nature. We learn every
day, but we never learn all there is to learn. What was to the credit of
Socrates, was his firm faith in the truth, his conviction of its
existence, and his faith in the mission of the human intellect to search
for truth.

On the contrary, the sophists confused and disputed everything. They
frivolously flouted all truth and research. This same frivolousness now
relies upon Kant who, misled by the prejudice of his time, removed truth
to a transcendental world and therefore deprecatingly called our actual
world the "world of phenomena." In distinction from him, our logic
teaches that the phenomena of this world without exception are parts of
the one truth, and that the true art of understanding consists in
studying the parts.

The doctrine of the sophists to the effect that everything may be denied
and disputed has a certain similarity with ours in that we declare that
the universe is the truth and all parts of it true parts, that smoke and
fog, reason and imagination, dreams and realities, subject and object,
are true parts of the world. They are not the whole truth, but still
true. For this reason it is well to call your attention to the
difference between the sophistical and the logical method of thought.
The contemporaries of Socrates are still alive to-day. They are teaching
in the name of God and believe in nothing, while to us truth, every day
naked and sober truth, is sacred.




THIRTEENTH LETTER


In his "Three Books On The Soul," Aristotle discussed at length the
question whether the human soul has five senses or one. The commentator,
J. H. von Kirchmann, the publisher of the "Philosophical Library,"
remarks in his footnote 172 that man has six senses. He divides feeling
into pure and active feeling. According to this, the phrase of the five
senses belongs to the old iron the same as that of the four elements.
Now neither you, nor I, nor any reader should worry about the question
whether all sensation may be summed up in the one sense of feeling,
whether there are five senses according to Aristotle, or six according
to Kirchmann, or whether there is even a seventh sense for the
transcendental, the organ of which, as some optimists hope, will
gradually be developed with the growing perfection of man. We are
concerned in this matter only so far as it is connected with the
cardinal question, whether the world is only one thing or a mere
collection of an infinite number of disconnected things; whether the
so-called things are independent subjects and objects, or whether they
are only predicates of the one world subject.

Looking through the window I see the river, the street, the bridge,
houses, and trees. Everything is a thing in itself and yet is connected
inseparably with all others. The qualities of the world are regarded by
the intellect as subjects; but the intelligent subject should also know
that its actions, its distinguishing and understanding, are formalities,
a formal dismemberment of the absolute, which in spite of all division
always remains the undivided whole.

In order to master this method of thought, you must understand above all
that the things are only so-called things, but are in reality qualities
of the universe, in other words, relative things or predicates of the
absolute. You will then understand, that our thought has a right to make
one thing as well as six of a chair, its back, its seat, and its four
legs. You will recognize that the five senses of Aristotle are not an
eternal truth, but a classification, which is eternally variable.
Distinguishing means classifying.

I know very well that I am making a bold statement here, and that it is
not easy to justify it. For this reason you must not expect that I can
make my meaning clear in a few sentences. It is not only the general
prejudice which prevents this by making a most mysterious and miraculous
thing of the intellectual function, but also the fact that this thing is
still very obscure, although it has become clearer and clearer in the
course of time.

The freethinking pastor Hironymi writes on this point: "The most
prominent naturalists of the present, such as Dubois-Reymond, who are at
the same time thinkers, admit that they do not know what feeling, life,
consciousness, are, and how they arise. And this ignorance is far more
valuable for truth and religion than the alleged knowledge. Let us,
therefore, continue in the devotion with which we have hitherto admired
the universe without understanding it. The higher existence, the
consciousness, has not been explained, it has remained a miracle, the
only lasting, absolute, miracle."

Thus speaks the preacher who is a know-nothing by nature and makes a
business of admiring and wondering, while we are interested in
understanding and knowing. We wish to fathom the mystery, and hence I
may write still more letters on logic and you may study some more.

I shall try to demonstrate by a trivial example, how it is that
understanding or distinguishing is based on classification.

Take it that you awake at early dawn and notice in a corner of your bed
room something uncouth and moving which you cannot clearly distinguish.
To know that a phenomenon appears is not enough because the term
phenomenon applies to everything, natural and unnatural things, good and
evil spirits. Even if you are sufficiently enlightened to know that the
thing in question must be something natural, still this explains very
little, for the term "nature" again means everything. But you understand
or recognize more when you ascertain that the uncouth thing is dead or
alive, wall paper or garment, man or animal. You will notice that in
this intellectual enlightenment it is simply a matter of classification,
of the head under which the mystery should be classed. To classify the
phenomena of truth and life, means to understand, to use the intellect,
to enlighten the brain.

But we must well consider how far we shall have to go in our
classification in order to find the place in the system which will fully
clarify and determine understanding. Suppose that in the above mentioned
case you have ascertained that the motion is due to a cat, then the
inquiring faculty of understanding has not yet reached the end of its
tether. The next question is then, whether it is your cat or that of
your neighbor, whether it is black, white, or grey, young or old. And
when you finally recognize that it is your tomcat Peter, you must
remember that the subject which understands as well as the object to be
recognized, being parts of the absolute, are absolutely and infinitely
divisible parts, which are never fully understood and never fully
exhausted.

Please remember that in speaking of something uncouth, we are not so
much concerned in Peter or Tabby, but in the intellect which we desire
to understand so that we may make a correct use of it. And I refer to it
as uncouth merely because its understanding is beset with so many
difficulties. When I compared it in the preceding letter with a
photographic apparatus which should furnish us with pictures, and in
likening it now to an instrument designed to distinguish things by
classification, I warn you not to be confused thereby. Classification is
most essential as a means of producing intellectual pictures. In this
connection I emphasize once more that the faculty of understanding, the
same as other things, is not independent by itself, but can accomplish
something only in the universal interconnection. The understanding that
the phenomenon quoted above belongs to the category of tomcats, and more
especially into the column labeled Peter, would not be any
understanding at all, if you had not become previously acquainted with
the mouse-devouring race and individual in question. Only in connection
with your previous experience is the understanding that this tomcat and
the uncouth motion are one and the same thing, or belong to the same
category, a true understanding.

Ludwig Feuerbach says: A talented writer is recognized by the fact that
he assumes talent on the part of the reader also and does not chew up
his subject into minute parts like a petty schoolmaster. On the other
hand, it seems to me that it is possible to assume too much, and I
pursued a schoolmasterly course in this case, because the subject is new
to you and still leaves plenty of room for reflection.

I wanted to show by a commonplace example what I mean by insight and
understanding and how by means of it the unknown and uncouth becomes
known and familiar. True, the understanding in this case was illumined
by previous experience, while you are after new knowledge. You want to
know how enlightenment arises in order to acquire new insight. Now, all
novelty has the dialectic quality of being at the same time something
antiquated. New understanding can be acquired only by the help of old
understanding. In other words, old and new understanding, which I define
here as the faculty of classification, have their existence only in the
total interdependence of the universal existence.

You must discard the old prejudice that knowledge can be collected like
cents. Although this is well enough, it does not suffice for the purpose
of logical thinking. One science belongs to another, and all of them
together belong to one class with the entire universe. It will be
apparent to you, then, that at the beginning of your young days your
knowledge has not sprouted all at once, but has come out of the unknown.
And what is true of you, is true of the whole human race. In its cradle
it was without intellect. It had, indeed, the germ. But do not beasts,
worms, and sensitive plants have that also? In short, the light of
perception and understanding is nothing new in the radical sense of the
word, but connected with the old and with the world in general, and of
the same kind. All our knowledge must be connected and combined into one
understanding, one system, one realm, and this is the realm of reality,
of truth, of life.

Systematic classification is the task of logic. The first requirement
for this purpose is the awakened consciousness of the indivisibility of
the universe, of its universal unity. This consciousness is, in other
words, at the same time the recognition of the merely formal
significance of all scientific classification.

The unity of the universe is true, and is the sole and innate truth.
That this sole world truth is full of differences, is just as absolutely
different as absolutely the same, does no more contradict a reasonable
unity and equality than there is any contradiction in the fact that the
various owls have different faces and still the same owl face.

Aristotle divided the sense into five parts, anthropologists the race of
man into five races, natural philosophers the space into three
dimensions. It is now a question of showing to you that such a division,
however true and just, is nevertheless far from being truth and justice,
but is merely classification. The fundamental requirement of logic is to
designate scientific classifications as that which they are, viz.,
mental operations. It is the business of the intellect to make
classifications. That is its characteristic quality and does not
contradict the indivisible truth in the least.

Old wiseacres teach that a reasonable man must not contradict himself,
and this is a wise, though very narrow, lesson. Hegel maintains that
everything in the world is reasonable, hence the contradictions are
also. Under this conservative exterior there is hidden a very
revolutionary perception of which the "destructive" minds take advantage
in order to flatly contradict the wiseacres and their stable, dead,
disordered order which cannot stand any contradiction.

Reason dissolves all contradictions and opposition into harmony by
logical classification. "Everything in its own time and place." If it
does not wish to be called unreason, reason must rise to the
understanding that its opposite is only a formal antagonism. It must
know that God and the world, body and soul, life and death, motion and
rest, and whatever else the dualists may distinguish, are two and yet
one. Then it becomes clear that the conservatives are the real
revolutionaries, because by their senseless adherence to the "good old
order" they drive the proletariat to desperation, until it upsets that
order. On the other hand, the maligned revolutionaries are conservative,
because they subordinate themselves to the world's evolutionary process
which was, is, and will be eternal.

The red thread winding through all these letters deals with the
following points: The instrument of thought is a thing like all other
common things, a part or attribute of the universe. It belongs
particularly to the general category of being and is an apparatus which
produces a detailed picture of human experience by categorical
classification or distinction. In order to use this apparatus
correctly, one must fully grasp the fact that the world unit is
multiform and that all multiformity is a unit.

It is the solution of the riddle of the ancient Eleatic philosophy: How
can the one be contained in the many, and the many in one?




FOURTEENTH LETTER


Shoemaking and beet culture are as much sciences as physics, chemistry,
and astronomy. Reading, writing, and reckoning are called elementary
knowledge, and though I do not deny that they have an elementary value
for the culture of the mind, yet I can truly say that I have met
well-informed people who could neither read nor write. I wish to
indicate by this that there are indeed high and low degrees of knowledge
and science, but that such graduations have only a temporary, local,
relative, subjective significance, while in the absolute all things are
the same.

The scorn with which you may hear some people speak of the night of the
absolute in which all cats are grey and all women beautiful Helenas
shall not prevent us from repeatedly studying the absolute which I have
again and again praised as the main topic of logic. Only remember,
please, that you must not have any mystic idea of it. The absolute is
the sum total of all that was, is, and will be.

The subjects as well as the objects of all science belong to the
absolute, which is commonly called "world."

All other sciences have for their object limited parts, relative
matters, while the science of the mind treats of all things, of the
infinite. This is a point to which I refer frequently because it tends
to make my lessons obscure. I am lecturing on the science of the
intellect, but I speak of all things, of the universe, because I am
obliged to demonstrate, not the relation of the mind to shoemaking or
astronomy, but its general interrelations. I have to make plain its
general conduct, and this leads necessarily to the all-embracing
generality, to the absolute. We wish to learn the art of thinking, not
on this or that subject, but the art of general world thought.

The intellect is a special part, the same as every other scientific or
practical object. But it is that part which is not satisfied with piece
work, which knows that it itself and all special things are attributes
or predicates of the absolute subject, that it itself and all things are
universally interrelated.

The human mind is sometimes called self-consciousness. But this name is
too limited for such an unlimited thing, for the pathfinder of the
infinite, for your, my, and every other consciousness of the world and
of existence in general.

For centuries the question has been discussed whether there are innate
ideas hidden in the intellect or whether it may be likened to a blank
paper which experience impregnates with knowledge. This is the question
after the origin and source of understanding. Whence comes reason, where
do we get our ideas, judgments, conclusions? By the help of brown-study
from the interior of our brain, from revelation, or from experience? It
seems to me that you will quickly decide this matter when I ask you to
consider that everything we experience, together with the intellect
going through experiences, is a revelation of the absolute. Everything
we know is experience. We may consider the mind as a sheet of blank
paper, but in order that it may receive writing on its surface this
internal paper is as necessary as the external world which produces the
hand, the pen and the ink for this process of writing. In other words,
all experience originates from the world organism. Not knowledge, but
consciousness, world consciousness, is innate in the intellect. It has
not the consciousness of this or that in itself, but it knows of itself
the general, the existence as such, the absolute.

The science of the intellect has ever wrestled with one peculiar fact.
It found knowledge which the mind had received from the outside,
so-called empirical knowledge. But it also found knowledge which was
innate, so-called _a priori_ knowledge. That there is always a valley
between two mountains, that gold is not sheet iron, that the part is
smaller than the whole, that the angles of a triangle are together equal
to two right angles, that circles are round, that water is wet, that
fire is hot, etc., these are things of which we know that they are true
in heaven and in hell, and in all time to come, although we have never
been there with our experience. This plainly shows that we harbor a
secret in our brains which the lovers of the mystical seek to exploit by
making believe that their self-interested wisdom of God and high
authority likewise belongs to the eternally innate truths. For this
reason it is especially important for the proletariat to bring the
controversy of the origin and source of understanding to a close.

Our logic asks: Does wisdom descend mysteriously from the interior of
the human brain, or does it come from the outer world like all
experience? We shall leave its descent from heaven out of the question.

The answer is: Science, perception, understanding, thought, require
internal and external things, subject and object, brain and world.
Truth is here and truth is there. Truth is so divine that it is
everywhere and absolute.

But how to explain that wonderful _a priori_ knowledge which exceeds all
experience? For it is a fact that the intellect has not alone the
faculty of knowing things in general, but also that of separating them
into their parts and from one another and to name them. It cuts off
slices, so to say. But not like the butcher who sees everything merely
from the standpoint of his trade. You will remember from your own
experience as well as from my repeated statements that the world is not
a monotonous, but a multiform unit. This confused knot is dissolved and
explained by intellectual separation, by classification. In the absolute
everything is alike and unlike. But the intellect makes abstractions
from the unlike. For instance, in conceiving of the term minerals, we
pass over the distinction between gold and sheet iron. Then, when we
continue the classification by subordinating gold and sheet iron as
separate species to the general term of minerals, we know very well that
gold and sheet iron are different kinds of the same general mineral
nature. We know what the names indicate, and so long as they retain
their meaning, we know that neither in heaven nor in hell can gold be
sheet iron or sheet iron be gold. Water and fire are specialties taken
from the universe and named. Is it a wonder, then, that these names have
a special meaning and that we have the settled conviction that wherever
sense instead of nonsense is master, fire burns, water wets, circles are
round, and the sum of the angles of every triangle is equal to two right
angles?

These illustrations are commonplace enough, indeed, but it seems to me
that they clearly show the mere formality of the distinction between
innate and experienced knowledge. You will recognize that both of these
kinds of knowledge are different and yet of the same kind, that both are
mixtures of the internal and external. Knowledge _a priori_ ceases to be
a miracle when we understand that it comes out of the same fountain of
experience as _a posteriori_ knowledge, and in either case knowledge is
acquired only by means of the intellect. Hence intellect connected with
the world is the sole source of all wisdom, and external nature as well
as our internal faculty of understanding are parts of the one general
nature, which is the truth and the absolute.

"Only a gradual, slow, gapless development," says Noire, "can free the
thinking mind from the philosophical disease of wondering."

The art of dialectics or logic which teaches that the universe, or the
whole world, is one being, is the science of absolute evolution. "In the
whole constitution of all natural things," writes Lazare Geiger, "there
is hardly anything more miraculous than the way in which the miracle
avoids our glance and continuously withdraws into the distance to escape
observation. In the place of the abrupt and strange things produced by
imagination, reason puts uniformity and transition."

And we add that the science of reason, or logic, teaches simultaneously
with the unity of the whole world, also that all things are alike
miraculous, or that there is only one miracle, which is existence in
general, the absolute. In other words, everything and nothing is
miraculous.

In demonstrating that the most different things, such as heat and cold,
and all radical distinctions, are only relative forms of universal
nature, I prove the uninterrupted and matter of fact transition and the
absolute graduality, the fusion, of all things.

I have tried to establish this proof in regard to the two kinds of
knowledge and illustrated it with commonplace examples, because these
have a popularizing effect. In order to meet the demands of more
exacting minds, I shall presently take up the miracle of causality. The
indubitable statement that everything must have its cause is regarded as
the most miraculous innate knowledge, and is much misused for the
purpose of bringing confusion into logic.




FIFTEENTH LETTER


My Son:

If on my return from some voyage I were to tell you of all the things I
have _not_ seen, you would justly doubt the order of my senses. Sane
reason demands that the description of unfamiliar things be given in a
positive, not in a negative manner. If that is so, is it not wrong to
proceed negatively by trying to prove in explaining the nature of the
intellect that it is not a miracle and no mysterious charm of wisdom? I
answer: No. For the present, the intellect is still a sort of _ignis
fatuus_ which is magnified into a fiery man. In order to understand the
_ignis fatuus_, it is necessary to remove the fiery man. Logic must show
that human reason is not a miracle, not a mystical receptacle of wisdom.
The negative process is in such a case positively in order. Wherever a
thing is obscured by prejudices, these must first be removed, in order
that room may be made for the bare fact.

It was the famous Kant who posed the question: "How is _a priori_
knowledge possible?" How do we arrive at the knowledge of things which
are not accessible to experience? The answer is that the intellect
cannot accomplish such a miracle, and Kant substantiates this in a
long-winded way and with admirable penetration. But he left a nasty hair
in the soup.

He found that by the help of our reason we can explain only phenomena.
The confusion between truth and phenomena had been handed down to him as
an infirmity of ancient times. He worked diligently on its solution, but
left some work for those coming after him. Originally the study of
supernatural and the profane study of natural things were closely
intermingled. Not until the obvious results of natural science became
known, did thinkers accommodate themselves to the habit of leaving
supernatural things to faith and limiting science to the study of
natural phenomena. Science had so to say passed on to the practical
order of business, not paying any further attention to the contrast
between phenomena and truth. But the logic, which is innate in the human
mind, cannot content itself with the dualistic split between faith and
science. It demands a monistic system and does not desist until the
primeval forests of faith are completely put under cultivation.

The logical impulse of culture caused Kant to continue what was begun by
Socrates. Philosophy before Socrates searched for truth externally.
While our logic teaches that everything is true, and truth is the
universe, the Ionic philosophers made a sort of fetish out of the
matter. Thales idolized the water as the thing of things, another the
fire, a third numbers. This worship of the fetish was the worship of
truth. The search for understanding starts out with misunderstanding.
From religious to scientific culture, it is a step, not a leap. When
Socrates turned to introspection and started out, with his "Know
thyself," in submitting the prodigy of the human soul to critique, he
made another important step.

You know that the "wisest of men" was not interested in air and water,
in natural science of the strict order, but rather in the good, the
true, and the beautiful, in the human in the narrower sense, in the
realm of the spirit, in the soul. It was indeed unwise that he was
interested to the verge of idolization, since in consequence of this
interest in a special part, the other, the material part was being
neglected. According to Goethe's statement that one thing is not fit for
all, Socrates did right. He and all philosophical lights after him
studied the intellect. What they missed was the now dawning
understanding that the faculty of thought is not a prodigy but a
special, and at the same time common, part of universal nature. While
these philosophers looked for truth in any one special form of
excellence, you are now invited to look for it in the total
interrelation of things.

Science has ever endeavored to do away with miracles and prodigies. This
could be accomplished only gradually, and the logicians have, therefore,
remained more or less biased and confused. The great Kant was no
exception. He looked for supreme truth, and for its sake he investigated
the intellect. He is celebrated because he explained so well that this
intellect feels no mission for anything transcendental, and cannot
understand anything but phenomena. Still he permitted something
transcendental to remain.

Kant is of the opinion that we perceive things as they appear, but not
as they are "in themselves." Nevertheless we should believe that a
mysterious truth is at the bottom of those phenomena, because we should
otherwise arrive at the irreconcilable contradiction that there are
phenomena without anything which could appear. The intellect, he holds,
can operate only on the field of phenomena, and for this reason we
should give up the endless grubbing after the transcendental. But we
should leave one little room in the house of reason, one little chamber
of faith, which points beyond experience up to the point where a
mysterious truth guards God and His commands.

The subsequent philosophers, especially the Hegelian philosophy, opposed
this separation which assigned to the intellect only the study of
phenomena and to faith the absolute and infinite for veneration. But
they did not yet succeed in completely mastering the matter, they did
not fully arrive at an indubitably clear exposition of the fountain of
understanding and of the unity of truth, so that reaction nowadays can
again sound the retreat after the melody: "Back to Kant." You know that
Lessing complained about the treatment of "a dead dog" accorded to
Spinoza, and Marx added pointedly: "Hegel is more of a dead dog to-day
than Spinoza was at Lessing's time." The enemies of the working class
are the enemies of evolution. They wish to preserve the existing order
of things and the good old time in which they feel at home. For this
reason it is the mission of the proletariat to continue the work of
logic. It is our duty to show clearly that the metaphysical truth which
Kant opposed to the phenomena of nature and could not eliminate from the
intellect, is nothing but just a metaphysical, a fantastically
exaggerated, thing.

According to our logic, the universe is the truth and everything
partakes of it. That such a truth is logical and such a logic true, is
shown by the interconnection of things, so that this science is
applicable to everything which the sciences respect as reasonable and
true.

In order to help you in the understanding of the absolute and liberate
your thought from all special miracles, I refer to Kant's critique of
reason. It teaches that our intellect becomes a source of understanding
only in connection with other phenomena of nature. Only his critique
stuck fast in the mysterious fountain of causality. Thus he showed that
he was only a seeker after logic, not its master. The conclusion that
there must be _something_ that does appear where there are phenomena is
certainly correct. But that which Kant was thinking of, something of a
transcendental or metaphysical nature, led him to the radically wrong
conclusion that there must be something different, peculiar, miraculous,
mysterious, wherever there are phenomena.

The Kantian conclusion that there must be an absolute truth by itself
behind a phenomenon, an absolute truth that exists independent of and
disconnected with such phenomenon, was due to his fetish-like conception
of truth. It is the first requirement for a correct use of the faculty
of logical reasoning to know that truth is the common nature of the
universe.

That a phenomenon must be based on nature, or an effect on a cause, is a
fact identical with "causality" which I already promised to discuss in
the preceding letter. This same problem may also be expressed in the
words: Where there are predicates, there must be a subject that carries
them. In order to make quite sure that I will not be misunderstood, I
emphasize once more the fact that I am not raising any doubt as to the
correctness of this conclusion, but only to the metaphysical application
of this conclusion after the Kantian manner which consists in making
the same use of it as a clergyman who tries to prove that his theology
is innate in reason.

Our conception of logic wishes to show that all causes and effects are
matter of the same kind, and that our faculty of reasoning is a matter
of fact thing which brooks no mysteries or metaphysical dreams.




SIXTEENTH LETTER


Now let me illustrate the interconnection of all things, or the
world-unit, by discussing the question of causality. We know that
everything has its cause. We know that this is also true on the Moon or
on Uranus, although we have not acquired this knowledge by experience on
those world bodies. Thus it seemed that the intellect was a mysterious
receptacle containing innate wisdom. The same receptacle also contains,
for instance, the truth that all white horses are white and all black
horses black. We do not know anything about the color of other horses in
other countries, but the color of black and white horses we know even if
we have never seen them in other countries. It is thus apparent that our
intellect is an instrument which reaches beyond experience. For this
reason there would seem to be no telling where the supply of such
miraculous revelations would stop and into what mysterious worlds the
intellect passing beyond the limits of experience would lead us.

In order that the human intellect may not appear transcendental, in
order to give it its place in the general classification of natural
forces, we must investigate the nature of causality and so-called _a
priori_ knowledge.

Kindly observe in the first place that a thing is just as wonderful
_after_ it is explained as it was before its explanation. A scientific
explanation of a thing ought not to do away with our admiration, but
only to reduce it to reasonable bounds. The intellect may very well be
regarded as something wonderful, but its wondrous quality should be
reduced to the measure of all things which are none of them any less
wonderful. After you have explained what water is, after you have
learned that it is composed of two chemical elements, after you have
realized all its qualities thoroughly, it still remains a wonderful,
divine, fluid.

"All things have their causes." What are all things? They are
attributes, qualities of the universe. It is innate in the intellect to
know that the world is _one_ thing, that all things belong, not to any
different thing, but to one and the same subject. The intellect is by
nature the absolute feeling of unity. It knows of itself that everything
is interrelated and that the consciousness of causality is nothing else
but the consciousness of cosmic interrelation. And I maintain that the
innateness of the consciousness of cosmic interrelation in our brain is
explained when we realize that it is an actual thing like all others, a
phenomenon which has the same general nature as every other
phenomenon.[7]

The fact is undeniable that a certain knowledge is innate in our
consciousness. The only difficulty has been to explain this fact. At
this point I call your attention to the exaggerated notion entertained
in regard to explaining, and understanding, things. By explanations, a
thing is not dissolved, but only classified.

The hatching of an egg is explained when you perceive that this process
is part and parcel of a whole class of similar processes. If you modify
the exalted idea of the effect of explanations in this sense, you must
realize that the innate consciousness of the general interrelation of
things is natural and intelligible and requires no other explanation
than the humidity of the water, the gravity of bodies, or the color of
black horses.

Even after it has been explained and understood, the intellect with its
logic remains a wonderful thing. Just as clay is by its nature
untransparent and pliable, or glass transparent and brittle, so
consciousness has its peculiar innate qualities. In this way knowledge
comes to the intellect not only by experience, but it is also a sort of
receptacle full of wisdom. Still this receptacle would no more contain
wisdom without experience than the eye would have impressions without
light.

In order to straighten out the intricate windings of our subject, I
recapitulate them. We wish to learn the proper use of our intellect, the
conscious application of consciousness. To this end we analyze its
hitherto hidden mystical nature. So long as we exalt this nature
transcendentally to the clouds, we do not acquire its proper use.
Therefore the first paragraph of our lesson reads: The intellect belongs
in the same category with all things of the universe. And the second
paragraph says: If we distinguish two classes of thought radiated by the
human intellect, viz., innate thoughts, such as causality, and on the
other hand thoughts which come through experience, we must remember that
such a distinction is correct only when we realize that in spite of this
classification in two kinds they really belong to the same kind. Innate
and acquired wisdom, though served on two different plates, still are
taken from the same general world dish.

From this it follows that the science of causality, though applicable
to all the phenomena of the world, does not apply to the universe. If it
is a fact that all wisdom is worldly, then one must not fly outside of
the world with the concept of causality.

This is the salient point at issue.

All things are one thing, are interdependent, stand in the relation of
cause and effect toward one another, or of genus and species. To say
that all things have a cause means that they have a mother. The fact
that every mother has a mother finds its final ending in the world
mother or mother world, which is absolute and motherless and contains
all mothers in its womb.

Causes are mothers, effects are daughters. Every daughter has not only a
mother, grand-mother, and great-grand-mother, but also a father,
grand-father, and great-grand-father. The origin, or the family
relationship, of a daughter is not one-sided, but all-sided. In the same
way all things have not one, but many causes which flow together in the
general cause.

The intellect which has the innate knowledge that everything has its
cause will accept the teaching that all causes in the world are founded
in the absolute world cause and must return to it. It is the
quintessence of logic not only to ascertain the true nature of the
intellect, but also to elucidate the nature of the universe by the help
of the intellect.

All things have a mother, but to expect that the world mother should
logically have a mother is to carry logic to extremities and to
misunderstand the intellect and its art of reasoning.

If you have recognized the faculty of understanding as a part of
existence, you will not wonder at its miraculousness. Existence is
wonderful. Its parts arise one out of the other, out of the universal
interrelations of the one world. They all have their predecessors and
causes. But what is true of the relative parts, is not true of the
absolute whole.

I am the son of my father and the father of my son. I am at the same
time father and son. In the same way all things are simultaneously cause
and effect. Although father and son are two different persons, still the
capacity of being father and son rest in the same person, and although
cause and effect are to be distinguished as two things, still they are
two relations of the same thing. Persons and things, causes and effects,
are not independent entities, but relative entities, are
interconnections or relations of the absolute.

The intellect is innate in us, and with it and through it also the
consciousness of being, although it is innate in us only as the teeth of
the child which grow after birth. Everything that we become aware of is
known only as a part of the universe. In so far as this is wonderful,
the consciousness of causality is miraculous. But, in fact, the
knowledge of the causality of all things is innate wisdom the same as
that of the color of all white and black horses. At the same time it
must be observed that every innate knowledge is in part acquired, and
every acquired knowledge in part innate, so that both kinds intermingle
and form one category.

My whole argument aims to convince you that all things are worldly
things, and their causality is only another name for the same thing,
just as the German _brot_ is called _pain_ in French and _bread_ in
English. Thus we derive the firm conviction that if there is _pain_ in
heaven there will be bread, and if there are things, there will be
causes and effects, or interrelation with the unit of existence.

The mystery of causality is sometimes expressed by the statement that we
possess the indubitable knowledge which extends beyond all experience
that wherever a change takes place there must have preceded another
change. Indeed, we have the faculty of recognizing the unity in the
infinite multiplicity, and infinite multiplicity in the unity.
Multiplicity, change, motion--who is to split hairs about them, who will
make fine distinctions? The intellect is the photographic organ of the
infinite motion and transformations called the "world." It is and
possesses the consciousness of cosmic changes. Is it a wonder that it
knows that there is interrelation in its things, that no part of the
world, not a particle of its motion and transformations, stands alone by
itself, that everything is connected and mutually dependent in and with
the universe? Because this understanding is in a way innate in the
intellect, therefore it understands that there is nothing but change,
infinitely proceeding transformations. And if it detaches any single
thing from this process, it knows that changes preceded it and changes
will follow.

In short, we must not marvel at any single part of nature, not even at
the intellect, but admire the whole universe. Then fetishism will at
last end and a true cult, the cult of world truth, can begin.

The art of thinking, my dear Eugene, is not so easy. For this reason I
keep on warning you against misunderstanding. I do not mean to advise
you with the foregoing against admiring any single part of nature, or of
art, a landscape or a statue. My teaching merely tends to moderate
admiration by the reflection that the whole world is wonderful, that
everything is beautiful, so that nothing ugly remains. The distinction
between beautiful and ugly is only relative. Even when I say that the
true worship of God, the cult of truth, cannot begin until idol worship
ceases, you will appreciate the phrase and will not insinuate that I do
not value the cultivation of science in the past, or that I hate idol
worship to the extent of forgetting what I have emphasized repeatedly,
viz., that idol worship is also worship of God, and error a paving stone
on the way toward truth. The most minute thing is a magnitude.
Everything is true, good, and beautiful, for the universe is absolute
truth, beauty and goodness. I conclude with the words of Fr. von Sallet:


     A sunny view of world and life
       Is balm for brain and heart,
     It is with health and beauty rife,
       With noblest works of art.
     But do not for a moment think
     That it is captured in a wink.
     The golden harvest does not grow,
     Unless the early tempests blow.
     And only bitter woe and strain
     Will bright and lofty wisdom gain.


FOOTNOTE:

[7] E. g. That of natural existence.--EDITOR.




SEVENTEENTH LETTER.


My subject, dear Eugene, is the simplest in the world, but it requires
thorough treatment for all its full understanding. So every letter is in
a way but a repetition of the same argument. "It is remarkable," says
Schopenhauer, "that we find the few main theses of pre-socratic
philosophy repeated innumerable times. Also in the works of modern
thinkers, such as Cartesius, Spinoza, Leibniz, and even Kant, we find
that their few main theses are repeated over and over."

Now I ask you to consider what I said in my first letters, viz., that
the titles of the principal philosophical works reveal that philosophy
is engaged in the study of logic, in the analysis of the intellect and
the art of its use. You will then recognize that in the very nature of
the subject my presentation of the matter lacks systematization. It has
no real beginning and end, because its object, the intellect, is
interconnected with the whole universe, which is without beginning and
end, which has neither before nor after, neither above nor below.

You may venture that the relation of the intellect to the universe does
not concern the intellect especially, but is a universal matter. That
would be true.

But it is easy to show that the art of thinking and wisdom of the world
are identical. And although the universal interrelation of things is
germain to all things and subjects, yet its consideration is a special
task of logic which treats all objects of thought summarily.

My subject therefore begins everywhere, even though it is a specialty.
Hence I take the liberty to take my departure from any literature which
I happen to study. In the present letter, I deal with "logical
investigations" of the prominent Professor Trendelenburg. His is a bulky
volume, but you need not fear that I shall weary you with its
subtleties. As a rule I read only the preface of philosophical works of
the second and third order, their introduction and perhaps the first few
chapters. Then I am approximately informed as to what I may expect from
them further on. One frequently finds statements which, if they do not
throw new light on the subject, still bring out in bolder relief some of
the accomplishments of historical research in our field. And in order
that the son may not trust to the father alone, which might lead to
distrust, I connect my argument with some statements of Trendelenburg.

In the preface to the second edition the author complains of the "dull
headache" which the Hegelian intoxication has left in Germany and says:
"Philosophy will not resume its old power until it becomes consistent,
and it will not become consistent until it grows in the same way that
all other sciences do. In other words, it must not take a new departure
in every brain and then quit, but it must approach its problems
historically and develop them. The German prejudice must be abandoned,
according to which the philosophy of the future is supposed to look for
a new principle. This principle has already been found. It consists in
the organic world conception, the fundaments of which are resting in
Plato and Aristotle."

The Professor is right, but he overlooks that the philosophers, even of
modern times, do not begin "each on his own account," do not have "each
his own principle," or if they have, such a "false originality" is but
the indifferent attribute of historical development which has handed the
object of logic, the true art of thought, from generation to generation
in an ever brighter condition.

I repeat this emphatically for pedagogic reasons, because I consider it
essential to convince you and the reader that the apparent paradoxes
which I state are the objects of discussion since time immemorial. I
also wish to stimulate you to a study of the master works of philosophy
which show the cheering spectacle, in the persons of the most brilliant
specimens of the human mind, of the onward march of this mind from
darkness to light.

In order that the wheat contained in this human treasure box may not be
concealed by the tares, I am endeavoring to throw light on the outcome
of the historical development of philosophy, and for this purpose I
continue to discuss the question by taking my departure in this instance
from some further statements of Trendelenburg.

"It is a peculiarity of philosophical methods of reasoning to recognize
a part in the whole, and it is tacitly assumed that the whole is
descended from a thought which determines the parts. On the other hand,
it is peculiar to empirical methods of analysis to study the parts
without regard to their interrelation, or at best to collect them and
put them together, and it is tacitly assumed that every point is
something peculiar in itself which must be studied apart from all the
rest."

"The aim of all human understanding is always to solve the miracle of
divine creation by further creative thought. When this task is
undertaken in detail, the detail study forces one on to other things:
for things must go backwards toward their dissolution by the same force
through which they arose out of the depths."

These sentences state the problem before us. Shall we use the intellect
philosophically, or shall we use it empirically? We are striving to
understand the parts and the whole, and this is identical with the
research after a systematical world philosophy, or with the art of
dialectics. Now we must state in the first place that thinking of any
kind, whether it be philosophical or empirical, is of the same species,
that the same kernel is contained in both forms. Roses are different
flowers from carnations, but the flower nature is in both of them. Thus
the nature of thought is contained in both philosophical and empirical
thinking. The distinction is well enough, but their unity must not be
lost sight of.

The philosophers, he says, seek to understand the detail by the whole;
the empirical thinkers analyze the details without regard to
interrelations. But both methods of research are different specimens of
the same genus, and both of them are one-sided when their
interconnection is overlooked. The empirical thinker who seeks to
understand the details in their isolation, thinks philosophically, when
he regards his special research as a contribution to the whole, and the
philosopher, who seeks to understand the detail by the whole, thinks
empirically when he rightly regards all details as attributes of the
whole.

Trendelenburg, then, has expressed his case very obscurely. Both methods
of study, if employed one-sidedly, entirely misconceive the art of
thinking. The philosophers err when they regard the intellect as the
only source of understanding and truth; it is only a part of truth and
must be supplemented by all the rest of the world. On the other hand,
the empirical thinkers err when they look for understanding and truth
exclusively in the outer world, without taking into account the
intellectual instrument by the help of which they lift their treasures.
In fact, such one-sided philosophers exist only in theory; I mean there
are some who imagine that truth could be one-sided. But in practice they
all testify, much against their will, to the inevitable interconnection
of matter and mind, of inside and outside. In the practical use of the
intellect everybody shows that the part operates in the whole, and that
the whole is active in its parts.

We know _a priori_ that the universe is a whole. The universal existence
can be conceived only as of one kind or nature. The mere thought that
there might be something which does not partake of the nature of the
universe is no thought, because it is a thought without sense or reason.
The whole world is the supreme being, though I grant that we have but a
vague conception of it. We have as yet no detailed, true, conception of
the universe, but it is gradually acquired in the course of science.
Still, our conception will never be perfect because details are
infinitesimal and the absolute being is infinite growth.

As to details, we know them more or less accurately and yet not
accurately, because even the most minute part of the infinite is
infinite. All science has searched in vain for atoms. What our
understanding knows, has always been nothing but predicates or
attributes of truth, although they are true attributes and are truly
understood by us.

I emphasize the inadequacy of all modes of thought and of all
understanding in opposition to those who make an idol of science. I
emphasize the truth of all perceptions in opposition to those
knownothings who claim that truth cannot be understood, but can only be
admired and worshipped. Hence it follows for our theory of understanding
that intellect and reason and the art of thought are no independent
treasure boxes which make any revelations to us. They are theoretical
classifications which in practice are operative only in the universal
interconnection of things. Understanding, perceiving, judging,
distinguishing and concluding, etc., are unable to produce any truths.
They can only enlighten and clarify experience by logical classification
and distinction. Because man produces works which are preceded by
planning, therefore the philosophical mode of research has "assumed that
the whole is descended from a thought." But this is an assumption of
human origin, which is shown to be without foundation on closer
analysis. The plans of our works are copies of natural originals and are
"free creations of the mind" only in a limited sense. The artists are
well aware of the natural descent of their thoughts and fictions. To
regard the world as the outcome of thought is a perverse logic. It is
the first condition of rational, proletarian, thought to recognize the
intellect and its products as attributes of the world subject.




EIGHTEENTH LETTER


Just as in political history action and reaction follow one another,
just as periods of economic prosperity are alternated by periods of
depression, so we find in literature a periodical fluctuation between
philosophical and anti-philosophical tendencies.

After Hegel had for a time thoroughly aroused the spirits, a time of
apathy followed, so that this hero of thought who shortly before had
been almost idolized could be attacked and reviled. For about a decade,
a philosophical breeze has now once more been blowing. The subject of
logic, the theory of understanding, is again the object of universal
attention. This movement is stimulated by important discoveries in
science, such as the heat equivalent of Robert Mayer, the origin of
species by Darwin, etc., and natural science and philosophy may be
compared to two miners who are digging a tunnel, so that sharp ears on
both sides can hear the blows of the hammers and the clanging of the
tools.

There is much truth in this picture, but it may also lead to
misunderstandings. By the vivisection of frogs and rabbits, by boring
into the brain, physiology will not discover the mind. No microscope, no
telescope, will reveal the nature of reason and truth or the art of
logical discernment.

Neither will Lazarre Geiger, Max Mueller, Steinthal, and Noire succeed in
philology in solving the "last questions of all knowledge" by the help
of any primitive arch-language.

At the same time, the value of the co-operation of these gentlemen is
not denied, only I desire to point out that the comparison with the
tunnel is not quite accurate. What Marx said of economic formulas, is
true of logical formulas: "In their analysis neither the microscope nor
chemical reagents are of any service. The power of abstraction must
replace them both."

The two sciences will finally meet, not because each one of them digs
away in its own one-sided fashion, but because the miners meet after
working hours and exchange their experiences. And the philosophers may
be the dominant party, because they are specialists in logic and
therefore prepared to utilize anything which may serve their purpose, no
matter from what side it comes. The other party, on the other hand, has
its own specialties and promotes the cause of logic in a secondary and
involuntary fashion.

Natural science has its own monism which is distinguished from
philosophical proletarian monism in that it does not appreciate the
historical outcome of philosophical research. One of the most prominent
representatives of the former is Noire. He entitles one of his little
works "Monistic Thought," but shows himself on its pages as a very
unclear dualist. He speaks of the "dual nature of causality" and relates
that the mind operates with a different causality than the mere
mechanical one. He calls this other "sensory causality."

According to him the world has only two attributes: "Motion and
sensation are the only true and objective qualities of the world....
Motion is the truly objective ... though it is admitted that it gives us
only the phenomenon.... Sensation makes up the internal nature of
things. Every subject, whether man or atom, is endowed with the two
qualities of all beings, viz., motion and sensation."

Thereupon I have carefully looked for an explanation in Noire's works,
why he regards the nature of things as composed of an external and an
internal quality, and why sensation should not be regarded as a sort of
motion, but the only reason I could find was the dualistic nature of his
"monistic" reasoning.

As Schopenhauer provided the whole world with a "will," so Noire
provides it with "sensation."

Kant and his "Critical Philosophy" held in their time that our intellect
perceives only the phenomena of nature, while the mystic law of
causality, according to him, points to a hidden being, which cannot be
perceived but must be believed, which we may venerate but must leave
undisturbed by science. Schopenhauer, his brilliant successor, who in
spite of his brilliancy did not materially advance the cause of
philosophy, mystified the problem of causality by his discovery that the
nature of the world is will power. These teachings of Kant and
Schopenhauer are dressed up anew and mixed with the recent discoveries
of science by Noire. But he entirely ignores the work of Schelling and
Hegel, who by their criticisms have made evident the lack of logic in
the Kantian separation of phenomenon (apparition) from noumenon
(essence), of cause from effect.

You are familiar with the silly question whether Goethe or Schiller,
Shakespeare or Byron, is the greater poet, and you will not think that I
am trying to elevate Hegel above Kant or Kant above Hegel. They are just
two cogs on the spinning wheel of history. If the second crushes what
the first has cracked, such is the result of their succession.

Natural science is also a valuable co-operator in the solution of the
world problem, not so much by digging in the logical tunnel itself, or
making amateur excursions into the fields of philosophy or metaphysics,
but because it elucidates and renders tangible the special object of
logic in such far-embracing objects as the unity of natural forces or of
animal species. The scientific presentation of this special object,
however, requires a brain armed with the full equipment of the
historical outcome of philosophy.

Now you must not believe that I am conceited enough to place my own
little personality on the pedestal as the only true philosopher. I am
too well aware of my shortcomings as a self-educated man. But seeing
that I have striven earnestly and without prejudice since my young days
to understand the high object of my studies, I feel in my heart a
certain confidence in my qualification to deal with it. On the other
hand, I know my lack of that sort of learning which is required in order
to be able to present the scientifically much-courted nature of the
human mind in such a form and with such emphasis as its sublime
character deserves. And if I, nevertheless, come before the public on
various occasions with my tentative works, I offer as an excuse that
hitherto the Messiah has not appeared who will come after me and whose
John the Baptist I should like to be.

You, my dear Eugene, will take me soberly and reduce my resounding words
to their proper measure, when I, in the intoxication of enthusiasm, flow
over like that now and then. You know that I am no hero worshipper.
Though all research is but the product of individual minds, the mind of
each man is a part of the universal mind which produces science. Now
follows the point which forms the conclusion of all my letters: The
intellect which produces science is indeed a part of man, but still more
a part of the world, it is the universal world intellect, the reason of
the absolute, the absolute reason.

The study of this intellect at work, not merely in shoemaking, in
anatomy, or in astronomy, but in all fields, in the infinite, of its
life in the absolute, is the means by which the art of logic is
acquired. It is true that the infinite exists only in finite parts, and
you cannot conceive of the infinite directly, you can perceive it only
in its parts. And in perceiving them you must always remember that every
part is an infinite piece of the infinite universe.

In his "Introduction and Proofs of a Monistic Theory of Understanding,"
Noire, after enumerating the new points contained in his work, adds
sneeringly that he is "not in a position to give any new clews as to the
nature of the absolute." For this very reason I want to denounce his
"Monism" as a shallow piece of work, which offers only the name instead
of the essence.

The well-known Ernst Haeckel knows a great deal more about this subject.
In a lecture given at the twenty-fifth convention of natural scientists
in Eisenach, he calls the monistic view of nature "a grand pantheistic
one." The essence of all religion, according to him, consists in the
"conviction of a final and unmistakably common cause of all things." And
he continues: "In the admission that with the present day organization
of our brain, we are unable to penetrate to the final cause of all
things, the critical natural philosophy and dogmatic religion agree."
Whether the professor is one of those natural philosophers who regard
the human mind as too narrow for the understanding of the "unmistakably
(hence somewhat understood) common cause of all things," is not quite
clear to me, nor probably to the famous scientist himself. For he adds:
"The more we progress in the understanding of nature, the more we
approach that unattainable final cause." And further on: "The purest
form of monistic faith culminates in the conviction of the unity of God
and nature."

Now I ask: If nature, God, and absolute truth are one and the same
thing, have we not learned something about the "final cause of all
things?" What necessity is there in that case for speaking in such an
abjectedly humble tone of human understanding, or to assign nothing but
straw and husks to it, in the language of Hegel?

You see, then, that Haeckel has a higher estimate of absolute nature than
Noire who does not care to have anything to do with the nature of the
absolute. But my object at this moment is to convince you that neither
the one nor the other of these two, nor natural science, so-called, is
directly digging in the tunnel which will give us light on the question
of the limits of our understanding and the final cause of things. Our
logic, on the other hand, which treats the intellect as a part of
nature, cultivates a natural science that includes the mere empirical
natural science in the same way in which the day of twenty-four hours
includes the day of twelve hours and the night.

Natural science proper deals mainly with tangible things. Light and
sound, the objects of eye and ear, are still included in its studies.
The objects of smell and taste stand on the dividing line. But the
socalled sciences of the mind, such as grammar and politics, political
economy and history, morals and law, and most decidedly logic, are
entirely excluded.

Such a limitation is well enough, if we remember that it is purely
formal. However, it must not overlook the bridge which leads from
limited nature to universal, infinite, nature.

The monism of natural science has a far too narrow view of the universe.
When it says that "all is motion," it says just as little or as much as
Solomon with his "all is vain." Everything is crooked and straight,
everything great and small, everything temporal and eternal, everything
truth and life. But nothing is thus said to show the meaning of
distinction in this world, to explain how rest exists in motion, and
sense in nonsense.

In order to differentiate logically we must know that everything is
everything, that the universe or absolute is its own cause and the final
cause of all things, which embraces all distinctions, even that of
causality and that between matter and mind.




NINETEENTH LETTER


"Philosophy should not try to be edifying," said Hegel. This means that
religious feeling is far below scientific thought. But there is a
reverse side to this sentence, viz., that thoughts which do not rise to
the edifying interconnection of all things, no matter whether they
remain stuck in some specialty on account of frivolousness or of
narrowmindedness, are far below a wise world philosophy.

In a former letter I have already emphasized, and I hope to prove it
more convincingly, that the conception of "God," or of the absolute, is
indispensable for a logical world philosophy.

You know that in my dictionary the gods and divinities of all religions
and denominations are "idols," and justly so, since they are all
manufactured images. Instead of the entire universe, they worship a more
or less unessential part of it.

The religions show by their idolatry, the sciences frequently by their
little creditable indifference, that they have no conception of the
intellect and its art of reasoning.

The universe is a familiar conception. Everybody uses it, and there is
apparently little to say about it. But in fact it is the conception of
all conceptions, the being of all beings, the cause of itself which has
no other cause and no other being beside itself. That the whole world is
contained in the universe is so obvious that you may wonder at my waste
of words over such a matter-of-fact thing. But when you consider that
the people have always searched for a world cause outside of the world,
together with a beginning of the world and a transcendental truth, then
you will see that they have not grasped the conception of the world as a
whole, as a universe. And if that is admitted, then the proof that it is
the cause of all causes, the beginning of all beginnings, and the truth
of all truths, is not such a superfluous undertaking.

Now you may say that it is presumptuous to try to understand the whole
universe at once. This objection is justified in a way, according to the
interpretation of the words. Still I hope that it will be my
justification to declare that it is not a question of understanding the
universe in detail, but only in general, not each and everything in its
differentiation, but only in a summary way. And it is only the edifying
conception of the universe as a whole which will open for you the door
to the understanding of the human mind, of thought, and the art of using
it. We wish to understand _the_ conception; not this or that conception,
but the whole conception, the conception of the whole. You will no
longer indulge in the superstition that the faculty of thought or
understanding is a thing apart from the world's interconnection. I
presume that you have now learned enough about the art of thought to be
sure not to think of anything without its worldwide interrelation. For
so long as one imagines that a piece of wood or a stone is a thing in
itself, without connection with light and air, with Earth, Moon, and
Sun, he has a very barbarian conception of the things of this world.

I maintain that the understanding of the human faculty of reason and the
art of its use are inseparable from the world concept. And I want this
understood in the sense, that it is not a mistake to distinguish between
the internal mind and the outside world, but that these are merely
formal distinctions of the essentially indivisible and absolute
universe.

The concept of this true God or divine, because universal, Truth shows
on close analysis that it includes the special truth of the art of
thought as well as all other sciences, and pre-eminently the science of
thought, because this science must not limit itself to any special
thing, but must be world wisdom by its very will and nature.

To understand the universe, then, means to become aware that this being
of all beings has no beginning, no cause, no truth nor reason outside
and beside itself, but has everything in and by itself. To understand
the universe means to recognize that one is rushing beyond the worldly
infinity into the realm of fantastic transcendentalism and abusing the
intellect, when illogically applying such terms as beginning and end,
cause and effect, being and not being, to the absolute universe. Such an
illogical use of the faculty of thought is well illustrated and rebuked
by the poet who questions and answers:


     "And when my life has passed away,
       What will become of me?
     The world has one eternal day,
       'Thereafter' cannot be."


In order to acquire the universal sense, you will strive to understand
that the universe includes all relative things, while as a whole it
embodies the absolute or the edifying deity.

If you would become world-wise, you must learn that the things called
opposites and contradictions have a different meaning than is ordinarily
applied to them by the logic of the idolators. They say that God and the
world, body and soul, truth and error, life and death, etc., are
irreconcilable antipodes; that they exclude one another; that they
cannot be brought under the same roof, but must be kept wide apart by
the laws of eternal reason. But this doctrine of contradiction is merely
narrow dogmatism, which confuses the minds instead of enlightening them.
Certainly, death differs from life, the perishable from the
imperishable, black from white, crooked from straight, large from small.
Who would be silly enough to deny that? But even the apparently most
contradictory and opposite things may be classified under the same
genus, family, or species, as twins in a mother's womb. The same thing
that does not prevent male and female from sitting in the same nest,
does not prevent the most widely different things, in spite of their
separate characters, from being one and the same, from being two pieces
of the same caliber. You are certainly still the same Eugene that you
were as a little baby, and yet you are at the same time another. The
experts in physiology even claim that they can compute how often a man
of sixty has changed his flesh, bones, skin, and hair. Although the old
man is the same individual that he was when first born, yet he never
remained the same.

You will see by this illustration that all difference is of the same
nature, a general, supreme, universal being, absolute and divine, and
this absolute world being is highly edifying, because it comprises all
other beings and is the Alpha and Omega of all things.

Is this world-god a mere idea? No, it is the truth and life itself. And
it is very interesting to note that the so-called "ontological proof of
the existence of God" agrees very well with the world truth which I
proclaim in the tabernacle of logic. This proof is originally attributed
to the learned Anselmo of Canterbury. However that may be, it is certain
that Descartes and Spinoza support him with their famous names. They
hold that the "most perfect being" must necessarily have existence,
because otherwise it would not be the most perfect.

"I understood very well," writes Descartes in the fourth section of his
"Method of Correct Thought," "that in accepting the hypothesis of a
triangle I would have to accept the fact that the sum of its three
angles is equal to two right angles. But nothing convinced me of the
presence of such a triangle, while I found that my conception of the
most perfect being was as inseparably linked to existence as my
conception of a triangle is to the identity of the sum of its angles
with two right angles.... Hence it is certainly as undeniable as any
geometrical proof can be that God exists as this most perfect being."

This argument appears to me as clear as daylight and ought to convince
you, not of the existence of a transcendental idol, but of the truth of
the absolute and most perfect world being. If you were to remark that
this perfectness is not so very great, considering its many obvious
imperfections, I should ask you not to split hairs and to recognize with
sane senses that these imperfections of the world belong as logically to
the perfect world as the evil desires belong to virtue which becomes
virtue only by the test of overcoming them. The conception of a
perfection which has no imperfections to overcome would be a silly idea.

Now in conclusion let me say a few words of apology for continually
interchanging the universe and the concept of the universe. I frequently
speak of the idea of a thing as if it were the thing itself. But see
here! Do you not ask on seeing the portrait of some person unknown to
you: Who is this? And do you not interchange the portrait for the person
itself, without difficulty and misunderstanding? The idea stands in the
same relation to the thing, as the portrait to the person it represents.
This remark is directed against that unsound logic which knows only the
separation of the idea from the thing, of reason from its objects, but
does not grasp the mere formality of such a distinction, does not
appreciate the unity of the world, the edifying and supreme truth, the
truth of the supreme being.

This letter, my dear Eugene, pleads for edification, but only for that
kind of edification which includes the unedifying, whereby edification
is sobered down. If you would give the name of pantheism to this world
philosophy, you should remember that it is not a sentimental and
exalted, but a common sense pantheism, a deification which has the taste
of the godless.




TWENTIETH LETTER


Dear Eugene:

Today I am going to present my case with the precision of a
schoolmaster.

The concept of white cabbage embraces all white cabbage heads that ever
were and ever will be.

The concept of cabbage embraces red, white, and many other kinds of
cabbage. The concept of vegetable embraces a still wider range. The
organic field is still more comprehensive. And finally the world concept
embraces everything which we know and don't know, the end of which we
cannot conceive, and which therefore is called infinite.

When we trace our steps backward over the same reasoning, we find at
once that the universal concept is divided into two parts, viz., the
universe and the conception of it. We thus find the world in the concept
and the concept in the world, so that both of these parts are
interconnected, each is the predicate of the other, and whether we turn
the thing to the right or to the left, the concept is in the world and
the world in the concept.

Now it is true that the concept, or the faculty of understanding, is the
object of our study rather than the world outside of it. The faculty of
understanding, by the way, is nothing but a collective noun for all
concepts, hence simply another name for concept in general. But what I
eternally repeat is this: We cannot make a concept separated from all
the rest of the world the object of our study, because that would be an
empty abstraction which does not take on any meaning until we connect it
with the world, for instance the special concept of cabbage with
sense-perceived cabbage and so forth.

The concepts of white cabbage, cabbage in general, vegetables, or
plants, etc., are all of them special concepts and at the same time
general concepts. The one and the other is relative. Compared to the
various species it includes, the general concept of cabbage is abstract,
while compared to the general concept of vegetables it is concrete. And
so it is with all concepts. They are abstract and concrete at the same
time. Only the final concept, the world concept, is neither concrete nor
abstract, but absolute. It is the concept of the absolute, which is
indispensable for an understanding of logic.

We found a while ago that the absolute world concept consisted of two
parts, viz., the concept and the world. In the same way, the chemists
teach us that water consists of two elements, each of which by itself
does not make any water, while their compound makes pure water. But we
do not need such distant illustrations. My table in its present
composition is something different from what it would be if the same
pieces were put together in some other way and without a plan.

Therefore the world concept is a far more sublime concept than all the
parts of which it consists. And in order to make this quite clear, I may
honor this compound of the world and its concept by a special name, say
"universe," so as to distinguish it from its component parts.

Now I declare, without fear of having the word turned in my mouth by any
sophist, that the world embracing the thought, or the universe, is the
absolute which includes everything, while the world and the thought of
it, each by itself, are but classifications or relative things.

We wish to understand thought, not empty abstract thought, but the
universal world-embracing thought, the thought in a philosophical sense.
This is not mere thought, but living truth, the universe, the absolute,
the supreme being.

It is with the universe and its parts as it is with a telescope and its
concentric rings. Our intellect is a special ring which gives us a
picture of the whole concentric thing. This photographer, as I have
called it in a former letter, is not the object of our study for its own
sake, nor for the sake of its pictures, but rather for the sake of the
original, of the universe. It is as if somebody were to buy a portrait
of some historically renowned person. No matter how much concerned the
buyer would be with the picture, in the last analysis he is concerned
with that person itself. So it is with the art of understanding the
absolute, with world wisdom, which we study not for the sake of the
wisdom, but of the world itself.

This lengthy discussion might have been cut short by simply speaking of
the world instead of going to so much trouble on account of the world
concept. But I should then miss my point, which is that the human
intellect is a part of the world, and that the ideological distinction
which separates this intellect from the rest of the world, requires for
the whole an embracing term.

The absolute concept is the concept of the absolute, of the supreme
being. To it applies all the true, good, and beautiful ever attributed
to God, and it is also that being which lends logic, consistency, and
form to all thought.

Plato is a philosopher who has thrown a wonderful light on the faculty
of understanding, though he has not fully explained it. In his dialogue
entitled "Gorgias," he makes Socrates say the following: "Does it seem
to you that men want that with which they occupy themselves at any time,
or that for the sake of which they undertake whatever they may be
engaged in? Do those, for instance, who take some medicine prescribed by
the physicians seem to want that which they do ... or to want that for
the sake of which they take medicine, viz., health?... In the same way
those who go on board of ships and trade do not want that which they are
doing; for who would care to go to sea and face danger or conquer
obstacles? That for which they go to sea is that which they want, viz.,
to become rich; they are going to sea for the sake of acquiring wealth."

Plato thus says that the immediate purposes of men are not their real
purposes, but means to an end, means to welfare or for "good." He
therefore continues: "It is in pursuit of good, then, that we go when we
go, because we are after something better, and we stand still for the
sake of the same good."

Now let us go a step farther than Socrates and Plato. Just as men's
actions are truly done, not for the sake of some immediate purpose, but
of the ulterior, of welfare, and just as their socalled ethical actions
are justified only by the general wellbeing, so all things of the world
are not substantiated by their immediate environment, but by the
infinite universe. It is not the seed planted in the soil which is the
cause of the growing plant, as the farmer thinks, but the Earth, the
Sun, the winds, and the weather, in short, the whole of nature, and that
includes the seed germ.

If we apply this reasoning to our special object, the faculty of
understanding, we find that it is not a narrowly human, nor a
transcendental, but a universal cosmic faculty. According to Homer, the
immortal gods call things by other names than mortal men. But once you
have grasped the concept of the absolute, you understand the language of
the gods, you understand that the intellect by itself is but a minute
particle, while in the interrelation with the universe it is an absolute
and integral part of the universal absolute.

All things have a dual nature, all of them are limited parts of the
unlimited, the inexhaustible, the unknowable. Just as all things are
small and great, temporal and eternal, so all of them including the
human mind are knowable and unknowable at the same time. We must not
idolize the faculty of thought nor forget its divine nature. Man should
be humble, but without bowing in doglike submission to a transcendental
spirit, and he should be sustained by the sublime consciousness that his
spirit is the true one, the spirit of universal truth.

Everything can be seen by eyes, including those of a hawk. Just as the
eye is the instrument of vision, so the intellect is the instrument of
thought. And just as spectacles and glasses are means of assisting the
eye in seeing, so senses, experience, and experiments are means of
assisting the intellect in understanding. With this equipment the
intellect can assimilate everything in its conceptions. It understands
"all," but "all" only in a relative sense. We understand all, just as we
buy everything for money. We can buy only what is for sale. Reason and
sunshine cannot be valued in money. We can see everything with eyes, and
yet not everything. Sounds and smells cannot be seen. Just as everything
is great and small, so everything is knowable and unknowable, according
to the meaning given to "everything" in the language of men or gods.
That word has the dual meaning of applying to any particle and to the
whole universe. So is the human mind universal, but only a universal
specialty.

Look at that magnificently colored carnation. You see the whole flower,
and yet you do not see all of it. You do not see its scent nor its
weight. In the human language "whole" means a relative whole, which is
at the same time a part. Every particle of the universe is such a dual
thing. But in the language of the gods, which is spoken by philosophy,
only the absolute universe is whole.

When the subject under discussion is not the intellect, but some other
part of the world, for instance the eyes, the universal concept of the
absolute is not so important, because the faculty of seeing, like the
faculty of wealth, is in little danger of being metaphysically abused.

One knows that eyes which can see around a corner, or through a block of
iron, or which can perceive the scent of a carnation, are as meaningless
as a white sorrel. Even though our eyes cannot see the invisible, that
does not prevent them from being a universal instrument which can see
everything, that is everything visible.

If you understand this, you will also see through the miserable wisdom
of the professors which wallows on its belly in the dust and cries with
the faithful: O Lord, O Lord! similarly to Du Bois-Reymond, who cries
out: _Ignorabimus_! It is true that the human mind is an ignoramus in
the sense that it is ever learning, because there is inexhaustible
material in nature. There is also something unknowable in every particle
of nature, just as there is something invisible in every carnation. But
the unknowable in the sense used by those ignorant people who cannot
understand the human mind because they have a transcendental monster in
their mind, such a monstrous unknowable exists only in the imagination
of the idolators to whom the true spirit reveals itself as little as the
spirit of truth.

Just as surely as we know that there cannot be in heaven any knife
without a blade and a handle, nor any black horses that are white, just
so surely do we know that the faculty of understanding can never and
nowhere be the absolute, but must always be a special faculty. The
concept of understanding, like the concept of a knife, is limited to a
definite instrument. There may be all kinds of knives and intellects,
but nothing exists that has escaped from its own skin or from the
limitation of its own particular concept.

By this standard you may measure the silly thought of those who speak
transcendentally of an unlimited faculty of understanding. They haven't
any right idea of the mind nor of the universe, of the conceivable nor
of the inconceivable, otherwise they would not speak in such a
nonsensical sense of the "Limits of Understanding." In short, you see
that the relative limitation or absoluteness of reason can only be
understood by means of the concept of the absolute.




TWENTY-FIRST LETTER


The proletarian logic of the working class searches after the supreme
being. The working class knows that it must serve but it wants to know
whom to serve. Shall it be an idol or a king? Where, who, what, is the
supreme being to which everything else is subordinate, which brings
system, consistency, logic, into our thought and actions? The next
question is then: By what road do we arrive at its understanding? Any
transcendental revelation being of no use to us, there are only two ways
open: Reason and experience.

Now it is a mistake of common logic to regard these two roads as
separate, while, in fact, they are one and the same common road, which
by the help of empirical reason or reasonable experience leads us to the
point where we recognize that the supreme being to which everything is
subordinate, is nothing special, not a part or a particle, but the
universe itself with all its parts.

We take medicine for the sake of health, we make efforts for the sake of
wealth. But neither health nor wealth are an end in themselves. What
good is health to us, when we have nothing to bite? What good are all
the treasures of Croesus, if health is lacking? Therefore health and
wealth must be combined. Nor is that enough. There is a spirit in us
that drives us farther ahead. There are still other treasures and
requirements, for instance contentment is surely one of them. But the
motive power of the world spirit is so infinite, that it is not
satisfied until it has everything. Everything, then, in other words the
whole world, that is the true end.

Socrates and his school, to whom I alluded in the preceding letter,
wandered the way of separate reason for the purpose of finding the
supreme being, the true, the good, the beautiful. The platonic dialogues
paint a very magnificent picture of the truth that neither health nor
wealth, neither bravery nor devotion, are "the greatest good," but that
it is mainly a question of the understanding and use to which mankind
put these things. Accordingly they are good or bad, they are but
relative "goods." Love and faith, honesty and veracity, are good enough,
but not _the_ good; they only partake of the good. What is sought is
that which is under all circumstances absolutely good, true, and
beautiful.

When Socrates asked his disciples to define the good or reasonable, they
enumerated as a rule a series of good and reasonable specialties, while
the master was continually compelled to instruct them, that his research
was not aimed at those objects. They name important virtues, and he
wants to know what absolute virtue is. They name good things, and he is
looking for _the_ good, for pure goodness, while the good things have
the bad quality of being good only under certain circumstances.

The Socratic school then finds out that only the understanding or the
intellect can find the circumstances under which we may arrive at the
absolute. Understanding, the human mind, philosophy, is to them the
divine. Thus they arrive at their famous "Know thyself," which in their
language means: Hold introspection and rack your brain. But they did not
succeed in thus using the intellect as an oracle. Nor did the Christian
philosophers of later times fare any better with that method, when they
changed the title of the object of their studies and substituted God,
Liberty, and Immortality, for the good, the true, and the beautiful.

In order to get out of the confusion resulting from the many names given
to the object of logic in the course of history, it must be remembered
that pagan as well as Christian research founded their quest for the
absolute on the innate need of understanding the supreme being which was
to be the pivot of all thought and action. Polytheism had to have a
supreme god, no matter whether his name was Zeus or Jupiter. In
consequence of this longing for unity it was very natural that the place
of the many immortals was finally taken by one eternal father of all.
The philosophers are distinguished from the theologians only in so far
as the former seek for the fulcrum of the world more on real than on
imaginary ground.

After more than two thousand years of mediation by intermediary links,
ancient philosophy has at last been transformed into modern
democratic-proletarian logic which recognizes that the intellect is an
instrument which leads to the supreme being on condition that it does
not rack the brain but goes outside of itself and consciously connects
itself with the world outside. This connection constitutes the supreme
being, the imperishable, eternal, truth, goodness, beauty, and reason.
All other things only "partake of it," to use Platonic language.

Although the Socratic school were handicapped by many fantastical
attributes, still they were on the road towards true logic, as neither
health nor wealth, nor any other treasure or virtue satisfied them. They
did not care for true phenomena, but for truth itself. But truth is the
universe, and man must understand that this is the only truth, in order
to be able to use his intellect logically, to be reasonable in the
highest and classical sense of this word.

All the world speaks of logic and logical thought. But when you, my son,
as a thinking man feel the need of getting out of phraseology and
knowing exactly what words should mean, you will hardly find one book
that will give you sufficient light on the subject of logic. The best
book would be the Bible, perhaps. I mean that, when you inquire after
beginning and end, purpose and destination, in short, after that which
would give you and all things a definite support, when you search for
the vortex around which everything revolves, then the Bible does not
tell you about the beginning of this or that part of history, but speaks
of the absolute beginning and end of all history, of the general purpose
and general destination of all existence. That is what I call logic.

The free thinkers were not satisfied with religious mythology, they
wanted to bring consistency and logic into their brains by their own
studies. Plato and Aristotle have done good work along this line. So
have the subsequent philosophers, Cartesius, Spinoza, Kant. The main
impediment for all of them was the obstinate prejudice that man could
have reason in his own brain. Of course, that is where he has it, but it
is not reasonable reason. The intellect shut up in the skull has not
wisdom in its keeping, as the ancients thought. Wisdom cannot be
acquired by racking your brain. Hegel is right: Reason is in the brain,
it is in all things, "everything is reasonable." I merely repeat, then,
that the universe is the true reason.

You will not misunderstand the term "racking your brain." I am not an
opponent of introspective thought, but only desire to call your
attention to the fact that it has led to the wrong habit of separating
thought from sight, hearing, feeling, of divesting the mind of the body.
Just as the Christian looked for salvation outside of the flesh, so the
philosophers looked for reason or understanding outside of the
connection with the rest of the world, outside of experience. It was
especially the research after the nature of the intellect which imagined
it had to creep inside of itself.

When studying the stars, we look at the heavens; when endeavoring to
enrich our knowledge of plants, we gather flowers. But if we attempt to
understand the mind, we must not rack our brain, nor dissect it with an
anatomical knife. We shall indeed find the brain, but not the mind, not
reason.

And even the brain is not so easily cut out, as many an overzealous
materialist may think. The student of anatomy who pries into the nature
of the brain substance knows very well that this substance is not
contained in the head of this or that fellow, but must be sought in many
heads before the average brain is found, which differs materially from
that of Peter or Paul. This will show that your brain is not only your
own, but also "partakes" of the universal brain, and you will easily
conclude from this how much less your reason is yours alone. Hegel is
right: Not only men, but everything is reasonable.

True, the most rotten conditions may be defended by such maxims. Hence
the great logician Hegel has the bad name of having been, not a
philosopher of the people, but a royal state philosopher of Prussia. I
will neither blacken nor whitewash him, nor will I overlook that he left
the great cause in a state of mystical obscurity. But I recognize that
even the worst prejudices, the most perverted morals, laws and
institutions, have their reasonable justification in the times and
conditions of their origin. Such an understanding is immediately
followed by the further insight, that the most reasonable things,
crushed by the wheel of time, will become rotten and unreasonable. In
short, the "good" is not any special institutions, but is found in the
interrelations of the universe. Only the absolute is absolutely good.
And for this reason not only some conservative editors of capitalist
papers, but also the revolutionary authors of the "Communist Manifesto,"
are genuine Hegelians.




TWENTY-SECOND LETTER


Dear Eugene:

Socrates teaches: When we walk, it is not walking, when we stand still,
it is not standing which is our purpose. We always have something
ulterior in view, until finally the general welfare is the true end of
our actions, in other words, the "good." And on closer analysis you will
find that your individual welfare, the socalled egoistic good, is not
enough in itself.

You are not only related to your father, mother, brothers, sisters,
relatives and friends, but also to your community, state, and finally to
the entire population of the globe. Your welfare is dependent on their
welfare, on the welfare of the whole.

I know very well that the horizon of the everyday capitalist minds does
not reach farther than they can see from the steeple of their church.
They think according to the bad maxim: The shirt is closer to the skin
than the coat. If I had to choose between the shirt and the coat, I
should prefer to wear the coat without a shirt rather than to run
around in shirt sleeves as the object of universal ridicule. The old man
who plants a tree the fruits of which he will perhaps never see is not
such a capitalist mind, otherwise he would sow seeds that would ripen
during this year's summer.

At this juncture we must remember that the disciples of Socrates who
looked for the absolute under the name of the "good," were in so far
narrow as they conceived of it only from the moral, specifically human,
standpoint, instead of at the same time considering its cosmic side.
Just as health and wealth belong together, and even these are not
sufficient for human welfare which further requires all social and
political virtues, so the good is not comprised in the interrelations of
all mankind, but passes beyond them and connects itself with the entire
universe. Without the universe man is nothing. He has no eyes without
light, no ears without sound, no morals without physics. Man is not so
much the measure of all things; his more or less intimate connection
with all things is rather the measure of all humanity. Not narrow
morality, but the universe, the supreme being, is the good in the very
highest meaning of the word, is absolute good, right, truth, beauty, and
reason.

In my preceding letter I spoke of universal reason and said that not
alone men, but also mountains, valleys, forests and fields, and even
fools and knaves were reasonable. Now you are familiar with that
student's song: "What's Coming from the Heights?" and you know that it
makes everything leathern. It speaks of a leathern hill, a leathern
coach-driver, a leathern letter, even father, mother, and sister are of
leather. And I mention this simply for the purpose of showing that I
understand that we cannot call leather reasonable and reasonable
leathern without brewing a mixture of language which is lacking the mark
by which all reasonable language is distinguished from chattering,
howling, and roaring. Language is only reasonable when it classifies the
world and distinguishes things by different names.

This is easily understood. But it is more difficult to see that those
who use their intellect without logical training exaggerate distinctions
to such an extent that they ignore the connection between them. All
things are not only distinct, but also connected. But logic so far must
be blamed for not rising to the recognition of the interrelation of all
things. The science of understanding frequently treats reason and
experience as if they were two different things without a common nature.
Therefore, I make it a point to insist that there is no experience
without reason and no reason without experience.

The linguists who dispute about the question whether reason has
developed after language or language after reason agree that both belong
together. One cannot speak without the use of reason, or talk without
sense, because chattering, or babbling, or whatever one may wish to call
it, are everything else but language. On the other hand, there can be no
reason without naming the things of this world, so as to distinguish
between leather and lady, between reason and experience.

Of course, the idea of a leathern lady is only a youthful prank. Still
it is calculated to illustrate the dialectic transfusion of all names
and things, of all subjects and predicates. It shows indirectly that
according to common sense thought, reason has its home only in the brain
of man, and that this reason is nevertheless unsound when it does not
know and remember that the individual human brain is connected with all
brains, and reasons with the whole world, so that only all existence and
the entire universe is reasonable in the highest meaning of the word.

In order to be able to use your reason in all research and on all
objects in a reasonable manner, you must know that the whole world has
one nature, even leather and your sister. Apparently there is a wide
gulf between these two, and yet in both of them the same forces are
active, just as a black horse has the same horse nature as a white
horse, so that from this point of view your sister is indeed leathern
and leather sisterly. Such statements sound paradoxical enough, yet I
insist on making them in this extreme manner in order to fully reveal
the absolute oneness of all existence, since it is the indispensable
basis of a reasonable understanding of logic.

Take one of the questions of the day now agitating the public mind, for
a further illustration. Two tendencies are now observed in the most
radical political movement of the nations. One of them is called
propaganda of the deed. It works in Russia and Ireland with dynamite,
powder, and lead. The other recommends the propaganda of the word, of
the vote, and of lawful agitation. And the difference between these two
is not discussed reasonably with a view to ascertaining for whom, when,
where, and why, this or that propaganda is fitting, but every one tries
to present his relative truth with the fanatical sectarianism of those
who claim absolute truth. But if you have grasped the method of getting
at truth, the true method of using your reasoning faculty, you will take
sides for one thing today and for another thing tomorrow, because you
will understand that all roads are leading toward Rome. And if some of
the comrades outvote you occasionally, you will still value these
antagonists as friends, and if you combat them, even in a war to the
knife, this will still be a relative war, a use of the knife with
reason.

Our proletarian logic is tolerant, not fanatical. This logic does not
want to be reasonable without passion, nor passionate without reason. It
does not abolish the difference between friend and foe, between truth
and falsehood, between reason and nonsense, but calms the fanaticism
which exaggerates those distinctions. Its fundamental maxim is: There is
only one absolute, the universe.

Remember well that the conception of a universe which has anything
outside or beside itself is still more senseless, if possible, than the
idea of wooden iron. You thus see that all differences have one common
nature which does not permit a transcendentally wide difference between
things or opinions. Because the universe is the supreme being, therefore
all differences, even those of opinion, are unessential.

For the purpose of studying logic, I entreat you to pay special
attention to the question of essential differences and to test it by
your own experience which will come to you from day to day.

By means of our logic we learn the language of the gods. In the
dictionary of this language, there is only one essential being, the
universal or supreme being. On the other hand, the language of the
mortals calls every particle a "being," but such being can be relative
beings only.

Every ear of a cornfield, every hair of an ox skin, and even every one
of their particles, is such a being. But these relative beings are at
the same time unessential attributes. Thus all differences between the
particles of the world are simultaneously essential and unessential; in
other words, they have a relative existence, they merely partake of the
supreme being, compared to whom they are absolutely unessential. Whether
you are a good or a bad man, whether your country is happy or unhappy,
free or oppressed, is very essential to you or me, but compared with the
great absolute whole it is very unessential. In the universal history
the fate of any single nation has no more significance than one hair on
my head, although none of my hairs is there by mere chance and all of
them have been counted. Hence everything is in its particular and
isolated self an unessential thing, but in the general interrelation
everything is a necessary, reasonable, essential and divine particle.

And now we come to the moral of it all. The human reason, the special
object of logical research, partakes of the nature of the universe. It
is nothing in itself. As an isolated being, it is wholly void and
incapable of producing any understanding or knowledge. Only in
connection, not merely with the material brain, but with the entire
universe, is the intellect capable of existing and acting. It is not the
mere brain which thinks, but the whole man is required for that purpose;
and not man alone, but the total interrelation with the universe is
necessary for the purpose of thinking. Reason itself reveals no truths.
The truths which are revealed to us by means of reason, are revelations
of the general nature of the absolute universe.

If you think of reason in this way, then, my son, you are thinking
reasonably, are world-wise, logical, and true.




TWENTY-THIRD LETTER




(A)

Although we know that there is no actual beginning, because we are
living in the universe without beginning and end, still we mortals must
always begin at a certain point. So I have begun one of my retrospects
over the history of my subject with Plato, and at another time I have
ended with Hegel, although before and after them there has been much
philosophical thought. These two names are luminant points which throw
their light over everything which is situated between them.

The errors of our predecessors are just as useful for the purpose of
illustration as their positive achievements. More even: the errors form
the steps of a ladder which leads toward a universal world philosophy.
We clamber up and down on it, perhaps a little irregularly, but nowadays
the crooked roads of an English park are preferred to the straight
French avenues.

It was an achievement on the part of the Socratic and Platonic schools
to seek the good not in good specialties, but in general good, as a
"pure" or absolute thing, to search for virtue in general instead of
virtues. But it was a mistake which prevented their success, to
exaggerate the distinction between the special and the general.
According to Plato, the black and white horses canter over terrestrial
pavements, but the horse in general, which is neither brown, black, nor
white, neither as slender as a race horse nor as clumsy as a draft
horse, cantered along in the Platonic "idea," in the ideal mists.
Platonic logic lacked what is taught by our present, or if you prefer,
future proletarian logic, viz., the general understanding of the
interrelation of all things, the truth that in spite of their
individual differences all things belong together as individuals of the
same genus. The logical relation between individual and genus stuck
upside down in the brain of the noble Plato.

He lived in a time which is similar to our own time in that the world of
the gods of the ancients was in the same state of dissolution in which
the Christian religions are today. Plato was as little satisfied with
Grecian mythology as a basis for a reasonable explanation of the world,
as we are with Christian mythology. He wanted to ascend to the universal
truth, not by way of little traditional stories, but by scientific
philosophy. His intention was good, but his weak flesh wrestled with a
task which required thousands of years for its solution.

A while ago I said that it was that topsy-turvy view of religion as to
the relation between the special and the general which thwarted Plato.
Let me illustrate a little more in detail in what this religious
topsy-turvydom consisted.

Here we have wind, the waters of the seas, the rays of the sun, chemical
and physical forces, forces of nature. These are specimens of the
universal force of nature. These specimens were regarded with sober
enough eyes by the Greeks, but the general nature sat high upon Olympus
in the form of Zeus. In the same way, the Greeks were familiar with
beautiful things, but beauty was an unapproachable goddess, Aphrodite.
True, the philosopher no longer believed in the gods, but he was
nevertheless still under the influence of transcendental concepts and
thus he mystified the general under the name of the "idea." The Platonic
ideas, like the gods of the heathen, are mystifications of the general.
Plato furthermore shows himself as a descendant of polytheism in this:
Although he clearly distinguished between virtue and virtuous things,
between beauty and beautiful things, between truth and true things, yet
he did not rise to the understanding that all generalities are
amalgamated and unified in the absolute generality, that, in so far, the
good, the true, and the beautiful are identical. The research for the
absolute did not become monistic until Christian monotheism lent a hand.
You will see from this that religion and philosophy form a common
chapter which has the genus of all genera for its object. Faith is
distinguished from science in that the latter no longer bows to the
dictates of imagination and of its organs, the priests, but seeks to
fathom the object of its studies by the exact use of the intellect. A
partial amalgamation of the two is, therefore, quite natural.

"When a woman is strong, isn't she strong after the same conception and
the same strength? By the term _same_," says the Platonic Socrates, "I
mean that it makes no difference whether the strength is in the man or
in the woman."

This quotation, taken from Plato's "Menon," shows that Platonic research
deals with the general, in this case the general concept of strength
which is the _same_ in man or woman, ox or mule, Tom and Jerry. It is
the genus by means of which black and white horses are known as horses,
dogs and monkeys as animals, animals and plants as organisms, and
finally the variations of the whole world as the universe, as the
_same_. Plato has grasped this _same-ness_ in a limited way, for
instance in regard to strength, reason, virtue, etc. But that in an
infinite sense everything is the _same_, that things as well as ideas,
bodies, and souls, are the same, remained for radical proletarian logic
to discover.

Hand in hand with the narrow Platonic conception of the general went a
narrow theory of understanding or science, a wrong conception of the
intellect and its functions. The Socratic Plato and the Platonic
Socrates both call understanding by the name of "remembering." By
praising understanding, they teach us that we must not believe the
priests, but study by the help of our senses. But, nevertheless, they
still teach a wrong method, a narrow art of thought.

In "Menon," the object of study is virtue. Socrates does not exactly
pose as a schoolmaster. He knows that he is called the wisest of men,
but explains that this is so, because others have a conceited opinion of
their wisdom, while his wisdom consists in humbly knowing that he knows
nothing. He does not so much try to teach what virtue is, as to
stimulate his disciples to search for it. But his idea of research is
distorted.

Among the immortal things which he transcendentally separates from
mortal things, he also classifies the soul, "the immortal soul" which
dies and lives again, and has always lived, knows everything, but must
"remember." Thus his research becomes a cudgeling of the brain, an
introspective speculation. He is not looking for understanding by way of
natural science, through the interrelations of the world, but
speculatively through the inside of the human skull.

In order to make his theory of memory plain, Socrates in "Menon" calls
an ignorant slave and instructs him in the fundamentals of geometry. He
quickly succeeds in getting from the ignorant fellow, who at first gives
wrong answers, the correct statements by recalling the connections of
thought by clever questioning. He thus demonstrates to his satisfaction
that man has wisdom _a priori_ in his head. But the Socratic-Platonic
art of logic has overlooked that such wisdom requires concepts which are
fixed in memory by internal _and_ external interrelations. The socalled
immortal soul with its innate wisdom has troubled the world a good while
thereafter.

You must not think that I have a poor opinion of Plato, because I
criticize him in this way. On the contrary, I am highly delighted with
his divine and immortal writings. "Honor to Socrates, honor to Plato,
but still more honor to truth." I also assure you that I am a great
admirer of natural science, but nevertheless I should like to show you
that it indulges in narrow reasoning.

Robert Mayer, the talented discoverer of the equivalent of heat, has
proven that the force of gravitation, of electricity, of steam, of heat,
etc., represents different modes of expression of the same force, of the
force of nature in general. But no, not quite so! He has ascertained the
numerical relation by which the transformations of one force into
another is accomplished. Thus a logical understanding sees that the
various forces and force in general are distinguished in detail but
identical in general. Darwin in his "Origin of Species" has accomplished
a similar demonstration. But neither Mayer nor Darwin have given that
general expression to world unity which is required by the art of logic.
In order to become an adept at this art, you must rise to the
understanding that all forces are various modes of expression of the one
force, all animals and species transformations of animaldom, that on the
moon a part is smaller than the whole, the same as on earth, that there
as well as here fire burns, and that as surely as you have no doubt of
your being, just as surely is there only one being, the infinite,
divine universe which has no other gods beside it, but contains all
forces, materials, and transformations.

This is an innate science which is the cause of all other science, an
innate science which, indeed, must first be awakened in you by "memory."

Hence our proletarian logic instructs you not to rack your brain by mere
introspection, as the ancient philosophers used to do, not to call the
senses impostors nor to search for truth without eyes, nose, and ears,
nor on the other hand to start out with the idea of certain natural
scientists who try to see, hear, and smell understanding without the
help of the intellect.

The mistake committed in making a wrong use of the intellect is a "sin
against the holy ghost." The Socratic-Platonic doctrine of memory is one
extreme side of this sin; the other extreme side is represented by that
modern science which tries to find truth by mere external means and
rejects everything as untrue which is not ponderable or tangible.

As this letter is more intimately connected with the following one than
is ordinarily the case, I take the liberty to unite them under the same
number and mark them with the letters A and B.




(B)

We are still the guests of Plato today, my son, and I should like to
show you that this philosopher, in whose time natural science had barely
developed its first downy feathers, already suspected its stubborn
narrowness, although in a certain sense the Platonic logic was no less
narrow than that of the so-called exact sciences still is to-day, at
least in part. Still Platonic logic had at least the advantage of its
outlook toward the Supreme Being, the absolute, while modern naturalism
is still stuck in the narrow land of specialties. Therefore, I hope that
you will find it interesting to note with me the way in which universal
truth is peeping forth beneath the wings of Platonic speculation.

"Listen, then, to what I am going to say," remarks Socrates in "Phaedo,"
paragraph 45. "In my youth, O Cebes, I had a great interest in natural
science, for it seemed to me a magnificent thing to know the cause of
everything, to learn how everything begins, exists, and passes. A
hundred times I turned to one thing and then to another, reflecting
about these matters by myself. Do animals arise when the hot and the
cold begin to disintegrate, as some claim? Is it the blood, which
enables us to think, or the air or the fire? Or is it none of these, but
rather the brain which produces all perceptions, such as seeing,
hearing, smelling, and does memory and thought then arise by these, and
from thought and memory, when they become adjusted, understanding? And
again, when I considered that all this passes away, and the changes in
heaven and on earth, I finally felt myself poorly qualified for this
whole investigation. Let this be sufficient proof to you: In the things
which formerly were familiar and known to me, I became so doubtful by
this investigation, that I forgot even that which I thought I knew of
many other things, as for instance the question as to how man grows. I
thought that everybody knew that this was caused by eating and drinking.
For when through the food flesh comes to flesh and bone to bone, and in
the same way that which is akin to all the rest of the things which
constitute man, it seemed natural that a small mass would become larger,
and thus a small man grow tall. Does not this appear reasonable to
you?... Consider furthermore this. It seemed enough to me that a man
appeared large when standing by the side of something small, that he
looked taller by one head, and in the same way one horse by the side of
another; or what is still plainer, ten seemed to me more than eight,
because it is more by two, and a thing of two feet longer than that
which measures only one foot, because it exceeds it by one."

Thereupon Cebes asks: "Well, and what do you think of this now?"

"I think, by Zeus," says Socrates, "that I am far removed from knowing
the cause of any of these things. I do not even admit that by adding one
to one I obtain two, by such an addition. For I wonder how it is that
each was supposed to be one when by itself, while now, that they have
been added to one another, they have become two. Neither can I convince
myself that if one thing divides a thing in two, that this division is
the cause of it becoming two. For this would be the opposite way of
making two. But when I heard somebody reading something from a book,
written by Anaxagoras as he said, to the effect that it is reason which
had arranged everything and was the cause of everything, I rejoiced at
this cause.... Now if one were to search for the cause of all things, of
their origin, existence and passing, he should only find out what is the
best way to maintain their existence.... Hence it is not meet that man
should care for anything else in regard to himself as well as to all
other things, but for that which is best and most excellent, and then he
would also know the worst about things, for the understanding of both
is the same. Considering this, I was glad to have found a teacher who
knows about the cause of all things, who suited me, I mean Anaxagoras,
and who would now tell me, first whether the earth is round or flat, and
after telling me that, would also explain to me the necessity for it and
the cause, by pointing to the fact that it was better that it should be
so. And when he claimed that the earth was the center of things, I hoped
he would explain why it was better that it should be the center, and
when he had explained that, I was resolved that I would not ask for any
other cause. In the same way I was going to inquire after the cause of
the sun, the moon, and the other stars, etc.... For I did not believe
that after claiming all this to have been arranged by reason, he would
be dragging in any other cause than that of being best to have it just
so. And this wonderful hope I had to abandon, my friends, when I
continued to read and saw that the man accomplished nothing by reason
and adduces no other reasons relating to the arrangement of things, but
quotes air, and water, and ether, and many other astonishing things.

"And it seemed that it was as if some one said Socrates accomplishes all
things by reason, and then, when he began to enumerate the cause of
everything I do, were to say first that I am sitting here because my
body consists of bones and sinews, and that the bones are hard and are
differentiated by joints, and the sinews so constructed that they can be
extended and shortened, etc. And further, if he tried to name the causes
of our discussion, he would refer to other similar things, such as
sound, and air and hearing, and a thousand and one other things, quite
neglecting the true cause, viz., that it suited the Athenians better to
condemn me, and that it suited me for this reason to stay here and
seemed more just to me to bear patiently the punishment which they have
ordered. For I believe that my bones and sinews would have gone long ago
to the dogs or been carried to the Boeotians, had I not considered it
more just and beautiful to atone to the state than to flee.

"It is very illogical, then, to name such causes. But if any one were to
say that I should not be able to do what I please without these things
(sinews and bones, and whatever else I may have), he would be right. But
it would be a very thoughtless contention to say that these things are
the cause of my actions, instead of my free choice to do the best. That
would show an inability to distinguish the fact that in all things the
cause is one thing, and another thing that without which the cause could
not be cause. And it seems to me that it is precisely this which some
call by a wrong name in considering it as the cause. For this reason
some put a whirlwind from heaven round the earth and others rest it on
air as they would a wide trough on a footstool."

So far Socrates, whose words I ask you to read repeatedly and carefully,
though they may look a little old-fashioned. This quotation is somewhat
lengthy, but I thought best not to cut it too short and to present it in
its main outlines.

This quotation says on the whole the same thing which I have said in my
proceeding letters. According to Socrates, all our thoughts and actions
have a wider and more general purpose, which he calls the "good," so
that we even do evil for the sake of good. A crime always aims at some
particular good. Evil is misunderstood good. Applied to natural science,
this means that it misunderstands the interrelation of all its fine
discoveries. And this charge is true even to-day. Although the natural
interrelations are more and more recognized from day to day, still the
understanding of the absolute inter-connection continues to be
overlooked, especially that of the intellect with material things, or of
the ideal with the real. Natural science teaches after the manner of the
gospel of John: Abraham begot Isaac, Isaac begot Jacob. But it forgets
to teach that all these genitors were not genitors in the last analysis,
but begotten by old Jehovah himself. The uncultivated condition of
Grecian natural sciences may have been ground enough for Socrates to
think little of it. We, on the other hand, have to-day good reasons for
thinking highly of natural science, and for this very reason I take
pains to illustrate by its prominent example in what respect the neglect
of the universal world thought results in a narrow conception of the
world.

We may well rejoice more lastingly than Socrates when natural science
teaches us how it happens that everything has its origin, life, and end,
because the knowledge of natural science has been far more enriched by
modern experiences than it was at the time of Anaxagoras. Nevertheless
you must not stop learning furthermore from logic that all growing,
coming into existence, living, and passing away is but a change of form.
The causes of natural science are indeed not causes, but effects of the
universe. They are reasonable effects of reason in so far as the latter
is not an isolated part, but interconnected with the universe. To
repeat: Our intellect is not ours, it does not belong to man, but it
together with man belongs to the universe. Reason and the world, the
true, the good, and the beautiful, together with Godhood which you
shall not idolize but understand in the spirit and in the world, in
truth and in reality, are all one thing, one being, and everywhere
eternal and the _same_.

Socrates shows that he has as yet only a narrow anthropomorphic, not a
cosmic conception of the "best and good" and of reason. He was dominated
by the prejudice which still holds sway over the uncultured believers in
God, that reason is older than all the rest of the world, that it is the
ruling and antecedent creator. Our conception of logic, on the other
hand, teaches that the spirit which we have in our brain is but the
emanation of the world spirit. And this latter must not be conceived as
a nebulous world monster, not as an enormous spirit, but as the actual
universe, which in spite of all change and all variation is eternally
one, true, good, reasonable, real, and supreme.




TWENTY-FOURTH LETTER


The art of thought, my son, for which we are striving, is not pure and
abstract, but connected with practice, a practical theory, a theoretical
practice. It is not a separate and isolated thing, not a "thing in
itself," but is connected with all things; it has a universal
interrelation. Hence our logic, as we have repeatedly stated, is a
philosophy, world wisdom, and metaphysics. I include the latter, because
our logic excludes nothing, not even the transcendental. It teaches that
everything, even transcendentalism, if practiced with consciousness and
the necessary moderation, and at the right time and place, for instance
at the carnival, is a reasonable and sublime pleasure.

All prominent philosophers were explorers and users of the same art of
thought, of living, of viewing the world, although many of them retired
to the solitude and were ascetics. Can the world be understood in a
hermitage? Yes and no. After you have been traveling and seeing many
lands, it is well to retire and classify the impressions received, and
thus to reflect about a true philosophy of life. In this way, secluded
thought, in the relative meaning of the word, that is, in connection
with observation and experience, with enjoyment and life, is a veritable
savior. Body and soul belong together, and if they are separated, it
must be remembered that such a separation is a mere matter of form, that
they are in fact one thing, attributes of the same being which is
infinitely great, so great that all other beings are but its fringes.

The art of distinction distinguishes the infinite infinitely with the
consciousness that in reality everything is interrelated without
distinction and is one.

This truth, and thus absolute truth, is ignored by laymen and
professional authorities alike. The thousand year dualism between body
and soul has been especially instrumental in preventing the
understanding of the universal interrelation. The whole history of
philosophy is but a wrestling with the dualism between matter and mind.
It was only by degrees that it moved towards its monistic goal.

After the brilliant triple star Socrates-Plato-Aristotle was
extinguished, the philosophical sky was covered with dark clouds. The
heathens stepped from the stage, and Christianity and the dogmas of its
church predominated the logic of men, until at last a new scientific
light arose in the beginning of modern times. It was especially
Cartesius and Spinoza who were most brilliant among the early thinkers
that emancipated their minds slowly and under great difficulties.
Spinoza, of Jewish descent, is especially interesting in his fight
against narrowmindedness and for a universal philosophy. He wrote an
"Essay on the Improvement of the Intellect and on the Way by which it is
best led to a true Understanding of Things." He, as well as we, was
looking for the best way, the true way, the way of truth. He, as well as
we, seeks to study and practice the fundamentals of the art of thought.

He begins: "After experience has taught me that everything which the
ordinary life offers is vain, and I have seen that everything which I
feared is only good or bad in so far as the mind is moved by it, I
finally resolved to investigate whether there is any true good--whether
there is anything the discovery of which will forever secure continuous
and supreme joy. What is most generally found in life, and what mankind
regards as the highest good, may be reduced to three things, viz.,
wealth, honor, and sensual pleasure."

After Spinoza has then uncovered the shadowy side and the vanity of
these popular ideals, he calls them "unsafe by their very nature," while
he is looking for "permanent good," which is "insecure only as regards
its possession, but not in its nature."

But how is that to be found?

"Here I shall say shortly what I mean by true good, and what is at the
same time the highest good. In order to grasp this fully, we must
remember that good or bad are only relative terms, and thus the same
thing may be called good or bad according to its relations, or on the
other hand perfect or imperfect."

Spinoza, forestalling the object of his research, discovers that the
true, supreme and permanent good is the "understanding of the unity" of
the soul with the entire nature. "This then," he says, "is the goal
which I am coveting."

"To this end, we must study morals, philosophy, and the education of
boys, and combine with this study the entire science of medicine,
because health materially assists us in reaching our ideal. Neither must
mechanics be neglected, because many difficult things are made easy by
art. Above all we must strive to find a way for the improvement of the
intellect."

Here we have once more arrived at the pivotal point of our subject, my
dear disciple. Who or what is the intellect, whence does it come from,
whither does it lead? Answer: It is a light which does not shine within
itself, but throws rays outside of itself for the illumination of the
world. For this reason the science which has the faculty of
understanding for its object, though a limited, is at the same time a
universal science, a universal world wisdom.

But isn't it a contradiction that a special science wants to be general
world wisdom? Is not general wisdom that which comprises all knowledge,
all special science? Must I not know everything in order to be world
wise? And how can any single brain assume to acquire all knowledge, to
know everything? Answer: It is impossible for you to know everything;
but you can rise to the understanding that your special wisdom and that
of all others is a part of universal wisdom and form together a relative
whole which in connection with all the rest of the world constitute the
absolute being. This understanding represents pure logic and is
universal understanding, understanding of the universal being.

Do not be troubled by the fact that Socrates was looking for virtue and
the "best," or Spinoza for permanent and supreme joy, and that their
wisdom aimed only at the narrow circle of human life, without rising to
the cosmic interrelation. The means and the instrument by the help of
which they strive for their ideal is the intellect. It is quite natural
that intellectual research led to the study of the intellect, to the
"improvement of the intellect," to the "critique of reason," to "logic,"
and finally to the understanding that the faculty of thought is an
inseparable part of the monistic whole, of the absolute which lends
support, consistency, reason and sense to all thought.

On his exploring tour for the improvement of the intellect, Spinoza
picks up a remark which seems to me worthy of closer attention. He says
in so many words: If we are looking for a way to improve the intellect,
is it not necessary for the purpose of finding such a way to first
improve the intellect, in order to be at all able to discern the way
which leads to an improvement of the intellect, and so on without end?
"We must have a hammer to forge the iron, and in order to have a hammer,
it must be made; but for this purpose we need another hammer and other
instruments, and so forth without end. In this way it must not be proven
that men have no power to forge iron. Men have rather accomplished only
the easiest tasks with difficulty and imperfectly by the help of the
natural tools of their bodies. Gradually they accomplished more
difficult things with less labor and better. And thus they slowly
proceeded from the simplest tasks to the instruments."

I admire in this process of reasoning the brilliant understanding that
the hammer is not such a limited instrument as the untrained human brain
thinks. It thinks that a hammer is not a pair of tongs. But Spinoza says
that the bare fist is a hammer when used for striking, much more a stone
or a club. A pair of tongs used to drive a nail becomes a hammer; a
hammer which I use to draw a nail becomes a pair of tongs. Fist or club,
sense or nonsense, all is one. In other words, things are separated, but
never so far as the fantastical dreamers think. Just as hammer and
tongs, saw and file, are parts of the class of tools, so all things are
parts of the one and absolute universe. Recognize, then, dear Eugene,
that the relative and the absolute are not separated by such a
bridgeless chasm, that the one should be praised to the skies and the
other damned to the lowest pit. Understand that everything is
dialectically interrelated, that the infinite, eternal, divine, can live
only in the finite, special things, and that on the other hand the parts
of the world can exist only in the absolute. In short, raise your
conception to the universal conception, and at the same time, understand
the supreme being in all its parts instead of idolizing it.




The Positive Outcome of Philosophy

BY JOSEPH DIETZGEN

Translated by Ernest Untermann




THE POSITIVE OUTCOME OF PHILOSOPHY




PREFACE


As a father cares for his child, so an author cares for his product. I
may be able to give a little additional zest to the contents of this
work by adding an explanation how I came to write it.

Although born by my mother in 1828, I did not enter my own world until
"the mad year," 1848. I was learning the trade of my father in my
paternal shop, when I saw in the "Koelnische Zeitung," how the people of
Berlin had overcome the King of Prussia and conquered "liberty." This
"liberty" now became the first object of my musings. The parties of that
period, the disturbers and howlers, made a great deal of fuss about it.
But the more I heard about it, and hence became enthusiastic over it,
the duller, hazier and more indistinct became the meaning of it, so that
it turned things upside down in my head. The psychologists have long
known that enthusiasm for a cause and understanding of that cause are
two different things. Mark, for instance, the zeal displayed by Catholic
peasants in singing their mass, although they do not understand a word
of Latin.

What is meant by political freedom? What is its beginning, what its end?
Where and how are we to find a positive and definite knowledge of it? In
the parties of the middle, the so-called "constitutionals," as well as
among the bourgeois democrats, there was no end of dissension. Nothing
could be learned there. Among them, as among the Protestants, every one
was a chosen interpreter of the gospel.

However, the papers of the extremes, that is, the "Neue Preussische"
with its "For God, King and Fatherland," and the "Neue Rheinische," the
organ of "Democracy," gave me a hint that liberty had some sort of a
material basis. During the following years, my life in rural
surroundings gave me leisure to follow this scent. On one side, it was
the work of men like Gerlach, Stahl, and Leo, on the other of Marx and
Engels, that gave me a foothold.

Though the communists and the ultra-conservatives came to widely
different conclusions, still I felt and read between the lines that both
of these extreme parties based their demands on one fundamental premise.
They knew what they wanted; they both had a definite beginning and end.
And that permitted the assumption that both had a common philosophy. The
Prussian landholding aristocracy based the cross, which they wore as an
emblem on their hats, on the historically acquired royal military power
and on the positive divine revelation of the Bible printed in black and
supported by the ecclesiastical police force dressed in black. And the
Communist point of departure was quite as positive, unquestionable and
material, viz., the growing supremacy of the mass of the people with
their proletarian interests based on the historically acquired
productive power of the working class. The spirit of both of these
hostile camps was descending from the results of philosophy, primarily
from the Hegelian school. Both of them were armed with the
philosophical achievements of the century, which they had not only
mechanically assimilated, but rather continually provided with fresh
food like a living being.

In the beginning of the fifties, a pamphlet was published by one of the
cross bearers, Stahl, entitled "Against Bunsen." This Bunsen was at the
time the Prussian Embassador at London, a crony of the ruling Prussian
King Frederic William IV., and, apart from this, nothing but a liberal
muddle head who was interested in political and religious tolerance.

The pamphlet of the cross bearer Stahl attacked this tolerance and
demonstrated valiantly that tolerance could be preached only by a
muddled free lance to whom religion and fatherland were indifferent
conceptions. Religious faith, so far as it is truth, so he said, has a
true power and can transpose mountains. Such a faith could not be
tolerant and indifferent, but must push its propaganda with fire and
sword.

In the same way in which Stahl defended the interests of the landed
aristocracy, the philosopher Feuerbach spoke in the interest of the
infidel revolutionaries. Both of them were to that extent in accord with
the "Communist Manifesto" that they no longer regarded Liberty as a
phantasmagoria, but as a being of flesh and blood.

When I had realized this, it dawned upon me that any conception
elucidated by philosophy, in this case the idea of liberty, had this
peculiarity: Liberty is as yet an abstract idea. In order to become
real, it must assume a concrete, special form.

Political freedom as a glittering generality is a thing of no reality.
Under such fantastic ideal the constitutionalists or the liberals
conceal the liberty of the money bag. Under these circumstances, they
are quite right in demanding German unity with Prussia as a head, or a
republic with a grand duke at the top. The landed aristocracy also are
right in demanding the liberty of that aristocracy. And the Communists
are still more right, for they demand the liberty that will guarantee
bread and butter for the mass of the people and will fully set free all
the forces of production.

From this experience and conclusion it follows that true liberty and the
highest right are composed of individual liberties and rights, that are
opposed to one another without being inconceivable. It is easy to
proceed from this premise to the rule of thought laid down in this work,
that the brain need not make any excursions into the transcendental in
order to find his way through the contradictions of the real world.

In this way I passed from politics to philosophy, and from philosophy to
the theory of positive knowledge which I presented to the public in 1869
in my little work "The Nature of Human Brain Work." Further studies on
the general powers of understanding have added to my special knowledge
of this subject, so that I am now enabled to fill the old wine into a
new bottle instead of publishing a new edition of my old work.

The science which I present in the following pages is very limited in
its circumference, but all the better founded and important in its
consequences. This, I trust, will be accepted as a sufficient excuse for
the recurring repetition of the same statements in a different form. My
remaining confined to a single point requires no apology. What is left
undone by one, is bequeathed as a problem to others.

There might be some dispute over the question, how much of this positive
achievement of philosophy is due to the author and to his predecessors.
But that is an interminable task of small concern. No matter who hoisted
the calf out of the well, so long as it is out. Anyway, this whole work
treats of the concatenation and interdependence of things, and this also
throws a bright light on the question of mine and thine.

J. DIETZGEN.

CHICAGO, March 30, 1887.




THE POSITIVE OUTCOME OF PHILOSOPHY




