PART III



SECTARIANISM AND THE KOAN





. . . in which the Ch'an movement diversifies into a variety of
schools, each beholden to a master or masters advocating an
individualized path to enlightenment. From this period of personality
and experimentation gradually emerge two main Ch'an paths, the Lin-chi
and the Ts'ao-tung (later called Rinzai and Soto in Japan). The Lin-chi
school concludes that enlightenment can be precipitated in a prepared
novice through shouts, jolts, and mental paradoxes. The Ts'ao-tung
relies more heavily on the traditional practice of meditation to
gradually release enlightenment. The faith grows in numbers, but
quality declines. To maintain Ch'an's intellectual vigor, there emerges
a new technique, called the koan, which uses episodes from Ch'an's
Golden Age to challenge novices' mental complacency. This invention
becomes the hallmark of the later Lin-chi sect, and through the
refinement of the koan technique Ch'an enjoys a renaissance of
creativity in China.




Chapter Eleven

LIN-CHI:

FOUNDER OF RINZAI ZEN


The Great Persecution of 845 brought to a close the creative Golden Age
of Ch'an, while also leaving Ch'an as the dominant form of Chinese
Buddhism. In the absence of an establishment Buddhism for Ch'an to
distinguish itself against, the sect proceeded to evolve its own
internal sectarianism. There arose what are today known as the "five
houses," regional versions of Ch'an that differed in minor but
significant ways.1 Yet there was no animosity among the schools, merely
a friendly rivalry. In fact, the teachers themselves referred back to
the prophecy attributed to Bodhidharma that the flower of _dhyana_
Buddhism would one day have five petals.

The masters who founded the five schools were all individualists of
idiosyncratic character. Yet the times were such that for the most part
their flowers bloomed gloriously only a few decades before slowly
fading. However, two of the sects did prosper and eventually went on to
take over the garden. These two houses, the Lin-chi and the Ts'ao-tung,
both were concerned with dialectics and became the forerunners of the
two Zen sects (Rinzai and Soto) eventually to flourish in Japan. Of the
two, the Lin-chi is most directly traceable back to the earlier
masters, since its founder actually studied under the master Huang-po.

The master known today as Lin-chi (d. 866?) was born in the prefecture
of Nan-hua, in what today is Shantung province.2 He reportedly was
brilliant, well behaved, and filled with the filial devotion expected
of good Chinese boys. Drawn early to Buddhism, although not necessarily
to Ch'an, he shaved his head and became a monk while still young. His
early studies were of the sutras, as well as the _vinaya_ or Buddhist
rules and the _sastra_ or commentaries. But in his early twenties he
decided that he was

more interested in intuitive wisdom than orthodoxy and consequently
took the road in search of a master.

Thus he arrived at the monastery of Huang-po already a fully ordained
monk. But his learning was traditional and his personality that of a
timorous fledgling monk. For three years he dutifully attended the
master's sermons and practiced all the observances of the mountain
community, but his advancement was minimal. Finally the head disciple
suggested that he visit Huang-po for an interview to try to gain
insight. The young man obligingly went in to see the master and asked
him the standard opener: "What is the real meaning of Bodhidharma's
coming from the West?" Huang-po's wordless response was to lay him low
with a blow of his stick.

Lin-chi scurried away in perplexity and related the story to the head
disciple, who encouraged him to return, which he did twice more. But
each time he received the same harsh reception. He was finally so
demoralized that he announced plans to leave the monastery and seek
enlightenment elsewhere. The head monk related this to Huang-po
together with the opinion that this young novice showed significant
promise. So when Lin-chi came to bid Huang-po farewell, the master
sympathetically directed him to the monastery of a kindly nearby
teacher, the master Ta-yu.

Perhaps it was all planned, but when Lin-chi arrived at the second
monastery and related his unhappy treatment at the hands of Huang-po
the master Ta-yu listened patiently and then declared, "Huang-po
treated you with great compassion. He merely wanted to relieve your
distress." Upon hearing this Lin-chi suddenly understood that Huang-po
was transmitting the wordless insight to him, the understanding that
Ch'an lies not in the words produced in the abbot's room but rather in
the realization of his intuitive mind. It suddenly was all so obvious
that the young monk could not contain his joy and declared, "So Huang-
po's Buddhism is actually very simple; there's nothing to it after
all!" This struck the master Ta-yu as either impertinent or a
significant breakthrough, so he grabbed Lin-chi and yelled, "You scamp!
A minute ago you complained that Huang-po's teaching was impossible to
understand and now you say there is nothing to it. What is it you just
realized? Speak quickly!" (Only in a spontaneous utterance is there
real, uncalculated evidence of enlightenment.)

Lin-chi's answer was to pummel Ta-yu in the ribs three times with his
fist. The older master then discharged him (or perhaps kicked him out)
with the observation, "Your teacher is Huang-po, and therefore you do
not concern me." Thus the enlightened young novice trudged back up the
mountain to Huang-po's monastery. The master greeted him with the
puzzled observation: "Haven't you come back a bit too soon? You only
just left." In response Lin-chi bowed and said, "It's because you've
been so kind to me that I came back so quickly," and he proceeded to
relate the story of his sudden enlightenment. To which Huang-po
declared, "What a big mouth that old man has. The next time I see him
I'll give him a taste of my staff." To this Lin-chi yelled, "Why wait!
I can give it to you now," and proceeded to slap the master's face. The
startled Huang-po declared, "This crazy monk is plucking the tiger's
whiskers." Whereupon Lin-chi emitted the first of what was to be a
lifetime of shouts, affirming his wordless insight. The satisfied
Huang-po called an attendant and said, "Take this crazy fellow to the
assembly hall."

This is a perfect example of "sudden" enlightenment that took many
years to achieve. Lin-chi had been a plodding, earnest young man until
the moment of his "sudden" enlightenment, which occurred over a
seemingly uncalculated remark by a teacher not even his own master. In
fact, all Huang-po had done was to assail him with a staff. But Lin-chi
was transformed suddenly from a milksop to the founder of a school,
probably the greatest radicalization since the Apostle Paul was struck
down on the road to Damascus.3 Still, Lin-chi's "sudden" enlightenment
had come about at the end of a highly disciplined period of
preparation. As he later described it:



_In bygone days I devoted myself to the _vinaya_ and also delved into
the _sutras _and _sastras_. Later, when I realized that they were
medicines for salvation and displays of doctrines in written words, I
once and for all threw them away, and searching for the Way, I
practiced meditation. Still later I met great teachers. Then it was,
with my Dharma Eye becoming clear, that I could discern all the old
teachers under Heaven and tell the false ones from the true. It is not
that I understood from the moment I was born of my mother, but that,
after exhaustive investigation and grinding discipline, in an instant I
knew of myself.4

_

        Like a reformed addict, he railed most against his own recent
practices. He proceeded to denounce all the trappings of Buddhism, even
the Ch'an Patriarchs themselves, as he shattered the chains of his
former beliefs:



_Followers of the Way, if you want insight into Dharma as is, just
don't be taken in by the deluded views of others. Whatever you
encounter, either within or without, slay it at once: on meeting a
buddha slay the buddha, on meeting a patriarch slay the patriarch, on
meeting an arhat slay the arhat, on meeting your parents slay your
parents, on meeting your kinsman slay your kinsman, and you attain
emancipation. By not cleaving to things, you freely pass through.5

_

After his enlightenment, he had many exchanges with Huang-po in which
he came off ahead as often as not. It is also interesting that many of
the interactions involved the manual labor of the monastery, an
indication of the significance of work in Ch'an life. One famous joust
between Lin-chi and Huang-po went as follows:



_One day Master Lin-chi went with Huang-po to do some work in which all
the monks participated. Lin-chi followed his master who, turning his
head, noticed that Lin-chi was carrying nothing in his hand.

"Where is your hoe?"

"Somebody took it away."

"Come here: let us discuss something," commanded Huang-po and as Lin-
chi drew nearer, he thrust his hoe into the ground and continued,
"There is no one in the world who can pick up my hoe."

However, Lin-chi seized the tool, lifted it up, and exclaimed, "How
then could it be in my hands?"

"Today we have another hand with us; it is not necessary for me to join
in."

And Huang-po returned to the temple.6



_        This story can be interpreted many ways. John Wu says,
"Obviously he was using the hoe as a pointer to the great function of
teaching and transmitting the lamp of Ch'an. . . . [This was] a
symbolic way of saying that in a mysterious manner the charge was now
in his hands."7 However, as Freud once remarked concerning the
celebrated phallic symbolism of his stogie, "Sometimes, madam, it's
just a cigar," and one suspects that in this little slapstick episode,
the hoe might possibly be just a hoe.

Another exchange between Huang-po and Lin-chi may have more dialectical
significance. According to the story:



_One day Huang-po ordered all the monks of the temple to work in the
tea garden. He himself was the last to arrive. Lin-chi greeted him, but
stood there with his hands resting on the hoe.

"Are you tired?" asked Huang-po

"I just started working; how can you say that I am tired?"

Huang-po immediately lifted his stick and struck Lin-chi, who then
seized the stick, and with a push, made his master fall to the ground.
Huang-po called the supervisor to help him up. After doing so, the
supervisor asked, "Master, how can you let such a madman insult you
like that?" Huang-po picked up the stick and struck the supervisor.
Lin-chi, digging the ground by himself, made this remark: "Let all
other places use cremation; here I will bury you alive._"8_

_

Of Lin-chi's final quip, which tends to take the edge off a really
first-rate absurdist anecdote, John Wu makes the following observation,
"This was a tremendous utterance, the first authentic roaring, as it
were, of a young lion. It was tantamount to declaring that his old
conventional self was now dead and buried, with only the True Self
living in him; that this death may and should take place long before
one's physical decease; that it is when this death has taken place that
one becomes one's True Self which, being unborn, cannot die. From that
time on, there could no longer be any doubt in Huang-po's mind that his
disciple was thoroughly enlightened, destined to carry on and brighten
the torch of Ch'an."9 Whether this is true or not, it does seem clear
that Lin-chi's pronounced personality appealed to old Huang-po, who
loved to match wits with him as he came and went around the monastery.
He even allowed the young master liberties he denied others. For
example, Lin-chi once showed up during the middle of a summer
meditation retreat, something strictly forbidden. He then decided to
leave before it was over, something equally unprecedented:



_One day after half the summer session had already passed, Lin-chi went
up the mountain to visit his master Huang-po whom he found reading a
sutra. Lin-chi said to him:

"I thought you were the perfect man, but here you are apparently a dull
old monk, swallowing black beans [Chinese characters]."

Lin-chi stayed only a few days and then bid farewell to Huang-po, who
said:

"You came here after the summer session had started, and now you are
leaving before the summer session is over."

"I came here simply to visit you, Master!"

Without ado, Huang-po struck him and chased him away. After having
walked a few li, Lin-chi began to doubt his enlightenment in Ch'an, so
he returned to Huang-po for the rest of the summer.10

_

Some time after Lin-chi received the seal of enlightenment from Huang-
po, he decided to go his own way and departed for the province of
Hopei, where he became the priest of a small temple on the banks of a
river. This little temple was called "Overlooking the Ford," or _lin-
chi_ in Chinese, and it was from this locale that he took his name.
After he was there for a time, however, some local fighting broke out,
forcing him to abandon his pastoral riverbank location. (This
disturbance may well have been connected with the disruptions of the
845 persecution of Buddhism.) But even when in the middle of a war he
seems to have always been a man of Ch'an. There is an episode that
strongly resembles the eighteenth-century essayist Dr. Samuel Johnson's
kicking a stone to refute Berkeley's proposition that matter is
nonexistent:



_One day the Master entered an army camp to attend a feast. At the gate
he saw a staff officer. Pointing to an open-air pillar, he asked: "Is
this secular or sacred?"

The officer had no reply.

Striking the pillar, the Master said: "Even if you could speak, this is
still only a wooden post." Then he went in.11

_

Fortunately, Ch'an was not a sect that required a lot of paraphernalia,
and Lin-chi merely moved into the nearby town, where the grand marshal
donated his house for a temple. He even hung up a plaque with the name
"Lin-chi," just to make the master feel at home. But things may have
heated up too much, for Lin-chi later traveled south to the prefecture
of Ho, where the governor, Counselor Wang, honored him as a master.
There is a telling conversation between the two that reveals much about
the teaching of Ch'an at the time. Apparently the Ch'anists had
completely abandoned even any pretense of traditional Buddhism--again a
fortuitous development, considering traditional Buddhism's imminent
destruction.



_One day the Counselor Wang visited the Master. When he met the Master
in front of the Monks' Hall, he asked: "Do the monks of this monastery
read the sutras?"

"No, they don't read sutras," said the Master.

"Then do they learn meditation?" asked the Counselor.

"No, they don't learn meditation," answered the Master.

"If they neither read sutras nor learn meditation, what in the world
are they doing?" asked the Counselor.

"All I do is make them become buddhas and patriarchs," said the
Master.12

_

Lin-chi eventually traveled on, finally settling at the Hsing-hua
temple in Taming prefecture, where he took up his final residence. It
was here that a record of his sermons was transcribed by a "humble
heir" named Ts'un-chiang. The result was _The Record of Lin-chi_, one
of the purest exercises in the dialectics of the nondialectical
understanding. But, as Heinrich Dumoulin observed, "Zen has never
existed in pure experience only, without admixture of theoretical
teachings or methodical practice, as it has sometimes been idealized.
It could not exist in that fashion, for mysticism, like all other human
experience, is dependent on the actual conditions of human life."13
Indeed, Lin-chi was one of the first to develop what might be called a
dialectic of irrationality. He loved categories and analysis in the
service of nonconceptual inquiry, and what he created were guides to
the uncharted seas of the intuitive mind.

Lin-chi is best known for his use of the shout. He shared the concern
of Huang-po and Ma-tsu with the problem of wordless transmission and to
their repertory of beatings and silences he added the yell, another way
to affirm insights that cannot be reasoned. We may speculate that the
shout was rather like a watered-down version of the beating, requiring
less effort but still able to startle at a critical instant.14 He seems
to have been particularly fond of classifying things into groups of
four, and one of his most famous classifications was of the shout
itself. He once demonstrated the shout to a hapless monk as follows:



_The Master asked a monk: "Sometimes a shout is like the jeweled sword
of a spirit King [i.e., extremely hard and durable]; sometimes a shout
is like the golden-haired lion crouching on the ground [i.e., strong,
taut, and powerful]; sometimes a shout is like a weed-tipped fishing
pole [i.e., probing and attracting the unwary]; and sometimes a shout
doesn't function as a shout. How do you understand this?"

As the monk fumbled for an answer, Lin-chi gave a shout.15

_

His philosophy of the shout as a device for cutting off sequential
reasoning was thus demonstrated by example. But the question those who
relate this story never resolve is: Which of the four shouts was the
shout he used on the student? [John Wu in _The Golden Age of Zen
_speculates that this shout was of the first category, since it was
meant to "cut off" the monk's sequential thought, but that seems a
rather simplistic mixing of the metaphorical with the concrete.16)

        Lin-chi also was not averse to the use of the stick in the
pursuit of reality, as the following example illustrates. The story
also shows that the use of the stick was meaningful only if it was
unexpected.



_Once the Master addressed the assembly.

"Listen, all of you! He who wants to learn Dharma must never worry
about the loss of his own life. When I was with Master Huang-po I asked
three times for the real meaning of Buddhism, and three times I was
struck as if tall reeds whipped me in the wind. I want those blows
again, but who can give them to me now?"

A monk came forth from the crowd, answering: "I can give them to you!"

Master Lin-chi picked up a stick and handed it to him. When the monk
tried to grab it, the Master struck him instead.17

_

There also is a story indicating that Lin-chi believed that when the
shout failed to work, the stick might be required.



_The Master took the high seat in the Hall. A monk asked, "What about
the cardinal principle of the Buddha-dharma?"

The Master raised his whisk.

The monk shouted. The Master struck him.

Another monk asked: "What about the cardinal principle of the Buddha-
dharma?"

Again the Master raised his whisk.

The monk shouted. The Master also shouted.

The monk faltered; the Master struck him.18

_

Yet another series of exchanges sounds a similar theme.



_The Master asked a monk, "Where do you come from?"

The monk shouted.

The master saluted him and motioned him to sit down. The monk
hestitated. The Master hit him.

Seeing another monk coming, the Master raised his whisk.

The monk bowed low. The Master hit him.

Seeing still another monk coming, the Master again raised his whisk.
The monk paid no attention. The Master hit him too.19



_He was also challenged by a nun, one of the few recorded

instances of a master actually matching wits with a woman who had taken
Ch'an orders.



_The Master asked a nun: "Well-come or ill-come?"

The nun shouted.

"Go on, go on, speak!" cried the Master, taking up his stick.

Again the nun shouted. The Master hit her.20

_

What Lin-chi also brought to Ch'an was a dialectical inquiry into the
relationship between master and pupil, together with a similar analysis
of the mind states that lead to enlightenment. He seems remarkably
sophisticated for the ninth century, and indeed we would be hard
pressed to find this kind of psychological analysis anywhere in the
West that early. The puzzling, contradictory quality about all this is
that Lin-chi believed fervently in intuitive intelligence, and in the
uselessness of words--even warning that questions were irrelevant:



_Does anyone have a question? If so, let him ask it now. But the
instant you open your mouth you are already way off.21

_

Among his dialectical creations were various fourfold categorizations
of the intangible. We have already seen his four categories of the
shout. He also created the four categories of relationship between
subject and object, also sometimes called the Four Processes of
Liberation from Subjectivity and Objectivity. Some believe this served
to structure the "four standpoints or points of view which Lin-chi used
in instructing his students."22 Lin-chi's original proposition, the
basis of all the later commentary, is provided in _The Record of Lin-
chi _as follows:



_At the evening gathering the Master addressed the assembly, saying:
"Sometimes I take away man and do not take away the surroundings;
sometimes I take away the surroundings and do not take away man;
sometimes I take away both man and the surroundings; sometimes I take
away neither man nor the surroundings._"23_



_As Chang Chung-yuan describes these four arrangements, the first is to
"take away the man but not his objective situation," i.e., to take away
all interpretation and just experience the world without subjective
associations.24 (This is quite similar to the approach of the Japanese
haiku poem, in which a description of something is provided completely
devoid of interpretation or explicit emotional response.)

The second arrangement is to let the man remain but take away
objectivity. As John Wu interprets this, "In the second stage, people
of normal vision, who see mountains as mountains and rivers as rivers,
must be reminded of the part that their own mind contributes to the
appearance of things, and that what they naively take for objectivity
is inextricably mixed with subjectivity. Once aware of subjectivity,
one is initiated into the first stages of Ch'an, when one no longer
sees mountains as mountains and rivers as rivers."25 This is merely the
Ch'an commonplace that "non-attachment or objectivity liberates one's
self from bondage to the outside and thus leads to enlightenment."26 As
Dumoulin describes these, "In the first and second stages, illusion
departs first from the subject and then from the object; clinging to
subjective intellectual perception and to the objective world is
overcome."27

Lin-chi's third stage is to "take away both the man and his objective
situation. In other words, it is liberation from . . . the attachments
of both subjectivity and objectivity. Lin-chi's famous 'Ho!' . . .
often served this purpose."28 In a blow of a master's staff or a shout
there is nothing one can grasp, either objectively or subjectively.
This is the next-to-last stage in the progression toward liberation
from the mind's tyranny.

In the fourth stage we find the final condition, in which objectivity
and subjectivity cease to be distinguishable. What this means is that
there is no intellectuation at all, that the world simply is. As
Dumoulin declares, "reality is comprehended in its final oneness."29 Or
as the story says: Before enlightenment, mountains are mountains and
rivers are rivers; during the study of Zen, mountains are not mountains
and rivers are not rivers; but when there finally is enlightenment,
mountains are again mountains and rivers are rivers. In this final
state the distinction and confrontation of subject and object dissolve,
as we are finally at one with the nameless world.

Another of Lin-chi's famous dialectical categories is his "Fourfold
Relationship possible Between Questioner and Answerer or Between Guest
and Host." The point of the structure he sets up is to elucidate the
interaction of master and novice, but he does so using metaphor of host
and guest--where the host represents the universal Self and the guest
the ego-form self.30 Lin-chi's sermon on the subject went as follows:



_A true student gives a shout, and to start with holds out a

sticky lacquer tray. The teacher, not discerning that this is an

objective circumstance, goes after it and performs a lot of antics with
it. The student again shouts but still the teacher is unwilling to let
go. This is . . . called "the guest examines the host."

Sometimes a teacher will proffer nothing, but the instant a student
asks a question, robs him of it. The student, having been robbed,
resists to the death and will not let go; this is called "the host
examines the guest."

Sometimes a student comes forth before a teacher in conformity with a
state of purity. The teacher, discerning that this is an objective
circumstance, seizes it and flings it into a pit. "What an excellent
teacher!" exclaims the student, and the teacher replies, "Bah! You
can't tell good from bad!" Thereupon the student makes a deep bow; this
is called "the host examines the host."

Or again, a student will appear before a teacher wearing a cangue and
bound with chains. The teacher fastens on still more chains and cangues
for him. The student is so delighted that he can't tell what is what:
this is called "the guest examines the guest._"31_



_In the first category, according to Chang Chung-yuan, the ego meets
the universal Self.32 In the second category the universal Self
encounters the ego-form self. In the third category, the universal Self
of one meets the universal Self of another, and in the fourth category
the ego of one encounters the ego of another. Or if we are to interpret
this in the concrete, in the first encounter, an enlightened master
meets an unenlightened novice; in the second an enlightened novice
meets an unenlightened master (which did happen); in the third an
enlightened master meets an enlightened novice; and in the fourth
category an unenlightened master meets an unenlightened novice, to the
mutual delusion of both.33

Lin-chi has been called the most powerful master in the entire history
of Ch'an, and not without reason. His mind was capable of operating at
several levels simultaneously, enabling him to overlay very practical
instruction with a comprehensive dialectic. He believed in complete
spontaneity, total freedom of thought and deed, and a teaching approach
that has been called the "lightning" method--because it was swift and
unpredictable. He was uncompromising in his approach, and he was also
extremely critical of the state of Ch'an in his time--a criticism
probably justified. He found both monks and masters wanting. It seems
that Ch' an had become fashionable, with the result that there were

many masters who were more followers of the trend than followers of the
Way. So whereas Huang-po often railed against other sects of Buddhism,
Lin-chi reserved his ire for other followers of Ch'an (there being few
other Buddhist sects left to criticize).

He even denounced his own students, who often mimicked his shouting
without perceiving his discernment in its use. He finally had to set
standards for this, announcing to the assembly one day that henceforth
only those who could tell the enlightened from the unenlightened would
have the right to shout.



_        "You all imitate my shouting," he said, "but let me give you a
test now. One person comes out from the eastern hall. Another person
comes out from the western hall. At their meeting, they simultaneously
shout. Do you possess enough discernment to distinguish the guest from
the host [i.e., the unenlightened from the enlightened]? If you have no
such discernment, you are forbidden hereafter to imitate my shouting.34

_

His major concern seems to have been that his students resist
intellection. Lin-chi himself was able to speculate philosophically
while still a natural man, using conceptual thought only when it served
his purpose. But perhaps his students could not, for he constantly had
to remind them that striving and learning were counterproductive.



        _"Followers of Tao!" Lin-chi said, "the way of Buddhism admits
of no artificial effort; it only consists in doing the ordinary things
without any fuss--going to the stool, making water, putting on clothes,
taking a meal, sleeping when tired. Let the fools laugh at me. Only the
wise know what I mean._"35_



_Or as he said at another time:



_The moment a student blinks his eyes, he's already way off. The moment
he tries to think, he's already differed. The moment he arouses a
thought, he's already deviated. But for the man who understands, it's
always right here before his eyes.36

_

The problem, he believed, was that too many teachers had started
"teaching" and explaining rather than forcing students to experience
truth for themselves. Thus these teachers had no right

to criticize their monks, since they themselves had failed in their
responsibility.



_There are teachers all around who can't distinguish the false from the
true. When students come asking about . . . the [objective]
surroundings and the [subjective] mind, the blind old teachers
immediately start explaining to them. When they're railed at by the
students they grab their sticks and hit them, [shouting], "What
insolent talk!" Obviously you teachers yourselves are without an eye so
you've no right to get angry with them.37

_

And finally, in his old age, Lin-chi became something of a monument
himself, a testing point for enlightenment in a world where true
teachers were rare. He even complained about it.



_Hearing everywhere of old man Lin-chi, you come here intending to bait
me with difficult questions and make it impossible for me to answer.
Faced with a demonstration of the activity of my whole body, you
students just stare blankly and can't move your mouths at all; you're
at such a loss you don't know how to answer me. You go around
everywhere thumping your own chests and whacking your own ribs, saying,
"I understand Ch'an! I understand the Way!" But let two or three of you
come here and you can't do a thing. Bah! Carrying that body and mind of
yours, you go around everywhere flapping your lips like winnowing fans
and deceiving villagers.38



_His school prospered, becoming the leading expression of Ch'an in
China as well as a vital force in the Zen that later arose among
Japan's samurai. And his dialectical teachings became the philosophical
basis for later Zen, something he himself probably would have deplored.
(Later teachers seem to have given Lin-chi's categories more importance
than he actually intended, for he professed to loathe systems and was
in fact much more concerned with enlightenment as pure experience.) In
any case, when he decided that his days were through he put on his
finest robes, seated himself in the meditation posture, made a brief
statement, and passed on. The year is said to have been 866 or 867.




Chapter Twelve

TUNG-SHAN AND TS'AO-SHAN:

       FOUNDERS OF SOTO ZEN

_Tung-shan_


Virtually all the masters encountered up to this point have been
traceable to Ma-tsu, descendant in Dharma of the legendary Huai-jang
and his master, the Sixth Patriarch, Hui-neng. This was the line that
became Japanese Rinzai Zen, many centuries later. However, Hui-neng had
another follower, a shadowy figure remembered as Ch'ing-yuan Hsing-ssu
(d. 740) whose line also was perpetuated to present-day Japan.1 His
foremost pupil was Shih-t'ou (700-90), and a common description of the
eighth-cen- tury Ch'an establishment was: "In Kiangsi the master was
Ma-tsu; in Hunan the master was Shih-t'ou. People went back and forth
between them all the time, and those who never met these two great
masters were completely ignorant."2 Shih-t'ou jousted with Ma-tsu, and
they often swapped students. Ma-tsu sent his pupils on their way with a
wink and the advice that Shih-t'ou was "slippery."3 This legendary
master was forebear of three of the five "houses" of Ch'an arising
after the Great Persecution of 845, although the only one of the three
surviving is the Ts'ao-tung, which arose during the later T'ang (618-
907) and early Five Dynasties (907-960) period and remains today as
Japanese Soto.

One of the cofounders of the Ts'ao-tung house was known as Tung-shan
Liang-chieh (807-869), who was born in present day Chekiang but
eventually found his way to what is now northern Kiangsi province.4 As
did most great masters, he took Buddhist orders early, and one of the
most enduring stories of his life has him confounding his elders--an
event common to many spiritual biographies. He began as a novice in the
Vinaya sect, an

organization often more concerned with the letter of the law than its
spirit. One day he was asked to recite the Heart Sutra, but when he
came to the phrase "There is no eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind,"
he wonderingly touched his own face and then inquired of his master, "I
have eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and so forth; how, then, can the sutra
say there are no such things?"5 The Vinaya master was dumbfounded by his
iconoclasm and suggested that his bent of mind would be more readily
cultivated in the Ch'an sect. So off he went to Mt. Sung, where he
subsequently was ordained at the precocious age of twenty-one.

Afterward he traveled across China, typical for young monks of the age.
Ironically enough, considering that his line eventually rivaled Ma-
tsu's, his first stop was the monastery of Nan-ch'uan, one of the
foremost disciples of Ma-tsu. As he arrived, Nan-ch'uan was announcing
a memorial service to be conducted the next day on the anniversary of
his master's death, a standard Chinese custom.



_Nan-ch'uan remarked, "When we serve food for Master Ma-tsu tomorrow, I
do wonder whether he will come for it." None of the monks made a reply
but [Tung-shan] came forth out of the crowd and said, "As soon as he
has companions he will come." Hearing this, Nan-ch'uan praised him:
"Although this man is young, he is worthy of being trained.'' [Tung-
shan] said to him, "Master, you should not make a slave out of an
honorable person._"6_



_Tung-shan studied briefly with Nan-ch'uan making a name for himself in
the process and then traveled on. He later landed at the monastery of a
teacher named Yun-yen, but after a successful period of study he
announced his intention to again continue down the road. Yun-yen,
however, protested losing his star pupil.



_"After you leave here, it will be very hard for us to see each other
again," said Master Yun-yen.

"It will be very hard for us not to see each other again," answered
[Tung-shan]. . . . Then Yun-yen said to him, "You must be very careful,
as you are carrying this great thing."

[Tung-shan] was puzzled. Later when he was crossing the water and saw
his image reflected, he suddenly understood the teaching of Yun-yen.7

_

By the year 860 Tung-shan had a monastery of his own and was besieged
by disciples. He subsequently moved to Tung-shan (Mt. Tung) in what is
today Kiangsi province, the locale that provided his historic name. His
respect for Yun-yen's enigmatic wisdom was explained years later.



_One day, when the Master was conducting the annual memorial service
for Master Yun-yen, a monk asked him:

"What instruction did you receive from the late Master Yun-yen?"

"Although I was there with him, he gave me no instruction," answered
the Master.

"Then why should you conduct the memorial service for him, if he did
not instruct you?" persisted the monk. . . .

"It is neither for his moral character nor his teaching of Dharma that
I respect him. What I consider important is that he never told me
anything openly._"8_

_

Yet Tung-shan does not seem completely against the cultivation of
enlightenment, as were some of the other, more radical Ch'anists. Take,
for example, the following reported encounter:



_A government officer wanted to know whether there was anyone
approaching Ch'an through cultivation. The Master answered: "When you
become a laborer, then there will be someone to do cultivation._"9_

_

The officer's question would have elicited a shout from Lin-chi, a blow
from Huang-po, and advice from Chao-chou to go wash his rice bowl.

Although Tung-shan may have avoided the deliberate absurdities of the
Lin-chi masters, his utterances are often puzzling nonetheless. Part of
the reason is that he preferred the metaphor to the concrete example.
Unlike the repartee of the absurdist Lin-chi masters, his exchanges are
not deliberately illogical. Instead we find a simple reluctance to say
anything straight. But if you follow the symbolic language, you realize
it is merely another clever way of never teaching with words, while
still using language. His frequent speaking in metaphors can be
appreciated by the following exchange, which uses language emeshed in
symbols.

_

Monk: "With what man of Tao should one associate, so that one will hear
constantly what one has never heard?"

The Master: "That which is under the same coverlet with you."

Monk: "This is still what you, Master, can hear yourself. What is it
that one will hear constantly which one has never heard?"

The Master: "It is not the same as wood and stone." . . .

 Monk: "Who is he in our country that holds a sword in his hand?"

The Master: "It is Ts'ao-shan."

Monk: "Whom do you want to kill?"

The Master: "All those who are alive will die."

Monk: "When you happen to meet your parents, what should

you do?"

The Master: "Why should you have any choice?"

Monk: "How about yourself?"

The Master: "Who can do anything to me?"

Monk: "Why should you not kill yourself, too?"

The Master: "There is no place on which I can lay my hands._"10



The Ch'an teachers deliberately avoided specifics, since these might
cause students to start worrying about the precise definition of words
and end up bogged down in conceptual quandries, neglecting their real
nature--which cannot be reached using words.11 But further than this, the
monk thinks he will trap the master by asking him if his injunction to
kill includes his own parents. (Remember Lin-chi's "On meeting your
parents, slay your parents.") But Tung-shan answered by accusing the
monk--indirectly--of making discriminations. As for self-murder, Tung-
shan maintains his immaterial self-nature is indestructible.12

The dialectic of Tung-shan, subsequently elaborated by his star pupil,
Ts'ao-shan, represents one of the last great expressions of Chinese
metaphysical thought. He defined a system of five positions or
relations between the Particular or Relative and the Universal or
Absolute, defined as follows.13

In the first state, called the Universal within the Particular, the
Absolute is hidden and obscured by our preoccupation with the world of
appearances. However, the world of appearances is in fact a part of the
larger world of Absolute reality. When we have achieved a true
understanding of the objective world we realize that it is no more real
than our senses make it, and consequently it represents not absolute
reality but merely our perception. This realization leads to the second
phase.

In the second state, called the Particular within the Universal, we
recognize that objective reality must always be perceived through our
subjective apparatus, just as the Absolute must be approached through
the relative, since all particularities merely exemplify the Absolute.
Even good and bad are part of this same Universality. It is all real,
but simply that--no values are attached, since it is all part of
existence. This, says the scholar John Wu, is the state of
enlightenment.14

In dialectical terms, this rounds out the comparison of the Particular
and the Universal, with each shown to be part of the other. But they
must ultimately be resolved back into sunyata, the Void that
encompasses everything. Neither the Universal or Absolute, nor the
particulars that give it physical form, are the ultimate reality. They
both are merely systems in the all-encompassing Void.

The third and fourth stages he defines exemplify achieving
enlightenment by Universality alone and achieving enlightenment by
Particularity alone. The third stage, enlightenment through
Universality, leads one to meditate on the Absolute, upon the single
wordless truth that defines the particular around us as part of itself.
(It sounds remarkably similar to the Tao.) This meditation is done
without props, language, or any of the physical world (the particular)
surrounding us.

Enlightenment through the Particular, through experience with the
phenomenal world, was the fourth stage. This received the most
attention from the Lin-chi sect--whose masters would answer the question
"What is the meaning of Ch'an?" with "The cypress tree in the
courtyard" or "Three pounds of flax."15

At the fifth stage, enlightenment reaches the Void, the state that
cannot be contained in a concept, since all concepts are inside it.
When you finally reach this state of wordless insight, you realize that
both words and wordlessness are merely part of this larger reality.
Action and nonaction are equally legitimate responses to the world.
Tung-shan demonstrated this when he was asked, "When a snake is
swallowing a frog, should you save the frog's life?" To this he
answered, "To save the frog is to be blind [i.e., to ultimate oneness
and therefore to discriminate between frog and snake]; not to save the
frog is not to let form and shadow appear [i.e., to ignore the
phenomena].16 Perhaps Tung-shan was demonstrating that he was free of
discrimination between either option.17

The question of the subjective and the objective, the Universal and the
Particular, permeated Tung-shan's teachings.



_Once the Master asked a monk what his name was. The monk answered that
his name was so-and-so. The Master then asked: "What one is your real
self?"

"The one who is just facing you."

"What a pity! What a pity! The men of the present day are all like
this. They take what is in the front of an ass or at the back of a
horse and call it themselves. This illustrates the downfall of
Buddhism. If you cannot recognize your real self objectively, how can
you see your real self subjectively?"

"How do you see your real self subjectively?" the monk immediately
asked.

"You have to tell me that yourself."

"If I were to tell you myself, it would be seeing myself objectively.
What is the self that is known subjectively?"

"To talk about it in such a way is easy to do, but to continue our
talking makes it impossible to reach the truth._"18



There also is a poem, known as the Pao-ching San-mei, traditionally
attributed to Tung-shan.19 One quatrain will give the flavor of the
verse:



_The man of wood sings,

The woman of stone gets up and dances,

This cannot be done by passion or learning,

It cannot be done by reasoning._20



This has been interpreted as the idea of Universality penetrating into
Particularity. The wooden man singing and the stone maiden dancing are
explained as evidence of the power of Universality.21 Tung-shan had a
number of distinguishing qualities. He often used Taoist language in
his teachings, quoting Chuang Tzu to make a point. Reportedly he never
used the shout or the stick to shock a novice into self-awareness. And
whereas his dialogues often used metaphors that at first appear
obscure, there are never the deliberate absurdities of the Lin-chi
masters, who frequently answered a perfectly reasonable question with a
deliberate inanity merely to demonstrate the absurdity of words. Unlike
the Lin-chi masters, he seems less concerned with the process of
transmission than with what exactly is transmitted. Tung-shan viewed
words as did Chuang Tzu, namely as the net in which to catch the fish.
Whereas the Lin-chi masters viewed enlightenment as a totality, Tung-
shan teachers believed that enlightenment arrived in stages, and they
were concerned with identifying what these stages were. This was, in
fact, the purpose of his five categories of Particularity and
Universality, which became a part of the historic dialectic of Zen
enlightenment. Ironically, with the emergence of the idea of stages, we
seem back to a concept of "gradual" enlightenment--arrived at because
the Chinese mind could not resist theoretical speculations.

Tung-shan's deathbed scene was almost worthy of comic opera. One day in
the third month of 869 he made known his resolve to die and, shaving
his head and donning his formal robes, ordered the gong to be struck as
he seated himself in meditation. But his disciples began sobbing so
disturbingly that he finally despaired of dying in peace and, opening
his eyes, chided them.



_Those who are Buddhists should not attach themselves to externalities.
This is the real self-cultivation. In living they work hard; in death
they are at rest. Why should there be any grief?_22



He then instructed the head monk to prepare "offerings of food to
ignorance" for everyone at the monastery, intending to shame all those
who still clung to the emotions of the flesh. The monks took a full
week to prepare the meal, knowing it was to be his last supper. And
sure enough, upon dining he bade them farewell and, after a ceremonial
bath, passed on.

The most famous disciple of Tung-shan, Master Ts'ao-shan (840-901), was
born as Pen-chi on the Fukien coast. Passing through an early interest
in Confucianism, he left home at nineteen and became a Buddhist. He was
ordained at age twenty-five and seems to have found frequent occasion
to Visit Tung-shan. Then one day they had an encounter that catapulted
Ts'ao-shan into the position of favored pupil. The exchange began with
a question by Tung-shan:



_"What is your name?"

"My name is [Ts'ao-shan]."

"Say something toward Ultimate Reality."

"I will not say anything."

"Why don't you speak of it?"

"It is not called [Ts'ao-shan]._"23



It is said that Tung-shan gave Ts'ao-shan private instruction after
this and regarded his capability highly. The anecdote, if we may
venture a guess, seems to assert that the Universal cannot be reached
through language, and hence he could only converse about his objective,
physical form.

After several years of study, Ts'ao-shan decided to strike out on his
own, and he announced this intention to Tung-shan. The older master
then inquired:

_

"Where are you going?"

"I go where it is changeless."

"How can you go where it is changeless?"

"My going is no change._"24



Ts'ao-shan subsequently left his master and went wandering and
teaching. Finally, in late summer of 901, the story says that Ts'ao-
shan one evening inquired about the date, and early the next morning he
died.

Although the recorded exchanges between Tung-shan and Ts'ao-shan are
limited to the two rather brief encounters given, the younger master
actually seems to have been the moving force behind the dialectical
constructions of the Ts'ao-tung school. The ancient records, such as
_The Transmission of the Lamp_, all declare that Ts'ao-shan was
inspired by the Five States of Universality and Particularity to become
a great Buddhist. As Dumoulin judges, "It was [Ts'ao-shan] who first,
in the spirit of and in accordance with the master's teachings,
arranged the five ranks in their transmuted form and explained them in
many ways. . . . The fundamental principles, however, stem from [Tung-
shan], who for that reason must be considered to be their originator."25

The ultimate concern of both the Ts'ao-tung and Lin-chi doctrines was
enlightenment. The difference was that Ts'ao-tung masters believed
quiet meditation was the way, rather than the mind-shattering
techniques of Lin-chi. Ts'ao-tung (Soto Zen) strives to soothe the
spirit rather than deliberately instigate psychic turmoil, as sometimes
does the Lin-chi (Rinzai). The aim is to be in the world but not of it;
to occupy the physical world but transcend it mentally, aloof and
serene.

A further difference has been identified by the British scholar Sir
Charles Eliot, who concludes that whereas Lin-chi "regards the
knowledge of the Buddha nature ... as an end in itself, all-satisfying
and all-engrossing, the [Ts'ao-tung] . . . held that it is necessary to
have enlightenment after Enlightenment, that is to say that the inner
illumination must display itself in a good life."26 Thus Eliot suggests
the Ts'ao-tung took something of an interest in what you do, in
distinction to the Lin-chi school, which preferred to focus on inner
wisdom.

The Ts'ao-tung sect, at least in its early forms, was fully as
dialectical in outlook as was the Lin-chi. In this it was merely
carrying on, to some extent, the example of its forebear Shih-t'ou, who
was himself remembered as deeply interested in theoretical and
intellectual speculations. Today the Ts'ao-tung sect is differentiated
from the Lin-chi primarily by its methods for teaching novices. There
is no disagreement about the goal, merely about the path.

It is interesting that the whole business of the Five Ranks seems not
to have survived the Sung Dynasty. Ts'ao-tung's real contribution was
essentially to revive the approach of Northern Ch'an, with its stress
on meditation, intellectual inquiry, stages of enlightenment, and the
idea that Ch'an is not entirely inner- directed but may also have some
place in the world at large. This is the real achievement of Ts'ao-
tung, and the quality that enabled it to survive and become Soto.




Chapter Thirteen

KUEI-SHAN, YUN-MEN, AND FA-YEN:

                   THREE MINOR HOUSES

 _

Yun-men (left)


_The "five houses" or sects of Ch'an that arose after the Great
Persecution of 845 did not all appear simultaneously, nor did they
enjoy equal influence. Whereas the Lin-chi and the Ts'ao-tung were
destined to survive and find their way to Japan, the three other houses
were treated less kindly by history. Nonetheless, in the search for
enlightenment, each of the three other houses contributed techniques,
insights, and original ideas that enriched the Zen tradition. It is
with the stories of the masters who founded the three extinct houses
that we close out the era preceding the Sung Dynasty and the rise of
the koan.



KUEI-SHAN, FOUNDER OF THE KUEI-YANG SECT


This earliest of the five houses was founded by a contemporary of
Huang-po and follower of the Ma-tsu tradition known by the name Kuei-
shan (771-853). Under his original name, Ling-yu, he left home at
fifteen to become a monk, studying under a local Vinaya master in
present-day Fukien province. He later was ordained at Hangchow, where
he assiduously absorbed the _vinaya _and sutras of both Theravada and
Mahayana.1 Then at age twenty-three he traveled to Kiangsi and became a
pupil of the famous Ch'an lawgiver Po-chang Huai-hai.

The moment of Kuei-shan's enlightenment at the hands of Huai-hai is a
Zen classic. As the story goes:



_One day as he was waiting upon [Huai-hai], the latter asked him to
poke the stove, to see whether there was any fire left in it. Kuei-shan
poked but found no fire. [Huai-hai] rose to poke it himself, and
succeeded in discovering a little spark. Showing it to his disciple, he
asked, "Is this not fire?" Thereupon Kuei-shan became enlightened.2



_Just why this seemingly trivial incident should trigger enlightenment
is clearly a matter that must be approached intuitively.3

Kuei-shan received his name from Mt. Kuei, where he was sent to found a
monastery by Po-chang Huai-hai. The circumstances of his selection
reveal almost more than we would wish to know about the Ch'an monastic
world at the beginning of the ninth century. It happened that Huai-hai
was considering the idea of founding a new monastery on Mt. Kuei in
Hunan province. However, he was uncertain whether the venture would
flourish, and consequently he turned for advice to a wandering
fortuneteller named Ssu-ma.4 This seer responded that Mt. Kuei was an
ideal location and would support fifteen hundred monks. However, Huai-
hai himself would not prosper there, since "You are a bony, ascetic man
and it is a fleshy, sensuous mountain." The advice was to find somebody
else.

Huai-hai consented and began calling in his candidates for Ssu-ma to
examine. The first to be summoned was the head monk--whom Ssu-ma asked
to produce a deep cough and then walk several steps. The wizened old
mystic watched carefully and then whispered to Huai-hai that this was
not the man. Next to be called in was Kuei-shan, currently
administrator of the monastery. Ssu-ma took one look and nodded his
approval to Huai-hai. That night Huai-hai summoned Kuei-shan and
assigned his new mission: "Go to Mt. Kuei and found the monastery that
will perpetuate my teachings."

When the head monk discovered he had been passed over he was outraged
and at the next morning's convocation demanded that Huai-hai justify
this slight. The master replied:



_"If you can make an outstanding response in front of the assembly, you
shall receive the appointment." [Huai-hai] then pointed to a pitcher
and said to him, "Do not call this a pitcher. What, instead, should you
call it?" [The head monk] answered, "It cannot be called a wooden
wedge." Master [Huai-hai] did not accept this, and turned to [Kuei-
shan], demanding his answer. [Kuei-shan] kicked the pitcher and knocked
it over. Master [Huai-hai] laughed and said, "Our head monk has lost
his bid for Mount Kuei._"5



The head monk's reply had been intellectualizing wordplay, caught up in
the world of names and categories. Kuei-shan's reply was spontaneous,
wordless, and devoid of distinctions. His was a mind that could
transcend rationality.

Kuei-shan did establish the monastery and from it a short-lived school.
However, Kuei-shan's memory was perpetuated largely through a brilliant
pupil later known as Yang-shan (807-883) owing to his founding a
monastery on Mt. Yang in Kiangsi province. Together their teachings
became known as the Kuei-yang school, the first of the "five houses."

The exchanges between Kuei-shan and Yang-shan reported in _The
Transmission of the Lamp_ are among the most electric in all Ch'an. In
the following they joust over the distinction between function of
wisdom (which is revealed through action) and substance or self-nature
(which is revealed through nonaction).



_Once when all the monks were out picking tea leaves the Master said to
Yang-shan, "All day as we were picking tea leaves I have heard your
voice, but I have not seen you yourself. Show me your original self."
Yang-shan thereupon shook the tea tree.

The Master said, "You have attained only the function, not the
substance." Yang-shan remarked, "I do not know how you yourself would
answer the question." The Master was silent for a time. Yang-shan
commented, "You, Master, have attained only the substance, not the
function." Master Kuei-shan responded, "I absolve you from twenty
blows!_"6



Commentators differ on who won this exchange and whether Kuei-shan was
really satisfied. Another story relates similar fast-witted but serious
repartee.



_Two Ch'an monks came from [a rival] community and said, "There is not
a man here who can understand Ch'an." Later, when all the monks went
out to gather firewood, Yang-shan saw the two, who were resting; he
took a piece of firewood and asked them, "Can you talk (about it)?" As
both remained silent, Yang-shan said to them, "Do not say that there is
no one here who can understand Ch'an."

When he returned to the monastery, Yang-shan reported to the master,
"Today, two Ch'an monks were exposed by me." The master asked, "How did
you expose them?" Yang-shan related the incident and the master said,
"I have now exposed you as well._"7



The translator Charles Luk suggests that Kuei-shan had "exposed" Yang-
shan by showing that he still distinguished between himself and the
other monks.

Yet another story, reminiscent of Nan-ch'uan, further dramatizes the
school's teaching of nondiscrimination. The report recounts a present
that Kuei-shan sent to Yang-shan, now also a master and co-founder of
their school:



_Kuei-shan sent [Yang-shan] a parcel containing a mirror. When he went
to the hall, [Yang-shan] held up the mirror and said to the assembly,
"Please say whether this is Kuei-shan's or Yang-shan's mirror. If
someone can give a correct reply, I will not smash it." As no one
answered, the master smashed the mirror.8

_

Kuei-shan's answer to one pupil who requested that he "explain" Ch'an
to him was to declare:



_If I should expound it explicitly for you, in the future you will
reproach me for it. Anyway, whatever I speak still belongs to me and
has nothing to do with you.9



_This monk, who later became the famous master Hsiang-yen, subsequently
burned his sutras and wandered the countryside in despair. Then one day
while cutting grass he nicked a piece of broken tile against some
bamboo, producing a sharp snap that suddenly triggered his
enlightenment. In elation he hurried back to his cell in the abandoned
monastery where he was living and burned incense to Kuei-shan,
declaring, "If you had broken the secret to me then, how could I have
experienced the wonderful event of today."10

The real contribution of the Kuei-yang sect is agreed to be the final
distinction Yang-shan made between the Ch'an of meditation (based on
the Lankavatara Sutra) and instantaneous Ch'an (that completely
divorced from the sutras). In this final revision of Ch'an history,
"traditional" or "Patriarchal" Ch'an was redefined as the anti-sutra
establishment of the Southern school, while the teaching of the
Lankavatara, which actually had been the basis of the faith until the
middle of the eighth century, was scorned as an aberration. He
emphasized, in a sense, Ch'an's ultimate disowning of Buddhism--through
a new, manufactured "history."

Kuei-shan died in the prescribed manner: After a ritual ablution he
seated himself in the meditation posture and passed on with a smile. He
was buried on Mt. Kuei, home of his monastery. His followers and those
of his pupil Yang-shan composed the Kuei-yang school, an early attempt
to formalize the anti-sutra position of Ma-tsu.11 However, they were
supplanted by other much more successful followers of Huai-hai, such as
Huang-po and Lin-chi, whose school became the real perpetuator of Ma-
tsu's iconoclasm.



THE YUN-MEN SECT

_

_The Master Yun-men (862/4-949) was born in Kiangsu province (some say
Chekiang) to a family whose circumstances forced them to place him in a
Vinaya temple as a novice. But his inquiring mind eventually turned to
Ch'an, and off he went to a master, with his first target being the
famous Mu-chou, disciple of Huang-po. (Mu-chou is remembered as the
monk who sent Lin-chi in for his first three withering interviews with
Huang-po.) For two days running, Yun-men tried to gain entry to see the
master, but each time he was ejected. The third day he succeeded in
reaching Mu-chou, who grabbed him and demanded, "Speak! Speak!" But
before Yun-men could open his mouth, the master shoved him out of the
room and slammed the door, catching his leg and breaking it in the
process. The unexpected bolt of pain shooting through Yun-men's body
suddenly brought his first enlightenment.12

He journeyed on, studying with several famous masters, until finally he
inherited a monastery from a retiring master who sensed his genius.
Yun-men was one of the best-known figures from Ch'an's waning Golden
Age, and stories of his exchanges with monks became a major source of
koans.13 He loathed words and forbade his followers to take notes or
write down his sermons. (However, his talks were secretly recorded by a
follower who attended in a paper robe and kept notes on the garment.)
As did the earlier masters, he struggled mightily with the problem of
how to prevent novices from becoming attached to his words and phrases.

_

[Yun-men] came to the assembly again and said: "My work here is
something that I cannot help. When I tell you to penetrate directly
into all things and to be non-attached to them, I have already
concealed what is within you. Yet you all continue looking for Ch'an
among my words, so that you may achieve enlightenment. With myriad
deviations and artificialities, you raise endless questions and
arguments. Thus, you merely gain temporary satisfactions from verbal
contests, repeatedly quarrel with words, and deviate even further from
Ch'an. When will you obtain it, and rest?_"14



          He firmly believed that all teaching was useless; that all
explanations do more harm than good; and that, in fact, nothing
worthwhile can ever be taught.



_The Master said, "If I should give you a statement that would teach
you how to achieve Ch'an immediately, dirt would already be spread on
top of your head. . . . To grasp Ch'an, you must experience it. If you
have not experienced it, do not pretend to know. You should withdraw
inwardly and search for the ground upon which you stand; thereby you
will find out what Truth is._"15



One of Yun-men's sermons reveals much about the growing pains of Ch'an.
The seriousness of the novices seems to have been steadily
deteriorating, and his characterization of the run-of-the- mill novices
of his time presents a picture of waning dynamism. Success was clearly
bringing a more frivolous student to the monasteries, and we sense here
the warning of a man who rightly feared for the future quality of
Ch'an.



_Furthermore, some monks, idle and not serious in their studies, gather
together trying to learn the sayings of the ancients, and attempt to
reveal their own nature through memorizing, imagining, prophesying.
These people often claim that they understand what Dharma is. What they
actually do is simply talk themselves into endless entanglements and
use meditation to pass the time.16

_

He also felt the traditional pilgrimages from master to master had
become hardly more than a glorified version of sightseeing.



_Do not waste your time wandering thousands of [miles], through this
town and that, with your staff on your shoulder, wintering in one place
and spending the summer in another. Do not seek out beautiful mountains
and rivers to contemplate. . . . [T]he fundamental thing for you to do
is to obtain the essence of Ch'an. Then your travels will not have been
in vain. If you find a way to guide your understanding under a severe
master . . . wake up, hang up your bowl-bag, and break your staff.
Spend ten or twenty years of study under him until you are thoroughly
enlightened.17

_

He also advised that they try to simplify their search, that they try
to realize how uncomplicated Ch'an really is.

_Let me tell you that anything you can directly point at will not lead
you to the right trail. . . . Besides dressing, eating, moving bowels,
releasing water, what else is there to do?18

_

Yun-men was one of the most dynamic masters of the late ninth and early
tenth century, providing new twists to the historic problem of
nonlanguage transmission. His celebrated solution was the so-called
one-word answer. Several of these are preserved in the two major koan
collections of later years. Two of the better-known follow:



_A monk asked Yun-men, "What is the teaching that transcends the Buddha
and patriarchs?" Yun-men said, "A sesame bun._"19_



A monk asked Yun-men, "What is Buddha?" Yun-men replied, "A dried piece
of shit._"20_

_

The "one-word" was his version of the blow and the shout. R. H. Blyth
is particularly fond of Yun-men and suggests he may have had the
keenest intellect of any Ch'an master--and even goes so far as to
declare him the greatest man China has produced.21

At the very least Yun-men was in the great tradition of the
iconoclastic T'ang masters, with a touch that bears comparison to
Huang-po. And he probably was wise in attempting to stop copyists, for
his teachings eventually were reduced to yet another abominable system,
as seemed irresistible to the Chinese followers of the five houses. A
later disciple produced what is known as the "Three propositions of the
house of Yun-men." It is not difficult to imagine the barnyard response
Yun-men would have had to this "systematization" of his thought.22 The
school of this "most eloquent of Ch'an masters" lasted through the Sung
dynasty, but its failure to find a transplant in Japan eventually meant
that history would pass it by. Nonetheless, the cutting intellect of
Yun-men was one of the bright stars in the constellation of Ch'an,
providing what is possibly its purest antirational statement.



THE FA-YEN SECT



The master known as Fa-yen (885-958), founder of the third short-lived
house of Ch'an, need not detain us long. Fa-yen's novel method for
triggering enlightenment was to repeat back the

questioner's own query, thereby isolating the words and draining them
of their meaning. It was his version of the shout, the silence, the
single word. And whereas the Lin-chi school was concerned with the Four
Processes of Liberation from Subjectivity and Objectivity and the
Ts'ao-tung school constructed the five relations between Particularity
and Universality, the Fa-yen school invented the Six Attributes of
Being.23 The Six Attributes of Being (totality and differentiation,
sameness and difference, becoming and disappearing) were adapted from
the doctrine of another Buddhist sect, and in fact later attempts by
one of Fa-yen's disciples to combine Ch'an and Pure Land Buddhism have
been credited with accelerating the disappearance of his school.

According to _The Transmission of the Lamp_, the master remembered as
Fa-yen was born as Wen-i, near Hangchow. He became a Ch'an novice at
age seven and was ordained at twenty. Learned in both Buddhist and
Confucianist literature (though not, significantly enough, in the
Taoist classics), he then got the wanderlust, as was common, and headed
south to seek out more Ch'an teachers. He ended up in Kiangsi province
in the city of Fuchou, where to escape the floodings of a rainstorm he
found himself one evening in a local monastery. He struck up a
conversation with the master there, who suddenly asked him:



_"Where are you going, sir?"

"I shall continue my foot travels along the road."

"What is that which is called foot travel?"

"I do not know."

"Not-knowing most closely approaches the Truth._"24



The _Transmission of the Lamp _states that he was enlightened on the
spot and decided to settle down for a period of study. He eventually
became a famous teacher himself, shepherding as many as a thousand
students at one time.

One of his most often repeated exchanges concerned the question of the
difference between the "moon" (i.e., enlightenment) and the "finger
pointing at the moon," (i.e., the teaching leading to enlightenment).
It was a common observation that students confused the finger pointing
at the moon with the moon itself, which is to say they confused talk
about enlightenment with the state. One day a monk came along who
thought he was smart enough to get around the dilemma.



_A monk asked, "As for the finger, I will not ask you about it. But
what is the moon?"

The Master said, "Where is the finger that you do not ask about?"

So the monk asked, "As for the moon, I will not ask you about it. But
what is the finger?"

The Master said, "The moon!"

The monk challenged him, "I asked about the finger; why should you
answer me, 'the moon'?"

The Master replied, "Because you asked about the finger._"25



At age seventy-four Fa-yen died in the manner of other great masters,
calmly and seated in the meditation posture. Part of the lineage of
Shih-t'ou and an offshoot of the branch of Ch'an that would become
Soto, he was a kindly individual with none of the violence and
histrionics of the livelier masters. However, his school lasted only
briefly before passing into history. Nonetheless, a number of disciples
initially perpetuated his memory, and his wisdom is preserved in
various Sung-period compilations of Ch'an sermons.




Chapter Fourteen


TA-HUI:

MASTER OF THE KOAN


To confront the koan--the most discussed, least understood teaching
concept of the East--is to address the very essence of Zen itself. In
simple terms the koan is merely a brief story--all the encounters
between two monks related here could be koans. During the Sung Dynasty
(960-1279) these stories were organized into collections, commented
upon, and structured into a system of study--which involved meditating
on a koan and arriving at an intuitive "answer" acceptable to a Zen
master. Faced with the threatening intellectualism of the Sung
scholars, Ch'anists created the koan out of the experience of the older
masters, much the way a liferaft might be constructed from the timbers
of a storm-torn ship. But before we examine this raft, it would be well
to look again at the ship.

It will be recalled that Ch'an grew out of both Buddhism and Taoism,
extracting from them the belief that a fundamental unifying quality
transcends all the diversity of the world, including things that appear
to be opposite. However, Ch'an taught that this cannot be understood
using intellectualism, which rationally makes distinctions and relates
to the world by reducing it to concepts and systems. One reason is that
all rationality and concepts are merely part of a larger, encompassing
Reality; and trying to reach this Reality intellectually is like trying
to describe the outside of a building while trapped inside.

There is, however, a kind of thought--not beholden to concepts, systems,
discriminations, or rationality--that can reach this new understanding.
It is intuition, which operates in a mode entirely different from
rationality. It is holistic, not linear; it is unself-conscious and
noncritical; and it doesn't bother with any of the rational systems of
analysis we have invented for ourselves. But since we can't call on it
at our pleasure, the next best thing we can do is clear the way for it
to operate--by shutting off the rational part of the mind. Then
intuition starts hesitantly coming out of the shadows. Now, if we
carefully wait for the right moment and then suddenly create a
disturbance that momentarily short-circuits the rational mind--the way
shock suppresses our sense of pain in the first moments of a serious
accident--we may get a glimpse of the intuitive mind in full flower. In
that instant we intuitively understand the oneness of the world, the
Void, the greater Reality that words and rationality have never allowed
us to experience.

The Zen teachers have a very efficient technique for making all this
happen. They first discredit rationality for a novice by making him
feel foolish for using it. Each time the novice submits a rational
solution to a koan, he receives a humiliating rebuff. After a while the
strain begins to tell. In the same way that a military boot camp
destroys the ego and self-identity of a recruit, the Zen master slowly
erodes the novice's confidence in his own logical powers.

At this point his intuitive mind begins overcoming its previous
repression. Distinctions slowly start to seem absurd, because every
time he makes one he is ridiculed. Little by little he dissolves his
sense of object and subject, knower and known. The fruit now is almost
ready to fall from the tree. (Although enlightenment cannot be made to
happen, it can be made possible.) Enter at this point the unexpected
blow, the shout, the click of bamboo, the broken leg. If the student is
caught unawares, rationality may be momentarily short-circuited and
suddenly he glimpses--Reality.

The irony is that what he glimpses is no different from what he saw
before, only now he understands it intuitively and realizes how
simplistic and confining are rational categories and distinctions.
Mountains are once again mountains; rivers are once again rivers. But
with one vital difference: Now he is not attached to them. He travels
through the world just as always, but now he is at one with it: no
distinctions, no critical judgments, no tension. After all that
preparatory mental anguish there is no apparent external change. But
internally he is enlightened: He thinks differently, he understands
differently, and ultimately he lives differently.

Ch'an began by working out the question of what this enlightenment
really is. Prior to Ma-tsu the search was more for the nature of
enlightenment than for its transmission. This was the doctrinal phase
of Ch'an. As time went by, however, the concern shifted more and more
from defining enlightenment--which the Ch'an masters believed had been
done sufficiently--to struggling with the process. After Ma-tsu, Ch'an
turned its attention to "auxiliary means" for helping along
transmission: paradoxical words and actions, shouts, beatings, and
eventually the koan.1

The koan, then, is the final step in the "auxiliary means." A succinct
analysis of the koan technique is provided by Ruth F. Sasaki in _Zen
Dust_: "Briefly, [koans] consisted of questions the early masters had
asked individual students, together with the answers given by the
students; questions put to the masters by students in personal talks or
in the course of the masters' lectures, together with the masters'
answers; statements of formulas in which the masters had pointed to the
profound Principle; anecdotes from the daily life of the masters in
which their attitudes or actions illustrated the functioning of the
Principle; and occasionally a phrase from a sutra in which the
Principle or some aspect of it was crystallized in words. By presenting
a student with one or another of these koans and observing his reaction
to it, the degree or depth of his realization could be judged. The
koans were the criteria of attainment."2

Called _kung-an _in Chinese (meaning a "case" or a problem), the koan
was a response to two major challenges that beset Ch'an in the Sung
era: First, the large number of students that appeared at Ch'an
monasteries as a result of the demise of other sects meant that some
new means was needed to preserve personalized attention (some masters
reportedly had one thousand or even two thousand followers at a
monastery); and second, there was a noticeable decline in the
spontaneity of both novices and masters. The masters had lost much of
the creative fire of Ch'an's Golden Age, and the novices were caught up
in the intellectual, literary world of the Sung, to the point that
intellectualism actually threatened the vitality of the sect.

The koan, then, was the answer to this dilemma. It systematized
instruction such that large numbers of students could be treated to the
finest antirational tradition of the Ch'an sect, and it rescued the
dynamism of the earlier centuries. Although mention of kung-an occurs
in the Ch'an literature before the end of the T'ang era (618-907), the
reference was to a master's use of a particularly effectual question on
more than one student. This was still an instance of a master using his
own questions or paradoxes. The koan in its true form--that is, the use
of a classic incident from the literature, posed as a conundrum--is said
to have been created when a descendant of Lin-chi, in the third
generation, interviewed a novice about some of Lin-chi's sayings.3 This
systematic use of the existing literature was found effective, and soon
a new teaching technique was in the making.

Examples of classic koans already have been seen throughout this book,
since many of the exchanges of the early masters were later isolated
for use as kung-an. But there are many, many others, Perhaps the best-
known koan of all time is the exchange between Chao-chou (778-897) and
a monk:



_A monk asked Chao-chou. "Does a dog have Buddha nature [i.e., is a dog
capable of being enlightened]?" Chao-chou answered, _"Mu _[a word whose
strict meaning is "nothingness"]._"4



Quick, what does it mean? Speak! Speak! If you were a Ch'an novice, a
master would be glaring at you demanding an immediate, intuitive
answer. (A favored resolution of this, incidentally, is simply "Mu,"
but bellowed with all the force of the universe's inherent Oneness
behind it. And if you try to fake it, the master will know.) Or take
another koan, drawn completely at random.



_When the monks assembled before the noon meal to hear his lecture, the
Master Fa-yen [885-958] pointed at the bamboo blinds. Two monks
simultaneously went and rolled them up. Fa-yen said, "One gain, one
loss._"5



Don't think! Respond instantly! Don't say a word unless it's right,
Don't make a move that isn't intuitive. And above all, don't analyze.

_

Yun-men [862/4-949] asked a monk, "Where have you come here from?" The
monk said, "From Hsi-ch'an." Yun-men said, "What words are being
offered at Hsi-ch'an these days?" The monk stretched out his hands.
Yun-men struck him. The monk said, "I haven't finished talking." Yun-
men then extended his own hands. The monk was silent, so Yun-men struck
him._6



You weren't there. You're not the monk. But now you've got to do
something to show the master you grasp what went on in that exchange.
What was spontaneous to the older masters you must grasp in a
secondhand, systematized situation. And if you can't answer the koan
right (it should be stressed, incidentally, there is not necessarily a
fixed answer), you had best go and meditate, try to grasp it
nonintellectually, and return tomorrow to try again.

Off you go to meditate on "Mu" or "One gain, one loss," and the mental
tension starts building. Even though you know you aren't supposed to,
you analyze it intellectually from every angle. But that just heightens
your exasperation. Then suddenly one day something dawns on you.
Elated, you go to the master. You yell at him, or bark like a dog, or
kick his staff, or stand on your hands, or recite a poem, or declare,
"The cypress tree in the courtyard," or perhaps you just remain silent.
He will know (intuitively) if you have broken through the bonds of
reason, if you have transcended the intellect.

There's nothing quite like the koan in the literature of the world:
historical episodes that have to be relived intuitively and responded
to. As Ruth F. Sasaki notes, "Collections of 'old cases,' as the koans
were sometimes called, as well as attempts to put the koans into a
fixed form and to systematize them to some extent, were already being
made by the middle of the tenth century. We also find a few masters
giving their own alternate answers to some of the old koans and
occasionally appending verses to them. In many cases these alternate
answers and verses ultimately became attached to the original koans and
were handled as koans supplementary to them."7 Ironically, koans became
so useful, indeed essential, in the perpetuation of Ch'an that they
soon were revered as texts. Collections of the better koans appeared,
and next came accretions of supporting commentaries--when the whole
point was supposed to be circumventing reliance on words! But
commentaries always seemed to develop spontaneously out of Ch'an.

Today two major collections of koans are generally used by students of
Zen. These are the Mumonkan (to use the more familiar Japanese name)
and the Hekiganroku (again the Japanese name) or _Blue Cliff Record_.8
Masters may work a student through both these collections as he travels
the road to enlightenment, with a new koan being assigned after each
previous one has been successfully resolved.

The _Blue Cliff Record _was the first of the two collections. It began
as a grouping of one hundred kung-an by a master named Hsueh-tou
Ch'ung-hsien (980-1052) of the school of Yun-men. This master also
attached a small poem to each koan, intended to direct the student
toward its meaning. The book enjoyed sizable circulation throughout the
latter part of the eleventh century, and sometime thereafter a Lin-chi
master named Yuan-wu K'o-ch'in (1063-1135) decided to embellish it by
adding an introduction to each koan and a long-winded commentary on
both the koan and the poem supplied by the previous collector. (In the
case of the poem we now have commentary on commentary--the ultimate
achievement of the theologian's art! However, masters today often omit
Yuan-wu's commentaries, giving their own interpretation instead.9) The
commentator, Yuan-wu, was the teacher of Ta-hui, the dynamic master of
the Lin-chi lineage whom we will meet here.

The Mumonkan, a shorter work, was assembled in 1228 by the Ch'an monk
Wu-men Hui-k'ai (1183-1260) and consists of forty-eight koans, together
with an explanatory comment and a verse. Some of the koans in the
Mumonkan also appear in the _Blue Cliff Record_. The Mumonkan is
usually preferred in the Japanese summer, since its koans are briefer
and less fatiguing.10

The koan was an invention of the Sung Dynasty (960-1279), an era of
consolidation in the Chinese empire after the demise of the T'ang and
passage of a war-torn interlude known as the Five Dynasties (907-60).
Although Sung Ch'an seemed to be booming, Buddhism in general continued
the decline that began with the Great Persecution of 845. For example,
the number of registered monks dropped from around 400,000 in 1021 to
approximately half that number a scant half-century later.11 But the
monks who did come probably had higher education than previously, for
the Sung educational system was the world's best at the time. Colleges
were established nationwide, not just in the sophisticated metropolitan
areas, and scholarship flourished. Whether this was good for Ch'an is
not a simple question. The hardy rural monks who had passed beyond the
Buddhist scriptures made Ch'an what it was. Could the powers of the
antirational be preserved in an atmosphere where the greatest respect
was reserved for those who spent years memorizing the Chinese classics?
The answer to this was to rest with the koan.

The Ch'an master Ta-hui (1089-1163), who perfected the koan technique,
was rumored to be a reincarnation of Lin-chi. Born in Anhwei province,
located about halfway between the older capitals of the north and the
Ch'an centers in the south, he was said to be both pious and
precocious, becoming a devoted monk at age seventeen while assiduously
reading and absorbing the teachings of the five houses.12 At age
nineteen, he began his obligatory travels, roaming from master to
master. One of his first teachers reportedly interviewed him on the
koans in the collection now known as the _Blue Cliff Record_, but he
did so by not speaking a word and thereby forcing Ta-hui to work them
out for himself. Ta-hui also experimented with the Ts'ao-tung
teachings, but early on began to question the straitlaced, quietistic
approach of that house. He finally was directed to the Szechuan teacher
Yuan-wu K'o-ch'in of the Lin-chi school, beginning the association that
would move him to the forefront of the struggle to save Ch'an via the
koan.

Ta-hui experienced his first enlightenment under Yuan-wu, in the
master's temple in the Northern Sung capital of Pien-liang. As the
story is reported:



_One day when Yuan-wu had taken the high seat in the lecture hall, he
said: "A monk asked Yun-men: 'From whence come all the buddhas?' Yun-
men answered: 'The East Mountain walks over the water.' But if I were
asked, I would not answer that way. 'From whence come all the buddhas?'
A fragrant breeze comes of itself from the south, and in the palace
pavilion a refreshing coolness stirs." At these words [Ta-hui] suddenly
attained enlightenment.13

_

After this he grew in experience and wisdom, eventually taking over
many temple duties from Yuan-wu. He soon became a part of the Ch'an
establishment in the north and in 1126 was even presented with an
official robe and title from a minister.

Then suddenly, in the midst of this tranquillity, outside forces
intervened to change dramatically the course of Chinese history. For
many years previous, China had been threatened by nomadic peoples from
the north and west, peoples whom the Chinese haughtily identified as
"barbarians." The Sung emperors, cloistered gentlemen in the worst
sense of the term, had maintained peace in their slowly shrinking
domain by buying off belligerent neighbors and occasionally even ceding
border territories. They thought their troubles finally might be easing
somewhat when their hostile neighbors were overwhelmed by a new warring
tribe from Manchuria. But after a series of humiliating incidents, the
Chinese found themselves with merely a new enemy, this time more
powerful than any before. China was at last on the verge of being
overwhelmed, something it had forestalled for many centuries. Even the
invention of gunpowder, which the Chinese now used to fire rocket-
propelled arrows, could not save them. Before long the barbarians
marched on the capital, and after some years of Chinese attempts at
appeasement, the invaders carried off the emperor and his entire court
to Manchuria. The year was 1127, which marked the end of the Chinese
dynasty now known as the Northern Sung (960-1127).

After this disheartening setback a son of the former emperor moved
south and set up a new capital in the coastal city of Hangchow, whose
charms the Chinese were fond of comparing

favorably with heaven (in the refrain, "Heaven above; Hangchow below").
This new regime, known as the Southern Sung (1127-1279), witnessed yet
another transformation of Ch'an. Among other things, Southern Ch'an
came to resemble eighth-century Northern Ch'an, in its close
association with the court and the intelligentsia.

When political discord forced the Northern Sung government to flee
south, the master Yuan-wu was assigned a monastery in the southern
province of Kiangsi by the emperor, and Ta-hui accompanied him there,
again as head monk. After four years, Ta-hui again decided to migrate--
this time alone--to Szechuan and there to build a secluded hermitage.
After another move he was summoned in 1137 by the prime minister,
himself also a former pupil of Yuan-wu, to come and establish a temple
near the new southern capital of Hangchow. Before long he had collected
almost two thousand disciples and was becoming known as the
reincarnation of Lin-chi, possibly because he was giving new life to
the Lin-chi sect. But then his politics got him in trouble and he was
banished for almost fifteen years to various remote outposts, during
which time he began to write extensively.14 Finally, in 1158, he was
ordered back to Hangchow to take over his old temple. Since by then old
age was encroaching, he was permitted to retire at this temple and live
off imperial patronage. It is said that his pupils swelled to seventeen
hundred when he returned and that when he died in 1163 he left ninety-
four enlightened heirs.15

Ta-hui is regarded today as the great champion of the koan method, and
he was celebrated during his life for a running disagreement he had
with the Ts'ao-tung (later Soto) school. In a sense, this dispute drew
the distinctions that still divide Zen into two camps. The issue seems
to have boiled down to the matter of what one does with one's mind
while meditating. The Ts'ao-tung masters advocated what they called
Silent Illumination (_mo-chao_) Ch'an, which Ta-hui preferred to call
Silent Illumination Heterodox (_mo-chao-hsieh_) Ch'an. The Ts'ao-tung
master Cheng-chueh, with whom he argued, believed that enlightenment
could be achieved through sitting motionless and slowly bringing
tranquillity and empty nonattachment to the mind. The koans were
recognized to be useful in preserving the original spirit of Ch'an, but
their brain-fatiguing convolutions were not permitted to disturb the
mental repose of meditation. Ta-hui, in contrast, believed that this
silent meditation lacked the dynamism so essential to the sudden
experience of enlightenment. His own approach to enlightenment came to
be called Introspecting-the-Koan (_k'an-hua_) Ch'an, in which
meditation focused on a koan.16

 Another of Ta-hui's objections to the Silent Illumination school seems
to have been its natural drift toward quietism, toward the divorcing of
men from the world of affairs. This he believed led nowhere and was
merely renouncing humanity rather than illuminating it.



_These days there's a breed of shaven-headed outsiders [i.e., rival
masters] whose own eyes are not clear, who just teach people to stop
and rest and play dead. . . . They teach people to "keep the mind
still," to "forget feelings" according to circumstances, to practice
"silent illumination." . . . To say that when one has put things to
rest to the point that he is unawares and unknowing, like earth, wood,
tile, or stone, this is not unknowing silence--this is a view of wrongly
taking too literally words that were (only) expedient means to free
bonds.17



_He seemed to be counseling never to forget that meditation is only a
means, not an end. Instead Ta-hui advocated meditating deeper and ever
deeper into a koan, focusing on the words until they "lose their
flavor." Then finally the bottom falls out of the bucket and
enlightenment hits you. This "Introspecting the Koan" form of Ch'an
(called Kanna Zen by the Japanese) became the standard for the Rinzai
sect, whose students were encouraged to meditate on a koan until it
gradually infiltrated the mind. As one commentator has explained, "The
essential is to immerse oneself patiently and wholeheartedly in the
koan, with unwavering attention. One must not be looking for an answer
but looking at the koan. The 'answer,' if it comes, will come of its
own accord."18 As described by Ta-hui:



_Just steadily go on with your koan every moment of your life. . . .
Whether walking or sitting, let your attention be fixed upon it without
interruption. When you begin to find it entirely devoid of flavor, the
final moment is approaching: do not let it slip out of your grasp. When
all of a sudden something flashes out in your mind, its light will
illumine the entire universe, and you will see the spiritual land of
the Enlightened Ones. . . .19

_

The important thing is to concentrate totally on a koan. This
concentration need not necessarily be confined to meditation, as Ta-hui
illustrates using one of the more celebrated one-word statements of
Yun-men.



_A monk asked Yun-Men, "What is Buddha?" Yun-Men said, "A dry piece of
shit." Just bring up this saying. . . .Don't ask to draw realization
from the words or try in your confusion to assess and explain. . . .
Just take your confused unhappy mind and shift it onto "A dry piece of
shit." Once you hold it there, then the mind . . . will naturally no
longer operate. When you become aware that it's not operating, don't be
afraid of falling into emptiness. . . . In the conduct of your daily
activities, just always let go and make yourself vast and expansive.
Whether you're in quiet or noisy places, constantly arouse yourself
with the saying "A dry piece of shit." As the days and months come and
go, of itself your potential will be purified and ripen. Above all you
must not arouse any external doubts besides: when your doubts about "A
dry piece of shit" are smashed, then at once doubts numerous as the
sands of the Ganges are all smashed.20

_

Although Ta-hui was a strong advocate of the koan, he was staunchly
against its being used in a literary sense. Whenever a student starts
analyzing koans intellectually, comparing one against another, trying
to understand rationally how they affect his nonrational intelligence,
he misses the whole point. The only way it can work is if it is fresh.
Only then does it elicit a response from our spontaneous intelligence,
our intuitive mind.

But the Sung trend toward intellectualism was almost irresistible. The
prestige of the Chinese "gentleman"--who could quote the ancient poets,
compose verse himself, and analyze enlightenment--was the great nemesis
of Ch'an.



_Gentlemen of affairs who study the path often understand rationally
without getting to the reality. Without discussion and thought they are
at a loss, with no place to put their hands and feet--they won't believe
that where there is no place to put one's hands and feet is really a
good situation. They just want to get there in their minds by thinking
and in their mouths to understand by talking--they scarcely realize
they've already gone wrong.21

_

Equally bad was the Ch'an student who memorized koans rather than
trying to understand them intuitively.



_A gentleman reads widely in many books basically in order to augment
his innate knowledge. Instead, you have taken to memorizing the words
of the ancients, accumulating them in

your breast, making this your task, depending on them for something to
take hold of in conversation. You are far from knowing the intent of
the sages in expounding the teachings. This is what is called counting
the treasure of others all day long without having half a cent of your
own.22



_Ta-hui rightly recognized in such scholarship an impending destruction
of Ch'an's innate vigor. At one point, in desperation, he even
destroyed the original printing blocks for the best-known koan
collection of the time, the _Blue Cliff Record _compiled by his master,
Yuan-wu.23 But the trend continued nonetheless.

Ch'an was not over yet, however. It turns out that the sect did not
continue to fly apart and diversify as might be suspected, but rather
it actually consolidated. Although the Kuei-yang and Fa-yen houses
fizzled comparatively quickly, the Yun-men lasted considerably longer,
with an identifiable line of transmission lasting virtually throughout
the Sung Dynasty. The Ts'ao-tung house languished for a while, but with
Silent Illumination Ch'an it came back strongly during the Sung
Dynasty. Lin-chi split into two factions in the early eleventh century,
when two pupils of the master Ch'u-yuan (986-1036) decided to go their
own way, One of these masters, known as Huang-lung Hui-nan (1002-1069),
started a school which subsequently was transmitted to Japan by the
Japanese master Eisai, where it became known as Oryo Zen. However, this
school did not last long in China or Japan, becoming moribund after a
few generations. The other disciple of Ch'u-yuan was a master named
Yang-ch'i Fang-hui (992-1049), whose school (known in Japanese as Yogi
Zen) eventually became the only school of Chinese Ch'an, absorbing all
other sects when the faith went into its final decline after the Sung.
Ta-hui was part of this school, and it was the branch of the Lin-chi
sect that eventually took hold in Japan.

In closing our journey through Chinese Ch'an we must note that the
faith continued on strongly through the Sung largely because the
government began selling ordinations for its own profit. Ch'an also
continued to flourish during the Mongol-dominated Yuan Dynasty (1279-
1309), with many priests from Japan coming to China for study. During
the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644), it merged with another school of
Buddhism, the Pure Land Salvationist sect, and changed drastically.
Although Ming-style Chinese Ch'an still persists today, mainly outside
China, its practice bears scant resemblance to the original teachings.
For the practice of the classical Ch'an described here we must now turn
to Japan.



















 PART IV



ZEN IN JAPAN



. . . in which Ch'an is imported to Japan by traditional Buddhists
disillusioned with the spiritual decadence of existing Japanese sects.
Through a fortuitous association with the rising military class, Ch'an
is eventually elevated to the most influential religion of Japan.
Before long, however, it evolves into a political and cultural rather
than a spiritual force. Although some Japanese attempt to restore
Ch'an's original vigor by deliberately attacking its "High Church"
institutions, few Japanese Zen teachers respect its original teachings
and practice. Japanese teachers contribute little to the Ch'an (Zen)
experience until finally, in the eighteenth century, a spiritual leader
appears who not only restores the original vitality of the faith, but
goes on to refine the koan practice and revolutionize the relationship
of Zen to the common people. This inspired teacher, Hakuin, creates
modern Zen.




Chapter Fifteen

EISAI:

THE FIRST JAPANESE MASTER


There is a twelfth-century story that the first Japanese monk who
journeyed to China to study Ch'an returned home to find a summons from
the Japanese court. There, in a meeting reminiscent of the Chinese
sovereign Wu and the Indian Bodhidharma some seven hundred years
before, Japan's emperor commanded him to describe the teachings of this
strange new cult. The bemused monk (remembered by the name Kakua)
replied with nothing more than a melody on his flute, leaving the court
flabbergasted.1 But what more ideal expression of China's wordless
doctrine?

As in the China entered by Bodhidharma, medieval Japan already knew the
teachings of Buddhism. In fact, the Japanese ruling classes had been
Buddhist for half a millennium before Ch'an officially came to their
attention. However, contacts with China were suspended midway during
this time, leaving Japanese Buddhists out of touch with the many
changes in China--the most significant being Ch'an's rise to the
dominant Buddhist sect.2 Consequently the Japanese had heard almost
nothing about this sect when contacts resumed in the twelfth century.
To their amazement they discovered that Chinese Buddhism had become
Ch'an. The story of Ch'an's transplant in Japan is also the story of
its preservation, since it was destined to wither away in China.

Perhaps we should review briefly how traditional Buddhism got to Japan
in the first place. During the sixth century, about the time of
Bodhidharma, a statue of the Buddha and some sutras were transmitted to
Japan as a gift/bribe from a Korean monarch seeking military aid. He
claimed Buddhism was very powerful although difficult to understand.
Not all Japanese, however, were overjoyed with the appearance of a new
faith. The least pleased were those employed by the existing religion,
the Japanese cult of Shinto, and they successfully discredited Buddhism
for several decades. But a number of court intrigues were underway at
the time, and one faction got the idea that Buddhism would be helpful
in undermining the Shinto-based ruling clique. Eventually this new
faction triumphed, and by the middle of the seventh century, the
Japanese were constructing Buddhist temples and pagodas.3

Other imports connected with these early mainland contacts were Chinese
writing and the Chinese style of government. The Japanese even
recreated the T'ang capital of Ch'ang-an, consecrated at the beginning
of the eighth century as Nara, their first real city. The growing
Buddhist establishment soon overwhelmed Nara with a host of sects and
temples, culminating in 752 with the unveiling of a bronze meditating
Buddha larger than any statue in the world.

Japan was now awash in thirdhand Buddhism, as Chinese missionaries
patronizingly expounded Sanskrit scriptures they themselves only
vaguely understood. Buddhism's reputation for powerful magic soon
demoralized the simple religion of Shinto, with its unpretentious
shrines and rites, and this benign nature reverence was increasingly
pushed into the background. The impact of Buddhism became so
overwhelming that the alarmed emperor finally abandoned Nara entirely
to the Buddhists, and at the close of the eighth century set up a new
capital in central Japan, known today as Kyoto.

The emperor also decided to discredit the Nara Buddhists on their own
terms, sending to China for new, competing sects. Back came emissaries
with two new schools, which soon assumed dominance of Japanese
Buddhism. The first of these was Tendai, named after the Chinese T'ien-
t'ai school. Its teachings centered on the Lotus Sutra, which taught
that the human Buddha personified a universal spirit, evidence of the
oneness permeating all things. The Tendai school was installed on Mt.
Hiei, in the outskirts of Kyoto, giving birth to an establishment
eventually to number several thousand buildings. The monks on Mt. Hiei
became the authority on Buddhist matters in Japan for several centuries
thereafter, and later they also began meddling in affairs of state,
sometimes even resorting to arms. Tendai was, and perhaps to some
degree still is, a faith for the fortunate few. It did not stress an
idealized hereafter, since it served a class--the idle aristocracy--
perfectly comfortable in the present world. In any case, it became the
major Japanese Buddhist sect during the Heian era (794-1185), a time of
aristocratic rule.

The other important, and also aristocratic, version of Buddhism
preceding Zen was called Shingon, from the Chinese school Chen-yen, a
magical-mystery sect thriving on secrecy and esoteric symbolism. It
appealed less to the intellect than did Tendai and more to the taste
for entertainment among the bored aristocrats. Although Shingon
monasteries often were situated in remote mountainous areas, the
intrigue of their engaging ceremonies (featuring efflorescent
iconography, chants, and complex liturgies) and their evocative
mandalas (geometrical paintings full of symbolism) made this sect a
theatrical success. This so-called Esoteric Buddhism of Shingon grew so
popular that the sober Tendai sect was obliged to start adding
ritualistic complexity into its own practices.4

The Japanese government broke off relations with China less than a
hundred years after the founding of Kyoto, around the middle of the
ninth century. From then until the mid-twelfth century mainland
contacts virtually ceased, and consequently both Japanese culture and
Japanese Buddhism gradually evolved away from their Chinese models. The
Japanese aristocracy became obsessed with aesthetics, finery, and
refined lovemaking accompanied by poetry, perfumes, and flowers.5  They
distilled the vigorous T'ang culture to a refined essence, rather like
extracting a delicate liqueur from a stout potion.

The Buddhist church also grew decadent, even as it grew ever more
powerful and ominous. The priesthood became the appointment of last
resort for otherwise unemployable courtiers, and indeed Buddhism
finally degenerated largely into an entertainment for the ruling class,
whose members were amused and diverted by its rites. This carefree
aristocracy also allowed increasing amounts of wealth and land to slip
into the hands of corrupt religious establishments. For their own part,
the Buddhists began forming armies of monks to protect their new
wealth, and they eventually went on to engage in inter-temple wars and
threaten the civil government.

During this time, the Japanese aristocracy preserved its privileged
position through the unwise policy of using an emerging military class
to maintain order. These professional soldiers seem to have arisen from
the aristocacy itself. Japanese emperors had a large number of women at
their disposal, through whom they scattered a host of progeny, not all
of which could be maintained idle in Kyoto. A number of these were sent
to the provinces, where they were to govern untamed outlying areas.
This continued until one day the court in Kyoto awoke to find that
Japan was in fact controlled by these rural clans and their mounted
warriors, the samurai.6

In the middle of the twelfth century, the samurai effectively seized
Japan, and their strongman invented for himself the title of _shogun_,
proceeding to institute what became almost eight centuries of unbroken
warrior rule. The age of the common man had arrived, and one of the
_shogun's _first acts was to transfer the government away from
aristocratic Kyoto, whose sophisticated society made him uncomfortable,
to a warrior camp called Kamakura, near the site of modern Tokyo. The
rule of Japan passed from perfumed, poetry-writing aesthetes to fierce,
often illiterate swordsmen.

Coincident with this coup, the decadence and irrelevance of traditional
Buddhism had begun to weigh heavily upon a new group of spiritual
reformers. Before long Tendai and Shingon were challenged by new faiths
recognizing the existence and spiritual needs of the common people. One
form this reformation took was the appearance of new sects providing
spiritual comfort to the masses and the possibility of eternal
salvation through some simple act, usually the repetition of a sacred
chant. One, and later two, such sects (Jodo and Jodo Shin) focused on
the Buddhist figure Amida, whose Paradise or "Pure Land" in the
hereafter was open to all those calling upon his name (by chanting a
sort of Buddhist "Hail Mary" called the _nembutsu_, "Praise to Amida
Buddha"). Another simplified sect preached a fundamentalist return to
the Lotus Sutra and was led by a firebrand named Nichiren, who also
created a chant for his largely illiterate followers. A formula
guaranteeing Paradise had particular appeal to the samurai, whose day-
to-day existence was dangerous and uncertain. The scandalized Tendai
monks vigorously opposed this home-grown populist movement,
occasionally even burning down temples to discourage its growth. But
the Pure Land and Nichiren sects continued to flourish, since the
common people finally had a Buddhism all their own.

There were others, however, who believed that the aristocratic sects
could be reformed from within--by importing them afresh from China, from
the source. These reformers hoped that Buddhism in China had maintained
its integrity and discipline during the several centuries of
separation. And by fortunate coincidence, Japanese contacts with the
mainland were being reopened, making it again allowable to undertake
the perilous sea voyage to China. But when the first twelfth-century
Japanese pilgrims reached the mainland, they were stunned to find that
traditional Buddhism had been almost completely supplanted by Ch'an.
Consequently, the Japanese pilgrims returning from China perforce
returned with Zen, since little else remained. However, Zen was not
originally brought back to replace traditional Buddhism, but rather as
a stimulant to restore the rigor that had drained out of monastic life,
including formal meditation and respect or discipline.7

Credit for the introduction of Lin-chi Zen (called Rinzai) in Japan is
traditionally given to the aristocratic priest and traveler Myoan Eisai
(1141-1215).8 He began his career as a young monk in the Tendai complex
near Kyoto, but in the summer of 1168 he accompanied a Shingon priest
on a trip to China, largely to sightsee and to visit the home of the
T'ien-t'ai sect as a pilgrim. However, the T'ien-t'ai school must have
been a mere shadow of its former self by this time, and naturally
enough Eisai became familiar with Ch'an. But he was hardly a firebrand
for Zen, for when he returned to Japan he continued practice of
traditional Buddhism.

Some twenty years later, in 1187, Eisai again journeyed to China, this
time planning a pilgrimage on to India and the Buddhist holy places.
But the Chinese refused him permission to travel beyond their borders,
leaving Eisai no choice but to study there. He finally attached himself
to an aging Ch'an monk on Mt. T'ien-t'ai and managed to receive the
seal of enlightenment before returning to Japan in 1191, quite probably
the first Japanese ever certified by a Chinese Ch'an master. He was
not, however, totally committed to Zen. His Ch'an teacher was also
occupied with other Buddhist schools, and what Eisai brought back was a
Buddhist cocktail blended from several different traditions.9 But he did
proceed to build a temple to the Huang-lung (Japanese Oryo) branch of
the Lin-chi sect on the southernmost Japanese island, Kyushu (the
location nearest China), in the provincial town of Hakata. Almost as
important, he also brought back the tea plant (whose brew was used in
China to keep drowsy monks awake during meditation), thereby
instituting the long marriage of Zen and tea.

Although his provincial temple went unchallenged, later attempts to
introduce this new sect into Kyoto, the stronghold of traditional
Buddhism, met fierce resistance from the establishment, particularly
Tendai. But Eisai contended that Zen was a useful sect and that the
government would reap practical benefits from its protection. His
spirited defense of Zen, entitled "Propagation of Zen for the
Protection of the Country," argued that its encouragement would be good
for Japanese Buddhism and therefore good for Japan.10



_As in India, so in China its teaching has attracted followers and
disciples in great numbers. It propagates the Truth as the ancient
Buddha did, with the robe of authentic transmission passing from one
man to the next. In the matter of religious discipline, it practices
the genuine method of the sages of old. Thus the Truth it teaches, both
in substance and appearance, perfects the relationships of master and
disciple. In its rules of action and discipline, there is no confusion
of right and wrong. . . . Studying it, one discovers the key to all
forms of Buddhism; practicing it, one's life is brought to fulfillment
in the attainment of enlightenment. Outwardly it favors discipline over
doctrine, inwardly it brings the Highest Inner Wisdom. This is what the
Zen sect stands for.11

_

He also pointed out how un-Japanese it would be to deny Zen a hearing:
Japan has been open-minded in the past, why should she reject a new
faith now?



_In our country the [emperor] shines in splendor and the influence of
his virtuous wisdom spreads far and wide. Emissaries from the distant
lands of South and Central Asia pay their respects to his court. Lay
ministers conduct the affairs of government; priests and monks spread
abroad religious truth. Even the truths of the Four Hindu Vedas are not
neglected. Why then reject the five schools of Zen Buddhism?12

_

Eisai was the classic tactician, knowing well when to fight and when to
retire, and he decided in 1199 on a diversionary retreat to Kamakura,
leaving behind the hostile, competitive atmosphere of aristocratic
Kyoto. Through his political connections, he managed to get installed
as head of a new temple in Kamakura, beginning Zen's long association
with the Japanese warrior class.

Eisai seems to have done well in Kamakura, for not long after he
arrived, the current strongman gave him financing for a Zen temple in
Kyoto, named Kennin-ji and completed in 1205. Eisai returned the favor
by assisting in the repair of temples ravaged by the recent wars. It
was reportedly for a later, hard-drinking ruler that Eisai composed his
second classic work, "Drink Tea and Prolong Life," which championed the
medicinal properties of this exotic Chinese beverage, declaring it a
restorative that tuned up the body and strengthened the heart.



_In the great country of China they drink tea, as a result of which
there is no heart trouble and people live long lives. Our country is
full of sickly-looking, skinny persons, and this is simply because we
do not drink tea. Whenever one is in poor spirits, one should drink
tea. This will put the heart in order and dispel all illness. When the
heart is vigorous, then even if the other organs are ailing, no great
pain will be felt. . . . The heart is the sovereign of the five organs,
tea is the chief of the bitter foods, and bitter is the chief of the
tastes. For this reason the heart loves bitter things, and when it is
doing well all the other organs are properly regulated. . . . When,
however, the whole body feels weak, devitalized, and depressed, it is a
sign that the heart is ailing. Drink lots of tea, and one's energy and
spirits will be restored to full strength.13

_

This first Zen teacher was certainly no Lin-chi. He was merely a Tendai
priest who imported Lin-chi's sect from China hoping to bring
discipline to his school; he established an ecumenical monastery at
which both Zen and esoteric Tendai practices were taught; he consorted
with leaders whose place was owed to a military coup d'etat; and he
appeared to advocate Zen on transparently practical, sometimes almost
political, grounds. He compromised with the existing cults to the end,
even refusing to lend aid to other, more pure-minded advocates of Ch'an
who had risen in Kyoto in the meantime.14 But Eisai was a colorful
figure whom history has chosen to remember as the founder of Zen in
Japan, as well as (perhaps equally important) the father of the cult of
tea.

Eisai ended his days as abbot of the Kyoto temple of Kennin-ji and
leader of a small Zen community that was careful not to quarrel with
the powers of Tendai and Shingon, which also had altars in the temple.
Eisai's "Zen" began in Japan as a minor infusion of Buddhism's original
discipline, but through an accommodation with the warrior
establishment, he accidentally planted the seeds of Ch'an in fertile
soil. Gradually the number of Zen practitioners grew, as more and more
of the samurai recognized in Zen a practical philosophy that accorded
well with their needs. As Paul Varley has explained: "Zen . . .
stresses cultivation of the intuitive faculties and places a high
premium on discipline and self-control. It rejects rational decision-
making as artificial and delusory, and insists that action must come
from emotion. As such, Zen proved particularly congenial to the
medieval samurai, who lived with violence and imminent death and who
sought to develop such things as 'spontaneity of conduct' and a
'tranquility of heart' to meet the rigours of his profession. Under the
influence of Zen, later samurai theorists especially asserted that the
true warrior must be constantly prepared to make the ultimate sacrifice
of his life in the service of his lord--without a moment's reflection or
conscious consideration."15

It can only be ironic that what began in China as a school of
meditation, then became an iconoclastic movement using koans to beat
down the analytical faculties finally emerged (in an amalgam with other
teachings) in Japan as a psychological mainstay for the soldiers of a
military dictatorship. There was, however, another Japanese school of
Zen that introduced its practice in a form more closely resembling
original Ch'an. This was the movement started by Dogen, whose life we
may now examine.




Chapter Sixteen

DOGEN:

FATHER OF JAPANESE SOTO ZEN


The Soto master Dogen (1200-53) is probably the most revered figure in
all Japanese Zen. Yet until recently he has been comparatively unknown
abroad, perhaps because that great popularizer of Zen in the West, D.
T. Suzuki, followed the Rinzai school and managed to essentially ignore
Dogen throughout his voluminous writings. But it was Dogen who first
insisted on intensive meditation, who produced the first Japanese
writings explaining Zen practice, and who constructed the first real
Zen monastery in Japan, establishing a set of monastic rules still
observed. Moreover, the strength of his character has inspired many Zen
masters to follow. Indeed, it is hard to contradict the scholar
Dumoulin, who declared him "the strongest and most original thinker
that Japan has so far produced."1

Born January 2 of the year 1200 an illegitimate son of a noble Fujiwara
mother and a princely father, Dogen's circumstances from the start were
aristocratic.2 Around him swirled the literary life of the court, the
powerful centuries-old position of the Fujiwara, and the refined
decadence of ancient Kyoto. Although his father died when he was two,
his privileged education continued at the hands of his mother and half-
brother. He most certainly learned to read and write classical Chinese,
as well as to versify and debate--all skills that he would one day put
to extensive use. His poetic sensitivity (something traditionally
prized by the Japanese above logic and precision of thought) was
encouraged by all he met in the hothouse atmosphere of ancient Kyoto.
This idyllic, protected life was shattered at age seven with the sudden
death of his mother. But she set the course of his life when, at the
last, she bade him become a monk and reach out to suffering mankind. A
popular tradition has it that at his mother's funeral Dogen sensed in
the rising incense the impermanence of all things. After the shock of
his mother's death he was adopted by an uncle as family heir and set on
the way to a reluctant career in statecraft. But as he approached age
twelve, the time when a formal ceremony would signify his entry into
the male circle of aristocracy, his reservations overwhelmed him and he
slipped away to visit another uncle, a priest living in the foothills
of Mt. Hiei. When Dogen begged to be allowed to turn his back on the
aristocratic world of Kyoto and fulfill his mother's dying wish by
becoming a monk the family was dismayed. But finally they relented, and
he was ordained the following year as a Tendai brother on Mt. Hiei.

Already a scholar of the Chinese classics, he now turned to the
literature of Tendai Buddhism. But soon he was snagged on a problem
that has haunted theologians East and West for many centuries. In
Christian terms it is the Calvinist question of whether man is already
saved by predestination or whether he must earn his salvation. Dogen
formulated this in a Buddhist context as follows:



_As I study both the exoteric and the esoteric schools of Buddhism,
they maintain that man is endowed with the Dharma-nature by birth. If
this is the case, why had the Buddhas of all ages--undoubtedly in
possession of enlightenment--to seek enlightenment and engage in
spiritual practice_?3



In other words, if man already has the Buddha nature, why must he
struggle to realize it by arduous disciplines? Conversely, if the
Buddha nature must be acquired, how can it be inherent in all things,
as was taught?

This perplexing paradox, which no one in Japan's Tendai "Vatican" on
Mt. Hiei could resolve, finally drove Dogen wandering in search of
other teachers. He initially stopped at Eisai's temple, Kennin-ji, long
enough to be taught the basics of Rinzai Zen practice, but then he
traveled on. Eventually, though, he returned to Kennin-ji, and in 1217,
began Zen study under Eisai's disciple, Myozen (1184-1225). Of his
relationship with this Rinzai master he later declared:



_Ever since I awakened to the Bodhi-mind and sought the supreme Truth I
made many visits to Buddhist masters throughout the country. It was
thus that I happened to meet the Venerable Myozen at Kennin-ji. Nine
years quickly passed as I studied the Way under him. During that period
I had the opportunity to learn from him, to some extent, the training
methods of the Rinzai Zen sect. To the Venerable Myozen, leading
disciple of my late master Eisai, was rightly transmitted the highest
supreme Law and he was unparalleled among his fellow disciples in
learning and virtue.4



_Dogen may have been impressed as much by the legend of Eisai as by the
shouting and beating of the Rinzai sect, for he often sprinkled stories
about Eisai through his writings and sermons thereafter.

But Dogen still could not find contentment, even with the Rinzai he
received at Kennin-ji, and at age twenty-three he resolved to go to
China and experience Ch'an teachings firsthand. So in the spring of
1223 he and Myozen shipped out for China, intending to visit Buddhist
establishments there. (Another reason for his hasty decision to go to
China for study may have been a series of political upheavals involving
armed monks, which resulted in some of his high-placed relations being
banished--while a series of executions took place.)5

After a rough but speedy voyage across the East China Sea, they arrived
at Ming-chou, down the coast from the Sung capital of Hangchow. Myozen
could not wait and headed straight for the Ch'an complex on Mt. T'ien-
t'ung. However, the more cautious Dogen chose to stay aboard ship until
midsummer, easing himself into Chinese life slowly. But even there he
experienced an example of Ch'an fervor and devotion that impressed him
deeply, if only because it was so different from what he had seen in
Japan. This lesson was at the hands of a sixty-year-old Chinese cook
from a Ch'an monastery who visited the ship to purchase some Japanese
mushrooms. Dogen became involved in an animated conversation with the
old monk and, since his monastery was over ten miles away, out of
courtesy invited him to stay the night on board ship. However, the old
tenzo monk (one in charge of monastery meals) insisted on returning,
saying duty called. But, Dogen pressed, surely there must be others who
could cook in such a large monastery, and besides cooking was hardly
the point of Zen. As Dogen later recalled his own words:



_"Venerable sir! Why don't you do_ zazen _[Zen meditation] or study the
koan of ancient masters? What is the use of working so hard as a tenzo
monk?"

On hearing my remarks, he broke into laughter and said, "Good
foreigner! You seem to be ignorant of the true training and meaning of
Buddhism." In a moment, ashamed and surprised at his remark, I said to
him, "What are they?"

"If you understand the true meaning of your question, you will have
already realized the true meaning of Buddhism," he answered. At that
time, however, I was unable to understand what he meant.6_



Such were the exchanges between Japanese Buddhist scholars and Ch'an
monastery cooks in the early thirteenth century.

In midsummer of 1223, Dogen finally moved ashore and entered the temple
on Mt. T'ien-t'ung called Ching-te-ssu. His intense study brought no
seal of enlightenment, but it did engender severe disappointment with
the standards of Ch'an monasteries in China. Although the school that
Dogen found was a branch of Lin-chi traceable back to the koan master
Ta-hui, different from the fading school Eisai had encountered, Dogen
later would denounce impartially the general run of all Ch'an masters
he met in China.



_Although there are in China a great number of those who profess
themselves to be the descendants of the Buddhas and patriarchs, there
are few who study truth and accordingly there are few who teach truth.
. . . Thus those people who have not the slightest idea of what the
great Way of the Buddhas and patriarchs is now become the masters of
monks. . . . Reciting a few words of Lin-chi and Yun-men they take them
for the whole truth of Buddhism. If Buddhism had been exhausted by a
few words of Lin-chi and Yun-men, it could not have survived till
today.7

_

After studying for two years while simultaneously nosing about other
nearby monasteries, Dogen finally decided to travel, hoping others of
the "five houses" had maintained discipline. (He also seems to have
experienced some discrimination as a foreigner in China.) But the
farther he went, the more despondent he became; nowhere in China could
he find a teacher worthy to succeed the ancient masters. He finally
resolved to abandon China and return to Japan.

But at this moment fate took a turn that--in retrospect--had enormous
importance for the future of Japanese Buddhism. A monk he met on the
road told him that T'ien-t'ung now had a new

abbot, a truly enlightened master namd Ju-ching (1163-1228). Dogen
returned to see and was received warmly, being invited by Ju-ching to
ignore ceremony and approach him as an equal. The twenty-five-year-old
Japanese monk was elated, and settled down at last to undertake the
study he had come to China for. The master Ju-ching became Dogen's
ideal of what a Zen teacher should be, and the habits--perhaps even the
eccentricities--of this aging teacher were translated by Dogen into the
model for monks in Japan.

Ju-ching was, above all things, uncompromising in his advocacy of
meditation or _zazen_. He might even have challenged Bodhidharma for
the title of its all-time practitioner, and it was from Ju-ching's
Ch'an (which may also have included koan study) that Dogen took his
cue. Although Ch'an was still widespread, Ju-ching seems to have been
the only remaining advocate of intensive meditation in China, and a
chance intersection of history brought this teaching to Japan.
Significantly, he was one of the few Ts'ao-tung masters ever to lead
the important T'ien-t'ung monastery, traditionally headed by a member
of the Lin-chi school. Ju-ching was a model master: strict but kindly;
simple in habits, diet, dress; immune to the attractions of court
recognition; and an uncompromising advocate of virtually round-the-
clock meditation.

But he never asked anything of his monks he did not also demand of
himself, even when advanced in years. He would strike nodding monks to
refresh their attention, while lamenting that age had so diminished the
strength in his arm it was eroding his ability to create good monks.
Ju-ching would meditate until eleven in the evening and then be up
again by two-thirty or three the next morning, back at _zazen_. He
frequently developed sores on his backside from such perpetual sitting,
but nothing deterred him. He even declared the pain made him love
_zazen _all the more.

The story of Dogen's final enlightenment at the hands of Ju-ching is a
classic of Japanese Zen. In the meditation hall one early morning all
the monks were sitting in meditation when the man next to Dogen dozed
off--a common enough occurrence in early-morning sessions. But when Ju-
ching came by on a routine inspection and saw the sleeping monk, he was
for some reason particularly rankled and roared out, "_Zazen _means the
dropping away of mind and body! What will you get by sleeping?" Dogen,
sitting nearby, was at first startled, but then an indescribable calm,
an ecstatic joy washed over him. Could it be that this was the moment
he had been hoping for? Could it be that the fruit had been ready to
fall from the tree, with this just the shake needed?

Dogen rushed to Ju-ching's room afterward and burned incense, to
signify his enlightenment experience. Throwing himself at the master's
feet, he declared, "I have experienced the dropping away of mind and
body."

Ju-ching immediately recognized his enlightenment to be genuine (modern
masters reportedly can discern a novice's state merely by the way he
rings a gong) and he replied, "You have indeed dropped body and mind."

"But wait a minute," Dogen cautioned. "Don't sanction me so easily. How
do you really know I've achieved enlightenment?"

To which Ju-ching replied simply, "Body and mind have dropped away."

Dogen bowed in acknowledgment of his acknowledgment. And thus, in May
1225, was the greatest Zen teacher in Japan enlightened. In the fall
Ju-ching conferred upon Dogen the seal of patriarchal succession of his
line of the Ts'ao-tung sect.8

Dogen stayed on for two more years studying under Ju-ching, but finally
he decided to return again to Japan. When they parted, Ju-ching gave
his Japanese protege the patriarchal robe, his own portrait (called
_chinso_, a symbol of transmission), and bade him farewell. So did
Dogen return to Japan in the fall of 1227, taking with him the koan
collection _Blue Cliff Record_, which he copied his last night in
China. But he also brought the fire of a powerful idea, pure
meditation, that formed the basis for the Japanese Soto school of Zen.

Dogen returned to Eisai's old temple of Kennin-ji, where he proceeded
to write the minor classic _A Universal Recommendation for Zazen_,
introducing the idea of intense meditation to his countrymen.



_You should pay attention to the fact that even the Buddha Sakyamuni
had to practice_ zazen _for six years. It is also said that Bodhidharma
had to do _zazen _at Shao-lin temple for nine years in order to
transmit the Buddha-mind. Since these ancient sages were so diligent,
how can present-day trainees do without the practice of _zazen_? You
should stop pursuing words and letters and learn to withdraw and
reflect on yourself. When you do so, your body and mind will naturally
fall away, and your original Buddha-nature will appear.9

_

It was the opening shot in a campaign to make pure Zen the meaningful
alternative to the decadent traditional Buddhism of the aristocracy and
the new Salvationist sect of Pure Land. But first the Japanese had to
be taught how to meditate, so he wrote a meditation "handbook" that
explained exactly how and where to undertake this traditional Buddhist
practice. His directions are worth quoting at length.



_Now, in doing _zazen _it is desirable to have a quiet room. You should
be temperate in eating and drinking, forsaking all delusive
relationships. Setting everything aside, think neither of good nor
evil, right nor wrong. Thus, having stopped the various functions of
your mind, give up the idea of becoming a Buddha. This holds true not
only for _zazen _but for all your daily actions.

Usually a thick square mat is put on the floor where you sit and a
round cushion on top of that. You may sit in either the full or half
lotus position. In the former, first put your right foot on your left
thigh and then your left foot on your right thigh. In the latter, only
put your left foot on the right thigh. Your clothing should be worn
loosely but neatly. Next, put your right hand on your left foot and
your left palm on the right palm, the tips of the thumbs lightly
touching. Sit upright, leaning to neither left nor right, front nor
back. Your ears should be on the same plane as your shoulders and your
nose in line with your navel. Your tongue should be placed against the
roof of your mouth and your lips and teeth closed firmly. With your
eyes kept continuously open, breathe quietly through your nostrils.
Finally, having regulated your body and mind in this way, take a deep
breath, sway your body to left and right, then sit firmly as a rock.
Think of nonthinking. How is this done? By thinking beyond thinking and
nonthinking. This is the very basis of _zazen_._10



This first little essay was meant to provide Japan a taste of the real
Zen he had experienced in China, and it was the beginning of an
astounding literary output. Dogen asserted that since the Buddha had
meditated and Bodhidharma had meditated, the most valuable thing to do
is meditate. Not surprisingly, he received a cold response from the
other schools in Kyoto, both the Tendai sects and the other "Zen"
teachers who, like Eisai, taught a "syncretic" Zen of compromise with
establishment Buddhism. His rigid doctrine was socially awkward for the
syncretic Zen monks at Kennin-ji--who seasoned their practice with
chants and esoteric ceremonies--and Dogen finally decided to spare them
further embarrassment by retiring to a mountain retreat.

Off he went to another temple, An'yoin, where he began to elaborate on
the role of meditation in Zen practice, writing another essay, entitled
"Bendowa" or "Lecture on Training," designed to provide a more
dialectical defense for zazen. Written in the form of eighteen
questions and answers, the "Lecture on Training" was intended to
further justify the intense meditation he had described earlier. This
essay later became the initial section of a massive book today known as
the _Shobogenzo _(_Treasure of Knowledge Regarding the True Dharma_),
which was guarded as a secret treasure of the Soto school for many
centuries.



_Question: . . . For most people the natural way to enlightenment is to
read the scriptures and recite the nembutsu [Praise to Amida Buddha].
Since you do nothing more than sit cross-legged, how can this mere
sitting be a means of gaining enlightenment?



Answer: . . . Of what use is it to read the scriptures and recite the
_nembutsu_? It is useless to imagine that the merits of Buddhism come
merely from using one's tongue or voice; if you think such things
embrace all of Buddhism, the Truth is a long way from you. You should
only read the scriptures so as to learn that the Buddha was teaching
the necessity of gradual and sudden training and that from this you can
realise enlightenment; do not read them so as to make a show of wisdom
with useless intellection. . . . Just to continually repeat the
_nembutsu_ is equally useless, for it is a frog who croaks both day and
night in some field. . . . They who do nothing . . . more than study
the scriptures . . . never understand this, so just stop it and thereby
cure your delusions and doubts. Just follow the teachings of a true
master and, through the power of _Zazen_, find the utterly joyful
enlightenment of Buddha.11

_

It is not surprising to find Dogen firm in the belief that meditation
is superior to the practices of two competing movements: the
traditional sutra veneration of the Tendai sect and the Pure Land
schools' chanting of the nembutsu to Amida Buddha. But what about the
Rinzai Zen teaching that enlightenment is sudden and cannot be induced
by gradual practice? He next attacks this position:



_Question: Both in India and China, from the beginning of time to the
present day, some Zen teachers have been enlightened by such things as
the sound of stones striking bamboos, whilst the color of plum blossoms
cleared the minds of others. The [Buddha] was enlightened at the sight
of the morning star, whilst [his follower] Ananda understood the Truth
through seeing a stick fall. As well as these, many Zen teachers of the
five schools after the Sixth Patriarch were enlightened by only so much
as a word. Did all of them practise _Zazen_?



Answer: From olden times down to the present day, all who were ever
enlightened, either by colors or sounds, practised _Zazen _without
_Zazen_ and became instantaneously enlightened.12_



What exactly is he saying here? It would seem that he is convoluting
the early teaching of the Southern sect, which proposed that
"meditation" is a mind process that might also be duplicated by other
means. Dogen seems to be arguing that zazen is efficacious since all
who became enlightened were really "meditating" in daily life, whether
they realized it or not. The Southern school claimed that _dhyana_
could be anything and therefore it seemed ancillary; Dogen claims it
could be anything and therefore it is essential.

Dogen also came back to his original doctrinal dilemma, the question
that had sent him wandering from teacher to teacher in Japan while
still a youth: Why strive for enlightenment if all creatures are
Buddhas to begin with? He finally felt qualified to address his own
quandary.



_Question: There are those who say that one has only to understand that
this mind itself is the Buddha in order to understand Buddhism, and
that there is no need to recite the scriptures or undergo bodily
training. If you understand that Buddhism is inherent in yourself, you
are already fully enlightened and there is no need to seek for anything
further from anywhere. If this is so, is there any sense in taking the
trouble to practice _Zazen_?_

_Answer: This is a very grievous mistake, and even if it should be true
and the sages should teach it, it is impossible for you to understand
it. If you would truly study Buddhism, you must transcend all opinions
of subject and object. If it is possible to be enlightened simply by
knowing that the self is, in its self-nature, the Buddha, then there
was no need for Shakyamuni to try so diligently to teach the Way.1



_Whether this answer resolves the paradox will be left to the judgment
of others. But for all his intensities and eccentricities, Dogen was
certainly a powerful new thinker, clearly the strongest dialectician in
the history of Japanese Zen. He was also a magnetic personality who
attracted many followers, and by 1233 he had so outgrown the space at
An'yoin that a larger temple was imperative (which became available
thanks to his aristocratic connections). His next move was to Kosho-ji,
a temple near Kyoto, where he spent the succeeding ten years in intense
literary creativity, where he constructed the first truly independent
Zen monastery in Japan, and where he found a worthy disciple, Koun Ejo
(1198-1280), who served as head monk and ultimately as his successor.
It was here, beginning in 1233, that Dogen finally recreated Chinese
Ch'an totally in Japan, right down to an architectural replica of a
Sung-style monastery and an uncompromising discipline reminiscent of
his old Chinese master Ju-ching.

After settling in at Kosho-ji he began, in late 1235, a fundraising
drive for the purpose of building the first Zen-style monks' hall
(_sodo_) in Japan. He believed that this building, viewed by the
lawgiver Po-chang Huai-hai as the heart of a Ch'an monstery, was
essential if he were to effectively teach meditation. The doors would
be open to all, since the onetime aristocrat Dogen was now very much a
man of the people, welcoming rich and poor, monks and laymen, men and
women.14

When the meditation hall opened in 1236, Dogen signaled the occasion by
posting a set of rules for behavior reminiscent of Huai-hai's laws set
down in eighth-century China. A quick skim of these rules tells much
about the character of the master Dogen.



_No monk shall be admitted to this meditation hall unless he has an
earnest desire for the Way and a strong determination not to seek fame
and profit. . . . All monks in this hall should try to live in harmony
with one another, just as milk blends well with water. . . . You should
not walk about in the outside world; but if unavoidable, it is
permissible to do so once a month. . . . Keep the supervisor of this
hall informed of your whereabouts at all times. . . .Never speak ill of
others nor find fault with them. . . . Never loiter in the hall. . . .
Wear only robes of plain material. . . . Never enter the hall drunk
with wine. . . . Never disturb the training of other monks by inviting
outsiders, lay or clerical, into the hall. . . .15



_Dogen maintained this first pure Zen monastery for a decade, during
which time he composed forty more sections of his classic Shobogenzo.
And during this time the tree of Zen took root in Japanese soil firmly
and surely.

But things could not go smoothly forever. Dogen's powerful friends at
court protected him as long as they could, but eventually his
popularity became too much for the jealous Tendai monks on Mt. Hiei to
bear. To fight their censure he appealed to the emperor, claiming (as
had Eisai before him) that Zen was good for Japan. But the other
schools immediately filed opposing briefs with the emperor and the
court, culminating in a judiciary proceeding with distinguished clerics
being convened to hear both sides. As might have been expected they
ruled against Dogen, criticizing him for being obsessed with _zazen
_and ignoring the sutras, etc. It probably was this political setback
that persuaded him to quit the Kyoto vicinity in 1243 and move to the
provinces, where he could teach in peace.16

He camped out in various small Tendai monasteries (where he wrote
another twenty-nine chapters of the _Shobogenzo_) until his final
temple, called Eihei-ji, or Eternal Peace, was completed in the
mountains of present-day Fukui prefecture. This site became the center
of Soto Zen in Japan, the principal monastery of the sect. Dogen
himself was approaching elder statesmanhood, and in 1247 he was
summoned to the warrior headquarters of Kamakura by none other than the
most powerful man in Japan, the warrior Hojo Tokiyori. The ruler wanted
to learn about Zen, and Dogen correctly perceived it would be unhealthy
to refuse the invitation.

The warriors in Kamakura would most likely have been familiar with the
syncretic Rinzai Zen of Eisai, which focused on the use of the koan.
For his own part, Dogen did not reject the koan out of hand (he left a
collection of three hundred); rather he judged it a device intended to
create a momentary glimpse of satori, or enlightenment, whose real
value was mainly as a metaphor for the enlightenment experience--an
experience he believed could be realized in full only through gradual
practice.



_In the pursuit of the Way [Buddhism] the prime essential is sitting
(_zazen_). . . . By reflecting upon various "public-cases" (koan) and
dialogues of the patriarchs, one may perhaps get the sense of them but
it will only result in one's being led astray from the way of the
Buddha, our founder. Just to pass the time in sitting straight, without
any thought of acquisition, without any sense of achieving
enlightenment--this is the way of the Founder. It is true that our
predecessors recommended both the koan and sitting, but it was the
sitting that they particularly insisted upon. There have been some who
attained enlightenment through the test of the koan, but the true cause
of their enlightenment was the merit and effectiveness of sitting.
Truly the merit lies in the sitting.17

_

Dogen spent the winter of 1247-48 in Kamakura teaching meditation, and
was in turn offered the post of abbot in a new Zen monastery being
built for the warrior capital. But Dogen politely declined, perhaps
believing the Salvationist sects and the syncretic Zen of Eisai were
still too strong among the samurai for his pure meditation to catch
hold.18 Or possibly he sensed his health was beginning to fail and he
wanted to retire to his beloved mountain monastery, where the politics
of Kyoto and Kamakura could not reach.

Maybe Dogen's many nights of intense meditation in heat and cold had
taken their toll, or the long hours of writing and rewriting his manual
of Zen had sapped his strength. In any case, his health deteriorated
rapidly after Kamakura until finally, in 1253, all realized that the
end was near. He appointed the faithful head monk Ejo his successor at
Eihei-ji, and on the insistence of his disciples was then taken to
Kyoto for medical care. However, nothing could be done, and on August
28 he said farewell, dying in the grand tradition--sitting in _zazen_.

In the long run, Dogen seems the one we should acknowledge as the true
founder of Zen in Japan; pure Zen first had to be introduced before it
could grow. But at the time of Dogen's death it was not at all obvious
that Soto Zen, or any Zen for that matter, would ever survive to become
an independent sect in Japan.19 Perhaps Dogen felt this too, for his
later writings became increasingly strident in their denunciation of
the Salvationist sects and the syncretic Rinzai schools. He thought of
himself as above sectarianism, claiming that _zazen _was not a sect but
rather an expression of pure Buddhism. And perhaps it was after all
only an accident that the teacher who had taught him to meditate
happened to be a member of the Ts'ao-tung school.

After Dogen's death, his small community persevered in the mountains,
isolated and at first preserving his teaching. But

eventually internal disputes pulled the community apart, and the temple
fell inactive for a time. Furthermore, his teaching of intensive
meditation was soon diluted by the introduction of rituals from the
esoteric schools of traditional Buddhism. In this new form it began to
proselytize and spread outward, particularly in provincial areas, where
its simplicity appealed to common folk.20 It also welcomed women,
something not necessarily stressed in all the Buddhist sects. Although
Soto was by this time pretty much a thing of the past in China, with
the last recognized Chinese Soto master dying about a century after
Dogen, the school prospered in Japan, where today it has three
followers for every one of Rinzai.

Ch'an still had Rinzai masters in China, however, and in the next phase
of Zen they would start emigrating to teach the Japanese in Kamakura.
The result was that Soto became the low-key home-grown Zen, while
Rinzai became a vehicle for importing Chinese culture to the warrior
class. It is to this dynamic period of warrior Rinzai Zen that we must
now look for the next great masters.




Chapter Seventeen

IKKYU:

ZEN ECCENTRIC


The earliest Japanese masters brought Ch'an from China in the hope that
its discipline would revitalize traditional Buddhism. Since Eisai's
temple was the first to include Ch'an practice, he has received credit
for founding Japanese Rinzai Zen. History, however, has glorified
matters somewhat, for in fact Eisai was little more than a Tendai
priest who dabbled a bit in Ch'an practice and enjoyed a gift for
advancing himself with the Kamakura warlords. Nor was Dogen inspired to
establish the Soto sect in Japan. He too was merely a reformer who
chanced across a Chinese Soto master devoted to meditation. It was the
powerful discipline of meditation that Dogen sought to introduce into
Japan, not a sectarian branch of Zen. Only later did Dogen's movement
become a proselytizing Zen sect. These and other thirteenth-century
Japanese reformers imported Ch'an for the simple reason that it was the
purest expression of Buddhism left in China. During the early era Zen
focused on Kyoto and Kamakura and was mainly a reformation within the
Tendai school. The Japanese understanding of Ch'an was hesitant and
inconclusive--to the point that few Japanese of the mid-thirteenth
century actually realized a new form of Buddhism was in the making.1

Over the next century and a half, however, a revolution began, as Zen
at first gradually and then precipitously became the preoccupation of
Japan's ruling class. The Zen explosion came about via a combination of
circumstances. We have seen that the warrior ruler Hojo Tokiyori (1227-
63) was interested in the school and offered Dogen a temple in
Kamakura, an invitation Dogen refused. However, in 1246 an emigre Ch'an
master from the Chinese mainland named Lan-ch'i (1212-78) appeared in
Japan uninvited, having heard of Japanese interest in Ch'an. He went
first to Kyoto, where he found Zen still subject to hostile
sectarianism, and then to Kamakura, where he managed in 1249 to meet
Tokiyori. The Japanese strongman was delighted and proceeded to have
the temple of another sect converted to a Zen establishment, making
Lan-ch'i abbot. Shortly after, Tokiyori completed construction of a
Sung-style Zen monastery in Kamakura, again putting Lan-ch'i in charge.
This Chinese monk, merely one of many in his native China, had become
head of the leading Zen temple in Japan. When word got back, a host of
enterprising Chinese clerics began pouring into the island nation
seeking their fortune.2

Thus began the next phase of early Japanese Zen, fueled by the invasion
of Chinese Ch'an monks. This movement occupied the remainder of the
thirteenth century and was spurred along by unsettled conditions in
China--namely the imminent fall of the Southern Sung Dynasty to the
Mongols and a concurrent power struggle within Ch'an itself, which
induced monks from the less powerful establishments to seek greener
pastures.3 In 1263 a senior Ch'an cleric named Wu-an (1197-1276) arrived
in Kamakura and was also made an abbot by Tokiyori.4 The first monk,
Lan-ch'i, thereupon moved to Kyoto and began proselytizing in the old
capital. Wu-an subsequently certified Tokiyori with a seal of
enlightenment, making the military strongman of Japan an acknowledged
Ch'an master. Tokiyori's interest in Zen did not go unnoticed by the
warriors around him, and his advocacy, combined with the influx of
Chinese monks appearing to teach, initiated the Zen bandwagon in
Kamakura.

Tokiyori died in 1263, and his young son Tokimune (1251--84), who came
to power five years later, initially showed no interest in Zen
practice. But he was still in his teens in 1268 when there appeared in
Japan envoys from Kublai Khan demanding tribute. The Mongols were at
that moment completing their sack of China, and Japan seemed the next
step. Undeterred, the Japanese answered all Mongol demands with haughty
insults, with the not-unexpected result that in 1274 Kublai launched an
invasion fleet. Although his ships foundered in a fortuitous streak of
bad weather, the Japanese knew that there would be more. It was then
that Tokimune began strengthening his discipline through Zen meditation
and toughening his instincts with koans. He studied under a newly
arrived Chinese master whose limited Japanese necessitated their
communicating through a translator. (When the enlightened Chinese found
cause to strike his all-powerful student, he prudently pummeled the
interpreter instead.)5 The samurai also began to take an interest in
Zen, which naturally appealed to the warrior mentality because of its
emphasis on discipline, on experience over education, and on a rough-
and-tumble practice including debates with a master and blows for the
loser--all congenial to men of simple, unschooled tastes. For their own
part, the perceptive Chinese missionaries, hampered by the language
barrier, rendered Zen as simplistic as possible to help the faith
compete with the Salvationist sects among the often illiterate
warriors.

In 1281 the Mongols launched another invasion force, this time 100,000
men strong, but they were held off several weeks by the steel-nerved
samurai until a typhoon (later named the Kamikaze or "Divine Wind")
providentially sank the fleet. The extent to which Zen training aided
this victory can be debated, but the courage of Tokimune and his
soldiers undoubtedly benefited from its rigorous discipline. The
Japanese ruler himself gave Zen heavy credit and immediately began
building a commemorative Zen monastery in Kamakura.

By the time of Tokimuni's premature death in 1284, Rinzai Zen had been
effectively established as the faith of the Kamakura rulers. His
successor continued the development of Zen establishments, supported by
new Chinese masters who also began teaching Chinese culture
(calligraphy, literature, ink painting, philosophy) to the Kamakura
warriors along with their Zen. Since the faith was definitely beginning
to boom, the government prudently published a list of restrictions for
Zen monasteries, including an abolition of arms (a traditional problem
with the other sects) and a limit on the number of pretty boys
(novices) that could be quartered in a compound to tempt the monks. The
maximum number of monks in each monastery also was prescribed, and
severe rules were established governing discipline. Out of this era in
the late thirteenth century evolved an organization of Zen temples in
Kyoto and Kamakura based on the Sung Chinese model of five main
monasteries (called the "five mountains" or _gozan_) and a network of
ten officially recognized subsidiary temples. Furthermore, Chinese
culture became so fashionable in Kamakura that collections of Sung art
began appearing among the illiterate provincial warriors--an early
harbinger of the Japanese evolution of Zen from asceticism to
aesthetics.6

The creation of the _gozan _system at the end of the thirteenth century
gave Zen a formal role in the religious structure of Japan. Zen was now
fashionable and had powerful friends, a perfect

combination to foster growth and influence. On the sometimes pointed
urging of the government, temples from other sects were converted to
Zen establishments by local authorities throughout Japan.7 The court and
aristocracy in Kyoto also began taking an interest in pure, Sung-style
Rinzai. Temples were built in Kyoto (or converted from other sects),
and even the cloistered emperors began to meditate (perhaps searching
less for enlightenment than for the rumored occult powers). When the
Kamakura regime collapsed in the mid-fourteenth century and warriors of
the newly ascendent Ashikaga clan returned the seat of government to
Kyoto, the old capital was already well acquainted with Zen's political
importance. However, although Rinzai Zen had made much visible headway
in Japan--the ruling classes increasingly meditated on koans, and
Chinese monks operated new Sung-style monasteries--the depth of
understanding seems disappointingly superficial overall. The _gozan
_system soon turned so political, as monasteries competed for official
favor, that before long establishment Zen was almost devoid of
spiritual content. In many ways, Japanese Zen became decadent almost
from the start. The immense prestige of imported Chinese art and ideas,
together with the powerful role of the Zen clerics as virtually the
only group sufficiently educated to oversee relations with the
continent, meant that early on, Zen's cultural role became as telling
as its spiritual place.

Perhaps the condition of Zen is best illustrated by noting that the
most famous priest of the era, Muso Soseki (1275-1351), was actually a
powerful political figure. This Zen prelate, who never visited China,
came to prominence when he served first an ill-fated emperor--
subsequently deposed--and later the Ashikaga warrior who deposed him.
Muso was instrumental in the Japanese government's establishment of
regular trade with the mainland. He was also responsible for a revision
of the _gozan _administrative system, establishing (in 1338) official
Zen temples in all sixty-six provinces of Japan and spreading the power
base of the faith. Although Muso is today honored as an important
Japanese master, he actually preferred a "syncretic" Zen intermingled
with esoteric rites and apparently understood very little of real Zen.
A prototype for many Zen leaders to come, he was a scholar,
aesthetician, and architect of some of the great cultural monuments in
Kyoto, personally designing several of the capital's finest temples and
landscape gardens.

Thus by the mid-fourteenth century Zen had become hardly more than an
umbrella for the import of Chinese technology, art,

and philosophy.8 The monks were, by Muso's own admission, more often
than not "shaven-headed laymen" who came to Zen to learn painting and
to write a stilted form of Chinese verse as part of a _gozan _literary
movement. The overall situation has been well summarized by Philip
Yampolsky: "The monks in temples were all poets and literary figures..
. . [T]he use of koans, particularly those derived from the [_Blue
Cliff Record_], became a literary and educational device rather than a
method for the practice of Zen."9 He further notes that ". . . with the
_gozan _system frozen in a bureaucratic mold, priests with
administrative talents gained in ascendency. In the headquarters
temples men interested in literary pursuits withdrew completely from
temple affairs and devoted themselves exclusively to literature. To be
sure, priests gave lectures and continued to write commentaries. But
the _gozan _priests seemed to concern themselves more and more with
trivialities. By the mid-fifteenth century Zen teaching had virtually
disappeared in the temples, and the priests devoted themselves mainly
to ceremonial and administrative duties."10 Authentic Zen practice had
become almost completely emasculated, overshadowed by the rise of a
Zen-inspired cultural movement far outstripping Chinese prototypes.

The political convolutions of fourteenth-century Japan, as well as the
organizational shenanigans of the official Rinzai Zen sect, need not
detain us further.11 We need only note that the _gozan _system, which so
effectively gave Zen an official presence throughout Japan, also meant
that the institution present was Zen in name only. Significantly,
however, a few major monasteries elected not to participate in the
official system. One of the most important was the Daitoku-ji in Kyoto,
which managed, by not becoming part of the establishment, to maintain
some authenticity in its practice. And out of the Daitoku-ji tradition
there came from time to time a few Zen monks who still understood what
Zen was supposed to be about, who understood it was more than painting,
gardens, poetry, and power. Perhaps the most celebrated of these
iconoclastic throwbacks to authentic Zen was the legendary Ikkyu Sojun
(1394-1481).

The master Ikkyu, a breath of fresh air in the stifling, hypocritical
world of institutionalized Zen, seems almost a reincarnation of the
early Ch'an masters of the T'ang.12 However, his penchant for drinking
and womanizing is more reminiscent of the Taoists than the Buddhists.
Historical information on Ikkyu and his writings is spread among
various documents of uneven reliability. The major source is a pious
chronicle allegedly compiled by his disciple Bokusai from firsthand
information. Whereas this document has the virtue of being
contemporaneous with his life, it has the drawback of being abbreviated
and selectively edited to omit unflattering facts. Then there is a
collection of tales from the Tokugawa era (1615-1868) which are heavily
embellished when not totally apocryphal. The picaresque character
created in the Tokugawa Tales led one commentator to liken Ikkyu to the
fabulous Sufi philosopher-vagabond Nasrudin, who also became a vehicle
to transmit folk wisdom.13 These tales seem to have developed around
Ikkyu simply because his devil-may-care attitude, combined with his
antischolarly pose, made him a perfect peg on which to hang all sorts
of didactic (not to mention Rabelaisian) anecdotes. Finally, there is a
vast body of his own poetry and prose, as well as a collection of
calligraphy now widely admired for its spontaneity and power.

Bokusai's chronicle identifies Ikkyu's mother as a lady-in-waiting at
the imperial palace of Emperor Gokomatsu, who chose from time to time
to "show her favor." When she was discovered to be with child, the
empress had her sent away, charging that she was sympathetic to a
competing political faction. Consequently, the master Ikkyu was born in
the house of a commoner on New Year's Day of the year 1394, the natural
son of an emperor and a daughter of the warrior class.

At age five his mother made him acolyte in a Zen monastery, a move some
suggest was for his physical safety, lest the shogun decide to do away
with this emperor's son as a potential threat. His schooling in this
_gozan _era was aristocratic and classical, founded on Chinese
literature and the Buddhist sutras. By age eleven he was studying the
Vimalakirti Sutra and by thirteen he was intensively reading and
writing Chinese poetry. One of his works, written at age fifteen and
entitled "Spring Finery," demonstrates a delicate sensibility
reminiscent of John Keats:



_How many passions cling to this wanderer's sleeves?

Multitudes of falling blossoms mark the passion of Heaven and Earth.

A perfumed breeze across my pillow; Am I asleep or awake?

Here and now melt into an indistinct Spring dream.14

_

The poet here has returned from a walk only to find the perfume of
flowers clinging to his clothes, confusing his sense of reality and
place. It recalls Keats' nightingale--"Fled is that music:--Do I

wake or sleep?" In this early poem we catch a glimpse of the sensualist
Ikkyu would one day become.

At age eighteen he became a novice to a reclusive monk of the Myoshin-
ji branch of Zen in Kyoto; but when his mentor died two years later he
wandered for a time disconsolate and suicide-prone. Then at twenty-two
he decided to try for an interview with Kaso Soton (1352-1428), the
Daitoku-ji-trained master known to be the sternest teacher in Japan. As
was traditional, the master at first shut him out and refused an
audience. Ikkyu resolved to wait outside until death, "taking the dew
for his roof and the grasses for his bed." He slept at night under an
empty boat and stood all day in front of Kaso's retreat. After Kaso
repeatedly failed to discourage him, even once dousing him with water,
the master relented and invited Ikkyu in for an interview. They were
made for each other and for many years thereafter Ikkyu and Kaso
"pursued deep matters tirelessly."

Ikkyu came to revere Kaso, probably one of the few authentic masters of
the age, and he stayed to serve this teacher for almost a decade, even
though life with Kaso was arduous. Since they lived near a major lake,
Ikkyu would each night meditate in a borrowed fisherman's boat until
dawn. When his purse "went flat," he would journey to the capital and
sell incense or cheap clothing to poor housewives--afterwards returning
to the monastery in the same straw sandals, hat, and cloak.15 After
three years Kaso gave him the Zen name Ikkyu, a recognition of his
progress.

Ikkyu's enlightenment occurred in his twenty-sixth year when, while
meditating in the boat, he was startled by the cry of a crow. He rushed
back at dawn and reported this to his master.

Kaso responded, "You have reached the stage of an _arhat _[one who has
overcome ego], but not that of a Master, novice."

Ikkyu replied, "Then I'm perfectly happy as an _arhat _and don't need
to be a Master."

Kaso responded, "Well, then, you really are a Master after all."16

Although it was customary for monks to receive a certificate from their
master attesting to their enlightenment, the matter of Ikkyu's
certificate is problematical. He himself refused to give out
certificates, and he is depicted in Bokusai's chronicle as periodically
taking out his own and requesting it be destroyed by his disciples--
after which it seemed to miraculously appear again several years later.
The quantity of invention and accretion attached to Ikkyu's
disappearing certificate has fostered speculation that he never, in
fact, actually received a seal.

In any case, he probably would have destroyed his own seal of
enlightenment in later years. His life grew progressively more
unconventional with time, just the opposite of most. Beginning as a
classicist in the finest Kyoto tradition, he had gone on to become a
spiritual recluse in the mountains under a harsh meditation master.
After all this training he then took the road, becoming a wandering
monk in the traditional T'ang mode.

Well, almost in the traditional mode. He seemed to wander into brothels
and wine shops almost as often as into Zen temples. He consorted with
high and low, merchant and commoner, male and female. Our record of
these explorations, both geographic and social, is in his writings,
particularly his poetry. He also harbored a vendetta against the
complacency and corruption of Japanese Zen and its masters,
particularly the new abbot of Daitoku-ji, an older man named Yoso who
had once been a fellow disciple of his beloved Kaso.

When Ikkyu was forty-six he was invited by Yoso to head a subtemple in
the Daitoku-ji compound. He accepted, much to the delight of his
admirers, who began bringing the temple donations in gratitude.
However, after only ten days Ikkyu concluded that Daitoku-ji too had
become more concerned with ceremony than with the preservation of Zen,
and he wrote a famous protest poem as a parting gesture--claiming he
could find more of Zen in the meat, drink, and sex traditionally
forbidden Buddhists.



_For ten days in this temple my mind's been in turmoil,

My feet are entangled in endless red tape.

If some day you get around to looking for me,

Try the fish-shop, the wine parlor, or the brothel.17

_

Ikkyu's attack on the commercialization of Zen was not without cause.
The scholar Jan Covell observes that in Ikkyu's time, "Rinzai Zen had
sunk to a low point and enlightenment was 'sold,' particularly by those
temples associated with the Shogunate. Zen temples also made money in
sake-brewing and through usury. In the mid-fifteenth century one Zen
temple, Shokoku-ji, furnished all the advisers to the Shogunate's
government and received most of the bribes. The imperial-sanctioned
temple of Daitoku-ji was only on the fringe of this corruption, but
Ikkyu felt he could not criticize it enough."18

Ironically, Ikkyu also attacked the writing of "Zen" poetry--in his
poems. He was really attacking the literary _gozan _movement, the
preoccupation of monks who forsook Zen to concentrate on producing
forgettable verse in formal Chinese. They put their poetry before,
indeed in place of, Zen practice. Ikkyu used his poetry (later
collected as the "Crazy Cloud Poems" or _Kyoun-shu_) as a means of
expressing his enlightenment, as well as his criticism of the
establishment. It also, as often as not, celebrated sensual over
spiritual pleasures.

Whereas the T'ang masters created illogic and struggled with intuitive
transmission, Ikkyu cheerfully gave in to the existential life of the
senses. In the introduction to one poem he told a parable explaining
his priorities.

_

Once upon a time there was an old woman who supported a retired hermit
for some twenty years. For a long time, she sent a young girl to serve
his food. One day she told the girl to throw her arms around the monk
and ask him how he felt. When the girl did so, the monk told her, "I am
like a withered tree propped up against a cold boulder after three
winters without warmth." The girl went back to the old woman and made
her report. "Twenty years wasted feeding a phony layman!" exclaimed the
woman. Then she ran him off and burnt his hut to the ground.



The grandmotherly old woman tried to give that rascal a ladder.

To provide the pure monk with a nice bride.

If tonight I were to be made such a proposition,

The withered willow would put forth new spring growth.19_



A particularly lyrical exploration of sensuality is found in a poem
entitled "A Woman's [Body] has the Fragrance of Narcissus," which
celebrates the essence of sexuality.



_One should gaze long at [the fairy] hill then ascend it.

Midnight on the Jade bed amid [Autumn] dreams

A flower opening beneath the thrust of the plum branch.

Rocking gently between the fairy's thighs.20_



Ikkyu's amours seem to have produced a number of natural progeny. In
fact, there is the legend that one of Ikkyu's most devoted followers, a
monk named Jotei, was in fact his illegitimate son. According to the
Tokugawa Tales, there was a once-rich fan

maker in Sakai whose business had declined to the point that he had to
sell his shop and stand on the streetcorner hawking fans. Then one day
Ikkyu came by carrying some fans decorated with his own famous
calligraphy and asked the man to take them on commission. Naturally
they all sold immediately and, by subsequent merchandising of Ikkyu's
works, the man's business eventually was restored. In gratitude he
granted Ikkyu his daughter, from which union sprang Ikkyu's natural
son, Jotei.

This story is questionable but it does illustrate the reputation Ikkyu
enjoyed, both as artist and lover. Furthermore, he wrote touching and
suspiciously fatherly poems to a little girl named Shoko.



_Watching this four-year-old girl sing and dance,

I feel the pull of ties that are hard to dismiss,

Forgetting my duties I slip into freedom.

Master Abbot, whose Zen is this_?21_

_

When Ikkyu was in his seventies, during the disastrous civil conflict
known as the Onin war, he had a love affair with a forty-year-old
temple attendant named Mori. On languid afternoons she would play the
Japanese _koto _or harp and he the wistful-sounding _shakuhachi_, a
long bamboo flute sometimes carried by monks as a weapon. This late-
life love affair occasioned a number of erotic poems, including one
that claims her restoration of his virility (called by the Chinese
euphemism "jade stalk") cheered his disciples.



_How is my hand like Mori's hand?

Self confidence is the vassal, Freedom the master.

When I am ill she cures the jade stalk

And brings joy back to my followers.22

_

Ikkyu also left a number of prose fables and sermons that portray a
more sober personality than does his often iconoclastic verse. One
classic work, written in 1457 and called "Skeletons," has become a Zen
classic. In the section given below he explores the Buddhist idea of
the Void and nothingness:



_Let me tell you something. Human birth is analogous to striking up a
fire--the father is flint, the mother is stone and the child is the
spark. Once the spark touches a lamp wick it continues to exist through
the "secondary support" of the fuel until that is exhausted. Then it
flickers out. The lovemaking of the parents is the equivalent of
striking the spark. Since the parents too have "no beginning," in the
end they, too, will flicker out. Everything grows out of empty space
from which all forms derive. If one lets go the forms then he reaches
what is called the "original ground." But since all sentient beings
come from nothingness we can use even the term "original ground" only
as a temporary tag.23

_

It seems unfortunate that Ikkyu's prose is not better known today.24 In
fact the best-known accounts of Ikkyu are the apocryphal tales that
attached to him during the Tokugawa era. A typical episode is the
following, entitled "Ikkyu Does Magic," in which the picaresque Zen-man
uses his natural resources to thwart the bluster of a haughty priest
from one of the scholarly aristocratic sects--just the thing guaranteed
to please the common man.

Once Ikkyu was taking the Yodo no Kawase ferry on his way to Sakai.
There was a _yamabushi _[mountain ascetic of Esoteric Buddhism] on
board who began to question him.



_"Hey, Your Reverence, what sect are you?"

"I belong to the Zen sect," replied Ikkyu.

"I don't suppose your sect has miracles the way our sect does?"

"No, actually we have lots of miracles. But if it's miracles, why don't
you show the sort of miracles that your people have?"

"Well," said the _yamabushi_, "By virtue of my magic powers I can pray
up Fudo [a fierce guardian deity of Buddhism] before your very eyes and
make him stand right there on the prow of the boat."

And, with the beads of his rosary the man began to invoke first Kongo
and then Seitaka [Esoteric Buddhist deities]. At this, all the
passengers began to look back and forth wondering what was going to
happen. Then, just as he had said, there on the prow of the boat, the
form of Fudo appeared surrounded by a halo of dancing flames.

Then the _yamabushi _made a ferocious face and told him, "You'd all
better offer him a prayer." This made the other passengers very uneasy--
all that is but Ikkyu, who was completely unruffled.

"Well," spat out the _yamabushi_, "How about you, Zen monk? How are you
going to deal with my miracle?"

"By producing a miracle of my own. From my very body I will cause water
to issue forth and extinguish the flames of your Fudo. You'd better
start your prayers up again." And Ikkyu began to pee mightily all over
the flames until at last the _yamabushi's _magic was counteracted and
the entire image melted away. Thereupon the passengers on the boat all
bowed to Ikkyu for his wonderful display.25_



Ironically, the real-life Ikkyu spent his twilight years restoring
Daitoku-ji after its destruction (along with the rest of Kyoto) from
the ten-year Onin war (1467-77), by taking over the temple and using
his contacts in the merchant community to raise funds. He had over a
hundred disciples at this time, a popularity that saddened him since
earlier (and, he thought, more deserving) masters had had many fewer
followers. Thus in the last decade of his life he finally exchanged his
straw sandals and reed hat for the robes of a prestigious abbot over a
major monastery. His own ambivalence on this he confessed in a poem:



_Fifty years a rustic wanderer,

Now mortified in purple robes.26

_

Ikkyu's contributions to Zen culture are also significant. He helped
inspire the secular Zen ritual known today as the tea ceremony, by
encouraging the man today remembered as its founder. He also supported
one of the best-known dramatists of the No theater and was himself a
master calligrapher, an art closely akin to painting in the Far East
and regarded by many as even more demanding.27 He even created a soybean
dish (_natto_) now a staple of Zen monastic cuisine.

But as his biographer James Sanford has pointed out, the real life of
this truly great Japanese master has all but eluded us. His poetry is
in classical Chinese and virtually unknown; his prose lies largely
unread; and the Tokugawa legend of Ikkyu is almost entirely apocryphal.
This last travesty has extended even to fictionalizing his role as a
child at the monastery; there is now a popular television cartoon
series in Japan about the irrepressible acolyte Ikkyu. Sanford
speculates that his attraction for contemporary Japanese is that, in
the legend of Ikkyu, "it is possible for the modern Japanese mind to
re-discover 'native' examples of, and justification for, individualism--
a term and concept whose full assimilation into modern Japanese culture
has for over fifty years been blocked by a legacy of residual Neo-
Confucian norms left over from [Japan's repressive past]."28

It does seem true that the Zen-man Ikkyu represents a safety valve in
Japanese society, both then and now. He brought the impulsive candor of
Zen to the world of affairs, demonstrating by example that after
enlightenment it is necessary to return to a world where mountains are
again mountains, rivers again rivers. And by rejecting official "Zen,"
Ikkyu may well have been the most Zenlike of all Japanese masters.




Chapter Eighteen

HAKUIN:

JAPANESE MASTER OF THE KOAN


The closing era of the Japanese middle ages, in the decades following
Ikkyu's death, is now known as the Century of the Country at War. Japan
became a land of quarreling fiefdoms, and Zen, too, drifted for want of
leadership and inspiration. The eventual reunification of the country
late in the sixteenth century was led by a brutal military strategist
named Oda Nobunaga (1534-82). As part of his takeover he obliterated
the militaristic Buddhist complex on Mt. Hiei by one day simply
slaughtering all its monks and burning the establishment to the ground,
thereby ending permanently the real influence of Buddhism in Japanese
politics. Nobunaga was succeeded by an even more accomplished
militarist, Toyotomi Hideyoshi (1536-98), who brought to the shogunate
a flair for diplomacy and cunning compromise. Hideyoshi solidified
Japan only to have yet another warlord, Tokugawa Ieyasu (1542-1616),
maneuver its rule into the hands of his own family--inaugurating the two
and a half centuries of totalitarian isolationism known today as the
Tokugawa era (1615-1868). He also moved the capital to the city whose
modern name is Tokyo, at last leaving historic Kyoto in repose.

Under the Tokugawa a new middle class of urban merchants and craftsmen
arose, and with it came a version of Zen for common people, with
masters who could touch the concerns of the working class. Among these
beloved masters must certainly be remembered the monk Takuan (1573-
1645) from Ikkyu's rebuilt Daitoku-ji temple, who introduced Zen
teachings to this new audience, and the wandering teacher Bankei (1622-
93), whose kindly, mystical interpretation of oneness through _zazen
_earned him wide fame. Overall, however, Rinzai Zen remained
spiritually dormant until the middle of the Tokugawa era, when there
appeared one of the most truly inspired Zen teachers of all time.

The master Hakuin (1686-1769) was born as Sugiyama Iwajiro in Hara, a
small village at the base of Mt. Fuji. He was the youngest of five
children in a family of modest means, an origin that may have helped
him understand the concerns of the poor. As he tells his story, he was
seven or eight when his mother took him to hear a priest from the
Salvationist Nichiren sect preach on the tormenting Buddhist hells. He
was terrified and secretly began day and night reciting the Lotus Sutra
(which claims to protect from the perils of fire or water those who
chant the proper incantation). The fear of hell, with its boiling
caldrons, so permeated his young mind that he even became leary of the
traditional Japanese bath, then often taken in a round tub fired from
the bottom with wood. He claimed this fear of the bath finally
convinced him to become a monk.



_One day when I was taking a bath with my mother, she asked that the
water be made hotter and had the maid add wood to the fire. Gradually
my skin began to prickle with the heat and the iron bath-cauldron began
to rumble. Suddenly I recalled the descriptions of the hells that I had
heard and I let out a cry of terror that resounded through the
neighborhood.

From this time on I determined to myself that I would leave home to
become a monk. To this my parents would not consent, yet I went
constantly to the temple to recite the sutras. . . .1_



But after several years of study and chanting, he was dismayed to find
he still felt pain (when he tested himself one day with a hot poker).
He resolved to intensify his devotion and at age fifteen he entered a
local Zen temple (against his parents' wishes) and was ordained as a
monk. Hakuin pursued his study of the Lotus Sutra, the primary
scripture venerated at this temple (an illustration of how far Japanese
Zen had traveled from its tradition of meditation and koans), but after
a year he concluded it was just another book, no different from the
Confucian classics. He therefore began to drift from temple to temple
until, at nineteen, he experienced another spiritual crisis. In a book
of religious biographies he came across the story of the Chinese monk
Yen-t'ou (828-87), who had been attacked and murdered by bandits,
causing him to emit screams heard a full three miles away. Hakuin was
plunged into depression.



_I wondered why such an enlightened monk was unable to escape the
swords of thieves. If such a thing could happen to a man who was like a
unicorn or phoenix among monks, a dragon in the sea of Buddhism, how
was I to escape the staves of the demons of hell after I died? What use
was there in studying Zen_?2



He thereupon took up his staff and set out as an itinerant seeker, only
to meet disappointment after disappointment--until finally he decided to
put his future in the hands of chance. One day as the abbot of a temple
was airing its library outside, Hakuin decided to select a book at
random and let it decide his fate. He picked a volume of biographies of
Chinese Ch'an worthies and opening it read of an eleventh-century Lin-
chi master who kept awake in meditation by boring into his own thigh
with a wood drill. The story galvanized Hakuin, and he vowed to pursue
Zen training until enlightenment was his.

Hakuin claims that at age twenty-four he had his first really moving
satori experience. He was in a temple in Niigata prefecture, meditating
on the "Mu" koan (Q: "Does a dog have Buddha-nature? A: "Mu!"), and so
intense was his concentration that he even forgot sleeping and eating.
Then one day . . .

_

Suddenly a great doubt manifested itself before me. It was as though I
were frozen solid in the midst of an ice sheet extending tens of
thousands of miles. A purity filled my breast and I could neither go
forward nor retreat. To all intents and purposes I was out of my mind
and the _Mu _alone remained. Although I sat in the Lecture Hall and
listened to the Master's lecture, it was as though I were hearing a
discussion from a distance outside the hall. At times it felt as though
I were floating through the air.

This state lasted for several days. Then I chanced to hear the sound of
the temple bell and I was suddenly transformed. It was as if a sheet of
ice had been smashed or a jade tower had fallen with a crash.3_



Elated with his transformation, he immediately trekked back to an
earlier master and presented a verse for approval. The master, however,
was not impressed.



_The Master, holding my verse up in his left hand, said to me: "This
verse is what you have learned from study. Now show me what your
intuition has to say," and he held out his right hand.

I replied: "If there were something intuitive that I could show you,
I'd vomit it out," and I made a gagging sound.

The Master said: "How do you understand Chao-chou's _Mu_?"

I replied: "What sort of place does _Mu _have that one can attach arms
and legs to it?"

The Master twisted my nose with his fingers and said: "Here's some
place to attach arms and legs." I was nonplussed and the Master gave a
hearty laugh.4

_

Again and again he tried to extract a seal from this master, but always
in vain. One of these fruitless exchanges even left him lying in a mud
puddle.



_One evening the Master sat cooling himself on the veranda. Again I
brought him a verse I had written. "Delusions and fancies," the Master
said. I shouted his words back at him in a loud voice, whereupon the
Master seized me and rained twenty or thirty blows with his fists on
me, and then pushed me off the veranda.

This was on the fourth day of the fifth month after a long spell of
rain. I lay stretched out in the mud as though dead, scarcely breathing
and almost unconscious. I could not move; meanwhile the Master sat on
the veranda roaring with laughter.5

_

He finally despaired of receiving the seal of enlightenment from this
teacher, although he did have further spiritual experiences under the
man's rigorous guidance--experiences Hakuin interpreted, perhaps
rightly, as _satori_. Feeling wanderlust he again took to the road,
everywhere experiencing increasingly deep _satori_. In southern Ise he
was enlightened when suddenly swamped in a downpour. Near Osaka he was
further enlightened one evening in a temple monks' hall by the sound of
falling snow. In Gifu prefecture he had an even deeper experience
during walking meditation in a monks' hall. He also had a mental and
physical collapse about this time, no doubt resulting from the strain
of his intensive asceticism. After his father's death in 1716, he
studied in Kyoto for a time, but the next year he returned to the
Shoin-ji temple near his original home at Hara. Weary of life at
thirty-two, he still was undecided about his future. Back at the temple
where he had started, he no longer had any idea of what to do. Then a
revelation appeared:



_One night in a dream my mother came and presented me with a purple
robe made of silk. When I lifted it, both sleeves seemed very heavy,
and on examining them I found an old mirror, five or six inches in
diameter, in each sleeve. The reflection from the mirror in the right
sleeve penetrated to my heart and vital organs. My own mind, mountains
and rivers, the great earth seemed serene and bottomless. . . . After
this, when I looked at all things, it was as though I were seeing my
own face. For the first time I understood the meaning of the saying,
"The [enlightened spirit] sees the Buddha-nature within his eye._"6_

_

With this dream he finally achieved full _satori_. He resolved that the
old ramshackle temple would be his final home. He had found
enlightenment there and there he would stay, his own master at last.

And sure enough, Hakuin never moved again. Instead, the people of
Japan--high and low--came to see him. His simple country temple became a
magnet for monks and laymen seeking real Zen. By force of his own
character, and most certainly without his conscious intention, he
gradually became the leading religious figure in Japan. By the end of
his life he had brought the koan practice back to a central place in
Zen and had effectively created modern Rinzai.

Hakuin was the legitimate heir of the Chinese koan master Ta-hui, and
the first teacher since to actually expand the philosophical dimensions
of Zen. It will be recalled that Ta-hui advocated "Introspecting-the-
Koan" meditation, called _k'an-hua _Ch'an in Chinese and Kanna Zen in
Japanese, which he put forth in opposition to the "Silent Illumination"
meditation of the Soto school. Hakuin himself claimed that he first
tried the quietistic approach of tranquil meditation (albeit on a
koan), but he was unable to clear his mind of all distractions.



_When I was young the content of my koan meditation was poor. I was
convinced that absolute tranquility of the source of the mind was the
Buddha Way. Thus I despised activity and was fond of quietude. I would
always seek out some dark and gloomy place and engage in dead sitting.
Trivial and mundane matters pressed against my chest and a fire mounted
in my heart. I was unable to enter wholeheartedly into the active
practice of Zen.7

_

Thus Hakuin concluded that merely following Ta-hui's injunction to
meditate on a koan was not the entire answer. He then decided the only
way that Zen could be linked meaningfully to daily life was if a
practitioner could actually meditate while going about daily affairs.

This idea was rather radical, although it probably would not have
unduly disturbed the T'ang masters. Hakuin was again extending both the
definition of enlightenment, as it intersects with the real world, and
the means of its realization. He was saying to meditate on a koan in
such a manner that you can continue your daily life but be oblivious to
its distractions. He invoked the Chinese masters to support the idea.



_The Zen Master Ta-hui has said that meditation in the midst of
activity is immeasurably superior to the quietistic approach. . . .
What is most worthy of respect is a pure koan meditation that neither
knows nor is conscious of the two aspects, the quiet and the active.
This is why it has been said that the true practicing monk walks but
does not know he is walking, sits but does not know he is sitting.8

_

Hakuin redefined meditation to include a physically active aspect as
well as merely a quiet, sitting aspect. And under this new definition
anyone, even laymen, could meditate at any time, in any place. Hakuin
did not exclude sitting in meditation; he tried to broaden the
definition to include the kind of thing he believed would really
produce meaningful enlightenment. In addition, meditation in action
takes away the excuse of most laymen for not practicing introspection--
and what is more, it brings respect from others.



_Do not say that worldly affairs and pressures of business leave you no
time to study Zen under a Master, and that the confusions of daily life
make it difficult for you to continue your meditation. Everyone must
realize that for the true practicing monk there are no worldly cares or
worries. Supposing a man accidentally drops two or three gold coins in
a crowded street swarming with people. Does he forget about the money
because all eyes are upon him? ... A person who concentrates solely on
meditation amid the press and worries of everyday life will be like the
man who has dropped the gold coins and devotes himself to seeking them.
Who will not rejoice in such a person_?9



Hakuin realized that meditating in the middle of distractions was
initially more difficult--with fewer short-term rewards--than sitting
quietly alone. However, if you want to make the heightened awareness of
Zen a part of your life, then you must meditate in daily life from the
very first. Just as you cannot learn to swim in the ocean by sitting in
a tub, you cannot relate your Zen to the world's pressures, stress, and
tensions if it is forever sheltered in silent, lonely isolation. If
this is difficult at first, persevere and look toward the ultimate
rewards.

_

Frequently you may feel that you are getting nowhere with practice in
the midst of activity, whereas the quietistic approach brings
unexpected results. Yet rest assured that those who use the quietistic
approach can never hope to enter into meditation in the midst of
activity. Should by chance a person who uses this approach enter into
the dusts and confusions of the world of activity, even the power of
ordinary understanding which he had seemingly attained will be entirely
lost. Drained of all vitality, he will be inferior to any mediocre,
talentless person. The most trivial matters will upset him, an
inordinate cowardice will afflict his mind, and he will frequently
behave in a mean and base manner. What can you call accomplished about
a man like this_?10



Quietistic meditation is easier, naturally, but a person who practices
it will turn out to be just as insecure and petty as someone not
enlightened at all. What is equally important, "leisure-time"
meditation that separates our spiritual life from our activities is
merely hiding from reality. You cannot come home from the job and
suddenly turn on a meditation experience. He cites the case of someone
who excuses himself to meditate, but who is then so harried and tense
it does no good.



_Even should there be such a thing as . . . reaching a state where the
great illumination is released by means of dead sitting and silent
illumination . . . people are so involved in the numerous duties of
their household affairs that they have scarcely a moment in which to
practice concentrated meditation. What they do then is to plead illness
and, neglecting their duties and casting aside responsibilities for
their family affairs, they shut themselves up in a room for several
days, lock the door, arrange several cushions in a pile, set up a stick
of incense, and proceed to sit. Yet, because they are exhausted by
ordinary worldly cares, they sit in meditation for one minute and fall
asleep for a hundred, and during the little bit of meditation that they
manage to accomplish, their minds are beset by countless delusions.11

_

But what is worse, these people then blame their careers, assuming they
need more isolation. But this is like the aspiring ocean swimmer in the
tub mistakenly desiring less water.



_[They] furrow their brows, draw together their eyebrows, and before
one knows it they are crying out: "Our official duties interfere with
our practice of the Way; our careers prevent our Zen meditation. It
would be better to resign from office, discard our seals, go to some
place beside the water or under the trees where all is peaceful and
quiet and no one is about, there in our own way to practice _dhyana
_contemplation, and escape from the endless cycle of suffering." How
mistaken these people are_!12



Having determined meditation in the midst of activity is the only
meaningful practice, he next addressed the question of how to go about
it. He explained that we can do it by making our activities into
meditation.



_What is this true meditation? It is to make everything: coughing,
swallowing, waving the arms, motion, stillness, words, action, the evil
and the good, prosperity and shame, gain and loss, right and wrong,
into one single koan.13

_

He gave an example of how to change the implements of daily living into
a Buddhist metaphor, in this case by a warrior's making his clothes,
sword, and saddle into a meditation hall of the mind.



_Make your skirt and upper garments into the seven- or nine- striped
monks' robe; make your two-edged sword into your resting board or desk.
Make your saddle your sitting cushion; make the mountains, rivers, and
great earth the sitting platform; make the whole universe your own
personal meditation cave. . . . Thrusting forth the courageous mind
derived from faith, combine it with the true practice of
introspection.14

_

If meditation bears no relationship to life, what good is it? It is
merely self-centered gratification. This he condemned, pointing out
that if everyone did nothing but meditate on his own inner concerns,
society at large would fall apart. And ultimately Zen would be blamed.
Furthermore, this inner-directed preoccupation with self-awareness is
bad Zen.

Hakuin similarly taught that a Zen which ignored society was hollow and
meaningless, and its monks of no use to anybody. He was particularly
stern with conventional Zen students, who were content in their own
enlightenment and ignored the needs of others. "Meditation in action"
for the monk meant the same as for a layman, with one significant
difference. Whereas the layman could bring meditation to his obligatory
life of affairs, the monk must bring the life of the world to his
meditation. Just to hide and meditate on your own original nature
produces inadequate enlightenment, while also shutting you off from any
chance to help other people, other sentient beings. The ancient masters
knew, said Hakuin, that a person truly enlightened could travel through
the world and not be distracted by the so-called five desires (wealth,
fame, food, sleep, and sex). The enlightened being is aware of, but not
enticed by, sensual gratification.



_The Third Patriarch [Seng-ts'an, d. 606] has said: "If one wishes to
gain true intimacy with enlightenment, one must not shun the objects of
the senses." He does not mean here that one is to delight in the
objects of the senses but, just as the wings of a waterfowl do not get
wet even when it enters the water, one must establish a mind that will
continue a true koan meditation without interruption, neither clinging
to nor rejecting the objects of the senses.15

_

But Hakuin asked something of a Zen novice even more difficult than
that asked by the Chinese masters of old--who merely demanded that a
monk reject the world, turn his back, and shut out its distractions. In
contrast, Hakuin insists that he meditate while out in the world,
actively immersing himself in its attractions. The older Ch'an masters
advised a monk to ignore the world, to treat it merely as a backdrop to
his preoccupation with inner awareness; Hakuin says to test your
meditation outside, since otherwise it serves for nothing. And today
Rinzai monks are expected to silently meditate during all activities,
including working in the yard of the monastery, harvesting vegetables,
or even walking through the town for their formal begging.

Hakuin not only redefined meditation, he also revitalized koan practice
among full-time Zen monks and ultimately brought on a renaissance of
Rinzai Zen itself. He formalized the idea of several stages of
enlightenment (based on his own experience of increasingly deep satori)
as well as a practice that supported this growth. But most of all
Hakuin was dismayed by what he considered to be the complete
misunderstanding of koan practice in Japan. Monks had memorized so many
anecdotes about the ancient Chinese masters that they thought they
could signify the resolution of a koan by some insincere theatrics.



_[0]f the monks who move about like clouds and water, eight or nine out
of ten will boast loudly that they have not the slightest doubt about
the essential meaning of any of the seventeen hundred koans that have
been handed down. . . . If you test them with one of these koans, some
will raise their fists, others will shout "_katsu_," but most of them
will strike the floor with their hands. If you press them just a little
bit, you will find that they have in no way seen into their own
natures, have no learning whatsoever, and are only illiterate, boorish,
sightless men.16

_

Hakuin breathed new life back into koan theory. For instance, he seems
the first Japanese master to take a psychological interest in the koan
and its workings. He believed a koan should engender a "great doubt" in
the mind of a novice, and through this great doubt lead him to the
first enlightenment or _kensho_.17 Initially he had advocated the "Mu"
koan for beginners, but late in life he came up with the famous "What
is the sound of one hand clapping?"18 As he described this koan in a
letter to a laywoman:



_What is the Sound of the Single Hand? When you clap together both
hands a sharp sound is heard; when you raise the one hand there is
neither sound nor smell. . . .

This is something that can by no means be heard with the ear. If
conceptions and discriminations are not mixed within it and it is quite
apart from seeing, hearing, perceiving, and knowing, and if, while
walking, standing, sitting, and reclining, you proceed
straightforwardly without interruption in the study of this koan, then
in the place where reason is exhausted and words are ended, you will
suddenly . . . break down the cave of ignorance.. . . At this time the
basis of mind, consciousness, and emotion is suddenly shattered.19

_

But this is not the end; rather it is the beginning. After a disciple
has penetrated this koan, he receives koans of increasing difficulty.
From Hakuin's own experience he knew that _satori _experiences could be
repeated and could become ever deeper and more meaningful. Although he
himself never chose to overtly systematize and categorize koans, his
heirs did not hesitate to do so, creating the structure that is modern
Rinzai Zen.

How did Zen finally emerge, after all the centuries and the
convolutions? As Hakuin's descendants taught Zen, a monk entering the
monastery was assigned a koan chosen by the master. He was expected to
meditate on this koan until his _kensho_, his first glimmer of satori,
which might require two to three years. After this a new phase of study
began. The monk was then expected to work his way through a program of
koans, requiring as much as a decade more, after which he might
meditate on his own, in seclusion, for a time longer.20

The master worked with monks individually (a practice reputedly left
over from the time when Chinese-speaking masters had to communicate in
writing) via a face-to-face interview (_senzen_) reminiscent of a
Marine Corps drill instructor harassing a recruit. The monk would bow
to the master, seat himself, and

submit his attempt at resolution of the koan. The master might either
acknowledge his insight, give him some oblique guidance, or simply
greet him with stony silence and ring for the next recruit--signifying
an unsatisfactory answer.

Hakuin made his disciples meditate; he made them struggle through koan
after koan; he made monastic discipline as rigorous as possible; and he
taught that it is not enough merely to be interested in yourself and
your own enlightenment. But he insisted that if you follow all his
teachings, if you meditate the right way and work through increasingly
difficult koans, you too can find the enlightenment he found, an
enlightenment that expressed itself in an enormous physical vitality.



_Even though I am past seventy now my vitality is ten times as great as
it was when I was thirty or forty. My mind and body are strong and I
never have the feeling that I absolutely must lie down to rest. Should
I want to I find no difficulty in refraining from sleep for two, three,
or even seven days, without suffering any decline in my mental powers.
I am surrounded by three- to five-hundred demanding students, and even
though I lecture on the scriptures or on the collections of the
Masters' sayings for thirty to fifty days in a row, it does not exhaust
me.21

_

Hakuin was a prolific writer and always aware of his audience. For his
lay followers, he wrote in simple Japanese and related his teachings to
the needs and limitations of secular life. For his monk disciples he
wrote in a more scholarly style. And finally, we have many long elegant
letters composed for various dignitaries of government and the
aristocracy.

He also was an artist of note, producing some of the most powerful Zen-
style paintings of any Japanese. Like his writings, these works are
vigorous, impulsive, and dynamic. He seems to have been an inspiration
for many later Zen artists, including Sengai (1750-1837) and the Zen
poet Ryokan (1758-1831).22

Hakuin died in his sleep at age eighty-three. During his life he had
reestablished Rinzai Zen in Japan in a form fully as rigorous as ever
practiced in the monasteries of T'ang and Sung China, and he had
simultaneously discovered a way this Zen could be made accessible to
laymen, through meditation in activity. Whereas previous Japanese
teachers had let koan practice atrophy in order to attract a greater
number of followers, Hakuin simultaneously made Zen both more authentic
and more popular. His genius thereby saved traditional Zen in its
classical form, while at last making it accessible and meaningful in
modern life.




Chapter Nineteen

REFLECTIONS


What is the resilience of Zen that has allowed it to survive and
flourish over all the centuries, even though frequently at odds
philosophically with its milieu? And why have the insights of obscure
rural teachers from the Chinese and Japanese Middle Ages remained
pertinent to much of modern life in the West? On the other hand, why
has there been a consistent criticism of Zen (from early China to the
present day) condemning it as a retreat from reality--or worse, a
preoccupation with self amidst a world that calls for social
conscience?

These questions are complex, but they should be acknowledged in any
inquiry into Zen thought. They are also matters of opinion: those
wishing to see Zen as unwholesome are fixed in their critical views,
just as those committed to Zen practice are unshakably steadfast. What
follows is also opinion, even though an attempt has been made to
maintain balance.



SOCIAL CONSCIENCE IN ZEN



A distinguished modern Zen master was once asked if Zen followers
looked only inward, with no concern for others. He replied that in Zen
the distinction between oneself and the world was the first thing to be
dissolved. Consequently, mere self-love is impossible; it resolves
naturally into a love of all things. Stated in this way, Zen teachings
become, in a twinkling, a profound moral philosophy. Where there is no
distinction between the universe and ourselves, the very concept of the
ego is inappropriate. We cannot think of ourselves without
simultaneously thinking of others. Zen is not, therefore, an obsession
with the self, but rather an obsession with the universe, with all
things--from nature to the social betterment of all. Although Zen
initially forces a novice to focus on his own mind, this is only to
enable him or her to attain the insight to merge with all things, great
and small. True Zen introspection eventually must lead to the
dissolution of the self. When this occurs, we no longer need the
chiding of a Golden Rule.

It is fair to question whether this particular view of social
conscience, which might be described as more "passive" than "active,"
adequately refutes the charge of "me-ism" in Zen. But perhaps less is
sometimes more in the long run. There is no great history of Zen
charity, but then there have been few if any bloody Zen Crusades and
little of the religious persecution so common to Western moral systems.
Perhaps the humanism in Zen takes a gentler, less flamboyant form. In
the scales of harm and help it seems as noble as any of the world's
other spiritual practices.



ZEN AND CREATIVITY



Zen gained from Taoism the insight that total reliance on logical
thought stifles the human mind. Logic, they found, is best suited to
analyzing and categorizing--functions today increasingly delegated to
the computer. Whereas the logical mode of thought can only manipulate
the world view of given paradigm, intuition can inspire genuine
creativity, since it is not shackled by the nagging analytical mind,
which often serves only to intimidate imaginative thought. Zen
struggled relentlessly to deflate the pomposity of man's rationality,
thereby releasing the potential of intuition. Although much research
has arisen in recent times to pursue the same effect--from
"brainstorming" to drugs--Zen challenged the problem many centuries ago,
and its powerful tools of meditation and the koans still taunt our
modern shortcuts.



ZEN AND MIND RESEARCH



That Zen ideas should find a place in psychoanalysis is not surprising.
Meditation has long been used to still the distraught mind. Japanese
researchers have studied the effects of meditation on brain activity
for many years, and now similar studies are also underway in the West.
The connection between Zen "enlightenment" and a heightened state of
"consciousness" has been examined by psychologists as diverse as Erich
Fromm and Robert Ornstein. But perhaps most significantly, our recent
research in the hemispheric specialization of the brain--which suggests
our left hemisphere is the seat of language and rationality while the
right dominates intuition and creativity-- appears to validate
centuries-old Zen insights into the dichotomy of thought. Zen
"research" on the mind's complementary modes may well light the path to
a fuller understanding of the diverse powers of the human mind.



ZEN AND THE ARTS



At times the ancient Chinese and Japanese art forms influenced by Zen
seem actually to anticipate many of the aesthetic principles we now
call "modern." Sixteenth-century Zen ceramics could easily pass as
creations of a contemporary potter, and ancient Chinese and Japanese
inks and calligraphies recall the modern monochrome avant-garde. Zen
stone gardens at times seem pure abstract expressionism, and the Zen-
influenced landscape gardens of Japan can manipulate our perception
using tricks only recently understood in the West. Japanese haiku
poetry and No drama, created under Zen influence, anticipate our modern
distrust of language; and contemporary architecture often echoes
traditional Japanese design--with its preference for clean lines, open
spaces, emphasis on natural materials, simplicity, and the integration
of house and garden.

Aesthetic ideals emerging from Zen art focus heavily on naturalness, on
the emphasis of man's relation to nature. The Zen artists, as do many
moderns, liked a sense of the materials and process of creation to come
through in a work. But there is a subtle difference. The Zen artists
frequently included in their works devices to ensure that the message
reached the viewer. For example, Zen ceramics are always intended to
force us to experience them directly and without analysis. The trick
was to make the surface seem curiously imperfect, almost as though the
artist were careless in the application of a finish, leaving it uneven
and rough. At times the glaze seems still in the process of flowing
over a piece, uneven and marred by ashes and lumps. There is no sense
of "prettiness": instead they feel old and marred by long use. But the
artist consciously is forcing us to experience the piece for itself,
not as just another item in the category of bowl. We are led into the
process of creation, and our awareness of the piece is heightened--just
as an unfinished painting beckons us to pick up a brush, This device of
drawing us into involvement, common to Zen arts from haiku to ink
painting, is one of the great insights of Zen creativity, and it is
something we in the West are only now learning to use effectively.



ZEN AND PERCEPTION



One of the major insights of Zen is that the world should be perceived
directly, not as an array of embodied names. As noted, the Zen arts
reinforce this attitude by deliberately thwarting verbal or analytical
appreciation. We are forced to approach them with our logical faculties
in abeyance. This insistence on direct perception is one of the
greatest gifts of Zen. No other major system of thought champions this
insight so clearly and forthrightly. Zen would have our perception of
the world, indeed our very thoughts, be nonverbal. By experiencing
nature directly, and by thinking in pure ideas rather than with
"internalized speech," we can immeasurably enrich our existence. The
dawn, the flower, the breeze are now experienced more exquisitely--in
their full reality. Zen worked hard to debunk the mysterious power we
mistakenly ascribe to names and concepts, since the Zen masters knew
these serve only to separate us from life. Shutting off the constant
babble in our head is difficult, but the richness of experience and
imagery that emerges is astounding. It is as though a screen between us
and our surroundings has suddenly dropped away, putting us in touch
with the universe.



THE ZEN LIFE



The heart of Zen is practice, "sitting," physical discipline. For those
wishing to experience Zen rather than merely speculate about it, there
is no other way. Koans can be studied, but without the guidance of
practice under a master, they are hardly more than an intellectual
exercise. Only in formal meditation can there be the real beginning of
understanding. Zen philosophy, and all that can be transmitted in
words, is an abomination to those who really understand. There's no
escaping the Taoist adage, "Those who speak do not know, those who know
do not speak." Words can point the way, but the path must be traveled
in silence.

                                    *    *    *

NOTES



PREFACE TO ZEN



1.	Chang Chung-yuan, Tao: A New Way of Thinking (New York: Perennial
Library, 1977), p. 4.

2.	Ibid., p. 6.

3.	Ibid., p. 50.

4.	Ibid., p. 145.

5.	Ibid., p. 153.

6.	Quoted in Max Kaltenmark, Lao Tzu and Taoism (Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press, 1969), p. 20.

7.	Burton Watson, Introduction to The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1968), p. 7.

8.	Arthur Waley, Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China (Garden City, N.
Y.: Doubleday, undated reprint of 1939 edition), p. 15.

9.	Gai-fu Feng and Jane English, trans., Chuang Tsu (New York: Vintage
Books, 1974), p. 55.

10.	Ibid. 309

11.	Wm. Theodore de Bary, Wing-tsit Chan, and Burton Watson, Sources of
Chinese Tradition, Vol. 1 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1960),
p. 240.

12.	Ibid., pp. 243-244.

13.	Quoted by Fung Yu-lan, A Short History of Chinese Philosophy (New
York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., 1948), p. 230.

14.	Quoted in ibid., p. 235.

15.	D. Howard Smith, Chinese Religions (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1968), p. 106.

16.	Frederick J. Streng, Emptiness: A Study in Religious Meaning
(Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1967), pp. 159-60.

17.	Arthur F. Wright, Buddhism in Chinese History (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1959), p. 63.

18.	Walter Liebenthal, Chao Lun: The Treatises of Seng-chao (Hong Kong:
hong Kong University Press, 1968), p. 62.

242 / NOTES 10, 11)1(1,, pp. fifi f)7.

20.	Helnrich Dumoulin, A History of Zen Badtihism (Boston: Beacon Press,
1000), |i. 60,

21.	Quoted by Fung Yu Ian, Short History of (Chinese Philosophy, p, 252,

1.	BODHIDHARMA: FIRST PATRIARCH OF ZEN
2.


1.	Translated by D. T. Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series
(New York: Grove Press, 1961), p. 1 79. This is a translation of a
passage from the Records of the Transmission of the Lamp compiled in
1004 by Tao-yuan. A simpler version of the story can be found in the
original source document, the Further Biographies of Eminent Priests
(Hsu kao-seng chuan), prepared around the year 645 by Tao hsuan, and
translated In Cat's Yawn, published by the First Zen Institute of
America, New York, 194 7. The story is repeated also in the Ch'uan fg-
pao chi, prepared ca, 700 10 by Tu Fei,

2.	The fact that this episode does not appear in the earliest story of
Bodhidharma's life makes one skeptical about its authenticity. It is
known that Emperor Wu welcomed another famous Indian missionary,
Paramartha, who landed in Canton in 540 (Smith, Chinese Religions, p.
120). This monk espoused the Idealistic school of Buddhism, which was
at odds with the school of Ch'an. It seems possible that the story of
Bodhidharma's meeting was constructed to counter the prestige that Wu's
Interest undoubtedly gave the Idealistic school.

3.	The Buddhist concept of Merit might be likened to a spiritual
savings account, Merit accrues on the record of one's good deeds and
provides several forms of reward in this world and the next, The Idea
that good deeds do not engender Merit seems to have been pioneered by
Tao-sheng (ca, 360 434), the Chinese originator of the idea of Sudden
Enlightenment, "Emptiness" is, of course, the teaching of the Middle
Path of Nagarjuna, The implication that Emperor Wu was startled by this
concept is worth a raised eyebrow, Sunyata or "emptiness" was hardly
unknown In the Buddhist schools of the time.

This whole story is suspect, being first found In the Ch'uan fa-pao chi
of Tu Fei (ca. 700 10), but not in the earlier biography, the Hsu kao-
seng chuan (Further Biographies of Eminent Priests I, compiled by Tao-
hsuan around 645, There is, incidentally, another competing story of a
monk named Bodhidharma in China, He was described as a Persian and was
reported in Yang I Isuan-chih's Buddhist Monasteries In Loyang (Lo-yang
Ch'leh-lan-chi), written In 547, to have been associated with the Yung-
ning monastery, which would have been possible only between the years
516 and 528. This Persian figure apparently claimed to be 150 years in
age, and he most probably came to China via the trading port of Canton
used by Persians. This fact has been used by some to cast doubt on the
more accepted story of a South Indian monk named Bodhidharma arriving
at Canton between 520 and 525. Perhaps a legendary Persian was
transformed into a legendary Indian by the _Dhyana_ school, or perhaps
it was a different individual.

4.	This is the conclusion of the leading Zen scholar today, Philip
Yampolsky, in The Platform Sutra of The Sixth Patriarch (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1967), p. 10.

5.	English translations of various versions of this essay may be found
In Cat's Yawn by the First Zen Institute of America; In I). T, Suzuki,
Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series; and in John C. H. Wu, The Golden
Age of Zen (Taipei: United Publishing Center, 1907). Concerning this
essay, Philip Yampolsky (private communication) has noted, "Whereas a
version exists In The Transmission of the Lamp, various texts have been
found in the Tun-huang documents and elsewhere, so that a more complete
version is available. It is considered authentic,"

6. Suzuki, Essays in Ann Buddhism, First Series, p. 180.

7.	Ibid., pp. 180-81.

8.	This point is enlarged considerably in an essay attributed to
Bodhidharma but most likely apocryphal, which Is translated In D. T,
Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, Third Series (New York: Samuel Weiser,
Inc., 1971) pp. 24-30,

9.	Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, p. 181.

10.	Suzuki, Ibid.

11.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, pp. 40 50.

12.	Ibid., p. 50.

13.	Ibid., p. 50.

14.	Suzuki translates the passage from the Vajrasamadhi Sutra in
Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, pp. 183-84. Portions are as
follows: "Said the Buddha: The two entrances are 'Entrance by Reason'
and 'Entrance by Conduct,' 'Entrance by Reason' means to have a deep
faith in that all sentient beings are identical in essence with the
true nature which is neither unity nor multiplicity; only it is
beclouded by external objects, The nature in itself neither departs nor
comes. When a man in singleness of thought abides in chueh-kuan, he
will clearly see into the Buddha-nature, of which we cannot say whether
it exists or exists not, and in which there is neither selfhood nor
otherness. . . ." Suzuki translates the term chueh-kuan as being
"awakened" or "enlightened,"

15.	Hu Shih, "The Development of Zen Buddhism in China," Chinese Social
and Political Science Review, 15,4 (January 1932), p. 483, Philip
Yampolsky (private communication) has questioned this generalization of
Hu Shih, noting, "There were few practicing 'Zen' Buddhists, but other
Chinese Buddhists probably meditated seriously, although not
exclusively."

16.	Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, p, 186.

17.	See Hu Shih, "Development of Zen Buddhism in China," p. 482: "But
the whole system of _dhyana_ practice, even in its concise form as
presented in the translated manuals, was not fully understood by the
Chinese Buddhists. . . . The best proof of this is the following
quotation from Hui-chiao, the scholarly historian of Buddhism and
author of the first series of Buddhist Biographies which was finished
in 519. In his general summary of the biographies of practitioners of
_dhyana_, Hui-chiao said: 'But the apparent utility of _dhyana_ lies in
the attainment of magic powers. . .'.'"

18.	Suzuki (Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, p. 191), points out,
"Nagarjuna says in his famous commentary on the Prajnaparamita sutra,
'Moral conduct is the skin, meditation is the flesh, the higher
understanding is the bone, and the mind subtle and good is the marrow.'
" Since this commentary must have been common knowledge, the interest
in Bodhidharma's alleged exchange with his disciples lies in his
recasting of a common coinage.

19.	From the Ch'uan fa-pao chi (ca. 700-10) of Tu Fei, as described by
Yampolsky, The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriach. This story happens
to parallel closely the posthumous capers ascribed to certain famous
religious Taoists of the age.

20.	Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, p. 72.

21.	Hu Shih, "Development of Zen Buddhism in China," p. 52.
22.


2. HUI-K'O: SECOND PATRIARCH OF ZEN



1.	Translated in Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, p.190.

2.	He is well documented in Tao-hsuan's Hsu kao-seng chuan or Further
Biographies of Eminent Priests (A.D. 645). Selected portions of this
biography are related in Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth
Patriarch; and Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, which form
the basis for much of the historical information reported here. Other
useful sources are Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism; and Chou Hsiang-
kuang, _Dhyana_ Buddhism in China (Allahabad, India: Indo-Chinese
Literature Publications, 1960).

3.	The Further Biographies of Eminent Priests by Tao-hsuan declares that
bandits were responsible for severing his arm, but the 710 Chuan fa-pao
chi of Tu Fei piously refutes this version, presumably since efforts
were starting to get underway to construct a Zen lineage, and dramatic
episodes of interaction were essential. This later work was also the
first to report that Bodhidharma was poisoned and then later seen
walking back to India.

4.	As reported by Dumoulin (History of Zen Buddhism, p. 73), this story,
which is typical of later Ch'an teaching methods, first appears some
five hundred years after Bodhidharma's death, in the Ching-te ch'uan-
teng-lu (1004).

5.	Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, p. 74.

6.	D. T. Suzuki, Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1930) pp. 4-7.

7.	Ibid, p. 59.

8.	D. T. Suzuki, Manual of Zen Buddhism (New York: Grove Press, 1960),
pp. 50-51.

9.	D. T. Suzuki, The Lankavatara Sutra (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1932), p. 79.

10.	Ibid., p. 81.

11.	Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, p. 193.

12.	Ibid., p. 194.

13.	Ibid., pp. 194-95.

14.	Chou Hsiang-kuang, _Dhyana_ Buddhism in China, p. 24.







3. SENG-TS'AN, TAO-HSIN, FA-JUNG, AND HUNG-JEN: FOUR EARLY MASTERS



1.	As usual, the biography can be traced in three sources. The earliest,
the Hsu kao-seng chuan of Tao-hsuan (645), apparently does not mention
Seng-ts'an, or if it does so it gives him a different name. However, in
the Ch'uan fa-pao chi of Tu Fei (710) he receives a perfunctory
biography. The more embellished tale, giving exchanges and a copy of
his supposed poem, is to be found in the later work, the Ching-te
ch'uan-teng-lu (1004).

Dumoulin (History of Zen Buddhism) provides a discussion of the
earliest historical notices of Seng-ts'an. The 710 version of the
history is translated in Cat's Yawn (p. 14) and the 1004 version is
repeated in Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series.

2.	Suzuki, who recounts this last story in Essays in Zen Buddhism, First
Series (p. 195), points out identical insights in the third chapter of
the Vimalakirti Sutra.

3.	Reportedly Hui-k'o also transmitted his copy of the Lankavatara to
Seng-ts'an, declaring that after only four more generations the sutra
would cease to have any significance (Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch, p. 11). As things turned out, this was more or less
what happened, as the Lankavatara was replaced in the Ch'an schools by
the more easily understood Diamond Sutra. The Lankavatara school was
destined to be short-lived and to provide nothing more than a sacred
relic for the dynamic Ch'an teachers who would follow.

4.	Suzuki points out (Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, p. 196) that
the Chinese word _hsin _can mean mind, heart, soul, and spirit,
beingall or any at a given time. He provides a full translation of the
poem, as does R. H. Blyth in Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 1 (Tokyo:
Hokuseido Press, 1960).

5.	Blyth, Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 1, p. 100.

6.	Ibid., p. 101.

7.	Ibid., p. 103.

8.	A detailed discussion of this era may be found in Woodbridge Bingham,
The Founding of the T'ang Dynasty (New York: Octagon Books, 1970).

9.	His biography may be found in C. P. Fitzgerald, Son of Heaven (New
York: AMS Press Inc., 1971), reprint of 1933 Cambridge University Press
edition.

10.	See Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, p. 78.

11.	This story is translated in Cat's Yawn, p. 18.

12.	Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, pp. 78-79.

13.	Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, Third Series, p. 28.

14.	A lucid account of Fa-jung may be found in Chang Chung-yuan, trans.,
Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism (New York: Random House, 1969;
paperback edition, Vintage, 1971), which is a beautiful translation of
portions of The Transmission of the Lamp (Ching-te ch'uan-teng-lu), the
text from 1004. This text was a major source for the abbreviated
biography given here.

15.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 19.

16.	Ibid., p. 5.

17.	A version of this exchange is given in Suzuki, Essays in Zen
Buddhism, First Series, p. 202.

18.	See Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, p. 16.



4. SHEN-HSIU AND SHEN-HUI: GRADUAL" AND "SUDDEN" MASTERS



1.	For an excellent biography see C. P. Fitzgerald, The Empress Wu
(Vancouver: University of British Columbia, 1968). Curiously, nowhere
in this biography is there mention of her lionizing of the Ch'an master
Shen-hsiu, something that figures largely in all Ch'an histories.

2.	A biography of Shen-hsiu from Ch'an sources may be found in
Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. Further details may
be found in Hu Shih, "Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in China: Its History and
Method," Philosophy East and West, 3, 1 (April 1953), pp. 3-24. See
also Kenneth Ch'en, Buddhism in China (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1964).

3.	Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, First Series, p. 214.

4.	Two books that give something of the intellectual atmosphere of T'ang
China are biographies of its two leading poets: Arthur Waley, The
Poetry and Career of Li Po (London: George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., 1950);
and A. R. Davis, Tu Fu (New York: Twayne Publishers, Inc., 1971).

5.	For a detailed biography of Shen-hui, see Yampolsky, Platform Sutra
of the Sixth Patriarch.

6.	The scholar who brought the significance of Shen-hui to the attention
of the world was Hu Shih, whose landmark English-language papers on Zen
are "Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in China: Its History and Method" and "The
Development of Zen Buddhism in China." These works draw upon the
manuscripts discovered this century in the Tun-huang caves in the
mountains of far northwest China. These manuscripts clarified many of
the mysteries surrounding the early history of Ch'an, enabling scholars
for the first time to distinguish between real and manufactured
history--since some of the works were written before Ch'an historians
began to embroider upon the known facts. A brief but useful account of
the finding of these caves and the subsequent removal of many of the
manuscripts to the British Museum in London and the Bibliotheque
Nationale in Paris may be found in Cat's Yawn. The best discussion of
the significance of these finds and of Hu Shih's lifelong interpretive
work is provided by Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch.

Regarding the circumstances of this sermon, Walter Liebenthal ("The
Sermon of Shen-hui," Asia Major, N.S. 3, 2 [1952], p. 134) says, "There
are only two opportunities to deliver addresses in the ritual of
Buddhist monasteries, one during the uposatha ceremony held monthly
when the pratimoksa rules are read to the members of the community and
they are admonished to confess their sins, one during the initiation
ceremony held once or twice a year. For the purpose of initiation
special platforms are raised, one for monks and one for nuns, inside
the compounds of some especially selected monasteries."

7.	Quoted in Hilda Hookham, A Short History of China (New York: St.
Martin's Press, Inc., 1972; paperback edition, New York: New American
Library, 1972), p. 175.

8.	Discussions of the adventures of An Lu-shan may be found in most
general surveys of Chinese history, including Hookham, Short History of
China, Wolfram Eberhard, A History of China (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1960); Kenneth Scott Latourette, The Chinese: Their
History and Culture (New York: Macmillan, 1962); John A. Harrison, The
Chinese Empire (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1972); and
Rene Grousset, The Rise and Splendour of the Chinese Empire (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1962).

9.	This is the interpretation of Hu Shih. For translations of the major
works of Shen-hui, see Walter Liebenthal, "The Sermon of Shen-hui," pp.
132-55; and Wm. Theodore de Bary, ed., Sources of Chinese Tradition,
Vol. 1., pp. 356-60. Also see Edward Conze, ed., Buddhist Texts Through
the Ages (Oxford: Bruno Cassirer, 1954), excerpted in Wade Baskin, ed.,
Classics in Chinese Philosophy (Totowa, N. J.: Littlefield, Adams,
1974). A short translation is also provided in Suzuki, Essays in Zen
Buddhism, Third Series, pp. 37 ff. The fullest translation of the works
of Shen-hui found in the Tun-huang caves is in Jacques Gernet,
Entret/ens du Maitre de _Dhyana_ Chen-houei du Ho-tso (Hanoi:
Publications de l'ecole frangaise d'Extreme-Orient, Vol. 31, 1949). An
English translation of a portion of this text may be found in Wing-tsit
Chan, A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1963).

10.	Liebenthal, "Sermon of Shen-hui," pp. 136 ff.

11.	Ibid., p. 144.

12.	Ibid., pp. 146, 147, 149.

13.	See Hu Shih, "Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in China."

14.	Hu Shih, "Development of Zen Buddhism in China," p. 493.

15.	Hu Shih, "Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in China," p. 11.

16.	The differences between the Northern and Southern schools of Ch'an
during the eighth century are explored in the works of Hu Shih, Philip
Yampolsky, and Walter Liebenthal noted elsewhere in these notes. Other
general surveys of Chinese religion and culture that have useful
analyses of the question include Wing-tsit Chan, Source Book in Chinese
Philosophy, pp. 425 ff., D. Howard Smith, Chinese Religions; and Fung
Yu-lan, Short History of Chinese Philosophy.

17.	A study of the last distinguished member of Shen-hui's school, the
scholar Tsung-mi (780-841), may be found in Jeffrey Broughton, "Kuei-
feng Tsung-mi: The Convergence of Ch'an and the Teachings" (Ph. D.
dissertation, Columbia University, 1975).

18.	    D. T. Suzuki, "Zen: A Reply to Hu Shih," Philosophy East and
West, 3, 1 (April 1953), pp. 25-46.
19.




5. HUI-NENG: THE SIXTH PATRIARCH AND FATHER OF MODERN ZEN



1.	A number of English translations of the Platform Sutra are in
existence. Among the most authoritative must certainly be counted
Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch; and Wing-tsit Chan,
The Platform Scripture (New York: St. John's University Press, 1963). A
widely circulated translation is in A. F. Price and Wong Mou-Lam, The
Diamond Sutra and the Sutra of Hui-Neng (Berkeley, Calif.: Shambhala,
1969). Another well-known version is found in Charles Luk, Ch'an and
Zen Teaching: Third Series (New York: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1971). Two
lesser-known translations are Paul F. Fung and George D. Fung, The
Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch on the Pristine Orthodox Dharma (San
Francisco: Buddha's Universal Church, 1964); and Hsuan Hua, The Sixth
Patriarch's Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra (San Francisco: Buddhist Text
Translation Society, 1971).

2.	From the Diamond Sutra, contained in Dwight Goddard, ed., A Buddhist
Bible (Boston: Beacon Press, 1970), p. 102. Another version may be
found in Price and Wong, Diamond Sutra and the Sutra of Hui-neng. An
extended commentary may be found in Charles Luk,

Ch'an and Zen Teaching, First Series, pp. 149-208. Later Ch'anists have
maintained that Hung-jen taught both the Diamond Sutra and the
Lankavatara Sutra, the respective scriptures of what came to be called
Southern and Northern schools of Ch'an. However, most scholars today
believe that his major emphasis was on the Lankavatara Sutra, not the
Diamond Sutra as the legend of Hui-neng would have.

3.	From Price and Wong, Diamond Sutra and the Sutra of Hui-neng, p. 15.

4.	Ibid., p. 18.

5.	The earliest version of the Platform Sutra is that found in the Tun-
huang caves and translated by Yampolsky and Chan. This manuscript
Yampolsky dates from the middle of the ninth century. A much later
version, dated 1153, was found in a temple in Kyoto, Japan, in 1934.
This is said to be a copy of a version dating from 967. The standard
version up until this century was a much longer work which dates from
1291. As a general rule of thumb with the early Ch'an writings, the
shorter the work, the better the chance it is early and authentic. For
this reason, the shorter Tun-huang works are now believed to be the
most authoritative and best account of the thoughts of the Sixth
Patriarch.

6.	Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, p. 69.

7.	The most obvious problem with attribution of the Platform Sutra to
Hui-neng is that many of the sections of the sermon appear almost
verbatim in The Sermon of Shen-hui, indicating that either one was a
copy of the other or they had a common source (which could have been
the simple setting down of a verbal tradition). It has been pointed out
that Shen-hui, who praises Hui-neng to the skies in his sermon, never
claims to be quoting the master. Instead, he pronounces as his own a
number of passages that one day would be found in the work attributed
to Hui-neng. The scholar Hu Shih has drawn the most obvious conclusion
and has declared that Shen-hui and his school more or less created the
legend of Hui-neng--lock, stock, and sutra. Others refuse to go this
far, preferring instead to conclude that Shen-hui and Hui-neng are
merely two representatives of the same school.

8.	Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, p. 157.

9.	Yampolsky, Ibid., p. 140

10.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 82.

11.	See especially "Intimations of Immortality":

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us,
our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, and cometh from afar:
Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing
clouds of glory do we come . . .

12.	Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, pp. 141-42.

13.	Ibid., p. 117.

14.	From ibid., pp. 138-39. For interpretive comment see D. T. Suzuki,
The Zen Doctrine of No Mind (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1972).

15.	Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, pp. 116-17.
16.


6. MA-TSU: ORIGINATOR OF "SHOCK" ENLIGHTENMENT



1.	See Broughton, Kuei-feng Tsung-mi: The Convergence of Ch'an and the
Teachings. It was also around this time that the idea of twenty-eight
Indian Patriarchs of Zen, culminating in Bodhidharma, was finally
ironed out and made part of the Zen tradition.

2.	See Arthur Waley, The Life and Times of Po Chu-i (London: Allen &
Unwin, 1949).

3.	Hu Shih, "Development of Zen Buddhism in China," p. 497.

4.	Hu-Shin, "Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in China," p. 18.

5.	For some of Huai-jang's attributed teachings, see Charles Luk, The
Transmission of the Mind Outside the Teaching (New York: Grove Press,
1975), pp. 32-37. The reliability of this text should be questioned,
however, if we accept Philip Yampolsky's essay in Platform Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch, p. 53: "Huai-jang (677-744) . . . is known as a
disciple of Hui-neng. Information about him is based on sources
composed much later than his death; no mention is made of him in any
eighth-century work. . . ."

6.	Jeffrey Broughton ("Kuei-feng Tsung-mi," p. 27) points out that Ma-
tsu's master's technique for achieving "no-mind" was to chant a phrase
until running out of breath, at which time the activities of the mind
would seem to terminate--a reaction the more skeptical might call
physiological. Breath control and breath exercises, it will be
recalled, have always figured largely in Indian meditative practices.

7.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 148. The
discussion of Ma-tsu in this volume supplied valuable background for
the analysis provided here.

8.	Hu Shih, "Development of Zen Buddhism in China," p. 498.

9.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 130.

10.	Ibid., p. 149.

11.	Ibid.

12.	Ibid.

13.	There are many translations of the Mumonkan. One of the more recent
and scholarly is by Zenkai Shibayama, Zen Comments on the Mumonkan (New
York: New American Library, 1975).

14.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 150.

15.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 95.

16.	The most recent and the most detailed translation of the Blue Cliff
Record is by Thomas and J. C. Cleary, The Blue CI iff Record, 3 vols.
(Berkeley, Calif.: Shambhala, 1977).

17.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 151.

18.	Ibid., p.151.

19.	This story is recounted in Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 100.

20.	Ibid., p. 102.

21.	Recounted in Ibid., p. 102.

22.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'ari Buddhism, pp.
150-52.

23.	Ibid., p. 150.

24.	See Luk, Transmission of the Mind Outside the Teaching, p. 46.
25.




7. HUAI-HAI: FATHER OF MONASTIC CH'AN



1.	This location is given by John Blofeld in The Zen Teaching of Hui-Hai
on Sudden Illumination (London: Ryder & Co., 1962; paperback reprint,
New York: Weiser, 1972), p. 29. Charles Luk (Transmission of the Mind
Outside the Teaching, p. 50) says: "Huai-hai, the Dharma-successor of
Ma Tsu, was also called Pai Chang [Po Ch'ang] after the mountain where
he stayed at Hung Chou (now Nanchang, capital of Kiangsi province). Pai
Chang means: Pai, one hundred, and Chang, a measure of ten feet, i.e.,
One-thousand-foot mountain." However, Luk identifies the birthplace of
Huai-hai as Chang Lo in modern Fukien province, as does Chou Hsiang-
kuang in _Dhyana_ Buddhism in China.

2.	This story is repeated in various places, including Wu, Golden Age of
Zen; and Blofeld, Zen Teaching of Hui Hai on Sudden Illumination. This
latter reference is as part of a document known as the Tsung-ching
Record, being a recorded dialogue of the master taken down by a monk
named Tsung-ching, who was a contemporary of Huai-hai.

3.	This story is Case 53 of the Hekiganroku or Blue Cliff Record, a Sung
Dynasty period collection of Ch'an stories and their interpretation.
The best current translation is probably in Cleary and Cleary, Blue
Cliff Record, Vol. 2, p. 357.

4.	See Luk, Transmission of the Mind Outside the Teaching, p. 46.

5.	Stories involving him may be found in the Mumonkan, Cases 2 and 40,
and in the Hekiganroku or Blue Cliff Record, Cases 53, 70, 71, 72. The
most complete accounting of anecdotes may be found in Blofeld, Zen
Teachings of Hui-Hai on Sudden Illumination; and Thomas Cleary, Sayings
and Doings of Pai-chang (Los Angeles: Center Publicatons, 1979).

6.	Kenneth K. S. Ch'en, (The Chinese Transformation of Buddhism
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973], p. 95) says, "Besides
the Vinaya controlling the conduct of the Buddhist clergy, the basic
code governing Buddhist and Taoist monks and nuns during the T'ang
Dynasty was the Tao-seng-ke (Rules concerning Buddhist and Taoist
clergy), formulated during the Chen-kuan era, probably 637. This Tao-
seng-ke is no longer extant, however, but the Japanese work Soni-ryo,
which governs the conduct of the community of monks and nuns in Japan,
was based on it. Therefore a study of the Soni-ryo would give us a good
idea of the contents of the Tao-seng-ke. . . . [Certain] provisions of
the T'ang codes superseded the monastic code and called for penalties
for offenses which went beyond those specified in the Soni-ryo or the
Buddhist Vinaya."

7.	For a scholarly discussion of the economic role of Buddhism in T'ang
China, see D. C. Twitchett, "Monastic Estates in T'ang China," Asia
Major, (1955-56), pp. 123-46. He explains that the T'ang government was
always a trifle uneasy about the presence of un-taxed monastic
establishments, and not without reason. Buddhism in T'ang China was big
business. The large monasteries were beneficiaries of gifts and
bequests from the aristocracy, as well as from the palace itself.
(Eunuchs, along with palace ladies, were particularly generous.) Laymen
often would bequeath their lands to a monastery, sometimes including in
the will a curse on anyone who might later wish to take the land away
from the church. These gifts were thought to ensure better fortunes in
the world to come, while simultaneously resolving tax difficulties for
the donor. For the monasteries themselves this wealth could only
accumulate, since it never had to be divided among sons. After An Lu-
shan's rebellion, a flavor of feudalism had penetrated Chinese society,
and huge tracts came to be held by the Buddhist monasteries, to which
entire estates were sometimes donated. As a result, the Buddhists had
enormous economic power, although we may suspect the iconoclastic
_dhyana_ establishments in the south enjoyed little of it.

8.	See Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, pp. 102-03.

9.	See Heinrich Dumoulin and Ruth Fuller Sasaki, The Development of
Chinese Zen (New York: First Zen Institute of America, 1953), p.13.
Interestingly, the Vinaya sect, founded by Tao-hsuan (596-667), was
primarily concerned with the laws of monastic discipline. The
familiarity of Ch'an teachers with the concerns of this sect may have
contributed to the desire to create rules for their own assemblies.

10.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 109.

11.	See D. T. Suzuki, The Zen Monk's Life (New York: Olympia Press,
1972); Eshin Nishimura, Unsui: A Diary of Zen Monastic Life (Honolulu:
University Press of Hawaii, 1973); Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism,
First Series, pp. 314-362; and Koji Sato, The Zen Life (New York:
Weatherhill/Tankosha, 1977). A succinct summary of Zen monastic life is
also provided by Sir Charles Eliot in Japanese Buddhism (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1935), p. 406.

12.	See Blofeld, Zen Teaching ofHui Hai on Sudden Illumination, p. 52.

13.	Ibid., pp. 60-61.

14.	Ibid., p.	48.

15.	Ibid., p.	133.

16.	Ibid., p.	77.

17.	Ibid., p.	55.

18.	Ibid., p.	56.

19.	Ibid., p.	78.

20.	Ibid., p.	54.



8. NAN-CH'UAN AND CHAO-CHOU: MASTERS OF THE IRRATIONAL



1.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 153.

2.	Ibid., p. 178.

3.	According to a biographical sketch of Nan-ch'uan given by Cleary and
Cleary in Blue Cliff Record, p. 262.

4.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 160.
This was also incorporated in the Blue Cliff Record as Case 40 (Ibid.,
p. 292), where the Sung-era commentary is actually more obscure than
what it attempts to explain.

5.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 136.

6.	Ibid., p. 136.

7.	Blyth, Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 3, p. 57.

8.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 159.

9.	Ibid., p. 157. This anecdote is also Case 69 of the Blue Cliff
Record.

10.	Ibid., p. 161.

11.	Ibid.

12.	Ibid., p. 162.

13.	Ibid., p. 164. Translation of a T'ang text, "The Sayings of Chao-
chou," is provided by Yoel Hoffman, Radical Zen (Brookline, Mass.:
Autumn Press, 1978).

14.	Recounted by Garma C. C. Chang in The Practice of Zen (New York:
Harper & Row, 1959), p. 24. This is also Case 14 of the Mumonkan and
Cases 63 and 64 of the Blue Cliff Record.

15.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 127. This is also Case 19 of the Mumonkan.

16.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 159.

17.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 129.

18.	Ibid., p. 133.

19.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 169.

20.	Ibid., p. 140.

21.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 136.

22.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 171.

23.	This is Case 1 of the Mumonkan, here quoted from a very readable new
translation by Katsuki Sekida, Two Zen Classics: Mumonkan 6-
Hekiganroku (New York: Weatherhill, 1977), p. 27.

24.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, pp. 144-45.

25.	Blyth, Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 3, p. 77.

26.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 145.

27.	Ibid., p. 139.

28.	Ibid., p. 146.

29.	Ibid., p. 144.
30.


9. P'ANG AND HAN-SHAN: LAYMAN AND POET



1.	See Burton Watson, Cold Mountain (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1970), p. 13. This concept of the Zen layman has longbeen a part
of Zen practice in Japan, and for this reason both Layman P'ang and the
poet Han-shan are favorite Ch'an figures with the Japanese. In fact,
the eighteenth-century Japanese master Hakuin wrote a commentary on
Han-shan.

2.	See Ruth Fuller Sasaki, Yoshitaka Iriya, and Dana R. Frasier, The
Recorded Sayings of Layman P'ang (New York: Weatherhill, 1971), p. 18.

3.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 145.
This story is famous and found in many sources.

4.	As evidenced by a common saying of the time: "In Kiangsi the Master
is Ma-tsu; in Hunan the Master is Shih-t'ou. People go back and forth
between them all the time, and those who do not know these two great
Masters are completely ignorant." Yampolsky, Platform Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch, p. 55.

5.	Sasaki et al., Recorded Sayings of Layman P'ang, p. 46.

6.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 145.

7.	See Ibid., p. 175.

8.	Sasaki et al., Recorded Sayings of Layman P'ang, p. 47.

9.	Luk, Transmission of the Mind Outside the Teaching, p. 42.

10.	Sasaki et al., Recorded Sayings of Layman P'ang, p. 58.

11.	Ibid., p. 69.

12.	Ibid., p. 71

13.	Ibid., p.47.

14.	Ibid., p. 88.

15.	Ibid., pp. 54-55. The translators explain the last two verses as
follows: "This is derived from the old Chinese proverb: 'To win by a
fluke is to fall into a fluke' (and thus to lose by a fluke)."
Concerning the meaning of this exchange, it would seem that water is
here being used as a metaphor for the undifferentiated Void, which
subsumes the temporary individuality of its parts the way the sea is
undifferentiated, yet contains waves. When Tan-hsia accepts this
premise a little too automatically, P'ang is forced to show him (via a
splash) that water (and by extension, physical manifestations of the
components of the Void) can also assume a physical reality that
impinges on daily life. Tan-hsia tries feebly to respond by returning
the splash, but he clearly lost the exchange.

16.  Ibid. p. 73.

17.  See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p.
176. Also see Sasaki et al., Recorded Sayings of Lay man P'ang, p. 75.

18.  Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 177.

19. Sasaki et al., Recorded Sayings of Layman P'ang, p. 42. Watson,
Cold Mountain, p. 50. Watson explains that the

20.  Arthur Waley, "27 Poems by Han-shan," Encounter, 3, 3 (September
1954), p. 3.

21.	opening line about taking along books while hoeing in the field was
"From the story of an impoverished scholar of the former Han Dynasty
who was so fond of learning that he carried his copies of the Confucian
classics along when he went to work in the fields." The last line is
"An allusion to the perch, stranded in a carriage rut in the road, who
asked the philosopher Chuang Tzu for a dipperful of water so that he
could go on living."
22.
23.	Ibid., p. 56.
24.
23.  Waley, "27 Poems by Han-shan," p. 6.

24.  From Wu Chi-yu, "A Study of Han Shan," T'oung Pao, 45, 4-5 (1957),
p. 432.

26.	Gary Snyder, "Han-shan," In Cyril Birch, ed., Anthology of
Chinese Literature, (New York: Grove Press, 1965), p. 201.
27.
28.	See Ibid., pp. 194-96.
29.
27.  See Watson, Cold Mountain, p. 14. Watson says, "Zen commentators
have therefore been forced to regard Han-shan's professions of
loneliness, doubt, and discouragement not as revelations of his own
feelings but as vicarious recitals of the ills of unenlightened men
which he can still sympathize with, though he himself has transcended
them. He thus becomes the traditional Bodhisattva figure--compassionate,
in the world, but not of it." Watson rejects this interpretation.

28.  Ibid., p. 67.

29.  Ibid., p. 88.

30.  Ibid., p. 78.

31.  Ibid., p. 81.

32.  Ibid., pp. 11-12.

33.  Snyder, "Han-shan," p. 202.







10. HUANG-PO: MASTER OF THE UNIVERSAL MIND



1.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 102.

2.	This probably was during the last decade of the eighth century, since
Ma-tsu died in 788.

3.	This volume actually consists of two books, known as the Chun-chou
Record (843) and the Wan-iing Record (849). They are translated and
published together by John Blofeld as The Zen Teaching of Huang Po.
(New York: Grove Press, 1958). This appears to have been the source for
biographical and anecdotal material later included in The Transmission
of the Lamp, portions of which are translated in Chang Chung-yuan.
Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism. Another translation of
biographical, didactic, and anecdotal material may be found in Charles
Luk, Transmission of the Mind Outside the Teaching, whose source is
unattributed but which possibly could be a translation of the 1602 work
Records of Pointing at The Moon, a compilation of Ch'an materials.

4.	Blofeld, Zen Teaching of Huang Po, p. 28.

5.	Ibid., p. 27.

6.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 103.

7.	Ibid.

8.	Ibid., p. 90.

9.	Ibid., p. 103.

10.	Blofeld, Zen Teaching of Huang Po, p. 99.

11.	This gesture of defeat is reported elsewhere to have been a triple
prostration. Huang-po apparently claimed victory in these exchanges
when he either kept silent or walked away.

12.	Wan-ling is reported by Chang Chung-yuan to be the modern town of
Hsuan-ch'eng in southern Anhwei province (Original Teachings of Ch'an
Buddhism, p. 123). According to The Transmission of the Lamp the prime
minister built a monastery and invited Huang-po to come lecture there,
which the master did. The monastery was then named after a mountain
where the master had once lived.

13.	Ibid., p. 104.

14.	Ibid.

15.	Blofeld, Zen Teaching of Huang Po, p. 55.

16.	Ibid., p. 130.

17.	Ibid., pp. 81-82.

18.	Ibid., p. 44

19.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 87.

20.	Blofeld, Zen Teaching of Huang Po, p. 53.

21.	Ibid., p. 39.

22.	Ibid., p. 46.

23.	Ibid., p. 37.

24.	Ibid.

25.	Ibid., p. 40.

26.	Ibid., p. 61.

27.	Ibid., p. 26.

28.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 85.

29.	Blofeld, Zen Teachings of Huang Po, p. 50.

30.	See Wu, Golden Age of Zen.

31.	Chang Chung-yuan reports some disagreement over the actual date of
Huang-po's death. It seems that he is reported to have died in 849 in
Records of Buddhas and Patriarchs in Various Dynasties, whereas the
year of his death is given as 855 in the General Records of Buddhas and
Patriarchs.

32.	Excerpts from the Han Yu treatise are provided in Edwin O.
Reischauer, Ennin's Travels in T'ang China (New York: Ronald Press,
1955), pp. 221 ff. This recounting of a visit by a ninth-century
Japanese monk to China reveals indirectly how lacking in influence the
Ch'anists actually were. In a diary of many years Ch'an is mentioned
only rarely, and then in tones of other than respect. He viewed the
Ch'anists warily and described them as "extremely unruly men at heart"
(p. 173). However, his trip in China was severely disturbed by the
sudden eruption of the Great Persecution, making him so fearful that he
actually destroyed the Buddhist art he had collected throughout the
country.

33.	See Hu Shih, "Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in China."

34.	See Ibid.

35.	Kenneth Ch'en, in "The Economic Background of the Hui-Ch'ang
Suppression of Buddhism," Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 19
(1956), points out that the imperial decree required the turning in
only of statues made from metals having economic value. Those made from
clay, wood, and stone could remain in the temples. He uses this to
support his contention that the main driving force behind the Great
Persecution was the inordinate economic power of the Buddhist
establishments.
36.


11. LIN-CHI: FOUNDER OF RINZAI ZEN



1.	A discussion of the five houses of Ch'an may be found in Dumoulin,
History of Zen Buddhism, pp. 106-22; and Dumoulin and Sasaki,
Development of Chinese Zen, pp. 17-32. Useful summaries of their
teachings also may be found in Chou Hsiang-kuang, _Dhyana_ Buddhism in
China.

2.	Accounts of Lin-chi's life are found in The Record of Lin-chi, The
Transmission of the Lamp, The Five Lamps Meeting at the Source, and
Finger Pointing at the Moon. The most reliable source is probably The
Record of Lin-chi, since this was compiled by his follower(s). The
definitive translation of this work certainly must be that by Ruth F.
Sasaki, The Recorded Sayings of Ch'an Master Lin-chi Hui-chao of Chen
Prefecture, (Kyoto, Japan: Institute of Zen Studies, 1975) and recently
re-issued by Heian International, Inc., South San Francisco, Calif.
Another version, The Zen Teachings of Rinzai, translated by Irmgard
Schloegl (Berkeley, Calif.: Shambhala, 1976), is less satisfactory. The
Lin-chi excerpts from The Transmission of the Lamp may be found in
Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism. Excerpts from
The Five Lamps Meeting at the Source and Finger Pointing at the Moon
are provided in Charles Luk, Ch'an and Zen Teaching, Second Series
(Berkeley: Shambhala, 1971). Translations of his sermons, sayings, etc.
together with commentary may also be found in Wu, Golden Age of Zen;
Chou Hsiang-kuang, _Dhyana_ Buddhism in China; and Blyth, Zen and Zen
Classics, Vol. 3.

3.	R. H. Blyth is suspicious that Lin-chi's story was enhanced somewhat
for dramatic purposes, claiming (Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 3, p. 151),
"As in the case of the Sixth Patriarch, [Lin-chi's] enlightenment is
recounted 'dramatically,' that is to say minimizing his previous
understanding of Zen in order to bring out the great change after
enlightenment."

4.	Sasaki, Recorded Sayings of Lin-chi, pp. 24-25.

5.	Ibid., p. 25.

6.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, pp. 117-18.

7.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 194.

8.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 118.

9.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 195.

10.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 119.

11.	Sasaki, Recorded Sayings of Lin-chi, p. 43.

12.	Ibid., p. 45.

13.	Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, p. 122.

14.	Of Lin-chi's shout, R. H. Blyth says (Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 3,
p. 154): "[The shout] is a war-cry, but the fight is a sort of shadow-
boxing. The universe shouts at us, we shout back. We shout at the
universe, and the echo comes back in the same way. But the shouting and
the echoing are continuous, and, spiritually speaking, simultaneous.
Thus the [shout] is not an expression of anything; it has no
(separable) meaning. It is pure energy, without cause or effect, rhyme
or reason."

15.	After Sasaki, Recorded Sayings of Lin-chi, p. 47.

16.	See Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 201.

17.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, pp. 121-22.

18.	Sasaki, Recorded Sayings of Lin-chi, p. 4.

19.	Ibid., p. 41.

20.	Ibid., p. 48.

21.	Ibid., p. 2.

22.	Ibid., p. 70.

23.	Ibid., p. 6.

24.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 98.

25.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, pp. 204-05.

26.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 99.

27.	Dumoulin, Development of Chinese Zen, p. 22.

28.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 99.

29.	Dumoulin, Development of Chinese Zen, p. 23.

30.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings ofCh'an Buddhism, p. 95.

31.	Sasaki, Recorded Sayings o/Lin-chi, pp. 27-28.

32.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 95.

33.	Heinrich Dumoulin (Development of Chinese Zen, p. 22) notes that
this is merely playing off the well-known "four propositions" of Ind
ian Buddhist logic: existence, nonexistence, both existence and
nonexistence, and neither existence nor nonexistence.

34.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 202.

35.	Ibid., p. 203.

36.	Sasaki, Recorded Sayings of Lin-chi. p. 29.

37.	Ibid., p. 24.

38.	Ibid., p. 38.
39.






12. TUNG-SHAN AND TSAO-SHAN: FOUNDERS OF SOTO ZEN



1.	Philip Yampolsky, in Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, alleges
that Hsing-ssu was resurrected from anonymity because Shih-t'ou (700-
90) was in need of a connection to the Sixth Patriarch. The mysterious
master Hsing-ssu comes into prominence well over a hundred years after
his death; his actual life was not chronicled by any of his
contemporaries. Neither, for that matter, was the life of his pupil
Shih-t'ou, although the latter left a heritage of disciples and a
burgeoning movement to perpetuate his memory.

2.	Ibid., p. 55.

3.	The stories attached to Shih-t'ou are varied and questioned by most
authorities. For example, there is the story that he was enlightened by
reading Seng-chau's Chao-Jun (The Book of Chao) but that his philosophy
came from Lao Tzu.

4.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 58.

5.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 171.

6.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 58.

7.	Ibid., p. 60.

8.	Ibid., pp. 61-62.

9.	Ibid., pp. 64-65.

10. Ibid., p. 76.

11.	This is elaborated by Luk, Ch'an and Zen Teaching, Second Series, p.
166.

12.	Ibid., p. 174.

13.	Extended discussions of this concept are provided by Chang Chung-
yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, pp. 41-57; and by Wu,
Golden Age of Zen, pp. 177-82.

14.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 179.

15.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 49.

16.	See Luk, Chan and Zen Teaching, Second Series, p. 139.

17.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 50.

18.	Ibid., p. 69.

19.	When R. H. Blyth translates this poem in Zen and Zen Classics, Vol.
2, called the Hokyozammai in Japanese, he includes a grand dose of
skepticism concerning its real authorship, since he believes the poem
unworthy of the master (p. 152).

20.	Ibid., p. 157.

21.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 48.

22.	Ibid., p. 70.

23.	Ibid., p. 71.

24.	Ibid., p. 72.

25.	Dumoulin, Development of Chinese Zen, p. 26.

30.	Eliot, Japanese Buddhism, p. 168.
31.


13. KUEI-SHAN, YUN-MEN, AND FA-YEN: THREE MINOR HOUSES



1.	Accounts of the lives and teachings of the masters of the Kuei-yang
school can be found in a number of translations, including Chang Chung-
yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism; and Luk, Ch'an and Zen
Teachings, Second Series. Both provide translations from The
Transmission of the Lamp. Other sources appear to be used in Wu, Golden
Age of Zen, which includes a lively discussion of Kuei-shan and the
Kuei-yang sect.

2.	Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 159.

3.	Charles Luk (Ch'an and Zen Teaching, Second Series, p. 58) makes a
valiant try at explication when he says, "[Huai-hai] wanted him to
perceive 'that which gave the order' and 'that which obeyed it.' . . .
[Huai-hai] continued to perform his great function by pressing the
student hard, insisting that the latter should perceive 'that' which
arose from the seat, used the poker, raised a little fire, showed it to
him and said, 'Is this not fire?' . . . This time the student could
actually perceive the reply by means of his self-nature. . . . Hence
his enlightenment."

4.	See Ibid., p. 58. Ssu-ma seems to have had a good record in
predicting monastic success, and he was much in demand. Although the
reliance

on a fortuneteller seems somewhat out of character for a Ch'an master,
we should remember that fortunetelling and future prediction in China
are at least as old as the I Ching.

5.   Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism,      p.
202.

6.    Ibid., p. 204.

7.    Luk, Ch'an and Zen Teaching, Second Series, p. 67.

8.    Ibid., p. 78.

9.    Wu, Golden Age of Zen, p. 167.

10.	Ibid., p. 167.

11.	John Wu (Golden Age of Zen, p. 165) says, "The style of the house of
Kuei-yang has a charm all of its own. It is not as steep and sharp-
edged as the houses of Lin-chi and Yun-men, nor as close-knit and
resourceful as the house of Ts'ao-tung nor as speculative and broad as
the house of Fa-yen, but it has greater depth than the others."

12.	See Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 269.
Other translations of Yun-men anecdotes, as well as interpretations and
appreciations, can be found in Luk, Ch'an and Zen Teaching, Second
Series; Chou, _Dhyana_ Buddhism in China; Wu, Golden Age of Zen; and
Blyth, Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 2.

13.	He had six koans out of forty-eight in the Mumonkan and eighteen
koans out of a hundred in the Hekiganroku. Perhaps his extensive
representation in the second collection is attributable to the fact
that its compiler, Ch'ung-hsien (980-1025), was one of the last
surviving representatives of Yun-men's school.

14.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism p. 284.

15.	Ibid., p. 286.

16.	Ibid., p. 229.

17.	Ibid., p. 228.

18.	Ibid., p. 229.

19.	Sekida, Two Zen Classics: Mumonkan & Hekiganroku, p. 349. This koan
is from Hekiganroku, Case 77.

20.	From the Mumonkan, Case 21. The Chinese term used was kan-shin
chueh, which Chang Chung-yuan (Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p.
300) characterizes as follows: "This may be translated either of two
ways: a piece of dried excrement or a bamboo stick used for cleaning as
toilet tissue is today."

21.	Blyth, Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 2, p. 142.

22.	Those with insatiable curiosity may consult Wu, Golden Age of Zen,
pp. 244 ff.

23.	Translations of his teachings from The Transmission of the Lamp are
provided by Chang Chung:yuan in Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism and
by Charles Luk in Ch'an and Zen Teachings, Second Series. A translation
of a completely different source, which varies significantly on all the
major anecdotes, is provided in John Wu, Golden Age of Zen. A
translation, presumably from a Japanese source, of some of his
teachings is supplied by R. H. Blyth in Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 2.
Heinrich Dumoulin offers a brief assessment of his influence in his two
books: Development of Chinese Zen and History of Zen Buddhism.

24.	Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism, p. 238. A
completely different version may be found in Wu, Golden Age of Zen, pp.
232-33.

25.	Buddhism Chang Chung-yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an, p. 242.
26.


14. TA-HUI: MASTER OF THE KOAN



1.	See Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, p. 128.

2.	Isshu Miura and Ruth Fuller Sasaki, Zen Dust (New York: Harcourt,
Brace & World, 1966), pp. 10-11.

3.	Ibid., p. 10. This individual is identified as Nan-yuan Hui-yang (d.
930).

4.	This is Case 1 in the Mumonkan, usually the first koan given to a
beginning student.

5.	This is Case 26 of the Mumonkan. The version given here is after the
translation in Sekida, Two Zen Classics: Mumonkan & Hekiganroku, p. 89.

6.	This is Case 54 of the Hekiganroku. The version given is after Ibid.,
p. 296, and Cleary and Cleary, Blue Cliff Record, p. 362.

7.	Isshu and Sasaki, Zen Dust, p. 13.

8.	There are a number of translations of the Mumonkan currently
available in English. The most recent is Sekida, Two Zen Classics:
Mumonkan & Hekiganroku; but perhaps the most authoritative is Zenkei
Shibayama, Zen Comments on the Mumonkan, trans. Sumiko Kudo (New York:
Harper Lr Row, 1974; paperback edition, New York: New American Library,
1975). Other translations are Nyogen Senzaki and Paul Reps, "The
Gateless Gate," in Paul Reps, ed., Zen Flesh, Zen Bones (Rutland and
Tokyo: Tuttle, 1957); Sohkau Ogata, "The Mu Mon Kwan," in Zen for the
West (New York: Dial, 1959); and R. H. Blyth, Zen and Zen Classics,
Vol. 4, "Mumonkan" (Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1966).

Three translations of the Blue Cliff Record are currently available in
English. There is the early and unsatisfactory version by R. D. M. Shaw
(London: Michael Joseph, 1961). A readable version is provided in
Sekida, Two Zen Classics, although this excludes some of the
traditional commentary. The authoritative version is certainly that by
Cleary and Cleary, Blue Cliff Record.

9.	This is the case with the version provided in Sekida, Two Zen
Classics.

10.	See Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, p. 128.

11.	See L. Carrington Goodrich, A Short History of the Chinese People
(New York: Harper & Row, 1943), p. 161.

12.	The most comprehensive collection of Ta-hui's writings is translated
in Christopher Cleary, Swampland Flowers: The Letters and Lectures of
Zen Master Ta Hui (New York: Grove Press, 1977). Excerpts are also
translated by Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, Second Series.
Biographical information may also be found in Isshu and Sasaki, Zen
Dust.

13.	Translated in Isshu and Sasaki, Zen Dust, p. 163.

14.	A work known today as the Cheng-fa-yen-tsang. See Isshu and Sasaki,
Zen Dust, p. 163.

15.	See Ibid.

16.	See Ibid.

17.	Translated by Cleary, Swampland Flowers, pp. 129-30.

18.	See Sekida, Two Zen Classics, p. 17.

19.	Suzuki, Essays in Zen Buddhism, Second Series, p. 103.

20.	Cleary, Swampland Flowers, p. 64.

21.	Ibid., p. 57.

22.	Ibid., p. 14.

25.	But he destroyed them in vain. Around 1300 a monk managed to
assemble most of the koans and commentary from scattered sources and
put the book back into print. The problem continues to this day; there
is now available a book of "answers" to a number of koans--Yoel Hoffman,
The Sound of One Hand Clapping (New York: Basic Books, 1975). One
reviewer of this book observed sadly, "Now if only getting the 'answer'
were the same as getting the point."
26.










15. EISAI: THE FIRST JAPANESE MASTER



1.	This anecdote is in Martin Charles Collcutt, "The Zen Monastic
Institution in Medieval Japan" (Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University,
1975).

2.	Although there were various attempts to introduce Ch'an into Japan
prior to the twelfth century, nothing ever seemed to stick. Dumoulin
(History of Zen Buddhism, pp. 138-39) summarized these efforts as
follows: "The first certain information we possess regarding Zen in
Japan goes back to the early period of her history. The outstanding
Japanese Buddhist monk during that age, Dosho, was attracted to Zen
through the influence of his Chinese teacher, Hsuan-tsang, under whom
he studied the Yogacara philosophy (653). . . . Dosho thus came into
immediate contact with the tradition of Bodhidharma and brought the Zen
of the patriarchs to Japan. He built the first meditation hall, at a
temple in Nara. . . .

"A century later, for the first time in history, a Chinese Zen master
came to Japan. This was Tao-hsuan, who belonged to the northern sect of
Chinese Zen in the third generation after Shen-hsiu. Responding to an
invitation from Japanese Buddhist monks, he took up residence in Nara
and contributed to the growth of Japanese culture during the Tempyo
period (729-749). . . . The contemplative element in the Tendai
tradition, which held an important place from the beginning, was
strengthened in both China and Japan by repeated contacts with Zen.

"A further step in the spread of Zen occurred in the following century
when I-k'ung, a Chinese master of the Lin-chi sect, visited Japan. He
came at the invitation of the Empress Tachibana Kachiko, wife of the
Emperor Saga, during the early part of the Showa era (834-848), to
teach Zen, first at the imperial court and later at the Danrinji temple
in Kyoto, which the empress had built for him. However, these first
efforts in the systematic propagation of Zen according to the Chinese
pattern did not meet with lasting success. I-k'ung was unable to launch
a vigorous movement. Disappointed, he returned to China, and for three
centuries Zen was inactive in Japan."

Another opportunity for the Japanese to learn about Ch'an was missed by
the famous Japanese pilgrim Ennin, who was in China to witness the
Great Persecution of 845, but who paid almost no attention to Ch'an,
which he regarded as the obsession of unruly ne'er-do-wells.

3.	A number of books provide information concerning early Japanese
history and the circumstances surrounding the introduction of Buddhism
to Japan. General historical works of particular relevance include:
John Whitney Hall, Japan, from Prehistory to Modern Times (New York:
Delacorte, 1970); Mikiso Hane, Japan, A Historical Survey (New York:
Scribner's, 1972); Edwin O. Reischauer, Japan: Past and Present, 3rd
ed. (New York: Knopf, 1964); and George B. Sansom, A History of Japan,
3 vols. (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1958-63).

Studies of early Japanese Buddhism may be found in: Masaharu Anesaki,
History of Japanese Religion (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner,
1930: reissue, Rutland, Vt.: Tuttle, 1963); William K. Bunce, Religions
in Japan (Rutland, Vt.: Tuttle, 1955); Ch'en, Buddhism in China; Eliot,
Japanese Buddhism; Shinsho Hanayama, A History of Japanese Buddhism
(Tokyo: Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966); and E. Dale Saunders, Buddhism in
Japan (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1964).

4.	In fact, the popularity of esoteric rituals was such that they were
an important part of early Zen practice in Japan.

5.	This world is well described by Ivan Morris in The World of the
Shining Prince: Court Life in Ancient Japan (New York: Knopf, 1964). A
discussion of the relation of this aesthetic life to the formation of
Japanese Zen may be found in Thomas Hoover, Zen Culture (New York:
Random House, 1977; paperback edition, New York: Vintage, 1978).

6.	One of the most readable accounts of the rise of the Japanese
military class may be found in Paul Varley, Samurai (New York:
Delacorte, 1970; paperback edition, New York: Dell, 1972).

7.	This theory is advanced eloquently in Collcutt, "Zen Monastic
Institution in Medieval Japan." In later years the Ch'an sect in China
itself actually entered a phase of decadence, with the inclusion of
esoteric rites and an ecumenical movement that advocated the chanting
of the nembutsu by Ch'anists--some of whom claimed there was great
similarity between the psychological aspects of this mechanical chant
and those of the koan.

8.	Accounts of Eisai's life may be found in Dumoulin, History of Zen
Buddhism; and in Collcutt, "Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval
Japan."

9.	See Collcutt, "Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval Japan."

10.	See Saunders, Buddhism in Japan, p. 221.

11.	Translated in Wm. Theodore de Bary, ed. Sources of Japanese
Tradition, Vol. 1 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1958), pp. 236-
37.

12.	Ibid., p. 237.

13.	De Bary, Sources of Japanese Tradition, pp. 239-40.

14.	Again the best discussion of this intrigue is provided by Collcutt,
"Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval Japan."
15.
16.	Varley, Samurai, p. 45.
17.


17.	DOGEN: FATHER OF JAPANESE SOTO ZEN
18.


1.	Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism, p. 151. This statement may be
faint praise, for Japan has never been especially noted for its
religious thinkers. As philosophers, the Japanese have been great
artists and poets. Perhaps no culture can do everything.

2.	Biographical information on Dogen may be found in Hee-Jin Kim, Dogen
Kigen--Mystical Realist (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1975);
Yuho Yokoi, Zen Master Dogen (New York: Weatherhill, 1976); and
Dumoulin, History of Zen Buddhism. Translations of his writings maybe
found in Dogen Kigen--Mystical Realist and Zen Master Dogen as well as
in Jiyu Kennett, Zen is Eternal Life (Emeryville, Calif.: Dharma,
1976); Dogen, Record of Things Heard from the Treasury of the Eye of
the True Teaching trans, by Thomas Cleary (Boulder, Colo.: Great
Eastern Book Company, 1978); Francis Dojun Cook, How to Raise an Ox
(Los Angeles: Center Publications, 1978); and Kosen Nishiyama and John
Steven, Shobogenzo: The Eye and Treasury of the True Law (New York:
Weatherhill, 1977).

3.	Kim, Dogen Kigen--Mystical Realist, p. 25.

4.	Yokoi, Zen Master Dogen, p. 28.

5.	See Collcutt, "Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval Japan."

6.	Kim, Dogen Kigen--Mystical Realist, p. 29.

7.	Ibid., p. 35.

8.	See Yokoi, Zen Master Dogen, p. 32.

9.	Ibid., pp. 45--46.

10.	Ibid., p. 46.

11.	Kennett, Zen Is Eternal Life, pp. 141-42.

12.	Ibid., p. 152.

13.	Ibid., pp. 150-51.

14.	Dogen's attitude toward women was revolutionary for his time. A
sampling is provided in Kim, Dogen Kigen--Mystical Realist, pp. 54-55:
"Some people, foolish in the extreme, also think of woman as nothing
but the object of sensual pleasures, and see her this way without ever
correcting their view. A Buddhist should not do so. If man detests
woman as the sexual object, she must detest him for the same reason.
Both man and woman become objects, thus being equally involved in
defilement. . . . What charge is there against woman? What virtue is
there in man? There are wicked men in the world; there are virtuous
women in the world. The desire to hear Dharma and the search for
enlightenment do not necessarily rely on the difference in sex."

15.	Yokoi, Zen Master Dogen, pp. 35-36.

16.	See Collcutt, "Zen Monastic Training in Medieval Japan," p. 59.

17.	Translated in de Bary, Sources of Japanese Tradition, Vol. 1., p.
247.

18.	See Collcutt, "Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval Japan," p. 62.

19.	See Ibid., pp. 62 ff.

20.See Philip Yampolsky, trans., The Zen Master Hakuin: Selected
Writings, (New York: Columbia University Press, 1971), p. 5.



19.	IKKYU: ZEN ECCENTRIC
20.


1.	This view is advanced convincingly by Collcutt in "Zen Monastic
Institution in Medieval Japan," p. 113 ff.

2.	Ibid., p. 80.

3.	This would seem to be one of the reasons for what became of a host of
emigrating Ch'an teachers as sub-sects of the Yogi branch struggled for
ascendency over each other.

4.	Wu-an's strength of mind is illustrated by a story related in
Collcutt, "Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval Japan," p. 84: "Wu-an
is said to have shocked the religious sensibilities of many warriors
and monks when, in what has been interpreted as a deliberate attempt to
sever the connection between Zen and prayer in Japanese minds, he
publicly refused to worship before the statue of Jizo in the Buddha
Hill of Kencho-ji on the grounds that whereas Jizo was merely a
Bodhisattva, he, Wu-an, was a Buddha."

5.	Related in Ibid., p. 88.

6.	Collcutt ("Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval Japan," p. 114)
points out that the warrior interest in Zen and its Chinese cultural
trappings should also be credited partly to their desire to stand up to
the snobbery of the Kyoto aristocracy. By making themselves emissaries
of a prestigious foreign civilization, the warrior class achieved a bit
of cultural one-upmanship on the Kyoto snob set.

7.	Collcutt ("Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval Japan," p. 106)
reports that this conversion of temples to Zen was not always
spontaneous. There is the story of one local governor who was called to
Kamakura and in the course of a public assembly asked pointedly whether
his family had yet built a Zen monastery in their home province. The
terrified official declared he had built a monastery for a hundred Zen
monks, and then raced home to start construction.

8.	A discussion of the contribution of Zen to Japanese civilization may
be found in Hoover, Zen Culture. An older survey is D. T. Suzuki, Zen
and Japanese Culture (Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press,
1959).

9.	Yampolsky, Zen Master Hakuin, p. 8.

10.	Philip Yampolsky, "Muromachi Zen and the Gozan System," in John W.
Hall and Toyoda Takeshi, eds., Japan in the Muromachi Age (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1977), p. 319.

11.	One of the best political histories of this era is Sansom, History
of Japan. For the history of Zen, the best work appears to be Martin
Collcutt, The Zen Monastic Institution in Medieval Japan (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, in press), a revised version of the
dissertation cited above.

12.	English sources on Ikkyu are less common than might at first be
supposed. The most exhaustive study and translation of original Ikkyu
writings to date is certainly that of James Sanford, "Zen-Man Ikkyu"
(Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1972). There is also a lively
and characteristically insightful essay by Donald Keene, "The Portrait
of Ikkyu," in Archives of Asian Art, Vol. 20 (1966-67), pp. 54-65. This
essay has been collected in Donald Keene, Landscapes and Portraits
(Palo Alto: Kodansha International, 1971). Another work of Ikkyu
scholarship is Sonja Arntzen, "A Presentation of the Poet Ikkyu with
Translations from the Kyounshu 'Mad Cloud Anthology'" (Unpublished
thesis, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 1966).

13.	See Thomas Cleary, The Original Face: An Anthology of Rinzai Zen
(New York: Grove Press, 1978), p. 13. An example of a Nasrudin-esque
parable told about Ikkyu is the story of his approaching the house of a
rich man one day to beg for food wearing his torn robes and straw
sandals. The man drove him away, but when he returned the following day
in the luxurious robe of a Buddhist prelate, he was invited in for a
banquet. But when the food arrived Ikkyu removed his robe and offered
the food to it.

14.	Sanford, "Zen-Man Ikkyu," p. 48.

15.	Ibid., p. 68.

16.	Ibid. pp. 80-81.

17. Translated by Keene, Landscapes and Portraits, p. 235. Professor
Keene (personal communication) has provided a revised and, he believes,
more fully accurate translation of this verse as follows:

After ten days of living in this temple my mind's in turmoil;

Red strings, very long, tug at my feet.

If one day you get around to looking for me,

Try the restaurants, the drinking places or the brothels.



He notes that the "red strings" of the second line refer to the ties of
physical attachment to women that drew Ikkyu from the temple to the
pleasure quarters.

18.	Jon Covell and Yamada Sobin, Zen at Daitoku-ji (New York: Kodansha
International, 1974), p. 36.

19.	Sanford, "Zen-Man Ikkyu," p. 221.

20.	Ibid., p. 226.

21.	Ibid., p. 235.

22.	Ibid., p. 225.

23.	Ibid., pp. 253-54. A translation may also be found in Cleary,
Original Face; and in R. H. Blyth and N. A. Waddell, "Ikkyu's
Skeletons," The Eastern Buddhist, N.S. 7, 3 (May 1973), pp. 111-25.
Also see Blyth, Zen and Zen Classics, Vol. 7.

24.	Sanford claims ("Zen-Man Ikkyu," p. 341) that Ikkyu's prose is
"almost totally unknown" in Japan.

25.	Ibid., pp. 326-27.

26.	Ibid., p. 172.

27.	Jan Covell (Zen at Daitoku-ji, p. 38) says, "Ikkyu's own ink
paintings are unpretentious and seemingly artless, always with the
flung-ink technique. His calligraphy is ranked among history's greatest
. . ."

32.	Sanford, "Zen-Man Ikkyu," p. 342.
33.


21.	HAKUIN: JAPANESE MASTER OF THE KOAN
22.


1.	Yampolsky, Zen Master Hakuin, p. 116. This is undoubtedly the
definitive work by and about Hakuin in English and has been used for
all the quotations that follow. Another translation of some of Hakuin's
works is R. D. M. Shaw, The Embossed Teakettle (London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1963). A short translation of Hakuin's writings may be found in
Cleary, Original Face. Perhaps the most incisive biographical and
interpretive material may be found, respectively, in Dumoulin, History
of Zen Buddhism; and Isshu and Sasaki, Zen Dust.

2.	Yampolsky, Zen Master Hakuin, p. 117.

3.	Ibid., p. 18.

4.	Ibid., pp. 118-19.

5.	Ibid., p. 119.

6.	Ibid., p. 121.

7.	Ibid., pp. 31-32.

8.	Ibid., p. 33.

9.	Ibid., p. 49.

10.	Ibid., p. 33.

11.	Ibid., pp. 52-53.

12.	Ibid., p. 53.

13.	Ibid., p. 58.

14.	Ibid.

15.	Ibid., p. 35.

16.	Ibid., pp. 63-64.

17.	The "great ball of doubt," known in Chinese as i-t'uan, was a
classic Zen phrase and has been traced by Ruth Fuller Sasaki (Zen Dust,
p. 247) back to a tenth-century Chinese monk, who claimed in a poem,
"The ball of doubt within my heart/Was as big as a big wicker basket."
Hakuin's analysis of the "great ball of doubt" is translated in Zen
Dust, p. 43.

18.	Hakuin's invention of his own koans, which were kept secret and
never published, is a significant departure from the usual technique of
simply taking situations from the classic literature, and demonstrates
both his creativity and his intellectual independence. It also raises
the question of whether they really were "koans" under the traditional
definition of "public case" or whether they should be given a different
name.

19.	Yampolsky, Zen Master Hakuin, p. 164.

20.	The koan system of Hakuin is discussed by Yampolsky in Zen Master
Hakuin, p. 15; and by Sasaki, in The Zen Koan, pp. 27-30.

21.	Yampolsky, Zen Master Hakuin, p. 32.

22.	See D. T. Suzuki, Sengai: The Zen Master (Greenwich, Conn.: New York
Graphic Society, 1971); Burton Watson, Ryokan: Zen Monk-Poet of Japan
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1977); and John Stevens, One
Robe, One Bowl: The Zen Poetry of Ryokan (New York: Weatherhill, 1977).















































  BIBLIOGRAPHY



Anesaki, Masaharu. History of Japanese Religion. London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, Trubner, 1930 (reissue, Rutland, Vt.: Tuttle, 1963).



Arntzen, Sonja. "A Presentation of the Poet Ikkyu with Translations
from the Kyounshu 'Mad Cloud Anthology.' " Master's thesis, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, 1966.



Baskin, Wade, ed. Classics in Chinese Philosophy. Totowa, N. J.:
Littlefield, Adams, 1974.



Berry, Thomas. Buddhism. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1975.



Bingham, Woodbridge. The Founding of the T'ang Dynasty. New York:
Octagon, 1970.



        Birch, Cyril. Anthology of Chinese Literature. New York: Grove,
1965.



Blofeld, John. The Secret and Sublime: Taoist Mysteries and Magic. New
York: E. P. Dutton, 1973.



Blofeld, John, trans. The Zen Teaching of Huang Po. New York: Grove,
1958.

-------  The Zen Teaching of Hui Hai on Sudden Illumination. London:
Ryder, 1962; paperback reprint, New York: Weiser, 1972.



Bloodworth, Dennis. The Chinese Looking Glass. New York: Dell, 1966.



Blyth, R. H. Zen and Zen Classics. 7 Vols. Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1960-1970.

-----	and N. A. Waddell, "Ikkyu's Skeletons," The Eastern Buddhist, N.S.
7, 3.



Broughton, Jeffrey. "Kuei-Feng Tsung-Mi: The Convergence of Ch'an and
the Teachings." Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1975.



Bunce, William K. Religions in Japan. Rutland: Tuttle, 1955.



Bynner, Witter. The Jade Mountain. New York: Vintage, 1957.



Chai, Ch'u, and Winberg Chai. Confucianism. New York: Barron's
Educational Series, 1973.

-----	The Humanist Way in Ancient China: Essential Works of
Confucianism. New York: Bantam, 1965.



Chan, Wing-tsit, trans. The Platform Scripture. New York: St. Johns
University Press, 1963.

------A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy. Princeton: Princeton

University Press, 1963.

-----	"Transformation of Buddhism in China," Philosophy East and

West, VII (1957-58) pp. 107-16.



Chang, Garma C. C. The Practice of Zen. New York: Harper & Row, 1959;
paperback edition, Perennial Library, 1970.



Chang, Chung-yuan. Creativity and Taoism: A Study of Chinese
Philosophy, Art, and Poetry. New York: Harper & Row, 1970.

-----	Tao: A New Way of Thinking. New York: Harper & Row, 1975;paperback
edition, Perennial Library, 1977.

-----	trans. Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism (The Transmission of
the Lamp). New York: Random House, 1969; paperback edition, Vintage,
1971.



Chatterjee, H., ed. Mula-Madhyamaka-Karika of Nagarjuna. Calcutta: K.
L. Mukhopadhyay, 1962.



Chau, Bhikshu Thich Minh. Hsuan Tsang, The Pilgrim Er Scholar. Nha-
trang, Vietnam: Vietnam Buddhist Institute, n.d.



Chen, C. M. The Lighthouse in the Ocean of Ch'an. Kalimpong: Buddhist
Association of the United States, 1965.



Ch'en, Kenneth. Buddhism in China. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1972.

-----	. Buddhism: The Light of Asia. New York: Barron's Educational
Series, Inc., 1968

-----	. The Chinese Transformation of Buddhism. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1973.

-----	. "The Economic Background of the Hui-ch'ang Suppression of
Buddhism," Harvard journal of Asiatic Studies, 19, (1956), pp. 67-105.



Chiang, Yee. The Chinese Eye. Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1964.



Chou, Hsiang-kuang. _Dhyana_ Buddhism in China. Allahabad, India: Indo-
Chinese Literature Publications, 1960.



Cleary, Christopher, trans. Swampland Flowers: The Letters and Lectures
of Zen Master Ta Hui. New York: Grove, 1977.



Cleary, Thomas, trans. The Original Face. New York: Grove, 1978.

-----	, Sayings and Doings of Pai-chang. Los Angeles: Center
Publications, 1979.

-----	, and J. C. Cleary, trans. The Blue Cliff Record. 3 vols.
Berkeley, Calif.: Shambhala, 1977.



Conze, Edward, ed. Buddhist Texts Through the Ages. Oxford: Bruno
Cassirer, 1954.



Cook, Francis Dojun. How to Raise an Ox. Los Angeles: Center
Publications, 1978.



Covell, Jon, and Yamada Sobin. Zen at Daitoku-ji. New York: Kodansha
International, 1974.



Creel, Herrlee G. What Is Taoism? And Other Studies in Chinese Cultural
History. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1970.



Davis, A. R. Tu Fu. New York: Twayne, 1971.



Day, Clarence Burton. The Philosophers of China. New York:
Philosophical Library, 1962; paperback edition, Secaucus, N. J.:
Citadel, 1978.

de Bary, William Theodore. The Buddhist Tradition in India, China and
Japan. New York: Random House, 1972.



de Bary, William Theodore, ed. Sources of Japanese Tradition. 2 vols.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1958.

-----	, Wing-tsit Chan, and Burton Watson. Sources of Chinese
Tradition,

Vol. I. New York: Columbia University Press, 1960.



Dogen, Record of Things Heard from the Treasury of the Eye of the True
Teaching. Trans. Thomas Cleary. Boulder, Colo.: Great Eastern Book Co.,
1978.



Dogen, Trans. Jiyu Kennett. Zen is Eternal Life. Emeryville, Calif.:
Dharma, 1976.



Dumoulin, Heinrich. A History of Zen Buddhism. New York: Random House,
1963; paperback edition, Boston: Beacon, 1969.

-----	, and Ruth Fuller Sasaki. The Development of Chinese Zen. New
York: First Zen Institute of America, 1953.



Eberhard, Wolfram. A History of China. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1977.



Eliot, Sir Charles. Japanese Buddhism. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1969.



Feng, Gai-fu, and Jane English, trans. Chuang Tsu. New York: Vintage,
1974.

-----	. Tao Te-Ching. New York: Vintage, 1972.



First Zen Institute of America. Cat's Yawn. New York: 1947.



Fitzgerald, C. P. China--A Short Cultural History. New York: Praeger,
1961.

-----	. The Empress Wu. Vancouver: University of British Columbia,
1968.

-----	. Son of Heaven: A Biography of Li Shih-min, Founder of the T'ang
Dynasty. Cambridge: University Press, 1933.



Frederic, Louis. Daily Life in Japan at the Time of the Samurai. Tokyo:
Tuttle, 1972.



Fung, Paul F., and George D. Fung, trans. The Sutra of the Sixth
Patriarch on the Pristine Orthodox Dharma. San Francisco: Buddha's
Universal Church, 1964.



Fung Yu-Ian. A Short History of Chinese Philosophy. New York:
Macmillan, 1948; paperback edition, Free Press, 1966.

-----	. The Spirit of Chinese Philosophy. Boston: Beacon Press, 1962.



Gernet, Jacques. "Biographie du Matre Chen-houei de Ho-tso," Journal
Asiatique, 249 (1951), pp. 29-60.

-----	. "Complement aux Entretiens du Maitre de _Dhyana_ Chen-houei
(668-760)," BEFEO, 44, 2 (1954), pp. 453-66.

-----	. Daily Life in China on the Eve of the Mongol Invasion. Trans.
H. M. Wright. New York: Macmillan, 1962.

-----	. "Entretiens du Maitre de _Dhyana_ Chen-bouei du Ho-tso," Hanoi,
1949. (Publications de l'ecole frangaise d'Extreme-Orient, Vol. 31).



Giles, Herbert A. A History of Chinese Literature. New York: Grove,
1923.



Goddard, Dwight, ed. A Buddhist Bible. New York: Dutton, 1938;

paperback edition, Boston: Beacon, 1970.



Goodrich, L. Carrington. A Short History of the Chinese People, 4th
edn. New York: Harper & Row, 1963.



Graham, A. C. Poems of the Late T'ang. Baltimore: Penguin, 1965.



Grousset, Rene. In The Footsteps of the Buddha. New York: Grossman,
1971.

-----	. The Rise and Splendour of the Chinese Empire. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1962. Hall, John Whitney. Japan, From
Prehistory to Modern Times. New York: Delacorte, 1970.

-----	, and Toyoda Takeshi, eds. Japan in The Muromachi Age. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1977.



 Hanayama, Shinsho. A History of Japanese Buddhism. Tokyo: Bukkyo Dendo
Kyokai, 1966.



 Harrison, John A. The Chinese Empire. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1972.



Hoffmann, Yoel. Radical Zen. Brookline, Mass.: Autumn Press, 1978.

-------. The Sound of One Hand Clapping. New York: Basic Books, 1975.



Hookham, Hilda. A Short History of China. New York: St. Martin's Press,
Inc., 1972; paperback edition, New York: New American Library, 1972.



Hoover, Thomas. Zen Culture. New York: Random House, 1977;

paperback edition, Vintage, 1978.



Hsuan Hua. The Sixth Patriarch's Dharma Jewel Platform Sutra. San
Francisco: Buddhist Text Translation Society, 1971.



Hu Shih. "Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism in China: Its History and Method,"
Philosophy East and West, 3, 1 (April 1953), pp. 3-24.

-----	. "The Development of Zen Buddhism in China," Chinese Social and
Political Science Review, 15, 4 (January 1932), pp. 475-505.



Inada, Kenneth K. Nagarjuna--A Translation of his Mulamadhyamakakarika
With An Introductory Essay. Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1970. Ishihara, Akira,
and Howard S. Levy, The Tao of Sex. Tokyo: Shibundo, 1968.



Kaltenmark, Max. Lao Tzu and Taoism. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford

University Press, 1969.



Kalupahana, David J. Buddhist Philosophy: A Historical Analysis.
Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii, 1976.



 Kato, Bunno, Yoshiro Tamura, and Kojiro Miyasaka, trans. The Threefold
Lotus Sutra. New York: Weatherhill/Kosei, 1975.



Keene, Donald, "The Portrait of Ikkyu," Landscapes and Portraits. Palo
Alto: Kodansha International, 1971.



Kim, Hee-jin. Dogen Kigen: Mystical Realist. Phoenix: University of
Arizona Press, 1975.



 Kodera, Takashi James. Dogen's Formative Years in China.      London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979.



 Kubose, Gyomay M. Zen Koans. Chicago: Regnery, 1973.



Latourette, Kenneth Scott. The Chinese: Their History and Culture. New
York: Macmillan, 1964.



Lau, D. C. Lao Tzu--Tao Te Ching. Baltimore: Penguin, 1963.

-----	. Mencius. Baltimore: Penguin, 1970.



Legge, James. A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms. New York: Dover, 1965.



Levenson, Joseph R., and Franz Schurmann. China: An Interpretive
History. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969.



Liebenthal, Walter. Chao Lun: The Treatises of Seng-chao. Hong Kong:
Hong Kong University Press, 1968.

-----	. "Chinese Buddhism During the 4th and 5th Centuries,"

Monumenta Nipponica, 11 (1955), pp. 44-83.

-----	. "The Sermon of Shen-hui," Asia Major, N. S. 3, 2 (1952), pp.

132-55.



Ling, Trevor. The Buddha. Baltimore: Penguin, 1973.



Luk, Charles. Ch'an and Zen Teachings. 3 vols. London: Rider, 1960-62.

-----	. The Transmission of the Mind Outside the Teaching. New York:
Grove, 1975.

-----	. The Vimalakirti Nirdesa Sutra. Berkeley, Calif.: Shambhala,
1972.



McNaughton, William. The Taoist Vision. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan, 1971.

Miura, Isshu, and Ruth Fuller Sasaki. Zen Dust. New York: Harcourt,
Brace & World, 1966.



Morris, Ivan. The World of the Shining Prince: Court Life in Ancient
Japan. New York: Knopf, 1964.



Munro, Donald J. The Concept of Man in Early China. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press, 1969.



Nishimura, Eshin. Unsui: A Diary of Zen Monastic Life. Honolulu:
University Press of Hawaii, 1973.



Nishiyama, Kosen, and John Stevens. Shobogenzo: The Eye and Treasury of
the True Law. New York: Weatherhill, 1977.



Ogata, Sohaku. Zen for the West. New York: Dial, 1959.



Pardue, Peter A. Buddhism: A Historical Introduction to Buddhist Values
and the Social and Political Forms they have Assumed in Asia. New York:
Macmillan, 1971.



Price, A. F., and Wong Mou-Lam, trans. The Diamond Sutra and the Sutra
of Hui Neng. Berkeley, Calif.: Shambhala, 1969.



Pullyblank, Edwin. The Background of the Rebellion of An Lu-shan.
London: 1955.



Ramanan, K. Venkata. Nagarjuna's Philosophy. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1975.



Reichelt, Karl Ludvig. Truth and Tradition in Chinese Buddhism. New
York: Paragon, 1968.



Reischauer, Edwin O. Ennin's Travels in T'ang China. New York: Ronald
Press, 1955.

-----	. Japan: Past and Present, 3rd. ed. New York: Knopf. 1964.



Reps, Paul, ed. Zen Flesh, Zen Bones. Rutland and Tokyo: Tuttle, 1957.



Robinson, Richard H. The Buddhist Religion. (Revised Edition) Belmont,
California: Dickenson Publishing Co., Inc., 1970.

-----	. Review of Buddhism in Chinese History, by Arthur F. Wright,
Journal of American Oriental Society, 79,4 (October-December, 1959),
pp. 313-38.



Sanford, James. "Zen-Man Ikkyu." Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard
University, 1972. (Obtainable only from James Sanford, Department of
Religion, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, N. C. 27514.)



Sansom, George B. A History of Japan. 3 vols. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press, 1958-63.



Sasaki, Ruth Fuller, trans. The Recorded Sayings of Ch'an Master Lin-
chi Hui-chao of Chen Prefecture. Kyoto: Institute for Zen Studies,
1975.

-----	, Yoshitaka Iriya, and Dana R. Fraser. The Recorded Sayings of
Layman P'ang: A Ninth-Century Zen Classic. New York: Weatherhill, 1971.



Sato, Koji. The Zen Life. New York: Weatherhill/Tankosha, 1977.



Saunders, E. Dale. Buddhism in Japan. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1964.



Schloegl, Irmgard, trans. The Zen Teachings of Rinzai. Berkeley,
Calif.: Shambhala, 1976.



Sekida, Katsuki, trans. Two Zen Classics: Mumonkan Er Hekiganroku. New
York: Weatherhill, 1977.



Shafer, Edward. "The Last Years of Ch'ang-an." Oriens Extremus, 2
(October 1963), pp. 133-79.



Shaw, R. D. M. The Embossed Teakettle. London: Allen & Unwin, 1963.

-----	, trans. The Blue Cliff Records. London: Michael Joseph, 1961.



Shibayama, Zenkei. Zen Comments on the Mumonkan. Trans. Sumiko Kudo.
New York: Harper & Row, 1974.



Shoko, Watanabe. Japanese Buddhism: A Critical Appraisal. Tokyo:
Japanese Cultural Society, 1970.



Smith, D. Howard. Chinese Religions. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1968.



Snyder, Gary. "Han-shan," in Cyril Birch, ed., Anthology of Chinese
Literature. New York: Grove, 1965.



Stevens, John. One Robe One Bowi: The Zen Poetry of Ryokan. New York:
Weatherhill, 1977.



Streng, Frederick J. Emptiness: A Study in Religious Meaning.
Nashville: Abingdon, 1967.



Suzuki, Daisetz T. Essays in Zen Buddhism (First Series). London:
Rider, 1949; paperback edition, New York: Grove,1961.

-----	. Essays in Zen Buddhism (Second Series). London: Rider, 1953;
paperback edition, New York: Weiser, 1971.

-----	. Essays in Zen Buddhism (Third Series). London: Rider, 1953;
paperback edition, New York: Weiser, 1971.

-----. The Lankavatara Sutra. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1968.

-----	. Manual of Zen Buddhism. New York: Grove, 1960.

-----	. Sengai: The Zen Master. Greenwich, Conn.: New York Graphic
Society, 1971.

----. Studies in the Lankavatara Sutra. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1930.

-----	. Zen and Japanese Culture. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University
Press, 1959.

-----	. The Zen Doctrine of No Mind. New York: Weiser, 1972.

-----	. The Zen Monk's Life. Kyoto: Eastern Buddhist Society, 1934;

         paperback edition, New York: Olympia, 1972.



Trevor, H. M., trans. The Ox and His Herdsman, A Chinese Zen Text.
Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1969.



Twitchett, Denis. "Monastic Estates in T'ang China," Asia Major, 5
(1955-56), pp. 123-46.



Varley, H. Paul. Imperial Restoration in Medieval Japan. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1971.

-----	. The Onin War. New York: Columbia University Press, 1967.

-----	. Samurai. New York: Delacorte, 1970; paperback edition, New York:
Dell, 1972.

Waley, Arthur. The Analects of Confucius. New York: Vintage, 1938.

-----	. The Book of Songs. New York: Grove, 1937.

-----	. The Life and Times of Po Chii-I. London: Allen & Unwin, 1949.

-----	. The Poetry and Career of Li Po. London: Allen & Unwin, 1950.

-----	. Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China. New York: Doubleday,
undated reprint of 1939 edition.

-----	. Translations from the Chinese. New York: Vintage, 1968.

-----	. "27 Poems by Han-shan." Encounter, 3, 3 (September 1954), p. 3.

-----	. The Way and Its Power: A Study of the Tao Te Ching and Its Place
in Chinese Thought. New York: Grove Press, 1958.



Waltham, Clae. Chuang-Tzu: Genius of the Absurd. New York: Ace, 1971.



Watson, Burton. Chinese Lyricism. New York: Columbia University Press,
1971.

-----	. Cold Mountain. New York: Columbia University Press, 1970.

-----	. Ryokan: Zen Monk-Poet of Japan. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1977.

-----	, trans. The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1968.



Weber, Max. The Religion of China. New York: Free Press, 1951.



Welch, Holmes. Taoism: The Parting of the Way. Boston: Beacon Press,
1957.



Wilhelm, Richard, trans. The Secret of the Golden Flower. New York:
Harcourt, Brace, 1931.



Wright, Arthur F. "Buddhism and Chinese Culture: Phases of
Interaction," Journal of Asian Studies, 18 (1957-58) pp. 17-42.

-----	. Buddhism in Chinese History. Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1959.



Wu, John C. H. The Golden Age of Zen. Taipei, Taiwan: Committee on
Compilation of the Chinese Library, 1967.



Wu, Chi-yu. "A Study of Han Shan." T'oung Pao, 4-5 (1957).



Yamada, Koun. Gateless Gate. Los Angeles: Center Publications, 1979.



Yampolsky, Philip B. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1967.

-----	 trans. The Zen Master Hakuin: Selected Writings. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1971.

Yokoi, Yuho. Zen Master Dogen. New York: Weatherhill, 1976.













BOOKS BY THOMAS HOOVER



Nonfiction

Zen Culture

The Zen Experience



Fiction

The Moghul

Caribbee

Wall Street _Samurai_

     (The _Samurai_ Strategy)

Project Daedalus

Project Cyclops

Life Blood

Syndrome



All free as e-books at

www.thomashoover.info













