The Project Gutenberg eBook of Joyous Gard
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Joyous Gard

Author: Arthur Christopher Benson


        
Release date: January 22, 2007 [eBook #20423]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20423

Credits: Produced by R. Cedron, Diane Monico, and the Project
        Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by R. Cedron, Diane Monico, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










JOYOUS GARD


ARTHUR CHRISTOPHER BENSON


LONDON

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.

1913




TO
ALL MY FRIENDS
KNOWN AND UNKNOWN
I DEDICATE THIS BOOK




PREFACE


_It is a harder thing than it ought to be to write openly and frankly
of things private and sacred. "Secretum meum mihi!"--"My secret is my
own!"--cried St. Francis in a harrowed moment. But I believe that the
instinct to guard and hoard the inner life is one that ought to be
resisted. Secrecy seems to me now a very uncivilised kind of virtue,
after all! We have all of us, or most of us, a quiet current of
intimate thought, which flows on, gently and resistlessly, in the
background of our lives, the volume and spring of which we cannot
alter or diminish, because it rises far away at some unseen source,
like a stream which flows through grassy pastures, and is fed by rain
which falls on unknown hills from the clouds of heaven. This inner
thought is hardly affected by the busy incidents of life--our work,
our engagements, our public intercourse; but because it represents the
self which we are always alone with, it makes up the greater part of
our life, and is much more our real and true life than the life which
we lead in public. It contains the things which we feel and hope,
rather than what we say; and the fact that we do not speak our inner
thoughts is what more than anything else keeps us apart from each
other.

In this book I have said, or tried to say, just what I thought, and as
I thought it; and since it is a book which recommends a studied
quietness and a cheerful serenity of life, I have put my feelings to a
vigorous test, by writing it, not when I was at ease and in leisure,
but in the very thickest and fullest of my work. I thought that if the
kind of quiet that I recommended had any force or weight at all, it
should be the sort of quiet which I still could realise and value in a
life full of engagements and duties and business, and that if it could
be developed on a background of that kind, it might have a worth which
it could not have if it were gently conceived in peaceful days and
untroubled hours.

So it has all been written in spaces of hard-driven work, when the day
never seemed long enough for all I had to do, between interruptions
and interviews and teaching and meetings. But the sight and scent that
I shall always connect with it, is that of a great lilac-bush which
stands just outside my study window, and which day by day in this
bright and chilly spring has held up its purple clusters, overtopping
the dense, rich, pale foliage, against a blue and cloudless sky; and
when the wind has been in the North, as it has often been, has filled
my room with the scent of breaking buds. How often, as I wrote, have I
cast a sidelong look at the lilac-bush! How often has it appeared to
beckon me away from my papers to a freer and more fragrant air
outside! But it seemed to me that I was perhaps obeying the call of
the lilac best--though how far away from its freshness and
sweetness!--if I tried to make my own busy life, which I do not
pretend not to enjoy, break into such flower as it could, and give out
what the old books call its 'spicery,' such as it is.

Because the bloom, the colour, the scent, are all there, if I could
but express them. That is the truth! I do not claim to make them, to
cause them, to create them, any more than the lilac could engender the
scent of roses or of violets. Nor do I profess to do faithfully all
that I say in my book that it is well to do. That is the worst, and
yet perhaps it is the best, of books, that one presents in them one's
hopes, dreams, desires, visions; more than one's dull and mean
performances. 'Als ich kann!' That is the best one can do and say.

It is our own fault, and not the fault of our visions, that we cannot
always say what we think in talk, even to our best friends. We begin
to do so, perhaps, and we see a shadow gather. Either the friend does
not understand, or he does not care, or he thinks it all unreal and
affected; and then there falls on us a foolish shyness, and we become
not what we are, but what we think the friend would like to think us;
and so he 'gets to know' as he calls it, not what is really there, but
what he chooses should be there.

But with pen in hand, and the blessed white paper before one, there is
no need to be anything in the world but what one is. Our dignity must
look after itself, and the dignity that we claim is worth nothing,
especially if it is falsely claimed. But even the meanest flower that
blows may claim to blossom as it can, and as indeed it must. In the
democracy of flowers, even the dandelion has a right to a place, if it
can find one, and to a vote, if it can get one; and even if it cannot,
the wind is kind to it, and floats its arrowy down far afield, by wood
and meadow, and into the unclaimed waste at last._




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                           PAGE

I. JOYOUS GARD, PRELUDE                             1

II. IDEAS                                           7

III. POETRY                                        10

IV. POETRY AND LIFE                                15

V. ART                                             22

VI. ART AND MORALITY                               35

VII. INTERPRETATION                                46

VIII. EDUCATION                                    54

IX. KNOWLEDGE                                      59

X. GROWTH                                          69

XI. EMOTION                                        77

XII. MEMORY                                        86

XIII. RETROSPECT                                   98

XIV. HUMOUR                                       107

XV. VISIONS                                       119

XVI. THOUGHT                                      126

XVII. ACCESSIBILITY                               136

XVIII. SYMPATHY                                   148

XIX. SCIENCE                                      157

XX. WORK                                          166

XXI. HOPE                                         173

XXII. EXPERIENCE                                  184

XXIII. FAITH                                      193

XXIV. PROGRESS                                    204

XXV. THE SENSE OF BEAUTY                          212

XXVI. THE PRINCIPLE OF BEAUTY                     220

XXVII. LIFE                                       228




JOYOUS GARD

I

PRELUDE


The Castle of _Joyous Gard_ in the _Morte D'Arthur_ was Sir Lancelot's
own castle, that he had won with his own hands. It was full of
victual, and all manner of mirth and disport. It was hither that the
wounded knight rode as fast as his horse might run, to tell Sir
Lancelot of the misuse and capture of Sir Palamedes; and hence
Lancelot often issued forth, to rescue those that were oppressed, and
to do knightly deeds.

It was true that Lancelot afterwards named it _Dolorous Gard_, but
that was because he had used it unworthily, and was cast out from it;
but it recovered its old name again when they conveyed his body
thither, after he had purged his fault by death. It was on the
morning of the day when they set out, that the Bishop who had been
with him when he died, and had given him all the rites that a
Christian man ought to have, was displeased when they woke him out of
his sleep, because, as he said, he was so merry and well at ease. And
when they inquired the reason of his mirth, the Bishop said, "Here was
Lancelot with me, with more angels than ever I saw men upon one day."
So it was well with that great knight at the last!

I have called this book of mine by the name of _Joyous Gard_, because
it speaks of a stronghold that we can win with our own hands, where we
can abide in great content, so long as we are not careful to linger
there in sloth and idleness, but are ready to ride abroad at the call
for help. The only time in his life when Lancelot was deaf to that
call, was when he shut himself up in the castle to enjoy the love that
was his single sin. And it was that sin that cost him so dear, and
lost the Castle its old and beautiful name. But when the angels made
glad over the sinner who repented, as it is their constant use to do,
and when it was only remembered of Lancelot that he had been a
peerless knight, the name came back to the Castle; and that name is
doubtless hidden now under some name of commoner use, whatever and
wherever it may be.

In the _Pilgrim's Progress_ we read how willing Mr. Interpreter was,
in the House that was full of so many devices and surprises, to
explain to the pilgrims the meaning of all the fantastic emblems and
comfortable sights that he showed them. And I do not think it spoils a
parable, but rather improves it, that it should have its secret
meaning made plain.

The Castle of _Joyous Gard_ then, which each of us can use, if we
desire it, is the fortress of beauty and joy. We cannot walk into it
by right, but must win it; and in a world like this, where there is
much that is anxious and troublesome, we ought, if we can, to gain
such a place, and provide it with all that we need, where we may have
our seasons of rest and refreshment. It must not be idle and selfish
joyance that we take there; it must be the interlude to toil and fight
and painful deeds, and we must be ready to sally out in a moment when
it is demanded of us. Now, if the winning of such a fortress of
thought is hard, it is also dangerous when won, because it tempts us
to immure ourselves in peace, and only observe from afar the plain of
life, which lies all about the Castle, gazing down through the high
windows; to shut out the wind and the rain, as well as the cries and
prayers of those who have been hurt and dismayed by wrongful usage. If
we do that, the day will come when we shall be besieged in our Castle,
and ride away vanquished and disgraced, to do what we have neglected
and forgotten.

But it is not only right, it is natural and wise, that we should have
a stronghold in our minds, where we should frequent courteous and
gentle and knightly company--the company of all who have loved beauty
wisely and purely, such as poets and artists. Because we make a very
great mistake if we allow the common course and use of the world to
engulph us wholly. We must not be too dainty for the work of the
world, but we may thankfully believe that it is only a mortal
discipline, and that our true life is elsewhere, hid with God. If we
grow to believe that life and its cares and business are all, we lose
the freshness of life, just as we lose the strength of life if we
reject its toil. But if we go at times to our _Joyous Gard_, we can
bring back into common life something of the grace and seemliness and
courtesy of the place. For the end of life is that we should do humble
and common things in a fine and courteous manner, and mix with simple
affairs, not condescendingly or disdainfully, but with all the
eagerness and modesty of the true knight.

This little book then is an account, as far as I can give it, of what
we may do to help ourselves in the matter, by feeding and nurturing
the finer and sweeter thought, which, like all delicate things, often
perishes from indifference and inattention. Those of us who are
sensitive and imaginative and faint-hearted often miss our chance of
better things by not forming plans and designs for our peace. We
lament that we are hurried and pressed and occupied, and we cry,

    _"Yet, oh, the place could I but find!"_

But that is because we expect to be conducted thither, without the
trouble of the journey! Yet we can, like the wise King of Troy, build
the walls of our castle to music, if we will, and see to the fit
providing of the place; it only needs that we should set about it in
earnest; and as I have often gratefully found that a single word of
another can fall into the mind like a seed, and quicken to life while
one sleeps, breaking unexpectedly into bloom, I will here say what
comes into my mind to say, and point out the towers that I think I
discern rising above the tangled forest, and glimmering tall and
shapely and secure at the end of many an open avenue.




II

IDEAS


There are certain great ideas which, if we have any intelligence and
thoughtfulness at all, we cannot help coming across the track of, just
as when we walk far into the deep country, in the time of the
blossoming of flowers, we step for a moment into a waft of fragrance,
cast upon the air from orchard or thicket or scented field of bloom.

These ideas are very various in quality; some of them deliciously
haunting and transporting, some grave and solemn, some painfully sad
and strong. Some of them seem to hint at unseen beauty and joy, some
have to do with problems of conduct and duty, some with the relation
in which we wish to stand or are forced to stand with other human
beings; some are questionings born of grief and pain, what the
meaning of sorrow is, whether pain has a further intention, whether
the spirit survives the life which is all that we can remember of
existence; but the strange thing about all these ideas is that we find
them suddenly in the mind and soul; we do not seem to invent them,
though we cannot trace them; and even if we find them in books that we
read or words that we hear, they do not seem wholly new to us; we
recognise them as things that we have dimly felt and perceived, and
the reason why they often have so mysterious an effect upon us is that
they seem to take us outside of ourselves, further back than we can
recollect, beyond the faint horizon, into something as wide and great
as the illimitable sea or the depths of sunset sky.

Some of these ideas have to do with the constitution of society, the
combined and artificial peace in which human beings live, and then
they are political ideas; or they deal with such things as numbers,
curves, classes of animals and plants, the soil of the earth, the
changes of the seasons, the laws of weight and mass, and then they are
scientific ideas; some have to do with right and wrong conduct,
actions and qualities, and then they are religious or ethical ideas.
But there is a class of thoughts which belong precisely to none of
these things, but which are concerned with the perception of beauty,
in forms and colours, musical sounds, human faces and limbs, words
majestic or sweet; and this sense of beauty may go further, and may be
discerned in qualities, regarded not from the point of view of their
rightness and justice, but according as they are fine and noble,
evoking our admiration and our desire; and these are poetical ideas.

It is not of course possible exactly to classify ideas, because there
is a great overlapping of them and a wide interchange. The thought of
the slow progress of man from something rude and beastlike, the
statement of the astronomer about the swarms of worlds swimming in
space, may awaken the sense of poetry which is in its essence the
sense of wonder. I shall not attempt in these few pages to limit and
define the sense of poetry. I shall merely attempt to describe the
kind of effect it has or may have in life, what our relation is or may
be to it, what claim it may be said to have upon us, whether we can
practise it, and whether we ought to do so.




