XII

MEMORY


Memory is for many people the only form of poetry which they indulge.
If a soul turns to the future for consolation in a sad or wearied or
disappointed present, it is in religion that hope and strength are
sometimes found; but if it is a retrospective nature--and the poetical
nature is generally retrospective, because poetry is concerned with
the beauty of actual experience and actual things, rather than with
the possible and the unknown--then it finds its medicine for the
dreariness of life in memory. Of course there are many simple and
healthy natures which do not concern themselves with visions at
all--the little businesses, the daily pleasures, are quietly and even
eagerly enjoyed. But the poetical nature is the nature that is not
easily contented, because it tends to idealisation, to the thought
that the present might easily be so much happier, brighter, more
beautiful, than it is.

    An eager soul that looks beyond
    And shivers in the midst of bliss,
    That cries, "I should not need despond,
    If this were otherwise, and this!"

And so the soul that has seen much and enjoyed much and endured much,
and whose whole life has been not spoiled, of course, but a little
shadowed by the thought that the elements of happiness have never been
quite as pure as it would have wished, turns back in thought to the
old scenes of love and companionship, and evokes from the dark, as
from the pages of some volume of photographs and records, the pictures
of the past, retouching them, it is true, and adapting them, by deftly
removing all the broken lights and intrusive anxieties, not into what
they actually were, but into what they might have been. Carlyle laid
his finger upon the truth of this power, when he said that the reason
why the pictures of the past were always so golden in tone, so
delicate in outline, was because the quality of fear was taken from
them. It is the fear of what may be and what must be that overshadows
present happiness; and if fear is taken from us we are happy. The
strange thing is that we cannot learn not to be afraid, even though
all the darkest and saddest of our experiences have left us unscathed;
and if we could but find a reason for the mingling of fear with our
lives, we should have gone far towards solving the riddle of the
world.

This indulgence of memory is not necessarily a weakening or an
enervating thing, so long as it does not come to us too early, or
disengage us from needful activities. It is often not accompanied by
any shadow of loss or bitterness. I remember once sitting with my
beloved old nurse, when she was near her ninetieth year, in her little
room, in which was gathered much of the old nursery furniture, the
tiny chairs of the children, the store-cupboard with the farmyard
pictures on the panel, the stuffed pet-birds--all the homely wrack of
life; and we had been recalling many of the old childish incidents
with laughter and smiles. When I rose to go, she sate still for a
minute, and her eyes filled with quiet tears, "Ah, those were happy
days!" she said. But there was no repining about it, no sense that it
was better to forget old joys--rather a quiet pleasure that so much
that was beautiful and tender was laid away in memory, and could
neither be altered nor taken away. And one does not find in old
people, whose memory of the past is clear, while their recollection of
the present grows dim, any sense of pathos, but rather of pride and
eagerness about recalling the minutest details of the vanished days.
To feel the pathos of the past, as Tennyson expressed it in that
wonderful and moving lyric, _Tears, idle tears_, is much more
characteristic of youth. There is rather in serene old age a sense of
pleasant triumph at having safely weathered the storms of fate, and
left the tragedies of life behind. The aged would not as a rule live
life over again, if they could. They are not disappointed in life.
They have had, on the whole, what they hoped and desired. As Goethe
said, in that deep and large maxim, "Of that which a man desires in
his youth, he shall have enough in his age." That is one of the most
singular things in life--at least this is my experience--how the
things which one really desired, not the things which one ought to
have desired, are showered upon one. I have been amazed and even
stupefied sometimes to consider how my own little petty, foolish,
whimsical desires have been faithfully and literally granted me. We
most of us do really translate into fact what we desire, and as a rule
we only fail to get the things which we have not desired enough. It is
true indeed that we often find that what we desired was not worth
getting; and we ought to be more afraid of our desires, not because we
shall not get them, but because we shall almost certainly have them
fulfilled. For myself I can only think with shame how closely my
present conditions do resemble my young desires, in all their petty
range, their trivial particularity. I suppose I have unconsciously
pursued them, chosen them, grasped at them; and the shame of it is
that if I had desired better things, I should assuredly have been
given them. I see, or seem to see, the same thing in the lives of many
that I know. What a man sows he shall reap! That is taken generally to
mean that if he sows pleasure, he shall reap disaster; but it has a
much truer and more terrible meaning than that--namely, that if a man
sows the seed of small, trivial, foolish joys, the grain that he
reaps is small, trivial, and foolish too. God is indeed in many ways
an indulgent Father, like the Father in the parable of the Prodigal
Son; and the best rebuke that He gives, if we have the wisdom to see
it, is that He so often does hand us, with a smile, the very thing we
have desired. And thus it is well to pray that He should put into our
minds good desires, and that we should use our wills to keep ourselves
from dwelling too much upon small and pitiful desires, for the fear is
that they will be abundantly gratified.

And thus when the time comes for recollection, it is a very wonderful
thing to look back over life, and see how eagerly gracious God has
been to us. He knows very well that we cannot learn the paltry value
of the things we desire, if they are withheld from us, but only if
they are granted to us; and thus we have no reason to doubt His
fatherly intention, because He does so much dispose life to please us.
And we need not take it for granted that He will lead us by harsh and
provocative discipline, though when He grants our desire, He sometimes
sends leanness withal into our soul. Yet one of the things that
strikes one most forcibly, as one grows older and learns something of
the secrets of other lives, is how lightly and serenely men and women
do often bear what might seem to be intolerable calamities. How
universal an experience it is to find that when the expected calamity
does come, it is an easier affair than we thought it, so that we say
under the blow, "Is that really all?" In that wonderful book, the
Diary of Sir Walter Scott, when his bankruptcy fell upon him, and all
the schemes and designs that he had been carrying out, with the joyful
zest of a child--his toy-castle, his feudal circle, his wide
estate--were suddenly suspended, he wrote with an almost amused
surprise that he found how little he really cared, and that the people
who spoke tenderly and sympathetically to him, as though he must be
reeling under the catastrophe, would themselves be amazed to find that
he found himself as cheerful and undaunted as ever. Life is apt, for
all vivid people, to be a species of high-hearted game: it is such fun
to play it as eagerly as one can, and to persuade oneself that one
really cares about the applause, the money, the fine house, the
comforts, the deference, the convenience of it all. And yet, if there
is anything noble in a man or woman, when the game is suddenly
interrupted and the toys swept aside, they find that there is
something exciting and stimulating in having to do without, in
adapting themselves with zest to the new conditions. It was a good
game enough, but the new game is better! The failure is to take it all
heavily and seriously, to be solemn about it; for then failure is
disconcerting indeed. But if one is interested in experience, but yet
has the vitality to see how detached one really is from material
things, how little they really affect us, then the change is almost
grateful. It is the spirit of the game, the activity, the energy, that
delights us, not the particular toy. And so the looking back on life
ought never to be a mournful thing; it ought to be light-hearted,
high-spirited, amusing. The spirit survives, and there is yet much
experience ahead of us. We waste our sense of pathos very strangely
over inanimate things. We get to feel about the things that surround
us, our houses, our very chairs and tables, as if they were somehow
things that were actually attached to us. We feel, when the old house
that has belonged to our family passes into other hands, as though
the rooms resented the intruders; as though our sofas and cabinets
could not be at ease in other hands, as if they would almost prefer
shabby and dusty inaction in our own lumber-room, to cheerful use in
some other circle. This is a delusion of which we must make haste to
get rid. It is the weakest sort of sentiment, and yet it is treasured
by many natures as if it were something refined and noble. To yield to
it, is to fetter our life with self-imposed and fantastic chains.
There is no sort of reason why we should not love to live among
familiar things; but to break our hearts over the loss of them is a
real debasing of ourselves. We must learn to use the things of life
very lightly and detachedly; and to entrench ourselves in trivial
associations is simply to court dreariness and to fall into a stupor
of the spirit.

And thus even our old memories must be treated with the same lightness
and unaffectedness. We must do all we can to forget grief and
disaster. We must not consecrate a shrine to sorrow and make the
votive altar, as Dido did, into a _causa doloris_, an excuse for
lamentation. We must not think it an honourable and chivalrous and
noble thing to spend our time in broken-hearted solemnity in the
vaults of perished joys. Or if we do it, we must frankly confess it to
be a weakness and a languor of spirit, not believe it to be a thing
which others ought to admire and respect. It was one of the base
sentimentalities of the last century, a real sign of the decadence of
life, that people felt it to be a fine thing to cherish grief, and to
live resolutely with sighs and tears. The helpless widow of
nineteenth-century fiction, shrouded in crape, and bursting into tears
at the smallest sign of gaiety, was a wholly unlovely, affected,
dramatic affair. And one of the surest signs of our present vitality
is that this attitude has become not only unusual, but frankly absurd
and unfashionable. There is an intense and gallant pathos about a
nature broken by sorrow, making desperate attempts to be cheerful and
active, and not to cast a shadow of grief upon others. There is no
pathos at all in the sight of a person bent on emphasising his or her
grief, on using it to make others uncomfortable, on extracting a
recognition of its loyalty and fidelity and emotional fervour.

Of course there are some memories and experiences that must grave a
deep and terrible mark upon the heart, the shock of which has been so
severe, that the current of life must necessarily be altered by them.
But even then it is better as far as possible to forget them and to
put them away from us--at all events, not to indulge them or dwell in
them. To yield is simply to delay the pilgrimage, to fall exhausted in
some unhappy arbour by the road. The road has to be travelled, every
inch of it, and it is better to struggle on in feebleness than to
collapse in despair.

Mrs. Charles Kingsley, in her widowhood, once said to a friend,
"Whenever I find myself thinking too much about Charles, I simply
force myself to read the most exciting novel I can. He is there, he is
waiting for me; and hearts were made to love with, not to break."

And as the years go on, even the most terrible memories grow to have
the grace and beauty which nature lavishes on all the relics of
extinct forces and spent agonies. They become like the old grey broken
castle, with the grasses on its ledges, and the crows nesting in its
parapets, rising blind and dumb on its green mound, with the hamlet
at its feet; or like the craggy islet, severed by the raging sea from
the towering headland, where the samphire sprouts in the rift, and the
sea-birds roost, at whose foot the surges lap, and over whose head the
landward wind blows swiftly all the day.




