XIII

RETROSPECT


But one must not forget that after all memory has another side, too
often a rueful side, and that it often seems to turn sour and
poisonous in the sharp decline of fading life; and this ought not to
be. I would like to describe a little experience of my own which came
to me as a surprise, but showed me clearly enough what memory can be
and what it rightly is, if it is to feed the spirit at all.

Not very long ago I visited Lincoln, where my father was Canon and
Chancellor from 1872 to 1877. I had only been there once since then,
and that was twenty-four years ago. When we lived there I was a small
Eton boy, so that it was always holiday time there, and a place which
recalls nothing but school holidays has perhaps an unfair advantage.
Moreover it was a period quite unaccompanied, in our family life, by
any sort of trouble, illness, or calamity. The Chancery of Lincoln is
connected in my mind with no tragic or even sorrowful event whatever,
and suggests no painful reminiscence. How many people, I wonder, can
say that of any home that has sheltered them for so long?

Of course Lincoln itself, quite apart from any memories or
associations, is a place to kindle much emotion. It was a fine sunny
day there, and the colour of the whole place was amazing--the rich
warm hue of the stone of which the Minster is built, which takes on a
fine ochre-brown tinge where it is weathered, gives it a look of
homely comfort, apart from the matchless dignity of clustered transept
and soaring towers. Then the glowing and mellow brick of Lincoln, its
scarlet roof tiles--what could be more satisfying for instance than
the dash of vivid red in the tiling of the old Palace as you see it on
the slope among its gardens from the opposite upland?--its
smoke-blackened facades, the abundance, all over the hill, of old
embowered gardens, full of trees and thickets and greenery, its grassy
spaces, its creeper-clad houses; the whole effect is one of
extraordinary richness of hue, of age vividly exuberant, splendidly
adorned.

I wandered transported about Cathedral and close, and became aware
then of how strangely unadventurous in the matter of exploration one
had always been as a boy. It was true that we children had scampered
with my father's master-key from end to end of the Cathedral--wet
mornings used constantly to be spent there--so that I know every
staircase, gallery, clerestory, parapet, triforium, and roof-vault of
the building--but I found in the close itself many houses, alleys,
little streets, which I had actually never seen, or even suspected
their existence.

It was all full of little ghosts, and a tiny vignette shaped itself in
memory at every corner, of some passing figure--a good-natured Canon,
a youthful friend, Levite or Nethinim, or some deadly enemy, the son
perhaps of some old-established denizen of the close, with whom for
some unknown reason the Chancery schoolroom proclaimed an inflexible
feud.

But when I came to see the old house itself--so little changed, so
distinctly recollected--then I was indeed amazed at the torrent of
little happy fragrant memories which seemed to pour from every doorway
and window--the games, the meals, the plays, the literary projects,
the readings, the telling of stories, the endless, pointless,
enchanting wanderings with some breathless object in view, forgotten
or transformed before it was ever attained or executed, of which
children alone hold the secret.

Best of all do I recollect long summer afternoons spent in the great
secluded high-walled garden at the back, with its orchard, its mound
covered with thickets, and the old tower of the city wall, which made
a noble fortress in games of prowess or adventure. I can see the
figure of my father in his cassock, holding a little book, walking up
and down among the gooseberry-beds half the morning, as he developed
one of his unwritten sermons for the Minster on the following day.

I do not remember that very affectionate relations existed between us
children; it was a society, based on good-humoured tolerance and a
certain democratic respect for liberty, that nursery group; it had its
cliques, its sections, its political emphasis, its diplomacies; but it
was cordial rather than emotional, and bound together by common
interests rather than by mutual devotion.

This, for instance, was one of the ludicrous incidents which came back
to me. There was an odd little mediaeval room on the ground-floor,
given up as a sort of study, in the school sense, to my elder brother
and myself. My younger brother, aged almost eight, to show his power,
I suppose, or to protest against some probably quite real grievance or
tangible indignity, came there secretly one morning in our absence,
took a shovelful of red-hot coals from the fire, laid them on the
hearth-rug, and departed. The conflagration was discovered in time,
the author of the crime detected, and even the most tolerant of
supporters of nursery anarchy could find nothing to criticise or
condemn in the punishment justly meted out to the offender.

But here was the extraordinary part of it all. I am myself somewhat
afraid of emotional retrospect, which seems to me as a rule to have a
peculiarly pungent and unbearable smart about it. I do not as a rule
like revisiting places which I have loved and where I have been happy;
it is simply incurring quite unnecessary pain, and quite fruitless
pain, deliberately to unearth buried memories of happiness.

Now at Lincoln the other day I found, to my wonder and relief, that
there was not the least touch of regret, no sense of sorrow or loss in
the air. I did not want it all back again, nor would I have lived
through it again, even if I could have done so. The thought of
returning to it seemed puerile; it was charming, delightful, all full
of golden prospects and sunny mornings, but an experience which had
yielded up its sweetness as a summer cloud yields its cooling rain,
and passes over. Yet it was all a perfectly true, real, and actual
part of my life, something of which I could never lose hold and for
which I could always be frankly grateful. Life has been by no means a
scene of untroubled happiness since then; but there came to me that
day, walking along the fragrant garden-paths, very clearly and
distinctly, the knowledge that one would not wish one's life to have
been untroubled! Halcyon calm, heedless innocence, childish joy, was
not after all the point--pretty things enough, but only as a change
and a relief, or perhaps rather as a prelude to more serious business!
I was, as a boy, afraid of life, hated its noise and scent, suspected
it of cruelty and coarseness, wanted to keep it at arm's length. I
feel very differently about life now; it's a boisterous business
enough, but does not molest one unduly; and a very little courage goes
a long way in dealing with it!

True, on looking back, the evolution was dim and obscure; there seemed
many blind alleys and passages, many unnecessary winds and turns in
the road; but for all that the trend was clear enough, at all events,
to show that there was some great and not unkindly conspiracy about me
and my concerns, involving every one else's concerns as well, some
good-humoured mystery, with a dash of shadow and sorrow across it
perhaps, which would be soon cleared up; some secret withheld as from
a child, the very withholder of which seems to struggle with
good-tempered laughter, partly at one's dulness in not being able to
guess, partly at the pleasure in store.

I think it is our impatience, our claim to have everything
questionable made instantly and perfectly plain to us, which does the
mischief--that, and the imagination which never can forecast any
relief or surcease of pain, and pays no heed whatever to the
astounding brevity, the unutterable rapidity of human life.

So, as I walked in the old garden, I simply rejoiced that I had a
share in the place which could not be gainsaid; and that, even if the
high towers themselves, with their melodious bells, should crumble
into dust, I still had my dear memory of it all: the old life, the old
voices, looks, embraces, came back in little glimpses; yet it was far
away, long past, and I did not wish it back; the present seemed a
perfectly natural and beautiful sequence, and that past life an old
sweet chapter of some happy book, which needs no rewriting.

So I looked back in joy and tenderness--and even with a sort of
compassion; the child whom I saw sauntering along the grass paths of
the garden, shaking the globed rain out of the poppy's head, gathering
the waxen apples from the orchard grass, he was myself in very
truth--there was no doubting that; I hardly felt different. But I had
gained something which he had not got, some opening of eye and heart;
and he had yet to bear, to experience, to pass through, the days which
I had done with, and which, in spite of their much sweetness, had yet
a bitterness, as of a healing drug, underneath them, and which I did
not wish to taste again. No, I desired no renewal of old things, only
the power of interpreting the things that were new, and through which
even now one was passing swiftly and carelessly, as the boy ran among
the fruit-trees of the garden; but it was not the golden fragrant husk
of happiness that one wanted, but the seed hidden within
it--experience was made sweet just that one might be tempted to live!
Yet the end of it all was not the pleasure or the joy that came and
passed, the gaiety, even the innocence of childhood, but something
stern and strong, which hardly showed at all at first, but at last
seemed like the slow work of the graver of gems brushing away the
glittering crystalline dust from the intaglio.




