XIV

HUMOUR


The Castle of _Joyous Gard_ was always full of laughter; not the wild
giggling, I think, of reckless people, which the writer of Proverbs
said was like the crackling of thorns under a pot; that is a wearisome
and even an ugly thing, because it does not mean that people are
honestly amused, but have some basely exciting thing in their minds.
Laughter must be light-hearted, not light-minded. Still less was it
the dismal tittering of ill-natured people over mean gossip, which is
another of the ugly sounds of life. No, I think it was rather the
laughter of cheerful people, glad to be amused, who hardly knew that
they were laughing; that is a wholesome exercise enough. It was the
laughter of men and women, with heavy enough business behind them and
before them, but yet able in leisurely hours to find life full of
merriment--the voice of joy and health! And I am sure too that it was
not the guarded condescending laughter of saints who do not want to be
out of sympathy with their neighbours, and laugh as precisely and
punctually as they might respond to a liturgy, if they discover that
they are meant to be amused!

Humour is one of the characteristics of _Joyous Gard_, not humour
resolutely cultivated, but the humour which comes from a sane and
healthy sense of proportion; and is a sign of light-heartedness rather
than a thing aimed at; a thing which flows naturally into the easy
spaces of life, because it finds the oddities of life, the
peculiarities of people, the incongruities of thought and speech, both
charming and delightful.

It is a great misfortune that so many people think it a mark of
saintliness to be easily shocked, whereas the greatest saints of all
are the people who are never shocked; they may be distressed, they may
wish things different; but to be shocked is often nothing but a mark
of vanity, a self-conscious desire that others should know how high
one's standard, how sensitive one's conscience is. I do not of course
mean that one is bound to join in laughter, however coarse a jest may
be; but the best-bred and finest-tempered people steer past such
moments with a delicate tact; contrive to show that an ugly jest is
not so much a thing to be disapproved of and rebuked, as a sign that
the jester is not recognising the rights of his company, and
outstepping the laws of civility and decency.

It is a very difficult thing to say what humour is, and probably it is
a thing that is not worth trying to define. It resides in the
incongruity of speech and behaviour with the surrounding
circumstances.

I remember once seeing two tramps disputing by the roadside, with the
gravity which is given to human beings by being slightly overcome with
drink. I suppose that one ought not to be amused by the effects of
drunkenness, but after all one does not wish people to be drunk that
one may be amused. The two tramps in question were ragged and
infinitely disreputable. Just as I came up, the more tattered of the
two flung his hat on the ground, with a lofty gesture like that of a
king abdicating, and said, "I'll go no further with you!" The other
said, "Why do you say that? Why will you go no further with me?" The
first replied, "No, I'll go no further with you!" The other said, "I
must know why you will go no further with me--you must tell me that!"
The first replied, with great dignity, "Well, I will tell you that! It
lowers my self-respect to be seen with a man like you!"

That is the sort of incongruity I mean. The tragic solemnity of a man
who might have changed clothes with the nearest scarecrow without a
perceptible difference, and whose life was evidently not ordered by
any excessive self-respect, falling back on the dignity of human
nature in order to be rid of a companion as disreputable as himself,
is what makes the scene so grotesque, and yet in a sense so
impressive, because it shows a lurking standard of conduct which no
pitiableness of degradation could obliterate. I think that is a good
illustration of what I mean by humour, because in the presence of such
a scene it is possible to have three perfectly distinct emotions. One
may be sorry with all one's heart that men should fall to such
conditions, and feel that it is a stigma on our social machinery that
it should be so. Those two melancholy figures were a sad blot upon
the wholesome countryside! Yet one may also discern a hope in the mere
possibility of framing an ideal under such discouraging circumstances,
which will be, I have no sort of doubt, a seed of good in the upward
progress of the poor soul which grasped it; because indeed I have no
doubt that the miserable creature _is_ on an upward path, and that
even if there is no prospect for him in this life of anything but a
dismal stumbling down into disease and want, yet I do not in the least
believe that that is the end of his horizon or his pilgrimage; and
thirdly, one may be genuinely and not in the least evilly amused at
the contrast between the disreputable squalor of the scene and the
lofty claim advanced. The three emotions are not at all inconsistent.
The pessimistic moralist might say that it was all very shocking, the
optimistic moralist might say that it was hopeful, the unreflective
humourist might simply be transported by the absurdity; yet not to be
amused at such a scene would appear to me to be both dull and
priggish. It seems to me to be a false solemnity to be shocked at any
lapses from perfection; a man might as well be shocked at the
existence of a poisonous snake or a ravening tiger. One must "see life
steadily and see it whole," and though we may and must hope that we
shall struggle upwards out of the mess, we may still be amused at the
dolorous figures we cut in the mire.

I was once in the company of a grave, decorous, and well-dressed
person who fell helplessly into a stream off a stepping-stone. I had
no wish that he should fall, and I was perfectly conscious of intense
sympathy with his discomfort; but I found the scene quite
inexpressibly diverting, and I still simmer with laughter at the
recollection of the disappearance of the trim figure, and his furious
emergence, like an oozy water-god, from the pool. It is not in the
least an ill-natured laughter. I did not desire the catastrophe, and I
would have prevented it if I could; but it was dreadfully funny for
all that; and if a similar thing had happened to myself, I should not
resent the enjoyment of the scene by a spectator, so long as I was
helped and sympathised with, and the merriment decently repressed
before me.

I think that what is called practical joking, which aims at
deliberately producing such situations, is a wholly detestable thing.
But it is one thing to sacrifice another person's comfort to one's
laughter, and quite another to be amused at what a fire-insurance
policy calls the act of God.

And I am very sure of this, that the sane, healthy, well-balanced
nature must have a fund of wholesome laughter in him, and that so far
from trying to repress a sense of humour, as an unkind, unworthy,
inhuman thing, there is no capacity of human nature which makes life
so frank and pleasant a business. There are no companions so
delightful as the people for whom one treasures up jests and
reminiscences, because one is sure that they will respond to them and
enjoy them; and indeed I have found that the power of being
irresponsibly amused has come to my aid in the middle of really tragic
and awful circumstances, and has relieved the strain more than
anything else could have done.

I do not say that humour is a thing to be endlessly indulged and
sought after; but to be genuinely amused is a sign of courage and
amiability, and a sign too that a man is not self-conscious and
self-absorbed. It ought not to be a settled pre-occupation. Nothing
is more wearisome than the habitual jester, because that signifies
that a man is careless and unobservant of the moods of others. But it
is a thing which should be generously and freely mingled with life;
and the more sides that a man can see to any situation, the more rich
and full his nature is sure to be.

After all, our power of taking a light-hearted view of life is
proportional to our interest in it, our belief in it, our hopes of it.
Of course, if we conclude from our little piece of remembered
experience, that life is a woeful thing, we shall be apt to do as the
old poets thought the nightingale did, to lean our breast against a
thorn, that we may suffer the pain which we propose to utter in liquid
notes. But that seems to me a false sentiment and an artificial mode
of life, to luxuriate in sorrow; even that is better than being
crushed by it; but we may be sure that if we wilfully allow ourselves
to be one-sided, it is a delaying of our progress. All experience
comes to us that we may not be one-sided; and if we learn to weep with
those that weep, we must remember that it is no less our business to
rejoice with those that rejoice. We are helped beyond measure by
those who can tell us and convince us, as poets can, that there is
something beautiful in sorrow and loss and severed ties; by those who
show us the splendour of courage and patience and endurance; but the
true faith is to believe that the end is joy; and we therefore owe
perhaps the largest debt of all to those who encourage us to enjoy, to
laugh, to smile, to be amused.

And so we must not retire into our fortress simply for lonely visions,
sweet contemplation, gentle imagination; there are rooms in our castle
fit for that, the little book-lined cell, facing the sunset, the high
parlour, where the gay, brisk music comes tripping down from the
minstrels' gallery, the dim chapel for prayer, and the chamber called
_Peace_--where the pilgrim slept till break of day, "and then he awoke
and sang"; but there is also the well-lighted hall, with cheerful
company coming and going; where we must put our secluded, wistful,
sorrowful thought aside, and mingle briskly with the pleasant throng,
not steeling ourselves to mirth and movement, but simply glad and
grateful to be there.

It was while I was writing these pages that a friend told me that he
had recently met a man, a merchant, I think, who did me the honour to
discuss my writings at a party and to pronounce an opinion upon them.
He said that I wrote many things which I did not believe, and then
stood aside, and was amused in a humorous mood to see that other
people believed them. It would be absurd to be, or even to feel,
indignant at such a travesty of my purpose as this, and indeed I think
that one is never very indignant at misrepresentation unless one's
mind accuses itself of its being true or partially true.

It is indeed true that I have said things about which I have since
changed my mind, as indeed I hope I shall continue to change it, and
as swiftly as possible, if I see that the former opinions are not
justified. To be thus criticised is, I think, the perfectly natural
penalty of having tried to be serious without being also solemn; there
are many people, and many of them very worthy people, like our friend
the merchant, who cannot believe one is in earnest if one is not also
heavy-handed. Earnestness is mixed up in their minds with bawling and
sweating; and indeed it is quite true that most people who are willing
to bawl and sweat in public, feel earnestly about the subjects to
which they thus address themselves. But I do not see that earnestness
is in the least incompatible with lightness of touch and even with
humour, though I have sometimes been accused of displaying none.
Socrates was in earnest about his ideas, but the penalty he paid for
treating them lightly was that he was put to death for being so
sceptical. I should not at all like the idea of being put to death for
my ideas; but I am wholly in earnest about them, and have never
consciously said anything in which I did not believe.

But I will go one step further and say that I think that many earnest
men do great harm to the causes they advocate, because they treat
ideas so heavily, and divest them of their charm. One of the reasons
why virtue and goodness are not more attractive is because they get
into the hands of people without lightness or humour, and even without
courtesy; and thus the pursuit of virtue seems not only to the young,
but to many older people, to be a boring occupation, and to be
conducted in an atmosphere heavy with disapproval, with dreariness and
dulness and tiresomeness hemming the neophyte in, like fat bulls of
Bashan. It is because I should like to rescue goodness, which is the
best thing in the world, next to love, from these growing influences,
that I have written as I have done; but there is no lurking cynicism
in my books at all, and the worst thing I can accuse myself of is a
sense of humour, perhaps whimsical and childish, which seems to me to
make a pleasant and refreshing companion, as one passes on pilgrimage
in search of what I believe to be very high and heavenly things
indeed.




