CHAPTER XVI.

THE METHOD OF MEANS.


All results of the measurement of continuous quantity can be only
approximately true. Were this assertion doubted, it could readily be
proved by direct experience. If any person, using an instrument of
the greatest precision, makes and registers successive observations
in an unbiassed manner, it will almost invariably be found that the
results differ from each other. When we operate with sufficient care
we cannot perform so simple an experiment as weighing an object in a
good balance without getting discrepant numbers. Only the rough and
careless experimenter will think that his observations agree, but
in reality he will be found to overlook the differences. The most
elaborate researches, such as those undertaken in connection with
standard weights and measures, always render it apparent that complete
coincidence is out of the question, and that the more accurate our
modes of observation are rendered, the more numerous are the sources
of minute error which become apparent. We may look upon the existence
of error in all measurements as the normal state of things. It is
absolutely impossible to eliminate separately the multitude of small
disturbing influences, except by balancing them off against each other.
Even in drawing a mean it is to be expected that we shall come near
the truth rather than exactly to it. In the measurement of continuous
quantity, absolute coincidence, if it seems to occur, must be only
apparent, and is no indication of precision. It is one of the most
embarrassing things we can meet when experimental results agree
too closely. Such coincidences should raise our suspicion that the
apparatus in use is in some way restricted in its operation, so as
not really to give the true result at all, or that the actual results
have not been faithfully recorded by the assistant in charge of the
apparatus.

If then we cannot get twice over exactly the same result, the question
arises, How can we ever attain the truth or select the result which may
be supposed to approach most nearly to it? The quantity of a certain
phenomenon is expressed in several numbers which differ from each
other; no more than one of them at the most can be true, and it is more
probable that they are all false. It may be suggested, perhaps, that
the observer should select the one observation which he judged to be
the best made, and there will often doubtless be a feeling that one
or more results were satisfactory, and the others less trustworthy.
This seems to have been the course adopted by the early astronomers.
Flamsteed, when he had made several observations of a star, probably
chose in an arbitrary manner that which seemed to him nearest to the
truth.[261]

  [261] Baily’s *Account of Flamsteed*, p. 376.

When Horrocks selected for his estimate of the sun’s semi-diameter a
mean between the results of Kepler and Tycho, he professed not to do
it from any regard to the idle adage, “Medio tutissimus ibis,” but
because he thought it from his own observations to be correct.[262] But
this method will not apply at all when the observer has made a number
of measurements which are equally good in his opinion, and it is quite
apparent that in using an instrument or apparatus of considerable
complication the observer will not necessarily be able to judge whether
slight causes have affected its operation or not.

  [262] *The Transit of Venus across the Sun*, by Horrocks, London,
  1859, p. 146.

In this question, as indeed throughout inductive logic, we deal only
with probabilities. There is no infallible mode of arriving at the
absolute truth, which lies beyond the reach of human intellect, and
can only be the distant object of our long-continued and painful
approximations. Nevertheless there is a mode pointed out alike by
common sense and the highest mathematical reasoning, which is more
likely than any other, as a general rule, to bring us near the truth.
The ἄριστον μέτρον, or the *aurea mediocritas*, was highly esteemed
in the ancient philosophy of Greece and Rome; but it is not probable
that any of the ancients should have been able clearly to analyse and
express the reasons why they advocated the *mean* as the safest course.
But in the last two centuries this apparently simple question of the
mean has been found to afford a field for the exercise of the utmost
mathematical skill. Roger Cotes, the editor of the *Principia*, appears
to have had some insight into the value of the mean; but profound
mathematicians such as De Moivre, Daniel Bernoulli, Laplace, Lagrange,
Gauss, Quetelet, De Morgan, Airy, Leslie Ellis, Boole, Glaisher, and
others, have hardly exhausted the subject.


*Several uses of the Mean Result.*

The elimination of errors of unknown sources, is almost always
accomplished by the simple arithmetical process of taking the *mean*,
or, as it is often called, the *average* of several discrepant numbers.
To take an average is to add the several quantities together, and
divide by the number of quantities thus added, which gives a quotient
lying among, or in the *middle* of, the several quantities. Before
however inquiring fully into the grounds of this procedure, it is
essential to observe that this one arithmetical process is really
applied in at least three different cases, for different purposes, and
upon different principles, and we must take great care not to confuse
one application of the process with another. A *mean result*, then, may
have any one of the following significations.

(1) It may give a merely representative number, expressing the general
magnitude of a series of quantities, and serving as a convenient mode
of comparing them with other series of quantities. Such a number is
properly called *The fictitious mean* or *The average result*.

(2) It may give a result approximately free from disturbing quantities,
which are known to affect some results in one direction, and other
results equally in the opposite direction. We may say that in this case
we get a *Precise mean result*.

(3) It may give a result more or less free from unknown and uncertain
errors; this we may call the *Probable mean result*.

Of these three uses of the mean the first is entirely different in
nature from the two last, since it does not yield an approximation
to any natural quantity, but furnishes us with an arithmetic result
comparing the aggregate of certain quantities with their number. The
third use of the mean rests entirely upon the theory of probability,
and will be more fully considered in a later part of this chapter. The
second use is closely connected, or even identical with, the Method of
Reversal already described, but it will be desirable to enter somewhat
fully into all the three employments of the same arithmetical process.


*The Mean and the Average.*

Much confusion exists in the popular, or even the scientific employment
of the terms *mean* and *average*, and they are commonly taken as
synonymous. It is necessary to ascertain carefully what significations
we ought to attach to them. The English word *mean* is equivalent to
*medium*, being derived, perhaps through the French *moyen*, from the
Latin *medius*, which again is undoubtedly kindred with the Greek
μεσος. Etymologists believe, too, that this Greek word is connected
with the preposition μετα, the German *mitte*, and the true English
*mid* or *middle*; so that after all the *mean* is a technical term
identical in its root with the more popular equivalent *middle*.

If we inquire what is the mean in a mathematical point of view, the
true answer is that there are several or many kinds of means. The old
arithmeticians recognised ten kinds, which are stated by Boethius, and
an eleventh was added by Jordanus.[263]

  [263] De Morgan, Supplement to the *Penny Cyclopædia*, art. *Old
  Appellations of Numbers*.

The *arithmetic mean* is the one by far the most commonly denoted by
the term, and that which we may understand it to signify in the absence
of any qualification. It is the sum of a series of quantities divided
by their number, and may be represented by the formula 1/2(*a* + *b*).
But there is also the *geometric mean*, which is the square root of the
product, √(*a* × *b*), or that quantity the logarithm of which
is the arithmetic mean of the logarithms of the quantities. There is
also the *harmonic mean*, which is the reciprocal of the arithmetic
mean of the reciprocals of the quantities. Thus if *a* and *b* be the
quantities, as before, their reciprocals are 1/*a* and 1/*b*, the
mean of which is 1/2 (1/*a* + 1/*b*), and the reciprocal again is
(2*ab*)/(*a* + *b*), which is the harmonic mean. Other kinds of means
might no doubt be invented for particular purposes, and we might apply
the term, as De Morgan pointed out,[264] to any quantity a function of
which is equal to a function of two or more other quantities, and is
such that the interchange of these latter quantities among themselves
will make no alteration in the value of the function. Symbolically, if
Φ(*y*, *y*, *y* ....) = Φ(*x*_{1}, *x*_{2}, *x*_{3} ....), then *y* is
a kind of mean of the quantities, *x*_{1}, *x*_{2}, &c.

  [264] *Penny Cyclopædia*, art. *Mean*.

The geometric mean is necessarily adopted in certain cases. When we
estimate the work done against a force which varies inversely as
the square of the distance from a fixed point, the mean force is
the geometric mean between the forces at the beginning and end of
the path. When in an imperfect balance, we reverse the weights to
eliminate error, the true weight will be the geometric mean of the two
apparent weights. In almost all the calculations of statistics and
commerce the geometric mean ought, strictly speaking, to be used. If a
commodity rises in price 100 per cent. and another remains unaltered,
the mean rise of a price is not 50 per cent. because the ratio
150 : 200 is not the same as 100 : 150. The mean ratio is as unity to
√(1·00 × 2·00) or 1 to 1·41. The difference between the three
kinds of means in such a case[265] is very considerable; while the
rise of price estimated by the Arithmetic mean would be 50 per cent.
it would be only 41 and 33 per cent. respectively according to the
Geometric and Harmonic means.

  [265] Jevons, *Journal of the Statistical Society*, June 1865,
  vol. xxviii, p. 296.

In all calculations concerning the average rate of progress of a
community, or any of its operations, the geometric mean should be
employed. For if a quantity increases 100 per cent. in 100 years, it
would not on the average increase 10 per cent. in each ten years, as
the 10 per cent. would at the end of each decade be calculated upon
larger and larger quantities, and give at the end of 100 years much
more than 100 per cent., in fact as much as 159 per cent. The true mean
rate in each decade would be ^{10}√2 or about 1·07, that is, the
increase would be about 7 per cent. in each ten years. But when the
quantities differ very little, the arithmetic and geometric means are
approximately the same. Thus the arithmetic mean of 1·000 and 1·001
is 1·0005, and the geometric mean is about 1·0004998, the difference
being of an order inappreciable in almost all scientific and practical
matters. Even in the comparison of standard weights by Gauss’ method
of reversal, the arithmetic mean may usually be substituted for the
geometric mean which is the true result.

Regarding the mean in the absence of express qualification to the
contrary as the common arithmetic mean, we must still distinguish
between its two uses where it gives with more or less accuracy and
probability a really existing quantity, and where it acts as a mere
representative of other quantities. If I make many experiments to
determine the atomic weight of an element, there is a certain number
which I wish to approximate to, and the mean of my separate results
will, in the absence of any reasons to the contrary, be the most
probable approximate result. When we determine the mean density of
the earth, it is not because any part of the earth is of that exact
density; there may be no part exactly corresponding to the mean
density, and as the crust of the earth has only about half the mean
density, the internal matter of the globe must of course be above the
mean. Even the density of a homogeneous substance like carbon or gold
must be regarded as a mean between the real density of its atoms, and
the zero density of the intervening vacuous space.

The very different signification of the word “mean” in these two uses
was fully explained by Quetelet,[266] and the importance of the
distinction was pointed out by Sir John Herschel in reviewing his
work.[267] It is much to be desired that scientific men would mark the
difference by using the word *mean* only in the former sense when it
denotes approximation to a definite existing quantity; and *average*,
when the mean is only a fictitious quantity, used for convenience
of thought and expression. The etymology of this word “average” is
somewhat obscure; but according to De Morgan[268] it comes from
*averia*, “havings or possessions,” especially applied to farm stock.
By the accidents of language *averagium* came to mean the labour of
farm horses to which the lord was entitled, and it probably acquired in
this manner the notion of distributing a whole into parts, a sense in
which it was early applied to maritime averages or contributions of the
other owners of cargo to those whose goods have been thrown overboard
or used for the safety of the vessel.

  [266] *Letters on the Theory of Probabilities*, transl. by Downes,
  Part ii.

  [267] Herschel’s *Essays*, &c. pp. 404, 405.

  [268] *On the Theory of Errors of Observations, Cambridge
  Philosophical Transactions*, vol. x. Part ii. 416.


*On the Average or Fictitious Mean.*

Although the average when employed in its proper sense of a fictitious
mean, represents no really existing quantity, it is yet of the
highest scientific importance, as enabling us to conceive in a single
result a multitude of details. It enables us to make a hypothetical
simplification of a problem, and avoid complexity without committing
error. The weight of a body is the sum of the weights of infinitely
small particles, each acting at a different place, so that a mechanical
problem resolves itself, strictly speaking, into an infinite number
of distinct problems. We owe to Archimedes the first introduction of
the beautiful idea that one point may be discovered in a gravitating
body such that the weight of all the particles may be regarded as
concentrated in that point, and yet the behaviour of the whole body
will be exactly represented by the behaviour of this heavy point. This
Centre of Gravity may be within the body, as in the case of a sphere,
or it may be in empty space, as in the case of a ring. Any two bodies,
whether connected or separate, may be conceived as having a centre of
gravity, that of the sun and earth lying within the sun and only 267
miles from its centre.

Although we most commonly use the notion of a centre or average point
with regard to gravity, the same notion is applicable to other cases.
Terrestrial gravity is a case of approximately parallel forces, and
the centre of gravity is but a special case of the more general Centre
of Parallel Forces. Wherever a number of forces of whatever amount
act in parallel lines, it is possible to discover a point at which
the algebraic sum of the forces may be imagined to act with exactly
the same effect. Water in a cistern presses against the side with a
pressure varying according to the depth, but always in a direction
perpendicular to the side. We may then conceive the whole pressure
as exerted on one point, which will be one-third from the bottom of
the cistern, and may be called the Centre of Pressure. The Centre
of Oscillation of a pendulum, discovered by Huyghens, is that point
at which the whole weight of the pendulum may be considered as
concentrated, without altering the time of oscillation (p. 315). When
one body strikes another the Centre of Percussion is that point in
the striking body at which all its mass might be concentrated without
altering the effect of the stroke. In position the Centre of Percussion
does not differ from the Centre of Oscillation. Mathematicians have
also described the Centre of Gyration, the Centre of Conversion, the
Centre of Friction, &c.

We ought carefully to distinguish between those cases in which an
*invariable* centre can be assigned, and those in which it cannot.
In perfect strictness, there is no such thing as a true invariable
centre of gravity. As a general rule a body is capable of possessing an
invariable centre only for perfectly parallel forces, and gravity never
does act in absolutely parallel lines. Thus, as usual, we find that our
conceptions are only hypothetically correct, and only approximately
applicable to real circumstances. There are indeed certain geometrical
forms called *Centrobaric*,[269] such that a body of that shape would
attract another exactly as if the mass were concentrated at the centre
of gravity, whether the forces act in a parallel manner or not.
Newton showed that uniform spheres of matter have this property,
and this truth proved of the greatest importance in simplifying his
calculations. But it is after all a purely hypothetical truth, because
we can nowhere meet with, nor can we construct, a perfectly spherical
and homogeneous body. The slightest irregularity or protrusion from
the surface will destroy the rigorous correctness of the assumption.
The spheroid, on the other hand, has no invariable centre at which its
mass may always be regarded as concentrated. The point from which its
resultant attraction acts will move about according to the distance
and position of the other attracting body, and it will only coincide
with the centre as regards an infinitely distant body whose attractive
forces may be considered as acting in parallel lines.

  [269] Thomson and Tait, *Treatise on Natural Philosophy*, vol. i.
  p. 394.

Physicists speak familiarly of the poles of a magnet, and the term
may be used with convenience. But, if we attach any definite meaning
to the word, the poles are not the ends of the magnet, nor any fixed
points within, but the variable points from which the resultants of
all the forces exerted by the particles in the bar upon exterior
magnetic particles may be considered as acting. The poles are, in
short, Centres of Magnetic Forces; but as those forces are never
really parallel, these centres will vary in position according to
the relative place of the object attracted. Only when we regard the
magnet as attracting a very distant, or, strictly speaking, infinitely
distant particle, do its centres become fixed points, situated in short
magnets approximately at one-sixth of the whole length from each end of
the bar. We have in the above instances of centres or poles of force
sufficient examples of the mode in which the Fictitious Mean or Average
is employed in physical science.


*The Precise Mean Result.*

We now turn to that mode of employing the mean result which is
analogous to the method of reversal, but which is brought into practice
in a most extensive manner throughout many branches of physical
science. We find the simplest possible case in the determination of
the latitude of a place by observations of the Pole-star. Tycho Brahe
suggested that if the elevation of any circumpolar star were observed
at its higher and lower passages across the meridian, half the sum of
the elevations would be the latitude of the place, which is equal to
the height of the pole. Such a star is as much above the pole at its
highest passage, as it is below at its lowest, so that the mean must
necessarily give the height of the pole itself free from doubt, except
as regards incidental errors. The Pole-star is usually selected for the
purpose of such observations because it describes the smallest circle,
and is thus on the whole least affected by atmospheric refraction.

Whenever several causes are in action, each of which at one time
increases and at another time decreases the joint effect by equal
quantities, we may apply this method and disentangle the effects. Thus
the solar and lunar tides roll on in almost complete independence of
each other. When the moon is new or full the solar tide coincides, or
nearly so, with that caused by the moon, and the joint effect is the
sum of the separate effects. When the moon is in quadrature, or half
full, the two tides are acting in opposition, one raising and the other
depressing the water, so that we observe only the difference of the
effects. We have in fact--

  Spring tide = lunar tide + solar tide;
  Neap tide   = lunar tide - solar tide.

We have only then to add together the heights of the maximum spring
tide and the minimum neap tide, and half the sum is the true height of
the lunar tide. Half the difference of the spring and neap tides on the
other hand gives the solar tide.

Effects of very small amount may be detected with great approach to
certainty among much greater fluctuations, provided that we have
a series of observations sufficiently numerous and long continued
to enable us to balance all the larger effects against each other.
For this purpose the observations should be continued over at least
one complete cycle, in which the effects run through all their
variations, and return exactly to the same relative positions as at the
commencement. If casual or irregular disturbing causes exist, we should
probably require many such cycles of results to render their effect
inappreciable. We obtain the desired result by taking the mean of all
the observations in which a cause acts positively, and the mean of all
in which it acts negatively. Half the difference of these means will
give the effect of the cause in question, provided that no other effect
happens to vary in the same period or nearly so.

Since the moon causes a movement of the ocean, it is evident that
its attraction must have some effect upon the atmosphere. The laws
of atmospheric tides were investigated by Laplace, but as it would
be impracticable by theory to calculate their amounts we can only
determine them by observation, as Laplace predicted that they would
one day be determined.[270] But the oscillations of the barometer thus
caused are far smaller than the oscillations due to several other
causes. Storms, hurricanes, or changes of weather produce movements
of the barometer sometimes as much as a thousand times as great as
the tides in question. There are also regular daily, yearly, or other
fluctuations, all greater than the desired quantity. To detect and
measure the atmospheric tide it was desirable that observations should
be made in a place as free as possible from irregular disturbances.
On this account several long series of observations were made at St.
Helena, where the barometer is far more regular in its movements than
in a continental climate. The effect of the moon’s attraction was
then detected by taking the mean of all the readings when the moon
was on the meridian and the similar mean when she was on the horizon.
The difference of these means was found to be only ·00365, yet it was
possible to discover even the variation of this tide according as the
moon was nearer to or further from the earth, though this difference
was only ·00056 inch.[271] It is quite evident that such minute effects
could never be discovered in a purely empirical manner. Having no
information but the series of observations before us, we could have
no clue as to the mode of grouping them which would give so small a
difference. In applying this method of means in an extensive manner
we must generally then have *à priori* knowledge as to the periods at
which a cause will act in one direction or the other.

  [270] *Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités*, pp. 49, 50.

  [271] Grant, *History of Physical Astronomy*, p. 163.

We are sometimes able to eliminate fluctuations and take a mean result
by purely mechanical arrangements. The daily variations of temperature,
for instance, become imperceptible one or two feet below the surface
of the earth, so that a thermometer placed with its bulb at that
depth gives very nearly the true daily mean temperature. At a depth
of twenty feet even the yearly fluctuations are nearly effaced, and
the thermometer stands a little above the true mean temperature of the
locality. In registering the rise and fall of the tide by a tide-gauge,
it is desirable to avoid the oscillations arising from surface waves,
which is very readily accomplished by placing the float in a cistern
communicating by a small hole with the sea. Only a general rise or
fall of the level is then perceptible, just as in the marine barometer
the narrow tube prevents any casual fluctuations and allows only a
continued change of pressure to manifest itself.


*Determination of the Zero point.*

In many important observations the chief difficulty consists in
defining exactly the zero point from which we are to measure. We can
point a telescope with great precision to a star and can measure to
a second of arc the angle through which the telescope is raised or
lowered; but all this precision will be useless unless we know exactly
the centre point of the heavens from which we measure, or, what comes
to the same thing, the horizontal line 90° distant from it. Since the
true horizon has reference to the figure of the earth at the place of
observation, we can only determine it by the direction of gravity,
as marked either by the plumb-line or the surface of a liquid. The
question resolves itself then into the most accurate mode of observing
the direction of gravity, and as the plumb-line has long been found
hopelessly inaccurate, astronomers generally employ the surface of
mercury in repose as the criterion of horizontality. They ingeniously
observe the direction of the surface by making a star the index. From
the laws of reflection it follows that the angle between the direct
ray from a star and that reflected from a surface of mercury will
be exactly double the angle between the surface and the direct ray
from the star. Hence the horizontal or zero point is the mean between
the apparent place of any star or other very distant object and its
reflection in mercury.

A plumb-line is perpendicular, or a liquid surface is horizontal only
in an approximate sense; for any irregularity of the surface of the
earth, a mountain, or even a house must cause some deviation by its
attracting power. To detect such deviation might seem very difficult,
because every other plumb-line or liquid surface would be equally
affected by gravity. Nevertheless it can be detected; for if we place
one plumb-line to the north of a mountain, and another to the south,
they will be about equally deflected in opposite directions, and if
by observations of the same star we can measure the angle between the
plumb-lines, half the inclination will be the deviation of either,
after allowance has been made for the inclination due to the difference
of latitude of the two places of observation. By this mode of
observation applied to the mountain Schiehallion the deviation of the
plumb-line was accurately measured by Maskelyne, and thus a comparison
instituted between the attractive forces of the mountain and the whole
globe, which led to a probable estimate of the earth’s density.

In some cases it is actually better to determine the zero point by the
average of equally diverging quantities than by direct observation. In
delicate weighings by a chemical balance it is requisite to ascertain
exactly the point at which the beam comes to rest, and when standard
weights are being compared the position of the beam is ascertained
by a carefully divided scale viewed through a microscope. But when
the beam is just coming to rest, friction, small impediments or other
accidental causes may readily obstruct it, because it is near the
point at which the force of stability becomes infinitely small. Hence
it is found better to let the beam vibrate and observe the terminal
points of the vibrations. The mean between two extreme points will
nearly indicate the position of rest. Friction and the resistance of
air tend to reduce the vibrations, so that this mean will be erroneous
by half the amount of this effect during a half vibration. But by
taking several observations we may determine this retardation and
allow for it. Thus if *a*, *b*, *c* be the readings of the terminal
points of three excursions of the beam from the zero of the scale,
then 1/2(*a* + *b*) will be about as much erroneous in one direction
as 1/2(*b* + *c*) in the other, so that the mean of these two means,
or 1/4(*a* + 2*b* + *c*), will be exceedingly near to the point of
rest.[272] A still closer approximation may be made by taking four
readings and reducing them by the formula 1/6(*a* + 2*b* + 2*c* + *d*).

  [272] Gauss, Taylor’s *Scientific Memoirs*, vol. ii. p. 43, &c.

The accuracy of Baily’s experiments, directed to determine the
density of the earth, entirely depended upon this mode of observing
oscillations. The balls whose gravitation was measured were so
delicately suspended by a torsion balance that they never came to
rest. The extreme points of the oscillations were observed both when
the heavy leaden attracting ball was on one side and on the other. The
difference of the mean points when the leaden ball was on the right
hand and that when it was on the left hand gave double the amount of
the deflection.

A beautiful instance of avoiding the use of a zero point is found in
Mr. E. J. Stone’s observations on the radiant heat of the fixed stars.
The difficulty of these observations arose from the comparatively great
amounts of heat which were sent into the telescope from the atmosphere,
and which were sufficient to disguise almost entirely the feeble heat
rays of a star. But Mr. Stone fixed at the focus of his telescope a
double thermo-electric pile of which the two parts were reversed in
order. Now any disturbance of temperature which acted uniformly upon
both piles produced no effect upon the galvanometer needle, and when
the rays of the star were made to fall alternately upon one pile and
the other, the total amount of the deflection represented double the
heating power of the star. Thus Mr. Stone was able to detect with
much certainty a heating effect of the star Arcturus, which even when
concentrated by the telescope amounted only to 0°·02 Fahr., and which
represents a heating effect of the direct ray of only about 0°·00000137
Fahr., equivalent to the heat which would be received from a three-inch
cubic vessel full of boiling water at the distance of 400 yards.[273]
It is probable that Mr. Stone’s arrangement of the pile might be
usefully employed in other delicate thermometric experiments subject to
considerable disturbing influences.

  [273] *Proceedings of the Royal Society*, vol. xviii. p. 159 (Jan.
  13, 1870). *Philosophical Magazine* (4th Series), vol. xxxix. p. 376.


*Determination of Maximum Points.*

We employ the method of means in a certain number of observations
directed to determine the moment at which a phenomenon reaches its
highest point in quantity. In noting the place of a fixed star at a
given time there is no difficulty in ascertaining the point to be
observed, for a star in a good telescope presents an exceedingly small
disc. In observing a nebulous body which from a bright centre fades
gradually away on all sides, it will not be possible to select with
certainty the middle point. In many such cases the best method is not
to select arbitrarily the supposed middle point, but points of equal
brightness on either side, and then take the mean of the observations
of these two points for the centre. As a general rule, a variable
quantity in reaching its maximum increases at a less and less rate,
and after passing the highest point begins to decrease by insensible
degrees. The maximum may indeed be defined as that point at which
the increase or decrease is null. Hence it will usually be the most
indefinite point, and if we can accurately measure the phenomenon we
shall best determine the place of the maximum by determining points on
either side at which the ordinates are equal. There is moreover this
advantage in the method that several points may be determined with the
corresponding ones on the other side, and the mean of the whole taken
as the true place of the maximum. But this method entirely depends upon
the existence of symmetry in the curve, so that of two equal ordinates
one shall be as far on one side of the maximum as the other is on the
other side. The method fails when other laws of variation prevail.

In tidal observations great difficulty is encountered in fixing
the moment of high water, because the rate at which the water is
then rising or falling, is almost imperceptible. Whewell proposed,
therefore, to note the time at which the water passes a fixed point
somewhat below the maximum both in rising and falling, and take
the mean time as that of high water. But this mode of proceeding
unfortunately does not give a correct result, because the tide follows
different laws in rising and in falling. There is a difficulty again in
selecting the highest spring tide, another object of much importance in
tidology. Laplace discovered that the tide of the second day preceding
the conjunction of the sun and moon is nearly equal to that of the
fifth day following; and, believing that the increase and decrease of
the tides proceeded in a nearly symmetrical manner, he decided that the
highest tide would occur about thirty-six hours after the conjunction,
that is half-way between the second day before and the fifth day
after.[274]

  [274] Airy *On Tides and Waves*, Encycl. Metrop. pp. 364*-366*.

This method is also employed in determining the time of passage of the
middle or densest point of a stream of meteors. The earth takes two
or three days in passing completely through the November stream; but
astronomers need for their calculations to have some definite point
fixed within a few minutes if possible. When near to the middle they
observe the numbers of meteors which come within the sphere of vision
in each half hour, or quarter hour, and then, assuming that the law of
variation is symmetrical, they select a moment for the passage of the
centre equidistant between times of equal frequency.

The eclipses of Jupiter’s satellites are not only of great interest as
regards the motions of the satellites themselves, but were, and perhaps
still are, of use in determining longitudes, because they are events
occurring at fixed moments of absolute time, and visible in all parts
of the planetary system at the same time, allowance being made for the
interval occupied by the light in travelling. But, as is explained by
Herschel,[275] the moment of the event is wanting in definiteness,
partly because the long cone of Jupiter’s shadow is surrounded by
a penumbra, and partly because the satellite has itself a sensible
disc, and takes time in entering the shadow. Different observers using
different telescopes would usually select different moments for that
of the eclipse. But the increase of light in the emersion will proceed
according to a law the reverse of that observed in the immersion,
so that if an observer notes the time of both events with the same
telescope, he will be as much too soon in one observation as he is too
late in the other, and the mean moment of the two observations will
represent with considerable accuracy the time when the satellite is in
the middle of the shadow. Error of judgment of the observer is thus
eliminated, provided that he takes care to act at the emersion as he
did at the immersion.

  [275] *Outlines of Astronomy*, 4th edition, § 538.




