CHAPTER XIV.

UNITS AND STANDARDS OF MEASUREMENT.


As we have seen, instruments of measurement are only means of
comparison between one magnitude and another, and as a general rule we
must assume some one arbitrary magnitude, in terms of which all results
of measurement are to be expressed. Mere ratios between any series of
objects will never tell us their absolute magnitudes; we must have at
least one ratio for each, and we must have one absolute magnitude.
The number of ratios *n* are expressible in *n* equations, which will
contain at least *n* + 1 quantities, so that if we employ them to make
known *n* magnitudes, we must have one magnitude known. Hence, whether
we are measuring time, space, density, mass, weight, energy, or any
other physical quantity, we must refer to some concrete standard, some
actual object, which if once lost and irrecoverable, all our measures
lose their absolute meaning. This concrete standard is in all cases
arbitrary in point of theory, and its selection a question of practical
convenience.

There are two kinds of magnitude, indeed, which do not need to be
expressed in terms of arbitrary concrete units, since they pre-suppose
the existence of natural standard units. One case is that of abstract
number itself, which needs no special unit, because any object which
exists or is thought of as separate from other objects (p. 157)
furnishes us with a unit, and is the only standard required.

Angular magnitude is the second case in which we have a natural unit
of reference, namely the whole revolution or *perigon*, as it has
been called by Mr. Sandeman.[208] It is a necessary result of the
uniform properties of space, that all complete revolutions are equal
to each other, so that we need not select any one revolution, but can
always refer anew to space itself. Whether we take the whole perigon,
its half, or its quarter, is really immaterial; Euclid took the right
angle, because the Greek geometers had never generalised their notions
of angular magnitude sufficiently to treat angles of all magnitudes,
or of unlimited *quantity of revolution*. Euclid defines a right angle
as half that made by a line with its own continuation, which is of
course equal to half a revolution, but which was not treated as an
angle by him. In mathematical analysis a different fraction of the
perigon is taken, namely, such a fraction that the arc or portion of
the circumference included within it is equal to the radius of the
circle. In this point of view angular magnitude is an abstract ratio,
namely, the ratio between the length of arc subtended and the length
of the radius. The geometrical unit is then necessarily the angle
corresponding to the ratio unity. This angle is equal to about 57°,
17′, 44″·8, or decimally 57°·295779513... .[209] It was called by De
Morgan the *arcual unit*, but a more convenient name for common use
would be *radian*, as suggested by Professor Everett. Though this
standard angle is naturally employed in mathematical analysis, and any
other unit would introduce great complexity, we must not look upon it
as a distinct unit, since its amount is connected with that of the half
perigon, by the natural constant 3·14159... usually denoted by the
letter π.

  [208] *Pelicotetics, or the Science of Quantity; an Elementary
  Treatise on Algebra, and its groundwork Arithmetic.* By Archibald
  Sandeman, M. A. Cambridge (Deighton, Bell, and Co.), 1868, p. 304.

  [209] De Morgan’s *Trigonometry and Double Algebra*, p. 5.

When we pass to other species of quantity, the choice of unit is found
to be entirely arbitrary. There is absolutely no mode of defining a
length, but by selecting some physical object exhibiting that length
between certain obvious points--as, for instance, the extremities of a
bar, or marks made upon its surface.


*Standard Unit of Time.*

Time is the great independent variable of all change--that which itself
flows on uninterruptedly, and brings the variety which we call motion
and life. When we reflect upon its intimate nature, Time, like every
other element of existence, proves to be an inscrutable mystery. We
can only say with St. Augustin, to one who asks us what is time, “I
know when you do not ask me.” The mind of man will ask what can never
be answered, but one result of a true and rigorous logical philosophy
must be to convince us that scientific explanation can only take place
between phenomena which have something in common, and that when we get
down to primary notions, like those of time and space, the mind must
meet a point of mystery beyond which it cannot penetrate. A definition
of time must not be looked for; if we say with Hobbes,[210] that it is
“the phantasm of before and after in motion,” or with Aristotle that it
is “the number of motion according to former and latter,” we obviously
gain nothing, because the notion of time is involved in the expressions
*before and after*, *former and latter*. Time is undoubtedly one of
those primary notions which can only be defined physically, or by
observation of phenomena which proceed in time.

  [210] *English Works of Thos. Hobbes*, Edit. by Molesworth, vol. i.
  p. 95.

If we have not advanced a step beyond Augustin’s acute reflections on
this subject,[211] it is curious to observe the wonderful advances
which have been made in the practical measurement of its efflux. In
earlier centuries the rude sun-dial or the rising of a conspicuous star
gave points of reference, while the flow of water from the clepsydra,
the burning of a candle, or, in the monastic ages, even the continuous
chanting of psalms, were the means of roughly subdividing periods, and
marking the hours of the day and night.[212] The sun and stars still
furnish the standard of time, but means of accurate subdivision have
become requisite, and this has been furnished by the pendulum and the
chronograph. By the pendulum we can accurately divide the day into
seconds of time. By the chronograph we can subdivide the second into
a hundred, a thousand, or even a million parts. Wheatstone measured
the duration of an electric spark, and found it to be no more than one
115,200th part of a second, while more recently Captain Noble has been
able to appreciate intervals of time not exceeding the millionth part
of a second.

  [211] *Confessions*, bk. xi. chapters 20–28.

  [212] Sir G. C. Lewis gives many curious particulars concerning the
  measurement of time in his *Astronomy of the Ancients*, pp. 241, &c.

When we come to inquire precisely what phenomenon it is that we thus
so minutely measure, we meet insurmountable difficulties. Newton
distinguished time according as it was *absolute* or *apparent* time,
in the following words:--“Absolute, true, and mathematical time,
of itself and from its own nature, flows equably without regard to
anything external, and by another name is called *duration*; relative,
apparent and common time, is some sensible and external measure of
duration by the means of motion.”[213] Though we are perhaps obliged to
assume the existence of a uniformly increasing quantity which we call
time, yet we cannot feel or know abstract and absolute time. Duration
must be made manifest to us by the recurrence of some phenomenon. The
succession of our own thoughts is no doubt the first and simplest
measure of time, but a very rude one, because in some persons and
circumstances the thoughts evidently flow with much greater rapidity
than in other persons and circumstances. In the absence of all
other phenomena, the interval between one thought and another would
necessarily become the unit of time, but the most cursory observations
show that there are changes in the outward world much better fitted by
their constancy to measure time than the change of thoughts within us.

  [213] *Principia*, bk. i. *Scholium to Definitions*. Translated by
  Motte, vol. i. p. 9. See also p. 11.

The earth, as I have already said, is the real clock of the astronomer,
and is practically assumed as invariable in its movements. But on
what ground is it so assumed? According to the first law of motion,
every body perseveres in its state of rest or of uniform motion in
a right line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces
impressed thereon. Rotatory motion is subject to a like condition,
namely, that it perseveres uniformly unless disturbed by extrinsic
forces. Now uniform motion means motion through equal spaces in equal
times, so that if we have a body entirely free from all resistance
or perturbation, and can measure equal spaces of its path, we have a
perfect measure of time. But let it be remembered that this law has
never been absolutely proved by experience; for we cannot point to any
body, and say that it is wholly unresisted or undisturbed; and even if
we had such a body, we should need some independent standard of time
to ascertain whether its motion was really uniform. As it is in moving
bodies that we find the best standard of time, we cannot use them to
prove the uniformity of their own movements, which would amount to a
*petitio principii*. Our experience comes to this, that when we examine
and compare the movements of bodies which seem to us nearly free from
disturbance, we find them giving nearly harmonious measures of time.
If any one body which seems to us to move uniformly is not doing so,
but is subject to fits and starts unknown to us, because we have no
absolute standard of time, then all other bodies must be subject to the
same arbitrary fits and starts, otherwise there would be discrepancy
disclosing the irregularities. Just as in comparing together a number
of chronometers, we should soon detect bad ones by their going
irregularly, as compared with the others, so in nature we detect
disturbed movement by its discrepancy from that of other bodies which
we believe to be undisturbed, and which agree nearly among themselves.
But inasmuch as the measure of motion involves time, and the measure
of time involves motion, there must be ultimately an assumption. We
may define equal times, as times during which a moving body under the
influence of no force describes equal spaces;[214] but all we can
say in support of this definition is, that it leads us into no known
difficulties, and that to the best of our experience one freely moving
body gives the same results as any other.

  [214] Rankine, *Philosophical Magazine*, Feb. 1867, vol. xxxiii.
  p. 91.

When we inquire where the freely moving body is, no perfectly
satisfactory answer can be given. Practically the rotating globe is
sufficiently accurate, and Thomson and Tait say: “Equal times are
times during which the earth turns through equal angles.”[215] No long
time has passed since astronomers thought it impossible to detect any
inequality in its movement. Poisson was supposed to have proved that a
change in the length of the sidereal day amounting to one ten-millionth
part in 2,500 years was incompatible with an ancient eclipse recorded
by the Chaldæans, and similar calculations were made by Laplace. But
it is now known that these calculations were somewhat in error, and
that the dissipation of energy arising out of the friction of tidal
waves, and the radiation of the heat into space, has slightly decreased
the rapidity of the earth’s rotatory motion. The sidereal day is now
longer by one part in 2,700,000, than it was in 720 B.C. Even before
this discovery, it was known that invariability of rotation depended
upon the perfect maintenance of the earth’s internal heat, which is
requisite in order that the earth’s dimensions shall be unaltered. Now
the earth being superior in temperature to empty space, must cool more
or less rapidly, so that it cannot furnish an absolute measure of time.
Similar objections could be raised to all other rotating bodies within
our cognisance.

  [215] *Treatise on Natural Philosophy*, vol. i. p. 179.

The moon’s motion round the earth, and the earth’s motion round the
sun, form the next best measure of time. They are subject, indeed,
to disturbance from other planets, but it is believed that these
perturbations must in the course of time run through their rhythmical
courses, leaving the mean distances unaffected, and consequently, by
the third Law of Kepler, the periodic times unchanged. But there is
more reason than not to believe that the earth encounters a slight
resistance in passing through space, like that which is so apparent
in Encke’s comet. There may also be dissipation of energy in the
electrical relations of the earth to the sun, possibly identical with
that which is manifested in the retardation of comets.[216] It is
probably an untrue assumption then, that the earth’s orbit remains
quite invariable. It is just possible that some other body may be found
in the course of time to furnish a better standard of time than the
earth in its annual motion. The greatly superior mass of Jupiter and
its satellites, and their greater distance from the sun, may render the
electrical dissipation of energy less considerable than in the case of
the earth. But the choice of the best measure will always be an open
one, and whatever moving body we choose may ultimately be shown to be
subject to disturbing forces.

  [216] *Proceedings of the Manchester Philosophical Society*, 28th
  Nov. 1871, vol. xi. p. 33.

The pendulum, although so admirable an instrument for subdivision of
time, fails as a standard; for though the same pendulum affected by the
same force of gravity performs equal vibrations in equal times, yet
the slightest change in the form or weight of the pendulum, the least
corrosion of any part, or the most minute displacement of the point of
suspension, falsifies the results, and there enter many other difficult
questions of temperature, friction, resistance, length of vibration, &c.

Thomson and Tait are of opinion[217] that the ultimate standard of
chronometry must be founded on the physical properties of some body
of more constant character than the earth; for instance, a carefully
arranged metallic spring, hermetically sealed in an exhausted glass
vessel. But it is hard to see how we can be sure that the dimensions
and elasticity of a piece of wrought metal will remain perfectly
unchanged for the few millions of years contemplated by them. A nearly
perfect gas, like hydrogen, is perhaps the only kind of substance in
the unchanged elasticity of which we could have confidence. Moreover,
it is difficult to perceive how the undulations of such a spring could
be observed with the requisite accuracy. More recently Professor Clerk
Maxwell has made the novel suggestion, discussed in a subsequent
section, that undulations of light *in vacuo* would form the most
universal standard of reference, both as regards time and space.
According to this system the unit of time would be the time occupied
by one vibration of the particular kind of light whose wave length is
taken as the unit of length.

  [217] *The Elements of Natural Philosophy*, part i. p. 119.


*The Unit of Space and the Bar Standard.*

Next in importance after the measurement of time is that of space.
Time comes first in theory, because phenomena, our internal thoughts
for instance, may change in time without regard to space. As to the
phenomena of outward nature, they tend more and more to resolve
themselves into motions of molecules, and motion cannot be conceived or
measured without reference both to time and space.

Turning now to space measurement, we find it almost equally difficult
to fix and define once and for ever, a unit magnitude. There are
three different modes in which it has been proposed to attempt the
perpetuation of a standard length.

(1) By constructing an actual specimen of the standard yard or metre,
in the form of a bar.

(2) By assuming the globe itself to be the ultimate standard of
magnitude, the practical unit being a submultiple of some dimension of
the globe.

(3) By adopting the length of the simple seconds pendulum, as a
standard of reference.

At first sight it might seem that there was no great difficulty in this
matter, and that any one of these methods might serve well enough;
but the more minutely we inquire into the details, the more hopeless
appears to be the attempt to establish an invariable standard. We must
in the first place point out a principle not of an obvious character,
namely, that *the standard length must be defined by one single
object*.[218] To make two bars of exactly the same length, or even two
bars bearing a perfectly defined ratio to each other, is beyond the
power of human art. If two copies of the standard metre be made and
declared equally correct, future investigators will certainly discover
some discrepancy between them, proving of course that they cannot both
be the standard, and giving cause for dispute as to what magnitude
should then be taken as correct.

  [218] See Harris’ *Essay upon Money and Coins*, part. ii. [1758]
  p. 127.

If one invariable bar could be constructed and maintained as the
absolute standard, no such inconvenience could arise. Each successive
generation as it acquired higher powers of measurement, would detect
errors in the copies of the standard, but the standard itself would be
unimpeached, and would, as it were, become by degrees more and more
accurately known. Unfortunately to construct and preserve a metre or
yard is also a task which is either impossible, or what comes nearly
to the same thing, cannot be shown to be possible. Passing over the
practical difficulty of defining the ends of the standard length
with complete accuracy, whether by dots or lines on the surface, or
by the terminal points of the bar, we have no means of proving that
substances remain of invariable dimensions. Just as we cannot tell
whether the rotation of the earth is uniform, except by comparing it
with other moving bodies, believed to be more uniform in motion, so
we cannot detect the change of length in a bar, except by comparing
it with some other bar supposed to be invariable. But how are we to
know which is the invariable bar? It is certain that many rigid and
apparently invariable substances do change in dimensions. The bulb of
a thermometer certainly contracts by age, besides undergoing rapid
changes of dimensions when warmed or cooled through 100° Cent. Can
we be sure that even the most solid metallic bars do not slightly
contract by age, or undergo variations in their structure by change
of temperature. Fizeau was induced to try whether a quartz crystal,
subjected to several hundred alternations of temperature, would be
modified in its physical properties, and he was unable to detect any
change in the coefficient of expansion.[219] It does not follow,
however, that, because no apparent change was discovered in a quartz
crystal, newly-constructed bars of metal would undergo no change.

  [219] *Philosophical Magazine*, (1868), 4th Series, vol. xxxvi. p. 32.

The best principle, as it seems to me, upon which the perpetuation of
a standard of length can be rested, is that, if a variation of length
occurs, it will in all probability be of different amount in different
substances. If then a great number of standard metres were constructed
of all kinds of different metals and alloys; hard rocks, such as
granite, serpentine, slate, quartz, limestone; artificial substances,
such as porcelain, glass, &c., &c., careful comparison would show from
time to time the comparative variations of length of these different
substances. The most variable substances would be the most divergent,
and the standard would be furnished by the mean length of those which
agreed most closely with each other just as uniform motion is that of
those bodies which agree most closely in indicating the efflux of time.


*The Terrestrial Standard.*

The second method assumes that the globe itself is a body of invariable
dimensions and the founders of the metrical system selected the
ten-millionth part of the distance from the equator to the pole as
the definition of the metre. The first imperfection in such a method
is that the earth is certainly not invariable in size; for we know
that it is superior in temperature to surrounding space, and must be
slowly cooling and contracting. There is much reason to believe that
all earthquakes, volcanoes, mountain elevations, and changes of sea
level are evidences of this contraction as asserted by Mr. Mallet.[220]
But such is the vast bulk of the earth and the duration of its past
existence, that this contraction is perhaps less rapid in proportion
than that of any bar or other material standard which we can construct.

  [220] *Proceedings of the Royal Society*, 20th June, 1872, vol. xx.
  p. 438.

The second and chief difficulty of this method arises from the vast
size of the earth, which prevents us from making any comparison with
the ultimate standard, except by a trigonometrical survey of a most
elaborate and costly kind. The French physicists, who first proposed
the method, attempted to obviate this inconvenience by carrying out
the survey once for all, and then constructing a standard metre, which
should be exactly the one ten millionth part of the distance from the
pole to the equator. But since all measuring operations are merely
approximate, it was impossible that this operation could be perfectly
achieved. Accordingly, it was shown in 1838 that the supposed French
metre was erroneous to the considerable extent of one part in 5527. It
then became necessary either to alter the length of the assumed metre,
or to abandon its supposed relation to the earth’s dimensions. The
French Government and the International Metrical Commission have for
obvious reasons decided in favour of the latter course, and have thus
reverted to the first method of defining the metre by a given bar. As
from time to time the ratio between this assumed standard metre and the
quadrant of the earth becomes more accurately known, we have better
means of restoring that metre by reference to the globe if required.
But until lost, destroyed, or for some clear reason discredited,
the bar metre and not the globe is the standard. Thomson and Tait
remark that any of the more accurate measurements of the English
trigonometrical survey might in like manner be employed to restore our
standard yard, in terms of which the results are recorded.


*The Pendulum Standard.*

The third method of defining a standard length, by reference to the
seconds pendulum, was first proposed by Huyghens, and was at one time
adopted by the English Government. From the principle of the pendulum
(p. 302) it clearly appears that if the time of oscillation and the
force actuating the pendulum be the same, the length of the pendulum
must be the same. We do not get rid of theoretical difficulties, for
we must assume the attraction of gravity at some point of the earth’s
surface, say London, to be unchanged from time to time, and the
sidereal day to be invariable, neither assumption being absolutely
correct so far as we can judge. The pendulum, in short, is only an
indirect means of making one physical quantity of space depend upon two
other physical quantities of time and force.

The practical difficulties are, however, of a far more serious
character than the theoretical ones. The length of a pendulum is not
the ordinary length of the instrument, which might be greatly varied
without affecting the duration of a vibration, but the distance from
the centre of suspension to the centre of oscillation. There are no
direct means of determining this latter centre, which depends upon
the average momentum of all the particles of the pendulum as regards
the centre of suspension. Huyghens discovered that the centres of
suspension and oscillation are interchangeable, and Kater pointed
out that if a pendulum vibrates with exactly the same rapidity when
suspended from two different points, the distance between these points
is the true length of the equivalent simple pendulum.[221] But the
practical difficulties in employing Kater’s reversible pendulum are
considerable, and questions regarding the disturbance of the air, the
force of gravity, or even the interference of electrical attractions
have to be entertained. It has been shown that all the experiments made
under the authority of Government for determining the ratio between
the standard yard and the seconds pendulum, were vitiated by an error
in the corrections for the resisting, adherent, or buoyant power of
the air in which the pendulums were swung. Even if such corrections
were rendered unnecessary by operating in a vacuum, other difficult
questions remain.[222] Gauss’ mode of comparing the vibrations of a
wire pendulum when suspended at two different lengths is open to equal
or greater practical difficulties. Thus it is found that the pendulum
standard cannot compete in accuracy and certainty with the simple bar
standard, and the method would only be useful as an accessory mode of
restoring the bar standard if at any time again destroyed.

  [221] Kater’s *Treatise on Mechanics*, Cabinet Cyclopædia, p. 154.

  [222] Grant’s *History of Physical Astronomy*, p. 156.


*Unit of Density.*

Before we can measure the phenomena of nature, we require a third
independent unit, which shall enable us to define the quantity of
matter occupying any given space. All the changes of nature, as we
shall see, are probably so many manifestations of energy; but energy
requires some substratum or material machinery of molecules, in and by
which it may be manifested. Observation shows that, as regards force,
there may be two modes of variation of matter. As Newton says in the
first definition of the Principia, “the quantity of matter is the
measure of the same, arising from its density and bulk conjunctly.”
Thus the force required to set a body in motion varies both according
to the bulk of the matter, and also according to its quality. Two cubic
inches of iron of uniform quality, will require twice as much force
as one cubic inch to produce a certain velocity in a given time; but
one cubic inch of gold will require more force than one cubic inch of
iron. There is then some new measurable quality in matter apart from
its bulk, which we may call *density*, and which is, strictly speaking,
indicated by its capacity to resist and absorb the action of force.
For the unit of density we may assume that of any substance which is
uniform in quality, and can readily be referred to from time to time.
Pure water at any definite temperature, for instance that of snow
melting under inappreciable pressure, furnishes an invariable standard
of density, and by comparing equal bulks of various substances with
a like bulk of ice-cold water, as regards the velocity produced in a
unit of time by the same force, we should ascertain the densities of
those substances as expressed in that of water. Practically the force
of gravity is used to measure density; for a beautiful experiment with
the pendulum, performed by Newton and repeated by Gauss, shows that all
kinds of matter gravitate equally. Two portions of matter then which
are in equilibrium in the balance, may be assumed to possess equal
inertia, and their densities will therefore be inversely as their cubic
dimensions.


*Unit of Mass.*

Multiplying the number of units of density of a portion of matter,
by the number of units of space occupied by it, we arrive at the
quantity of matter, or, as it is usually called, the *unit of mass*, as
indicated by the inertia and gravity it possesses. To proceed in the
most simple manner, the unit of mass ought to be that of a cubic unit
of matter of the standard density; but the founders of the metrical
system took as their unit of mass, the cubic centimetre of water, at
the temperature of maximum density (about 4° Cent.). They called this
unit of mass the *gramme*, and constructed standard specimens of the
kilogram, which might be readily referred to by all who required to
employ accurate weights. Unfortunately the determination of the bulk
of a given weight of water at a certain temperature is an operation
involving many difficulties, and it cannot be performed in the present
day with a greater exactness than that of about one part in 5000, the
results of careful observers being sometimes found to differ as much as
one part in 1000.[223]

  [223] Clerk Maxwell’s *Theory of Heat*, p. 79.

Weights, on the other hand, can be compared with each other to at least
one part in a million. Hence if different specimens of the kilogram be
prepared by direct weighing against water, they will not agree closely
with each other; the two principal standard kilograms agree neither
with each other, nor with their definition. According to Professor
Miller the so-called Kilogramme des Archives weighs 15432·34874 grains,
while the kilogram deposited at the Ministry of the Interior in Paris,
as the standard for commercial purposes, weighs 15432·344 grains. Since
a standard weight constructed of platinum, or platinum and iridium, can
be preserved free from any appreciable alteration, and since it can be
very accurately compared with other weights, we shall ultimately attain
the greatest exactness in our measurements of mass, by assuming some
single kilogram as a *provisional standard*, leaving the determination
of its actual mass in units of space and density for future
investigation. This is what is practically done at the present day,
and thus a unit of mass takes the place of the unit of density, both
in the French and English systems. The English pound is defined by a
certain lump of platinum, preserved at Westminster, and is an arbitrary
mass, chosen merely that it may agree as nearly as possible with old
English pounds. The gallon, the old English unit of cubic measurement,
is defined by the condition that it shall contain exactly ten pounds
weight of water at 62° Fahr.; and although it is stated that it has the
capacity of about 277·274 cubic inches, this ratio between the cubic
and linear systems of measurement is not legally enacted, but left open
to investigation. While the French metric system as originally designed
was theoretically perfect, it does not differ practically in this point
from the English system.


*Natural System of Standards.*

Quite recently Professor Clerk Maxwell has suggested that the
vibrations of light and the atoms of matter might conceivably be
employed as the ultimate standards of length, time, and mass. We
should thus arrive at a *natural system of standards*, which,
though possessing no present practical importance, has considerable
theoretical interest. “In the present state of science,” he says, “the
most universal standard of length which we could assume would be the
wave-length in vacuum of a particular kind of light, emitted by some
widely diffused substance such as sodium, which has well-defined lines
in its spectrum. Such a standard would be independent of any changes in
the dimensions of the earth, and should be adopted by those who expect
their writings to be more permanent than that body.”[224] In the same
way we should get a universal standard unit of time, independent of
all questions about the motion of material bodies, by taking as the
unit the periodic time of vibration of that particular kind of light
whose wave-length is the unit of length. It would follow that with
these units of length and time the unit of velocity would coincide with
the velocity of light in empty space. As regards the unit of mass,
Professor Maxwell, humorously as I should think, remarks that if we
expect soon to be able to determine the mass of a single molecule of
some standard substance, we may wait for this determination before
fixing a universal standard of mass.

  [224] *Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism*, vol. i. p. 3.

In a theoretical point of view there can be no reasonable doubt that
vibrations of light are, as far as we can tell, the most fixed in
magnitude of all phenomena. There is as usual no certainty in the
matter, for the properties of the basis of light may vary to some
extent in different parts of space. But no differences could ever
be established in the velocity of light in different parts of the
solar system, and the spectra of the stars show that the times of
vibration there do not differ perceptibly from those in this part
of the universe. Thus all presumption is in favour of the absolute
constancy of the vibrations of light--absolute, that is, so far as
regards any means of investigation we are likely to possess. Nearly
the same considerations apply to the atomic weight as the standard of
mass. It is impossible to prove that all atoms of the same substance
are of equal mass, and some physicists think that they differ, so that
the fixity of combining proportions may be due only to the approximate
constancy of the mean of countless millions of discrepant weights. But
in any case the detection of difference is probably beyond our powers.
In a theoretical point of view, then, the magnitudes suggested by
Professor Maxwell seem to be the most fixed ones of which we have any
knowledge, so that they necessarily become the natural units.

In a practical point of view, as Professor Maxwell would be the first
to point out, they are of little or no value, because in the present
state of science we cannot measure a vibration or weigh an atom with
any approach to the accuracy which is attainable in the comparison
of standard metres and kilograms. The velocity of light is not known
probably within a thousandth part, and as we progress in the knowledge
of light, so we shall progress in the accurate fixation of other
standards. All that can be said then, is that it is very desirable
to determine the wave-lengths and periods of the principal lines of
the solar spectrum, and the absolute atomic weights of the elements,
with all attainable accuracy, in terms of our existing standards. The
numbers thus obtained would admit of the reproduction of our standards
in some future age of the world to a corresponding degree of accuracy,
were there need of such reference; but so far as we can see at present,
there is no considerable probability that this mode of reproduction
would ever be the best mode.


*Subsidiary Units.*

Having once established the standard units of time, space, and density
or mass, we might employ them for the expression of all quantities
of such nature. But it is often convenient in particular branches of
science to use multiples or submultiples of the original units, for the
expression of quantities in a simple manner. We use the mile rather
than the yard when treating of the magnitude of the globe, and the
mean distance of the earth and sun is not too large a unit when we
have to describe the distances of the stars. On the other hand, when
we are occupied with microscopic objects, the inch, the line or the
millimetre, become the most convenient terms of expression.

It is allowable for a scientific man to introduce a new unit in any
branch of knowledge, provided that it assists precise expression,
and is carefully brought into relation with the primary units. Thus
Professor A. W. Williamson has proposed as a convenient unit of
volume in chemical science, an absolute volume equal to about 11·2
litres representing the bulk of one gram of hydrogen gas at standard
temperature and pressure, or the *equivalent* weight of any other
gas, such as 16 grams of oxygen, 14 grams of nitrogen, &c.; in short,
the bulk of that quantity of any one of those gases which weighs as
many grams as there are units in the number expressing its atomic
weight.[225] Hofmann has proposed a new unit of weight for chemists,
called a *crith*, to be defined by the weight of one litre of hydrogen
gas at 0° C. and 0°·76 mm., weighing about 0·0896 gram.[226] Both of
these units must be regarded as purely subordinate units, ultimately
defined by reference to the primary units, and not involving any new
assumption.

  [225] *Chemistry for Students*, by A. W. Williamson. Clarendon Press
  Series, 2nd ed. Preface p. vi.

  [226] *Introduction to Chemistry*, p. 131.


*Derived Units.*

The standard units of time, space, and mass having been once fixed,
many kinds of magnitude are naturally measured by units derived from
them. From the metre, the unit of linear magnitude follows in the most
obvious manner the centiare or square metre, the unit of superficial
magnitude, and the litre that is the cube of the tenth part of a metre,
the unit of capacity or volume. Velocity of motion is expressed by the
ratio of the space passed over, when the motion is uniform, to the time
occupied; hence the unit of velocity is that of a body which passes
over a unit of space in a unit of time. In physical science the unit of
velocity might be taken as one metre per second. Momentum is measured
by the mass moving, regard being paid both to the amount of matter and
the velocity at which it is moving. Hence the unit of momentum will be
that of a unit volume of matter of the unit density moving with the
unit velocity, or in the French system, a cubic centimetre of water of
the maximum density moving one metre per second.

An accelerating force is measured by the ratio of the momentum
generated to the time occupied, the force being supposed to act
uniformly. The unit of force will therefore be that which generates
a unit of momentum in a unit of time, or which causes, in the French
system, one cubic centimetre of water at maximum density to acquire in
one second a velocity of one metre per second. The force of gravity is
the most familiar kind of force, and as, when acting unimpeded upon any
substance, it produces in a second a velocity of 9·80868 . . metres per
second in Paris, it follows that the absolute unit of force is about
the tenth part of the force of gravity. If we employ British weights
and measures, the absolute unit of force is represented by the gravity
of about half an ounce, since the force of gravity of any portion of
matter acting upon that matter during one second, produces a final
velocity of 32·1889 feet per second or about 32 units of velocity.
Although from its perpetual action and approximate uniformity we find
in gravity the most convenient force for reference, and thus habitually
employ it to estimate quantities of matter, we must remember that it
is only one of many instances of force. Strictly speaking, we should
express weight in terms of force, but practically we express other
forces in terms of weight.

We still require the unit of energy, a more complex notion. The
momentum of a body expresses the quantity of motion which belongs or
would belong to the aggregate of the particles; but when we consider
how this motion is related to the action of a force producing or
removing it, we find that the effect of a force is proportional to the
mass multiplied by the square of the velocity and it is convenient to
take half this product as the expression required. But it is shown in
books upon dynamics that it will be exactly the same thing if we define
energy by a force acting through a space. The natural unit of energy
will then be that which overcomes a unit of force acting through a unit
of space; when we lift one kilogram through one metre, against gravity,
we therefore accomplish 9·80868 . . units of work, that is, we turn so
many units of potential energy existing in the muscles, into potential
energy of gravitation. In lifting one pound through one foot there is
in like manner a conversion of 32·1889 units of energy. Accordingly the
unit of energy will be in the English system, that required to lift
one pound through about the thirty-second part of a foot; in terms of
metric units, it will be that required to lift a kilogram through about
one tenth part of a metre.

Every person is at liberty to measure and record quantities in terms of
any unit which he likes. He may use the yard for linear measurement and
the litre for cubic measurement, only there will then be a complicated
relation between his different results. The system of derived units
which we have been briefly considering, is that which gives the most
simple and natural relations between quantitative expressions of
different kinds, and therefore conduces to ease of comprehension and
saving of laborious calculation.

It would evidently be a source of great convenience if scientific men
could agree upon some single system of units, original and derived, in
terms of which all quantities could be expressed. Statements would thus
be rendered easily comparable, a large part of scientific literature
would be made intelligible to all, and the saving of mental labour
would be immense. It seems to be generally allowed, too, that the
metric system of weights and measures presents the best basis for the
ultimate system; it is thoroughly established in Western Europe; it is
legalised in England; it is already commonly employed by scientific
men; it is in itself the most simple and scientific of systems. There
is every reason then why the metric system should be accepted at least
in its main features.


*Provisional Units.*

Ultimately, as we can hardly doubt, all phenomena will be recognised
as so many manifestations of energy; and, being expressed in terms of
the unit of energy, will be referable to the primary units of space,
time, and density. To effect this reduction, however, in any particular
case, we must not only be able to compare different quantities of
the phenomenon, but to trace the whole series of steps by which it
is connected with the primary notions. We can readily observe that
the intensity of one source of light is greater than that of another;
and, knowing that the intensity of light decreases as the square of
the distance increases, we can easily determine their comparative
brilliance. Hence we can express the intensity of light falling upon
any surface, if we have a unit in which to make the expression. Light
is undoubtedly one form of energy, and the unit ought therefore to be
the unit of energy. But at present it is quite impossible to say how
much energy there is in any particular amount of light. The question
then arises,--Are we to defer the measurement of light until we can
assign its relation to other forms of energy? If we answer Yes, it
is equivalent to saying that the science of light must stand still
perhaps for a generation; and not only this science but many others.
The true course evidently is to select, as the provisional unit of
light, some light of convenient intensity, which can be reproduced from
time to time in the same intensity, and which is defined by physical
circumstances. All the phenomena of light may be experimentally
investigated relatively to this unit, for instance that obtained after
much labour by Bunsen and Roscoe.[227] In after years it will become a
matter of inquiry what is the energy exerted in such unit of light; but
it may be long before the relation is exactly determined.

  [227] *Philosophical Transactions* (1859), vol. cxlix. p. 884, &c.

A provisional unit, then, means one which is assumed and physically
defined in a safe and reproducible manner, in order that particular
quantities may be compared *inter se* more accurately than they can
yet be referred to the primary units. In reality the great majority
of our measurements are expressed in terms of such provisionally
independent units, and even the unit of mass, as we have seen, ought to
be considered as provisional.

The unit of heat ought to be simply the unit of energy, already
described. But a weight can be measured to the one-millionth part, and
temperature to less than the thousandth part of a degree Fahrenheit,
and to less therefore than the five-hundred thousandth part of the
absolute temperature, whereas the mechanical equivalent of heat
is probably not known to the thousandth part. Hence the need of a
provisional unit of heat, which is often taken as that requisite to
raise one gram of water through one degree Centigrade, that is from
0° to 1°. This quantity of heat is capable of approximate expression
in terms of time, space, and mass; for by the natural constant,
determined by Dr. Joule, and called the mechanical equivalent of heat,
we know that the assumed unit of heat is equal to the energy of 423·55
gram-metres, or that energy which will raise the mass of 423·55 grams
through one metre against 9·8... absolute units of force. Heat may also
be expressed in terms of the quantity of ice at 0° Cent., which it is
capable of converting into water under inappreciable pressure.


*Theory of Dimensions.*

In order to understand the relations between the quantities dealt with
in physical science, it is necessary to pay attention to the Theory of
Dimensions, first clearly stated by Joseph Fourier,[228] but in later
years developed by several physicists. This theory investigates the
manner in which each derived unit depends upon or involves one or more
of the fundamental units. The number of units in a rectangular area
is found by multiplying together the numbers of units in the sides;
thus the unit of length enters twice into the unit of area, which is
therefore said to have two dimensions with respect to length. Denoting
length by *L*, we may say that the dimensions of area are *L* × *L* or
*L*^{2}. It is obvious in the same way that the dimensions of volume or
bulk will be *L*^{3}.

  [228] *Théorie Analytique de la Chaleur*, Paris; 1822, §§ 157–162.

The number of units of mass in a body is found by multiplying the
number of units of volume, by those of density. Hence mass is of
three dimensions as regards length, and one as regards density.
Calling density *D*, the dimensions of mass are *L*^{3}*D*. As already
explained, however, it is usual to substitute an arbitrary provisional
unit of mass, symbolised by *M*; according to the view here taken we
may say that the dimensions of *M* are *L*^{3}*D*.

Introducing time, denoted by *T*, it is easy to see that the dimensions
of velocity will be *L/T* or *LT*^{-1}, because the number of units
in the velocity of a body is found by *dividing* the units of length
passed over by the units of time occupied in passing. The acceleration
of a body is measured by the increase of velocity in relation to the
time, that is, we must divide the units of velocity gained by the units
of time occupied in gaining it; hence its dimensions will be *LT*^{-2}.
Momentum is the product of mass and velocity, so that its dimensions
are *MLT*^{-1}. The effect of a force is measured by the acceleration
produced in a unit of mass in a unit of time; hence the dimensions of
force are *MLT*^{-2}. Work done is proportional to the force acting and
to the space through which it acts; so that it has the dimensions of
force with that of length added, giving *ML*^{2}*T*^{-2}.

It should be particularly noticed that angular magnitude has no
dimensions at all, being measured by the ratio of the arc to the radius
(p. 305). Thus we have the dimensions *LL*^{-1} or *L*^{0}. This
agrees with the statement previously made, that no arbitrary unit of
angular magnitude is needed. Similarly, all pure numbers expressing
ratios only, such as sines and other trigonometrical functions,
logarithms, exponents, &c., are devoid of dimensions. They are absolute
numbers necessarily expressed in terms of unity itself, and are quite
unaffected by the selection of the arbitrary physical units. Angular
magnitude, however, enters into other quantities, such as angular
velocity, which has the dimensions 1/*T* or *T*^{-1}, the units of
angle being divided by the units of time occupied. The dimensions of
angular acceleration are denoted by *T*^{-2}.

The quantities treated in the theories of heat and electricity
are numerous and complicated as regards their dimensions. Thermal
capacity has the dimensions *ML*^{-3}, thermal conductivity,
*ML*^{-1}*T*^{-1}. In Magnetism the dimensions of the strength
of pole are *M*^{1/2}*L*^{3/2}*T*^{-1}, the dimensions of
field-intensity are *M*^{1/2}*L*^{-1/2}*T*^{-1}, and the intensity
of magnetisation has the same dimensions. In the science of
electricity physicists have to deal with numerous kinds of quantity,
and their dimensions are different too in the electro-static
and the electro-magnetic systems. Thus electro-motive force has
the dimensions *M*^{1/2}*L*^{1/2}*T*^{-1}, in the former, and
*M*^{1/2}*L*^{3/2}*T*^{-2} in the latter system. Capacity simply
depends upon length in electro-statics, but upon *L*^{-1}*T*^{2} in
electro-magnetics. It is worthy of particular notice that electrical
quantities have simple dimensions when expressed in terms of density
instead of mass. The instances now given are sufficient to show the
difficulty of conceiving and following out the relations of the
quantities treated in physical science without a systematic method of
calculating and exhibiting their dimensions. It is only in quite recent
years that clear ideas about these quantities have been attained. Half
a century ago probably no one but Fourier could have explained what
he meant by temperature or capacity for heat. The notion of measuring
electricity had hardly been entertained.

Besides affording us a clear view of the complex relations of physical
quantities, this theory is specially useful in two ways. Firstly, it
affords a test of the correctness of mathematical reasoning. According
to the *Principle of Homogeneity*, all the quantities *added* together,
and equated in any equation, must have the same dimensions. Hence if,
on estimating the dimensions of the terms in any equation, they be not
homogeneous, some blunder must have been committed. It is impossible
to add a force to a velocity, or a mass to a momentum. Even if the
numerical values of the two members of a non-homogeneous equation were
equal, this would be accidental, and any alteration in the physical
units would produce inequality and disclose the falsity of the law
expressed in the equation.

Secondly, the theory of units enables us readily and infallibly to
deduce the change in the numerical expression of any physical quantity,
produced by a change in the fundamental units. It is of course obvious
that in order to represent the same absolute quantity, a number must
vary inversely as the magnitude of the units which are numbered. The
yard expressed in feet is 3; taking the inch as the unit instead of
the foot it becomes 36. Every quantity into which the dimension length
enters positively must be altered in like manner. Changing the unit
from the foot to the inch, numerical expressions of volume must be
multiplied by 12 × 12 × 12. When a dimension enters negatively the
opposite rule will hold. If for the minute we substitute the second
as unit of time, then we must divide all numbers expressing angular
velocities by 60, and numbers expressing angular acceleration by
60 × 60. The rule is that a numerical expression varies inversely as
the magnitude of the unit as regards each whole dimension entering
positively, and it varies directly as the magnitude of the unit for
each whole dimension entering negatively. In the case of fractional
exponents, the proper root of the ratio of change has to be taken.

The study of this subject may be continued in Professor J. D. Everett’s
“Illustrations of the Centimetre-gramme-second System of Units,”
published by Taylor and Francis, 1875; in Professor Maxwell’s “Theory
of Heat;” or Professor Fleeming Jenkin’s “Text Book of Electricity.”


*Natural Constants.*

Having acquired accurate measuring instruments, and decided upon the
units in which the results shall be expressed, there remains the
question, What use shall be made of our powers of measurement? Our
principal object must be to discover general quantitative laws of
nature; but a very large amount of preliminary labour is employed in
the accurate determination of the dimensions of existing objects, and
the numerical relations between diverse forces and phenomena. Step
by step every part of the material universe is surveyed and brought
into known relations with other parts. Each manifestation of energy is
correlated with each other kind of manifestation. Professor Tyndall has
described the care with which such operations are conducted.[229]

  [229] Tyndall’s *Sound*, 1st ed. p. 26.

“Those who are unacquainted with the details of scientific
investigation, have no idea of the amount of labour expended on
the determination of those numbers on which important calculations
or inferences depend. They have no idea of the patience shown by a
Berzelius in determining atomic weights; by a Regnault in determining
coefficients of expansion; or by a Joule in determining the mechanical
equivalent of heat. There is a morality brought to bear upon such
matters which, in point of severity, is probably without a parallel in
any other domain of intellectual action.”

Every new natural constant which is recorded brings many fresh
inferences within our power. For if *n* be the number of such constants
known, then 1/2 (*n*^{2}--*n*) is the number of ratios which are within
our powers of calculation, and this increases with the square of *n*.
We thus gradually piece together a map of nature, in which the lines of
inference from one phenomenon to another rapidly grow in complexity,
and the powers of scientific prediction are correspondingly augmented.

Babbage[230] proposed the formation of a collection of the constant
numbers of nature, a work which has at last been taken in hand by the
Smithsonian Institution.[231] It is true that a complete collection of
such numbers would be almost co-extensive with scientific literature,
since almost all the numbers occurring in works on chemistry,
mineralogy, physics, astronomy, &c., would have to be included.
Still a handy volume giving all the more important numbers and their
logarithms, referred when requisite to the different units in common
use, would be very useful. A small collection of constant numbers will
be found at the end of Babbage’s, Hutton’s, and many other tables of
logarithms, and a somewhat larger collection is given in Templeton’s
*Millwright and Engineer’s Pocket Companion*.

  [230] British Association, Cambridge, 1833. Report, pp. 484–490.

  [231] *Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections*, vol. xii., the
  Constants of Nature, part. i. Specific gravities compiled by F. W.
  Clarke, 8vo. Washington, 1873.

Our present object will be to classify these constant numbers roughly,
according to their comparative generality and importance, under the
following heads:--

  (1) Mathematical constants.
  (2) Physical constants.
  (3) Astronomical constants.
  (4) Terrestrial numbers.
  (5) Organic numbers.
  (6) Social numbers.


*Mathematical Constants.*

At the head of the list of natural constants must come those which
express the necessary relations of numbers to each other. The ordinary
Multiplication Table is the most familiar and the most important of
such series of constants, and is, theoretically speaking, infinite in
extent. Next we must place the Arithmetical Triangle, the significance
of which has already been pointed out (p. 182). Tables of logarithms
also contain vast series of natural constants, arising out of the
relations of pure numbers. At the base of all logarithmic theory is
the mysterious natural constant commonly denoted by *e*, or ε, being
equal to the infinite series 1 + 1/1 + 1/1.2 + 1/1.2.3 + 1/1.2.3.4
+...., and thus consisting of the sum of the ratios between the numbers
of permutations and combinations of 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. things. Tables
of prime numbers and of the factors of composite numbers must not be
forgotten.

Another vast and in fact infinite series of numerical constants
contains those connected with the measurement of angles, and embodied
in trigonometrical tables, whether as natural or logarithmic sines,
cosines, and tangents. It should never be forgotten that though these
numbers find their chief employment in connection with trigonometry,
or the measurement of the sides of a right-angled triangle, yet the
numbers themselves arise out of numerical relations bearing no special
relation to space. Foremost among trigonometrical constants is the
well known number π, usually employed as expressing the ratio of the
circumference and the diameter of a circle; from π follows the value of
the arcual or natural unit of angular value as expressed in ordinary
degrees (p. 306).

Among other mathematical constants not uncommonly used may be mentioned
tables of factorials (p. 179), tables of Bernoulli’s numbers, tables of
the error function,[232] which latter are indispensable not only in the
theory of probability but also in several other branches of science.

  [232] J. W. L. Glaisher, *Philosophical Magazine*, 4th Series,
  vol. xlii. p. 421.

It should be clearly understood that the mathematical constants and
tables of reference already in our possession, although very extensive,
are only an infinitely small part of what might be formed. With the
progress of science the tabulation of new functions will be continually
demanded, and it is worthy of consideration whether public money
should not be available to reward the severe, long continued, and
generally thankless labour which must be gone through in calculating
tables. Such labours are a benefit to the whole human race as long as
it shall exist, though there are few who can appreciate the extent
of this benefit. A most interesting and excellent description of
many mathematical tables will be found in De Morgan’s article on
*Tables*, in the *English Cyclopædia*, Division of Arts and Sciences,
vol. vii. p. 976. An almost exhaustive critical catalogue of extant
tables is being published by a Committee of the British Association,
two portions, drawn up chiefly by Mr. J. W. L. Glaisher and Professor
Cayley, having appeared in the Reports of the Association for 1873 and
1875.


*Physical Constants.*

The second class of constants contains those which refer to the
actual constitution of matter. For the most part they depend upon
the peculiarities of the chemical substance in question, but we may
begin with those which are of the most general character. In a first
sub-class we may place the velocity of light or heat undulations, the
numbers expressing the relation between the lengths of the undulations,
and the rapidity of the undulations, these numbers depending only on
the properties of the ethereal medium, and being probably the same in
all parts of the universe. The theory of heat gives rise to several
numbers of the highest importance, especially Joule’s mechanical
equivalent of heat, the absolute zero of temperature, the mean
temperature of empty space, &c.

Taking into account the diverse properties of the elements we must
have tables of the atomic weights, the specific heats, the specific
gravities, the refractive powers, not only of the elements, but their
almost infinitely numerous compounds. The properties of hardness,
elasticity, viscosity, expansion by heat, conducting powers for heat
and electricity, must also be determined in immense detail. There are,
however, certain of these numbers which stand out prominently because
they serve as intermediate units or terms of comparison. Such are, for
instance, the absolute coefficients of expansion of air, water and
mercury, the temperature of the maximum density of water, the latent
heats of water and steam, the boiling-point of water under standard
pressure, the melting and boiling-points of mercury, and so forth.


*Astronomical Constants.*

The third great class consists of numbers possessing far less
generality because they refer not to the properties of matter, but to
the special forms and distances in which matter has been disposed in
the part of the universe open to our examination. We have, first of
all, to define the magnitude and form of the earth, its mean density,
the constant of aberration of light expressing the relation between
the earth’s mean velocity in space and the velocity of light. From
the earth, as our observatory, we then proceed to lay down the mean
distances of the sun, and of the planets from the same centre; all the
elements of the planetary orbits, the magnitudes, densities, masses,
periods of axial rotation of the several planets are by degrees
determined with growing accuracy. The same labours must be gone through
for the satellites. Catalogues of comets with the elements of their
orbits, as far as ascertainable, must not be omitted.

From the earth’s orbit as a new base of observations, we next proceed
to survey the heavens and lay down the apparent positions, magnitudes,
motions, distances, periods of variation, &c. of the stars. All
catalogues of stars from those of Hipparchus and Tycho, are full of
numbers expressing rudely the conformation of the visible universe.
But there is obviously no limit to the labours of astronomers; not
only are millions of distant stars awaiting their first measurements,
but those already registered require endless scrutiny as regards
their movements in the three dimensions of space, their periods of
revolution, their changes of brilliance and colour. It is obvious that
though astronomical numbers are conventionally called *constant*, they
are probably in all cases subject to more or less rapid variation.


*Terrestrial Numbers.*

Our knowledge of the globe we inhabit involves many numerical
determinations, which have little or no connection with astronomical
theory. The extreme heights of the principal mountains, the mean
elevations of continents, the mean or extreme depths of the oceans,
the specific gravities of rocks, the temperature of mines, the host of
numbers expressing the meteorological or magnetic conditions of every
part of the surface, must fall into this class. Many such numbers
are not to be called constant, being subject to periodic or secular
changes, but they are hardly more variable in fact than some which in
astronomical science are set down as constant. In many cases quantities
which seem most variable may go through rhythmical changes resulting
in a nearly uniform average, and it is only in the long progress of
physical investigation that we can hope to discriminate successfully
between those elemental numbers which are fixed and those which vary.
In the latter case the law of variation becomes the constant relation
which is the object of our search.

*Organic Numbers.*

The forms and properties of brute nature having been sufficiently
defined by the previous classes of numbers, the organic world, both
vegetable and animal, remains outstanding, and offers a higher series
of phenomena for our investigation. All exact knowledge relating to
the forms and sizes of living things, their numbers, the quantities
of various compounds which they consume, contain, or excrete, their
muscular or nervous energy, &c. must be placed apart in a class by
themselves. All such numbers are doubtless more or less subject to
variation, and but in a minor degree capable of exact determination.
Man, so far as he is an animal, and as regards his physical form, must
also be treated in this class.


*Social Numbers.*

Little allusion need be made in this work to the fact that man in
his economic, sanitary, intellectual, æsthetic, or moral relations
may become the subject of sciences, the highest and most useful of
all sciences. Every one who is engaged in statistical inquiry must
acknowledge the possibility of natural laws governing such statistical
facts. Hence we must allot a distinct place to numerical information
relating to the numbers, ages, physical and sanitary condition,
mortality, &c., of different peoples, in short, to vital statistics.
Economic statistics, comprehending the quantities of commodities
produced, existing, exchanged and consumed, constitute another
extensive body of science. In the progress of time exact investigation
may possibly subdue regions of phenomena which at present defy all
scientific treatment. That scientific method can ever exhaust the
phenomena of the human mind is incredible.




