BOOK V.

GENERALISATION, ANALOGY, AND CLASSIFICATION.




CHAPTER XXVII.

GENERALISATION.


I have endeavoured to show in preceding chapters that all inductive
reasoning is an inverse application of deductive reasoning, and
consists in demonstrating that the consequences of certain assumed laws
agree with facts of nature gathered by active or passive observation.
The fundamental process of reasoning, as stated in the outset, consists
in inferring of a thing what we know of similar objects, and it is on
this principle that the whole of deductive reasoning, whether simply
logical or mathematico-logical, is founded. All inductive reasoning
must be founded on the same principle. It might seem that by a plain
use of this principle we could avoid the complicated processes of
induction and deduction, and argue directly from one particular case
to another, as Mill proposed. If the Earth, Venus, Mars, Jupiter,
and other planets move in elliptic orbits, cannot we dispense with
elaborate precautions, and assert that Neptune, Ceres, and the last
discovered planet must do so likewise? Do we not know that Mr.
Gladstone must die, because he is like other men? May we not argue
that because some men die therefore he must? Is it requisite to ascend
by induction to the general proposition “all men must die,” and then
descend by deduction from that general proposition to the case of Mr.
Gladstone? My answer undoubtedly is that we must ascend to general
propositions. The fundamental principle of the substitution of similars
gives us no warrant in affirming of Mr. Gladstone what we know of
other men, because we cannot be sure that Mr. Gladstone is exactly
similar to other men. Until his death we cannot be perfectly sure that
he possesses all the attributes of other men; it is a question of
probability, and I have endeavoured to explain the mode in which the
theory of probability is applied to calculate the probability that from
a series of similar events we may infer the recurrence of like events
under identical circumstances. There is then no such process as that
of inferring from particulars to particulars. A careful analysis of
the conditions under which such an inference appears to be made, shows
that the process is really a general one, and that what is inferred of
a particular case might be inferred of all similar cases. All reasoning
is essentially general, and all science implies generalisation. In
the very birth-time of philosophy this was held to be so: “Nulla
scientia est de individuis, sed de solis universalibus,” was the
doctrine of Plato, delivered by Porphyry. And Aristotle[489] held a
like opinion--Οὐδεμία δὲ τέχνη σκοπεȋ τὸ καθ’ ἕκαστον ... τὸ δὲ καθ’
ἕκαστον ἄπειρον καὶ οὐκ ἐπιστητόν. “No art treats of particular cases;
for particulars are infinite and cannot be known.” No one who holds the
doctrine that reasoning may be from particulars to particulars, can
be supposed to have the most rudimentary notion of what constitutes
reasoning and scíence.

  [489] Aristotle’s *Rhetoric*, Liber I. 2. 11.

At the same time there can be no doubt that practically what we find
to be true of many similar objects will probably be true of the next
similar object. This is the result to which an analysis of the Inverse
Method of Probabilities leads us, and, in the absence of precise data
from which we may calculate probabilities, we are usually obliged to
make a rough assumption that similars in some respects are similars
in other respects. Thus it comes to pass that a large part of the
reasoning processes in which scientific men are engaged, consists in
detecting similarities between objects, and then rudely assuming that
the like similarities will be detected in other cases.


*Distinction of Generalisation and Analogy.*

There is no distinction but that of degree between what is known as
reasoning by *generalisation* and reasoning by *analogy*. In both
cases from certain observed resemblances we infer, with more or less
probability, the existence of other resemblances. In generalisation
the resemblances have great extension and usually little intension,
whereas in analogy we rely upon the great intension, the extension
being of small amount (p. 26). If we find that the qualities A and B
are associated together in a great many instances, and have never been
found separate, it is highly probable that on the next occasion when we
meet with A, B will also be present, and *vice versâ*. Thus wherever we
meet with an object possessing gravity, it is found to possess inertia
also, nor have we met with any material objects possessing inertia
without discovering that they also possess gravity. The probability
has therefore become very great, as indicated by the rules founded on
the Inverse Method of Probabilities (p. 257), that whenever in the
future we meet an object possessing either of the properties of gravity
and inertia, it will be found on examination to possess the other
of these properties. This is a clear instance of the employment of
generalisation.

In analogy, on the other hand, we reason from likeness in many points
to likeness in other points. The qualities or points of resemblance are
now numerous, not the objects. At the poles of Mars are two white spots
which resemble in many respects the white regions of ice and snow at
the poles of the earth. There probably exist no other similar objects
with which to compare these, yet the exactness of the resemblance
enables us to infer, with high probability, that the spots on Mars
consist of ice and snow. In short, many points of resemblance imply
many more. From the appearance and behaviour of those white spots we
infer that they have all the chemical and physical properties of
frozen water. The inference is of course only probable, and based upon
the improbability that aggregates of many qualities should be formed in
a like manner in two or more cases, without being due to some uniform
condition or cause.

In reasoning by analogy, then, we observe that two objects ABCDE....
and A′B′C′D′E′.... have many like qualities, as indicated by the
identity of the letters, and we infer that, since the first has another
quality, X, we shall discover this quality in the second case by
sufficiently close examination. As Laplace says,--“Analogy is founded
on the probability that similar things have causes of the same kind,
and produce the same effects. The more perfect this similarity, the
greater is this probability.”[490] The nature of analogical inference
is aptly described in the work on Logic attributed to Kant, where the
rule of ordinary induction is stated in the words, “*Eines in vielen,
also in allen*,” one quality in many things, therefore in all; and
the rule of analogy is “*Vieles in einem, also auch das übrige in
demselben*,”[491] many (qualities) in one, therefore also the remainder
in the same. It is evident that there may be intermediate cases in
which, from the identity of a moderate number of objects in several
properties, we may infer to other objects. Probability must rest either
upon the number of instances or the depth of resemblance, or upon the
occurrence of both in sufficient degrees. What there is wanting in
extension must be made up by intension, and *vice versâ*.

  [490] *Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités*, p. 86.

  [491] Kant’s *Logik*, § 84, Königsberg, 1800, p. 207.


*Two Meanings of Generalisation.*

The term generalisation, as commonly used, includes two processes which
are of different character, but are often closely associated together.
In the first place, we generalise when we recognise even in two objects
a common nature. We cannot detect the slightest similarity without
opening the way to inference from one case to the other. If we compare
a cubical crystal with a regular octahedron, there is little apparent
similarity; but, as soon as we perceive that either can be produced
by the symmetrical modification of the other, we discover a groundwork
of similarity in the crystals, which enables us to infer many things
of one, because they are true of the other. Our knowledge of ozone
took its rise from the time when the similarity of smell, attending
electric sparks, strokes of lightning, and the slow combustion of
phosphorus, was noticed by Schönbein. There was a time when the rainbow
was an inexplicable phenomenon--a portent, like a comet, and a cause of
superstitious hopes and fears. But we find the true spirit of science
in Roger Bacon, who desires us to consider the objects which present
the same colours as the rainbow; he mentions hexagonal crystals from
Ireland and India, but he bids us not suppose that the hexagonal form
is essential, for similar colours may be detected in many transparent
stones. Drops of water scattered by the oar in the sun, the spray from
a water-wheel, the dewdrops lying on the grass in the summer morning,
all display a similar phenomenon. No sooner have we grouped together
these apparently diverse instances, than we have begun to generalise,
and have acquired a power of applying to one instance what we can
detect of others. Even when we do not apply the knowledge gained to
new objects, our comprehension of those already observed is greatly
strengthened and deepened by learning to view them as particular cases
of a more general property.

A second process, to which the name of generalisation is often
given, consists in passing from a fact or partial law to a multitude
of unexamined cases, which we believe to be subject to the same
conditions. Instead of merely recognising similarity as it is brought
before us, we predict its existence before our senses can detect it, so
that generalisation of this kind endows us with a prophetic power of
more or less probability. Having observed that many substances assume,
like water and mercury, the three states of solid, liquid, and gas, and
having assured ourselves by frequent trial that the greater the means
we possess of heating and cooling, the more substances we can vaporise
and freeze, we pass confidently in advance of fact, and assume that
all substances are capable of these three forms. Such a generalisation
was accepted by Lavoisier and Laplace before many of the corroborative
facts now in our possession were known. The reduction of a single
comet beneath the sway of gravity was considered sufficient indication
that all comets obey the same power. Few persons doubted that the law
of gravity extended over the whole heavens; certainly the fact that
a few stars out of many millions manifest the action of gravity, is
now held to be sufficient evidence of its general extension over the
visible universe.


*Value of Generalisation.*

It might seem that if we know particular facts, there can be little
use in connecting them together by a general law. The particulars
must be more full of useful information than an abstract general
statement. If we know, for instance, the properties of an ellipse, a
circle, a parabola, and hyperbola, what is the use of learning all
these properties over again in the general theory of curves of the
second degree? If we understand the phenomena of sound and light and
water-waves separately, what is the need of erecting a general theory
of waves, which, after all, is inapplicable to practice until resolved
again into particular cases? But, in reality, we never do obtain an
adequate knowledge of particulars until we regard them as cases of
the general. Not only is there a singular delight in discovering the
many in the one, and the one in the many, but there is a constant
interchange of light and knowledge. Properties which are unapparent
in the hyperbola may be readily observed in the ellipse. Most of the
complex relations which old geometers discovered in the circle will
be reproduced *mutatis mutandis* in the other conic sections. The
undulatory theory of light might have been unknown at the present day,
had not the theory of sound supplied hints by analogy. The study of
light has made known many phenomena of interference and polarisation,
the existence of which had hardly been suspected in the case of
sound, but which may now be sought out, and perhaps found to possess
unexpected interest. The careful study of water-waves shows how waves
alter in form and velocity with varying depth of water. Analogous
changes may some time be detected in sound waves. Thus there is mutual
interchange of aid.

“Every study of a generalisation or extension,” De Morgan has well
said,[492] “gives additional power over the particular form by which
the generalisation is suggested. Nobody who has ever returned to
quadratic equations after the study of equations of all degrees,
or who has done the like, will deny my assertion that οὐ βλέπει
βλέπων may be predicated of any one who studies a branch or a case,
without afterwards making it part of a larger whole. Accordingly
it is always worth while to generalise, were it only to give power
over the *particular*. This principle, of daily familiarity to the
mathematician, is almost unknown to the logician.”

  [492] *Syllabus of a Proposed System of Logic*, p. 34.


*Comparative Generality of Properties.*

Much of the value of science depends upon the knowledge which we
gradually acquire of the different degrees of generality of properties
and phenomena of various kinds. The use of science consists in enabling
us to act with confidence, because we can foresee the result. Now this
foresight must rest upon the knowledge of the powers which will come
into play. That knowledge, indeed, can never be certain, because it
rests upon imperfect induction, and the most confident beliefs and
predictions of the physicist may be falsified. Nevertheless, if we
always estimate the probability of each belief according to the due
teaching of the data, and bear in mind that probability when forming
our anticipations, we shall ensure the minimum of disappointment. Even
when he cannot exactly apply the theory of probabilities, the physicist
may acquire the habit of making judgments in general agreement with its
principles and results.

Such is the constitution of nature, that the physicist learns to
distinguish those properties which have wide and uniform extension,
from those which vary between case and case. Not only are certain laws
distinctly laid down, with their extension carefully defined, but a
scientific training gives a kind of tact in judging how far other laws
are likely to apply under any particular circumstances. We learn by
degrees that crystals exhibit phenomena depending upon the directions
of the axes of elasticity, which we must not expect in uniform solids.
Liquids, compared even with non-crystalline solids, exhibit laws of
far less complexity and variety; and gases assume, in many respects,
an aspect of nearly complete uniformity. To trace out the branches of
science in which varying degrees of generality prevail, would be an
inquiry of great interest and importance; but want of space, if there
were no other reason, would forbid me to attempt it, except in a very
slight manner.

Gases, so far as they are really gaseous, not only have exactly the
same properties in all directions of space, but one gas exactly
resembles other gases in many qualities. All gases expand by heat,
according to the same law, and by nearly the same amount; the specific
heats of equivalent weights are equal, and the densities are exactly
proportional to the atomic weights. All such gases obey the general
law, that the volume multiplied by the pressure, and divided by the
absolute temperature, is constant or nearly so. The laws of diffusion
and transpiration are the same in all cases, and, generally speaking,
all physical laws, as distinguished from chemical laws, apply
equally to all gases. Even when gases differ in chemical or physical
properties, the differences are minor in degree. Thus the differences
of viscosity are far less marked than in the liquid and solid states.
Nearly all gases, again, are colourless, the exceptions being chlorine,
the vapours of iodine, bromine, and a few other substances.

Only in one single point, so far as I am aware, do gases present
distinguishing marks unknown or nearly so, in the solid and liquid
states. I mean as regards the light given off when incandescent.
Each gas when sufficiently heated, yields its own peculiar series
of rays, arising from the free vibrations of the constituent parts
of the molecules. Hence the possibility of distinguishing gases by
the spectroscope. But the molecules of solids and liquids appear to
be continually in conflict with each other, so that only a confused
*noise* of atoms is produced, instead of a definite series of luminous
chords. At the same temperature, accordingly, all solids and liquids
give off nearly the same rays when strongly heated, and we have in this
case an exception to the greater generality of properties in gases.

Liquids are in many ways intermediate in character between gases
and solids. While incapable of possessing different elasticity in
different directions, and thus denuded of the rich geometrical
complexity of solids, they retain the variety of density, colour
degrees of transparency, great diversity in surface tension, viscosity,
coefficients of expansion, compressibility, and many other properties
which we observe in solids, but not for the most part in gases. Though
our knowledge of the physical properties of liquids is much wanting in
generality at present, there is ground to hope that by degrees laws
connecting and explaining the variations may be traced out.

Solids are in every way contrasted to gases. Each solid substance
has its own peculiar degree of density, hardness, compressibility,
transparency, tenacity, elasticity, power of conducting heat and
electricity, magnetic properties, capability of producing frictional
electricity, and so forth. Even different specimens of the same kind
of substance will differ widely, according to the accidental treatment
received. And not only has each substance its own specific properties,
but, when crystallised, its properties vary in each direction with
regard to the axes of crystallisation. The velocity of radiation, the
rate of conduction of heat, the coefficients of expansibility and
compressibility, the thermo-electric properties, all vary in different
crystallographic directions.

It is probable that many apparent differences between liquids, and
even between solids, will be explained when we learn to regard them
under exactly corresponding circumstances. The extreme generality of
the properties of gases is in reality only true at an infinitely high
temperature, when they are all equally remote from their condensing
points. Now, it is found that if we compare liquids--for instance,
different kinds of alcohols--not at equal temperatures, but at points
equally distant from their respective boiling points, the laws and
coefficients of expansion are nearly equal. The vapour-tensions of
liquids also are more nearly equal, when compared at corresponding
points, and the boiling-points appear in many cases to be simply
related to the chemical composition. No doubt the progress of
investigation will enable us to discover generality, where at present
we only see variety and puzzling complexity.

In some cases substances exhibit the same physical properties in
the liquid as in the solid state. Lead has a high refractive power,
whether in solution, or in solid salts, crystallised or vitreous.
The magnetic power of iron is conspicuous, whatever be its chemical
condition; indeed, the magnetic properties of substances, though
varying with temperature, seem not to be greatly affected by other
physical changes. Colour, absorptive power for heat or light rays,
and a few other properties are also often the same in liquids and
gases. Iodine and bromine possess a deep colour whenever they are
chemically uncombined. Nevertheless, we can seldom argue safely from
the properties of a substance in one condition to those in another
condition. Ice is an insulator, water a conductor of electricity, and
the same contrast exists in most other substances. The conducting power
of a liquid for electricity increases with the temperature, while that
of a solid decreases. By degrees we may learn to distinguish between
those properties of matter which depend upon the intimate construction
of the chemical molecule, and those which depend upon the contact,
conflict, mutual attraction, or other relations of distinct molecules.
The properties of a substance with respect to light seem generally to
depend upon the molecule; thus, the power of certain substances to
cause the plane of polarisation of a ray of light to rotate, is exactly
the same whatever be its degree of density, or the diluteness of the
solution in which it is contained. Taken as a whole, the physical
properties of substances and their quantitative laws, present a problem
of infinite complexity, and centuries must elapse before any moderately
complete generalisations on the subject become possible.


*Uniform Properties of all Matter.*

Some laws are held to be true of all matter in the universe absolutely,
without exception, no instance to the contrary having ever been
noticed. This is the case with the laws of motion, as laid down
by Galileo and Newton. It is also conspicuously true of the law
of universal gravitation. The rise of modern physical science may
perhaps be considered as beginning at the time when Galileo showed,
in opposition to the Aristotelians, that matter is equally affected
by gravity, irrespective of its form, magnitude, or texture. All
objects fall with equal rapidity, when disturbing causes, such as the
resistance of the air, are removed or allowed for. That which was
rudely demonstrated by Galileo from the leaning tower of Pisa, was
proved by Newton to a high degree of approximation, in an experiment
which has been mentioned (p. 443).

Newton formed two pendulums, as nearly as possible the same in outward
shape and size by taking two equal round wooden boxes, and suspending
them by equal threads, eleven feet long. The pendulums were therefore
equally subject to the resistance of the air. He filled one box with
wood, and in the centre of oscillation of the other he placed an equal
weight of gold. The pendulums were then equal in weight as well as in
size; and, on setting them simultaneously in motion, Newton found that
they vibrated for a length of time with equal vibrations. He tried the
same experiment with silver, lead, glass, sand, common salt, water,
and wheat, in place of the gold, and ascertained that the motion of
his pendulum was exactly the same whatever was the kind of matter
inside.[493] He considered that a difference of a thousandth part
would have been apparent. The reader must observe that the pendulums
were made of equal weight only in order that they might suffer equal
retardation from the air. The meaning of the experiment is that all
substances manifest exactly equal acceleration from the force of
gravity, and that therefore the inertia or resistance of matter to
force, which is the only independent measure of mass known to us, is
always proportional to gravity.

  [493] *Principia*, bk. iii. Prop. VI. Motte’s translation, vol. ii.
  p. 220.

These experiments of Newton were considered conclusive up to very
recent times, when certain discordances between the theory and
observations of the movements of planets led Nicolai, in 1826, to
suggest that the equal gravitation of different kinds of matter might
not be absolutely exact. It is perfectly philosophical thus to call
in question, from time to time, some of the best accepted laws. On
this occasion Bessel carefully repeated the experiments of Newton with
pendulums composed of ivory, glass, marble, quartz, meteoric stones,
&c., but was unable to detect the least difference. This conclusion
is also confirmed by the ultimate agreement of all the calculations
of physical astronomy based upon it. Whether the mass of Jupiter be
calculated from the motion of its own satellites, from the effect
upon the small planets, Vesta, Juno, &c., or from the perturbation
of Encke’s Comet, the results are closely accordant, showing that
precisely the same law of gravity applies to the most different bodies
which we can observe. The gravity of a body, again, appears to be
entirely independent of its other physical conditions, being totally
unaffected by any alteration in the temperature, density, electric or
magnetic condition, or other physical properties of the substance.

One paradoxical result of the law of equal gravitation is the theorem
of Torricelli, to the effect that all liquids of whatever density
fall or flow with equal rapidity. If there be two equal cisterns
respectively filled with mercury and water, the mercury, though
thirteen times as heavy, would flow from an aperture neither more
rapidly nor more slowly than the water, and the same would be true of
ether, alcohol, and other liquids, allowance being made, however, for
the resistance of the air, and the differing viscosities of the liquids.

In its exact equality and its perfect independence of all
circumstances, except mass and distance, the force of gravity stands
apart from all the other forces and phenomena of nature, and has
not yet been brought into any relation with them except through the
general principle of the conservation of energy. Magnetic attraction,
as remarked by Newton, follows very different laws, depending upon the
chemical quality and molecular structure of each particular substance.

We must remember that in saying “all matter gravitates,” we exclude
from the term matter the basis of light-undulations, which is
immensely more extensive in amount, and obeys in many respects the
laws of mechanics. This adamantine substance appears, so far as can be
ascertained, to be perfectly uniform in its properties when existing
in space unoccupied by matter. Light and heat are conveyed by it with
equal velocity in all directions, and in all parts of space so far as
observation informs us. But the presence of gravitating matter modifies
the density and mechanical properties of the so-called ether in a way
which is yet quite unexplained.[494]

Leaving gravity, it is somewhat difficult to discover other laws
which are equally true of all matter. Boerhaave was considered to
have established that all bodies expand by heat; but not only is the
expansion very different in different substances, but we now know
positive exceptions. Many liquids and a few solids contract by heat
at certain temperatures. There are indeed other relations of heat to
matter which seem to be universal and uniform; all substances begin
to give off rays of light at the same temperature, according to the
law of Draper; and gases will not be an exception if sufficiently
condensed, as in the experiments of Frankland. Grove considers it to
be universally true that all bodies in combining produce heat; with
the doubtful exception of sulphur and selenium, all solids in becoming
liquids, and all liquids in becoming gases, absorb heat; but the
quantities of heat absorbed vary with the chemical qualities of the
matter. Carnot’s Thermodynamic Law is held to be exactly true of all
matter without distinction; it expresses the fact that the amount of
mechanical energy which might be theoretically obtained from a certain
amount of heat energy depends only upon the change of the temperatures,
so that whether an engine be worked by water, air, alcohol, ammonia, or
any other substance, the result would theoretically be the same, if the
boiler and condenser were maintained at similar temperatures.

  [494] Professor Lovering has pointed out how obscure and uncertain
  the ideas of scientific men about this ether are, in his interesting
  Presidential Address before the American Association at Hartford,
  1874. *Silliman’s Journal*, October 1874, p. 297. *Philosophical
  Magazine*, vol. xlviii. p. 493.


*Variable Properties of Matter.*

I have enumerated some of the few properties of matter, which are
manifested in exactly the same manner by all substances, whatever be
their differences of chemical or physical constitution. But by far
the greater number of qualities vary in degree; substances are more
or less dense, more or less transparent, more or less compressible,
more or less magnetic, and so on. One common result of the progress of
science is to show that qualities supposed to be entirely absent from
many substances are present only in so low a degree of intensity that
the means of detection were insufficient. Newton believed that most
bodies were quite unaffected by the magnet; Faraday and Tyndall have
rendered it very doubtful whether any substance whatever is wholly
devoid of magnetism, including under that term diamagnetism. We are
rapidly learning to believe that there are no substances absolutely
opaque, or non-conducting, non-electric, non-elastic, non-viscous,
non-compressible, insoluble, infusible, or non-volatile. All tends
to become a matter of degree, or sometimes of direction. There may
be some substances oppositely affected to others, as ferro-magnetic
substances are oppositely affected to diamagnetics, or as substances
which contract by heat are opposed to those which expand; but the
tendency is certainly for every affection of one kind of matter to be
represented by something similar in other kinds. On this account one of
Newton’s rules of philosophising seems to lose all validity; he said,
“Those qualities of bodies which are not capable of being heightened,
and remitted, and which are found in all bodies on which experiment can
be made, must be considered as universal qualities of all bodies.” As
far as I can see, the contrary is more probable, namely, that qualities
variable in degree will be found in every substance in a greater or
less degree.

It is remarkable that Newton whose method of investigation was
logically perfect, seemed incapable of generalising and describing
his own procedure. His celebrated “Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy,”
described at the commencement of the third book of the *Principia*, are
of questionable truth, and still more questionable value.


*Extreme Instances of Properties.*

Although substances usually differ only in degree, great interest
may attach to particular substances which manifest a property in a
conspicuous and intense manner. Every branch of physical science
has usually been developed from the attention forcibly drawn to some
singular substance. Just as the loadstone disclosed magnetism and
amber frictional electricity, so did Iceland spar show the existence
of double refraction, and sulphate of quinine the phenomenon of
fluorescence. When one such startling instance has drawn the attention
of the scientific world, numerous less remarkable cases of the
phenomenon will be detected, and it will probably prove that the
property in question is actually universal to all matter. Nevertheless,
the extreme instances retain their interest, partly in a historical
point of view, partly because they furnish the most convenient
substances for experiment.

Francis Bacon was fully aware of the value of such examples, which he
called *Ostensive Instances* or Light-giving, Free and Predominant
Instances. “They are those,” he says,[495] “which show the nature
under investigation naked, in an exalted condition, or in the highest
degree of power; freed from impediments, or at least by its strength
predominating over and suppressing them.” He mentions quicksilver as
an ostensive instance of weight or density, thinking it not much less
dense than gold, and more remarkable than gold as joining density
to liquidity. The magnet is mentioned as an ostensive instance of
attraction. It would not be easy to distinguish clearly between these
ostensive instances and those which he calls *Instantiae Monodicae*,
or *Irregulares*, or *Heteroclitae*, under which he places whatever
is extravagant in its properties or magnitude, or exhibits least
similarity to other things, such as the sun and moon among the heavenly
bodies, the elephant among animals, the letter *s* among letters, or
the magnet among stones.[496]

  [495] *Novum Organum*, bk. ii. Aphorisms, 24, 25.

  [496] Ibid. Aph. 28.

In optical science great use has been made of the high dispersive
power of the transparent compounds of lead, that is, the power of
giving a long spectrum (p. 432). Dollond, having noticed this peculiar
dispersive power in lenses made of flint glass, employed them to
produce an achromatic arrangement. The element strontium presents a
contrast to lead in this respect, being characterised by a remarkably
low dispersive power; but I am not aware that this property has yet
been turned to account.

Compounds of lead have both a high dispersive and a high refractive
index, and in the latter respect they proved very useful to Faraday.
Having spent much labour in preparing various kinds of optical glass,
Faraday happened to form a compound of lead, silica, and boracic
acid, now known as *heavy glass*, which possessed an intensely high
refracting power. Many years afterwards in attempting to discover the
action of magnetism upon light he failed to detect any effect, as has
been already mentioned, (p. 588), until he happened to test a piece of
the heavy glass. The peculiar refractive power of this medium caused
the magnetic strain to be apparent, and the rotation of the plane of
polarisation was discovered.

In almost every part of physical science there is some substance
of powers pre-eminent for the special purpose to which it is put.
Rock-salt is invaluable for its extreme diathermancy or transparency to
the least refrangible rays of the spectrum. Quartz is equally valuable
for its transparency, as regards the ultra-violet or most refrangible
rays. Diamond is the most highly refracting substance which is at the
same time transparent; were it more abundant and easily worked it would
be of great optical importance. Cinnabar is distinguished by possessing
a power of rotating the plane of polarisation of light, from 15 to 17
times as much as quartz. In electric experiments copper is employed for
its high conducting powers and exceedingly low magnetic properties;
iron is of course indispensable for its enormous magnetic powers; while
bismuth holds a like place as regards its diamagnetic powers, and was
of much importance in Tyndall’s decisive researches upon the polar
character of the diamagnetic force.[497] In regard to magne-crystallic
action the mineral cyanite is highly remarkable, being so powerfully
affected by the earth’s magnetism, that, when delicately suspended, it
assumes a constant position with regard to the magnetic meridian, and
may almost be used like the compass needle. Sodium is distinguished
by its unique light-giving powers, which are so extraordinary that
probably one half of the whole number of stars in the heavens have a
yellow tinge in consequence.

  [497] *Philosophical Transactions* (1856) vol. cxlvi. p. 246.

It is remarkable that water, though the most common of all fluids,
is distinguished in almost every respect by extreme qualities. Of
all known substances water has the highest specific heat, being thus
peculiarly fitted for the purpose of warming and cooling, to which
it is often put. It rises by capillary attraction to a height more
than twice that of any other liquid. In the state of ice it is nearly
twice as dilatable by heat as any other known solid substance.[498] In
proportion to its density it has a far higher surface tension than any
other substance, being surpassed in absolute tension only by mercury;
and it would not be difficult to extend considerably the list of its
remarkable and useful properties.

  [498] *Philosophical Magazine*, 4th Series, January 1870, vol. xxxix.
  p. 2.

Under extreme instances we may include cases of remarkably low powers
or qualities. Such cases seem to correspond to what Bacon calls
*Clandestine Instances*, which exhibit a given nature in the least
intensity, and as it were in a rudimentary state.[499] They may often
be important, he thinks, as allowing the detection of the cause of
the property by difference. I may add that in some cases they may be
of use in experiments. Thus hydrogen is the least dense of all known
substances, and has the least atomic weight. Liquefied nitrous oxide
has the lowest refractive index of all known fluids.[500] The compounds
of strontium have the lowest dispersive power. It is obvious that
a property of very low degree may prove as curious and valuable a
phenomenon as a property of very high degree.

  [499] *Novum Organum*, bk. ii. Aphorism 25.

  [500] Faraday’s *Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics*,
  p. 93.


*The Detection of Continuity.*

We should bear in mind that phenomena which are in reality of a
closely similar or even identical nature, may present to the senses
very different appearances. Without a careful analysis of the changes
which take place, we may often be in danger of widely separating facts
and processes, which are actually instances of the same law. Extreme
difference of degree or magnitude is a frequent cause of error. It is
truly difficult at the first moment to recognise any similarity between
the gradual rusting of a piece of iron, and the rapid combustion of a
heap of straw. Yet Lavoisier’s chemical theory was founded upon the
similarity of the oxydising process in one case and the other. We have
only to divide the iron into excessively small particles to discover
that it is really the more combustible of the two, and that it actually
takes fire spontaneously and burns like tinder. It is the excessive
slowness of the process in the case of a massive piece of iron which
disguises its real character.

If Xenophon reports truly, Socrates was misled by not making sufficient
allowance for extreme differences of degree and quantity. Anaxagoras
held that the sun is a fire, but Socrates rejected this opinion, on the
ground that we can look at a fire, but not at the sun, and that plants
grow by sunshine while they are killed by fire. He also pointed out
that a stone heated in a fire is not luminous, and soon cools, whereas
the sun ever remains equally luminous and hot.[501] All such mistakes
evidently arise from not perceiving that difference of quantity may be
so extreme as to assume the appearance of difference of quality. It is
the least creditable thing we know of Socrates, that after pointing
out these supposed mistakes of earlier philosophers, he advised his
followers not to study astronomy.

  [501] *Memorabilia*, iv. 7.

Masses of matter of very different size may be expected to exhibit
apparent differences of conduct, arising from the various intensity of
the forces brought into play. Many persons have thought it requisite
to imagine occult forces producing the suspension of the clouds, and
there have even been absurd theories representing cloud particles as
minute water-balloons buoyed up by the warm air within them. But we
have only to take proper account of the enormous comparative resistance
which the air opposes to the fall of minute particles, to see that
all cloud particles are probably constantly falling through the air,
but so slowly that there is no apparent effect. Mineral matter again
is always regarded as inert and incapable of spontaneous movement. We
are struck by astonishment on observing in a powerful microscope, that
every kind of solid matter suspended in extremely minute particles
in pure water, acquires an oscillatory movement, often so marked as
to resemble dancing or skipping. I conceive that this movement is due
to the comparatively vast intensity of chemical action when exerted
upon minute particles, the effect being 5,000 or 10,000 greater in
proportion to the mass than in fragments of an inch diameter (p. 406).

Much that was formerly obscure in the science of electricity arose from
the extreme differences of intensity and quantity in which this form of
energy manifests itself. Between the brilliant explosive discharge of a
thunder-cloud and the gentle continuous current produced by two pieces
of metal and some dilute acid, there is no apparent analogy whatever.
It was therefore a work of great importance when Faraday demonstrated
the identity of the forces in action, showing that common frictional
electricity would decompose water like that from the voltaic battery.
The relation of the phenomena became plain when he succeeded in showing
that it would require 800,000 discharges of his large Leyden battery
to decompose one single grain of water. Lightning was now seen to be
electricity of excessively high tension, but extremely small quantity,
the difference being somewhat analogous to that between the force of
one million gallons of water falling through one foot, and one gallon
of water falling through one million feet. Faraday estimated that one
grain of water acting on four grains of zinc, would yield electricity
enough for a great thunderstorm.

It was long believed that electrical conductors and insulators belonged
to two opposed classes of substances. Between the inconceivable
rapidity with which the current passes through pure copper wire,
and the apparently complete manner in which it is stopped by a
thin partition of gutta-percha or gum-lac, there seemed to be no
resemblance. Faraday again laboured successfully to show that these
were but the extreme cases of a chain of substances varying in all
degrees in their powers of conduction. Even the best conductors, such
as pure copper or silver, offer resistance to the electric current. The
other metals have considerably higher powers of resistance, and we pass
gradually down through oxides and sulphides. The best insulators, on
the other hand, allow of an atomic induction which is the necessary
antecedent of conduction. Hence Faraday inferred that whether we can
measure the effect or not, all substances discharge electricity more
or less.[502] One consequence of this doctrine must be, that every
discharge of electricity produces an induced current. In the case of
the common galvanic current we can readily detect the induced current
in any parallel wire or other neighbouring conductor, and can separate
the opposite currents which arise at the moments when the original
current begins and ends. But a discharge of high tension electricity
like lightning, though it certainly occupies time and has a beginning
and an end, yet lasts so minute a fraction of a second, that it would
be hopeless to attempt to detect and separate the two opposite induced
currents, which are nearly simultaneous and exactly neutralise each
other. Thus an apparent failure of analogy is explained away, and
we are furnished with another instance of a phenomenon incapable of
observation and yet theoretically known to exist.[503]

  [502] *Experimental Researches in Electricity*, Series xii. vol. i.
  p. 420.

  [503] *Life of Faraday*, vol. ii. p. 7.

Perhaps the most extraordinary case of the detection of unsuspected
continuity is found in the discovery of Cagniard de la Tour and
Professor Andrews, that the liquid and gaseous conditions of matter
are only remote points in a continuous course of change. Nothing is
at first sight more apparently distinct than the physical condition
of water and aqueous vapour. At the boiling-point there is an
entire breach of continuity, and the gas produced is subject to
laws incomparably more simple than the liquid from which it arose.
But Cagniard de la Tour showed that if we maintain a liquid under
sufficient pressure its boiling point may be indefinitely raised, and
yet the liquid will ultimately assume the gaseous condition with but
a small increase of volume. Professor Andrews, recently following out
this course of inquiry, has shown that liquid carbonic acid may, at
a particular temperature (30°·92 C.), and under the pressure of 74
atmospheres, be at the same time in a state indistinguishable from
that of liquid and gas. At higher pressures carbonic acid may be
made to pass from a palpably liquid state to a truly gaseous state
without any abrupt change whatever. As the pressure is greater the
abruptness of the change from liquid to gas gradually decreases, and
finally vanishes. Similar phenomena or an approximation to them have
been observed in other liquids, and there is little doubt that we may
make a wide generalisation, and assert that, under adequate pressure,
every liquid might be made to pass into a gas without breach of
continuity.[504] The liquid state, moreover, is considered by Professor
Andrews to be but an intermediate step between the solid and gaseous
conditions. There are various indications that the process of melting
is not perfectly abrupt; and could experiments be made under adequate
pressures, it is believed that every solid could be made to pass by
insensible degrees into the state of liquid, and subsequently into that
of gas.

  [504] *Nature*, vol. ii. p. 278.

These discoveries appear to open the way to most important and
fundamental generalisations, but it is probable that in many other
cases phenomena now regarded as discrete may be shown to be different
degrees of the same process. Graham was of opinion that chemical
affinity differs but in degree from the ordinary attraction which
holds different particles of a body together. He found that sulphuric
acid continued to evolve heat when mixed even with the fiftieth
equivalent of water, so that there seemed to be no distinct limit to
chemical affinity. He concludes, “There is reason to believe that
chemical affinity passes in its lowest degree into the attraction of
aggregation.”[505]

  [505] *Journal of the Chemical Society*, vol. viii. p. 51.

The atomic theory is well established, but its limits are not marked
out. As Grove points out, we may by selecting sufficiently high
multipliers express any combination or mixture of elements in terms
of their equivalent weights.[506] Sir W. Thomson has suggested that
the power which vegetable fibre, oatmeal, and other substances possess
of attracting and condensing aqueous vapour is probably continuous,
or, in fact, identical with capillary attraction, which is capable
of interfering with the pressure of aqueous vapour and aiding its
condensation.[507] There are many cases of so-called catalytic or
surface action, such as the extraordinary power of animal charcoal
for attracting organic matter, or of spongy platinum for condensing
hydrogen, which can only be considered as exalted cases of a more
general power of attraction. The number of substances which are
decomposed by light in a striking manner is very limited; but many
other substances, such as vegetable colours, are affected by long
exposure; on the principle of continuity we might expect to find that
all kinds of matter are more or less susceptible of change by the
incidence of light rays.[508] It is the opinion of Grove that wherever
an electric current passes there is a tendency to decomposition, a
strain on the molecules, which when sufficiently intense leads to
disruption. Even a metallic conducting wire may be regarded as tending
to decomposition. Davy was probably correct in describing electricity
as chemical affinity acting on masses, or rather, as Grove suggests,
creating a disturbance through a chain of particles.[509] Laplace went
so far as to suggest that all chemical phenomena may be results of
the Newtonian law of attraction, applied to atoms of various mass and
position; but the time is probably far distant when the progress of
molecular philosophy and of mathematical methods will enable such a
generalisation to be verified or refuted.

  [506] *Correlation of Physical Forces*, 3rd edit. p. 184.

  [507] *Philosophical Magazine*, 4th Series, vol. xlii. p. 451.

  [508] Grove, *Correlation of Physical Forces*, 3rd edit. p. 118.

  [509] Ibid. pp. 166, 199, &c.


*The Law of Continuity.*

Under the title of the Law of Continuity we may place many applications
of the general principle of reasoning, that what is true of one case
will be true of similar cases, and probably true of what are probably
similar. Whenever we find that a law or similarity is rigorously
fulfilled up to a certain point in time or space, we expect with a high
degree of probability that it will continue to be fulfilled at least a
little further. If we see part only of a circle, we naturally expect
that the circular form will be continued in the part hidden from us. If
a body has moved uniformly over a certain space, we expect that it will
continue to move uniformly. The ground of such inferences is doubtless
identical with that of other inductive inferences. In continuous
motion every infinitely small space passed over constitutes a separate
constituent fact, and had we perfect powers of observation the smallest
finite motion would include an infinity of information, which, by the
principles of the inverse method of probabilities, would enable us to
infer with certainty to the next infinitely small portion of the path.
But when we attempt to infer from one finite portion of a path to
another finite portion, inference will be only more or less probable,
according to the comparative lengths of the portions and the accuracy
of observation; the longer our experience is, the more probable our
inference will be; the greater the length of time or space over which
the inference extends, the less probable.

This principle of continuity presents itself in nature in a great
variety of forms and cases. It is familiarly expressed in the dictum
*Natura non agit per saltum*. As Graham expressed the maxim, there are
in nature no abrupt transitions, and the distinctions of class are
never absolute.[510] There is always some notice--some forewarning
of every phenomenon, and every change begins by insensible degrees,
could we observe it with perfect accuracy. The cannon ball, indeed, is
forced from the cannon in an inappreciable portion of time; the trigger
is pulled, the fuze fired, the powder inflamed, the ball expelled,
all simultaneously to our senses. But there is no doubt that time is
occupied by every part of the process, and that the ball begins to
move at first with infinite slowness. Captain Noble is able to measure
by his chronoscope the progress of the shot in a 300-pounder gun, and
finds that the whole motion within the barrel takes place in something
less than one 200th part of a second. It is certain that no finite
force can produce motion, except in a finite space of time. The amount
of momentum communicated to a body is proportional to the accelerating
force multiplied by the time during which it acts uniformly. Thus a
slight force produces a great velocity only by long-continued action.
In a powerful shock, like that of a railway collision, the stroke of a
hammer on an anvil, or the discharge of a gun, the time is very short,
and therefore the accelerating forces brought into play are exceedingly
great, but never infinite. In the case of a large gun the powder in
exploding is said to exert for a moment a force equivalent to at least
2,800,000 horses.

  [510] *Philosophical Transactions*, 1861. *Chemical and Physical
  Researches*, p. 598.

Our belief in some of the fundamental laws of nature rests upon the
principle of continuity. Galileo is held to be the first philosopher
who consciously employed this principle in his arguments concerning
the nature of motion, and it is certain that we can never by mere
experience assure ourselves of the truth even of the first law of
motion. *A material particle*, we are told, *when not acted on by
extraneous forces will continue in the same state of rest or motion.*
This may be true, but as we can find no body which is free from the
action of extraneous causes, how are we to prove it? Only by observing
that the less the amount of those forces the more nearly is the law
found to be true. A ball rolled along rough ground is soon stopped;
along a smooth pavement it continues longer in movement. A delicately
suspended pendulum is almost free from friction against its supports,
but it is gradually stopped by the resistance of the air; place it
in the vacuous receiver of an air-pump and we find the motion much
prolonged. A large planet like Jupiter experiences almost infinitely
less friction, in comparison to its vast momentum, than we can produce
experimentally, and we find in such a case that there is not the least
evidence of the falsity of the law. Experience, then, informs us that
we may approximate indefinitely to a uniform motion by sufficiently
decreasing the disturbing forces. It is an act of inference which
enables us to travel on beyond experience, and assert that, in the
total absence of any extraneous force, motion would be absolutely
uniform. The state of rest, again, is a limiting case in which motion
is infinitely small or zero, to which we may attain, on the principle
of continuity, by successively considering cases of slower and slower
motion. There are many classes of phenomena, in which, by gradually
passing from the apparent to the obscure, we can assure ourselves of
the nature of phenomena which would otherwise be a matter of great
doubt. Thus we can sufficiently prove in the manner of Galileo, that
a musical sound consists of rapid uniform pulses, by causing strokes
to be made at intervals which we gradually diminish until the separate
strokes coalesce into a uniform hum or note. With great advantage we
approach, as Tyndall says, the sonorous through the grossly mechanical.
In listening to a great organ we cannot fail to perceive that the
longest pipes, or their partial tones, produce a tremor and fluttering
of the building. At the other extremity of the scale, there is no fixed
limit to the acuteness of sounds which we can hear; some individuals
can hear sounds too shrill for other ears, and as there is nothing in
the nature of the atmosphere to prevent the existence of undulations
far more rapid than any of which we are conscious, we may infer, by the
principle of continuity, that such undulations probably exist.

There are many habitual actions which we perform we know not how. So
rapidly are acts of minds accomplished that analysis seems impossible.
We can only investigate them when in process of formation, observing
that the best formed habit is slowly and continuously acquired, and
it is in the early stages that we can perceive the rationale of the
process.

Let it be observed that this principle of continuity must be held of
much weight only in exact physical laws, those which doubtless repose
ultimately upon the simple laws of motion. If we fearlessly apply
the principle to all kinds of phenomena, we may often be right in
our inferences, but also often wrong. Thus, before the development
of spectrum analysis, astronomers had observed that the more they
increased the powers of their telescopes the more nebulæ they could
resolve into distinct stars. This result had been so often found
true that they almost irresistibly assumed that all nebulæ would be
ultimately resolved by telescopes of sufficient power; yet Huggins has
in recent years proved by the spectroscope, that certain nebulæ are
actually gaseous, and in a truly nebulous state.

The principle of continuity must have been continually employed in the
inquiries of Galileo, Newton, and other experimental philosophers,
but it appears to have been distinctly formulated for the first time
by Leibnitz. He at least claims to have first spoken of “the law of
continuity” in a letter to Bayle, printed in the *Nouvelles de la
République des Lettres*, an extract from which is given in Erdmann’s
edition of Leibnitz’s works, p. 104, under the title “Sur un Principe
Général utile à l’explication des Lois de la Nature.”[511] It has
indeed been asserted that the doctrine of the *latens processus* of
Francis Bacon involves the principle of continuity,[512] but I think
that this doctrine, like that of the *natures* of substances, is merely
a vague statement of the principle of causation.

  [511] *Life of Sir W. Hamilton*, p. 439.

  [512] Powell’s *History of Natural Philosophy*, p. 201. *Novum
  Organum*, bk. ii. Aphorisms 5–7.


*Failure of the Law of Continuity.*

There are certain cautions which must be given as to the application of
the principle of continuity. In the first place, where this principle
really holds true, it may seem to fail owing to our imperfect means
of observation. Though a physical law may not admit of perfectly
abrupt change, there is no limit to the approach which it may make to
abruptness. When we warm a piece of very cold ice, the absorption of
heat, the temperature, and the dilatation of the ice vary according
to apparently simple laws until we come to the zero of the Centigrade
scale. Everything is then changed; an enormous absorption of heat
takes place without any rise of temperature, and the volume of the ice
decreases as it changes into water. Unless carefully investigated, this
change appears to be perfectly abrupt; but accurate observation seems
to show that there is a certain forewarning; the ice does not turn into
water all at once, but through a small fraction of a degree the change
is gradual. All the phenomena concerned, if measured very exactly,
would be represented not by angular lines, but continuous curves,
undergoing rapid flexures; and we may probably assert with safety that
between whatever points of temperature we examine ice, there would be
found some indication, though almost infinitesimally small, of the
apparently abrupt change which was to occur at a higher temperature.
It might also be pointed out that the important and apparently simple
physical laws, such as those of Boyle and Mariotte, Dalton and
Gay-Lussac, &c., are only approximately true, and the divergences
from the simple laws are forewarnings of abrupt changes, which would
otherwise break the law of continuity.

Secondly, it must be remembered that mathematical laws of some
complexity will probably present singular cases or negative results,
which may bear the appearance of discontinuity, as when the law of
retraction suddenly yields us with perfect abruptness the phenomenon of
total internal reflection. In the undulatory theory, however, there is
no real change of law between refraction and reflection. Faraday in the
earlier part of his career found so many substances possessing magnetic
power, that he ventured on a great generalisation, and asserted that
all bodies shared in the magnetic property of iron. His mistake, as he
afterwards discovered, consisted in overlooking the fact that though
magnetic in a certain sense, some substances have negative magnetism,
and are repelled instead of being attracted by the magnet.

Thirdly, where we might expect to find a uniform mathematical law
prevailing, the law may undergo abrupt change at singular points,
and actual discontinuity may arise. We may sometimes be in danger of
treating under one law phenomena which really belong to different laws.
For instance, a spherical shell of uniform matter attracts an external
particle of matter with a force varying inversely as the square of the
distance from the centre of the sphere. But this law only holds true
so long as the particle is external to the shell. Within the shell
the law is wholly different, and the aggregate gravity of the sphere
becomes zero, the force in every direction being neutralised by an
exactly equal opposite force. If an infinitely small particle be in the
superficies of a sphere, the law is again different, and the attractive
power of the shell is half what it would be with regard to particles
infinitely close to the surface of the shell. Thus in approaching the
centre of a shell from a distance, the force of gravity shows double
discontinuity in passing through the shell.[513]

  [513] Thomson and Tait, *Treatise on Natural Philosophy*, vol. i. pp.
  346–351.

It may admit of question, too, whether discontinuity is really unknown
in nature. We perpetually do meet with events which are real breaks
upon the previous law, though the discontinuity may be a sign that
some independent cause has come into operation. If the ordinary
course of the tides is interrupted by an enormous irregular wave, we
attribute it to an earthquake, or some gigantic natural disturbance.
If a meteoric stone falls upon a person and kills him, it is clearly a
discontinuity in his life, of which he could have had no anticipation.
A sudden sound may pass through the air neither preceded nor followed
by any continuous effect. Although, then, we may regard the Law of
Continuity as a principle of nature holding rigorously true in many of
the relations of natural forces, it seems to be a matter of difficulty
to assign the limits within which the law is verified. Much caution is
required in its application.


*Negative Arguments on the Principle of Continuity.*

Upon the principle of continuity we may sometimes found arguments of
great force which prove an hypothesis to be impossible, because it
would involve a continual repetition of a process *ad infinitum*, or
else a purely arbitrary breach at some point. Bonnet’s famous theory
of reproduction represented every living creature as containing
germs which were perfect representatives of the next generation, so
that on the same principle they necessarily included germs of the
next generation, and so on indefinitely. The theory was sufficiently
refuted when once clearly stated, as in the following poem called the
Universe,[514] by Henry Baker:--

  “Each seed includes a plant: that plant, again,
   Has other seeds, which other plants contain:
   Those other plants have all their seeds, and those
   More plants again, successively inclose.

  “Thus, ev’ry single berry that we find,
   Has, really, in itself whole forests of its kind,
   Empire and wealth one acorn may dispense,
   By fleets to sail a thousand ages hence.”

  [514] *Philosophical Transactions* (1740), vol. xli. p. 454.

The general principle of inference, that what we know of one case must
be true of similar cases, so far as they are similar, prevents our
asserting anything which we cannot apply time after time under the same
circumstances. On this principle Stevinus beautifully demonstrated
that weights resting on two inclined planes and balancing each other
must be proportional to the lengths of the planes between their apex
and a horizontal plane. He imagined a uniform endless chain to be hung
over the planes, and to hang below in a symmetrical festoon. If the
chain were ever to move by gravity, there would be the same reason
for its moving on for ever, and thus producing a perpetual motion. As
this is absurd, the portions of the chain lying on the planes, and
equal in length to the planes, must balance each other. On similar
grounds we may disprove the existence of any *self-moving machine*;
for if it could once alter its own state of motion or rest, in however
small a degree, there is no reason why it should not do the like
time after time *ad infinitum*. Newton’s proof of his third law of
motion, in the case of gravity, is of this character. For he remarks
that if two gravitating bodies do not exert exactly equal forces in
opposite directions, the one exerting the strongest pull will carry
both away, and the two bodies will move off into space together with
velocity increasing *ad infinitum*. But though the argument might
seem sufficiently convincing, Newton in his characteristic way made
an experiment with a loadstone and iron floated upon the surface of
water.[515] In recent years the very foundation of the principle of
conservation of energy has been placed on the assumption that it is
impossible by any combination of natural bodies to produce force
continually from nothing.[516] The principle admits of application in
various subtle forms.

  [515] *Principia*, bk. i. Law iii. Corollary 6.

  [516] Helmholtz, Taylor’s *Scientific Memoirs* (1853), vol. vi.
  p. 118.

Lucretius attempted to prove, by a most ingenious argument of this
kind, that matter must be indestructible. For if a finite quantity,
however small, were to fall out of existence in any finite time, an
equal quantity might be supposed to lapse in every equal interval of
time, so that in the infinity of past time the universe must have
ceased to exist.[517] But the argument, however ingenious, seems to
fail at several points. If past time be infinite, why may not matter
have been created infinite also? It would be most reasonable, again,
to suppose the matter destroyed in any time to be proportional to the
matter then remaining, and not to the original quantity; under this
hypothesis even a finite quantity of original matter could never wholly
disappear from the universe. For like reasons we cannot hold that the
doctrine of the conservation of energy is really proved, or can ever be
proved to be absolutely true, however probable it may be regarded.

  [517] *Lucretius*, bk. i. lines 232–264.


*Tendency to Hasty Generalisation.*

In spite of all the powers and advantages of generalisation, men
require no incitement to generalise; they are too apt to draw hasty and
ill-considered inferences. As Francis Bacon said, our intellects want
not wings, but rather weights of lead to moderate their course.[518]
The process is inevitable to the human mind; it begins with childhood
and lasts through the second childhood. The child that has once been
hurt fears the like result on all similar occasions, and can with
difficulty be made to distinguish between case and case. It is caution
and discrimination in the adoption of conclusions that we have chiefly
to learn, and the whole experience of life is one continued lesson
to this effect. Baden Powell has excellently described this strong
natural propensity to hasty inference, and the fondness of the human
mind for tracing resemblances real or fanciful. “Our first inductions,”
he says,[519] “are always imperfect and inconclusive; we advance
towards real evidence by successive approximations; and accordingly we
find false generalisation the besetting error of most first attempts
at scientific research. The faculty to generalise accurately and
philosophically requires large caution and long training, and is not
fully attained, especially in reference to more general views, even
by some who may properly claim the title of very accurate scientific
observers in a more limited field. It is an intellectual habit which
acquires immense and accumulating force from the contemplation of wider
analogies.”

  [518] *Novum Organum*, bk. 1 Aphorism 104.

  [519] *The Unity of Worlds and of Nature*, 2nd edit. p. 116.

Hasty and superficial generalisations have always been the bane
of science, and there would be no difficulty in finding endless
illustrations. Between things which are the same in number there is a
certain resemblance, namely in number; but in the infancy of science
men could not be persuaded that there was not a deeper resemblance
implied in that of number. Pythagoras was not the inventor of a
mystical science of number. In the ancient Oriental religions the seven
metals were connected with the seven planets, and in the seven days
of the week we still have, and probably always shall have, a relic of
the septiform system ascribed by Dio Cassius to the ancient Egyptians.
The disciples of Pythagoras carried the doctrine of the number seven
into great detail. Seven days are mentioned in Genesis; infants acquire
their teeth at the end of seven months; they change them at the end
of seven years; seven feet was the limit of man’s height; every
seventh year was a climacteric or critical year, at which a change
of disposition took place. Then again there were the seven sages of
Greece, the seven wonders of the world, the seven rites of the Grecian
games, the seven gates of Thebes, and the seven generals destined to
conquer that city.

In natural science there were not only the seven planets, and the seven
metals, but also the seven primitive colours, and the seven tones
of music. So deep a hold did this doctrine take that we still have
its results in many customs, not only in the seven days of the week,
but the seven years’ apprenticeship, puberty at fourteen years, the
second climacteric, and legal majority at twenty-one years, the third
climacteric. The idea was reproduced in the seven sacraments of the
Roman Catholic Church, and the seven year periods of Comte’s grotesque
system of domestic worship. Even in scientific matters the loftiest
intellects have occasionally yielded, as when Newton was misled by the
analogy between the seven tones of music and the seven colours of his
spectrum. Other numerical analogies, though rejected by Galileo, held
Kepler in thraldom; no small part of Kepler’s labours during seventeen
years was spent upon numerical and geometrical analogies of the most
baseless character; and he gravely held that there could not be more
than six planets, because there were not more than five regular solids.
Even the genius of Huyghens did not prevent him from inferring that
but one satellite could belong to Saturn, because, with those of
Jupiter and the Earth, it completed the perfect number of six. A whole
series of other superstitions and fallacies attach to the numbers six
and nine.

It is by false generalisation, again, that the laws of nature have
been supposed to possess that perfection which we attribute to simple
forms and relations. The heavenly bodies, it was held, must move in
circles, for the circle was the perfect figure. Newton seemed to adopt
the questionable axiom that nature always proceeds in the simplest way;
in stating his first rule of philosophising, he adds:[520] “To this
purpose the philosophers say, that nature does nothing in vain, when
less will serve; for nature is pleased with simplicity, and affects
not the pomp of superfluous causes.” Keill lays down[521] as an axiom
that “The causes of natural things are such, as are the most simple,
and are sufficient to explain the phenomena: for nature always proceeds
in the simplest and most expeditious method; because by this manner of
operating the Divine Wisdom displays itself the more.” If this axiom
had any clear grounds of truth, it would not apply to proximate laws;
for even when the ultimate law is simple the results may be infinitely
diverse, as in the various elliptic, hyperbolic, parabolic, or circular
orbits of the heavenly bodies. Simplicity is naturally agreeable to a
mind of limited powers, but to an infinite mind all things are simple.

  [520] *Principia*, bk. iii, *ad initium*.

  [521] Keill, *Introduction to Natural Philosophy*, p. 89.

Every great advance in science consists in a great generalisation,
pointing out deep and subtle resemblances. The Copernican system was
a generalisation, in that it classed the earth among the planets; it
was, as Bishop Wilkins expressed it, “the discovery of a new planet,”
but it was opposed by a more shallow generalisation. Those who argued
from the condition of things upon the earth’s surface, thought that
every object must be attached to and rest upon something else. Shall
the earth, they said, alone be free? Accustomed to certain special
results of gravity they could not conceive its action under widely
different circumstances.[522] No hasty thinker could seize the deep
analogy pointed out by Horrocks between a pendulum and a planet,
true in substance though mistaken in some details. All the advances
of modern science rise from the conception of Galileo, that in the
heavenly bodies, however apparently different their condition, we shall
ultimately recognise the same fundamental principles of mechanical
science which are true on earth.

  [522] Jeremiæ Horroccii *Opera Posthuma* (1673), pp. 26, 27.

Generalisation is the great prerogative of the intellect, but it
is a power only to be exercised safely with much caution and after
long training. Every mind must generalise, but there are the widest
differences in the depth of the resemblances discovered and the care
with which the discovery is verified. There seems to be an innate
power of insight which a few men have possessed pre-eminently, and
which enabled them, with no exemption indeed from labour or temporary
error, to discover the one in the many. Minds of excessive acuteness
may exist, which have yet only the powers of minute discrimination,
and of storing up, in the treasure-house of memory, vast accumulations
of words and incidents. But the power of discovery belongs to a
more restricted class of minds. Laplace said that, of all inventors
who had contributed the most to the advancement of human knowledge,
Newton and Lagrange appeared to possess in the highest degree the
happy tact of distinguishing general principles among a multitude of
objects enveloping them, and this tact he conceived to be the true
characteristic of scientific genius.[523]

  [523] Young’s *Works*, vol. ii. p. 564.




