CHAPTER XV.

ANALYSIS OF QUANTITATIVE PHENOMENA.


In the two preceding chapters we have been engaged in considering how
a phenomenon may be accurately measured and expressed. So delicate
and complex an operation is a measurement which pretends to any
considerable degree of exactness, that no small part of the skill
and patience of physicists is usually spent upon this work. Much
of this difficulty arises from the fact that it is scarcely ever
possible to measure a single effect at a time. The ultimate object
must be to discover the mathematical equation or law connecting a
quantitative cause with its quantitative effect; this purpose usually
involves, as we shall see, the varying of one condition at a time,
the other conditions being maintained constant. The labours of the
experimentalist would be comparatively light if he could carry out
this rule of varying one circumstance at a time. He would then obtain
a series of corresponding values of the variable quantities concerned,
from which he might by proper hypothetical treatment obtain the
required law of connection. But in reality it is seldom possible to
carry out this direction except in an approximate manner. Before then
we proceed to the consideration of the actual process of quantitative
induction, it is necessary to review the several devices by which a
complicated series of effects can be disentangled. Every phenomenon
measured will usually be the sum, difference, or it may be the product
or quotient, of two or more different effects, and these must be in
some way analysed and separately measured before we possess the
materials for inductive treatment.


*Illustrations of the Complication of Effects.*

It is easy to bring forward a multitude of instances to show that a
phenomenon is seldom to be observed simple and alone. A more or less
elaborate process of analysis is almost always necessary. Thus if an
experimentalist wishes to observe and measure the expansion of a liquid
by heat, he places it in a thermometer tube and registers the rise of
the column of liquid in the narrow tube. But he cannot heat the liquid
without also heating the glass, so that the change observed is really
the difference between the expansions of the liquid and the glass. More
minute investigation will show the necessity perhaps of allowing for
further minute effects, namely the compression of the liquid and the
expansion of the bulb due to the increased pressure of the column as it
becomes lengthened.

In a great many cases an observed effect will be apparently at least
the simple sum of two separate and independent effects. The heat
evolved in the combustion of oil is partly due to the carbon and partly
to the hydrogen. A measurement of the heat yielded by the two jointly,
cannot inform us how much proceeds from the one and how much from the
other. If by some separate determination we can ascertain how much the
hydrogen yields, then by mere subtraction we learn what is due to the
carbon; and *vice versâ*. The heat conveyed by a liquid, may be partly
conveyed by true conduction, partly by convection. The light dispersed
in the interior of a liquid consists both of what is reflected by
floating particles and what is due to true fluorescence;[233] and we
must find some mode of determining one portion before we can learn the
other. The apparent motion of the spots on the sun, is the algebraic
sum of the sun’s axial rotation, and of the proper motion of the spots
upon the sun’s surface; hence the difficulty of ascertaining by direct
observations the period of the sun’s rotation.

  [233] Stokes, *Philosophical Transactions* (1852), vol. cxlii. p. 529.

We cannot obtain the weight of a portion of liquid in a chemical
balance without weighing it with the containing vessel. Hence to have
the real weight of the liquid operated upon in an experiment, we must
make a separate weighing of the vessel, with or without the adhering
film of liquid according to circumstances. This is likewise the mode
in which a cart and its load are weighed together, the *tare* of the
cart previously ascertained being deducted. The variation in the height
of the barometer is a joint effect, partly due to the real variation
of the atmospheric pressure, partly to the expansion of the mercurial
column by heat. The effects may be discriminated, if, instead of one
barometer tube we have two tubes containing mercury placed closely side
by side, so as to have the same temperature. If one of them be closed
at the bottom so as to be unaffected by the atmospheric pressure, it
will show the changes due to temperature only, and, by subtracting
these changes from those shown in the other tube, employed as a
barometer, we get the real oscillations of atmospheric pressure. But
this correction, as it is called, of the barometric reading, is better
effected by calculation from the readings of an ordinary thermometer.

In other cases a quantitative effect will be the difference of
two causes acting in opposite directions. Sir John Herschel
invented an instrument like a large thermometer, which he called
the Actinometer,[234] and Pouillet constructed a somewhat similar
instrument called the Pyrheliometer, for ascertaining the heating power
of the sun’s rays. In both instruments the heat of the sun was absorbed
by a reservoir containing water, and the rise of temperature of the
water was exactly observed, either by its own expansion, or by the
readings of a delicate thermometer immersed in it. But in exposing the
actinometer to the sun, we do not obtain the full effect of the heat
absorbed, because the receiving surface is at the same time radiating
heat into empty space. The observed increment of temperature is in
short the difference between what is received from the sun and lost
by radiation. The latter quantity is capable of ready determination;
we have only to shade the instrument from the direct rays of the sun,
leaving it exposed to the sky, and we can observe how much it cools
in a certain time. The total effect of the sun’s rays will obviously
be the apparent effect *plus* the cooling effect in an equal time. By
alternate exposure in sun and shade during equal intervals the desired
result may be obtained with considerable accuracy.[235]

  [234] *Admiralty Manual of Scientific Enquiry*, 2nd ed. p. 299.

  [235] Pouillet, *Taylor’s Scientific Memoirs*, vol. iv. p. 45.

Two quantitative effects were beautifully distinguished in an
experiment of John Canton, devised in 1761 for the purpose of
demonstrating the compressibility of water. He constructed a
thermometer with a large bulb full of water and a short capillary
tube, the part of which above the water was freed from air. Under
these circumstances the water was relieved from the pressure of the
atmosphere, but the glass bulb in bearing that pressure was somewhat
contracted. He next placed the instrument under the receiver of an
air-pump, and on exhausting the air, the water sank in the tube. Having
thus obtained a measure of the effect of atmospheric pressure on the
bulb, he opened the top of the thermometer tube and admitted the air.
The level of the water now sank still more, partly from the pressure
on the bulb being now compensated, and partly from the compression of
the water by the atmospheric pressure. It is obvious that the amount of
the latter effect was approximately the difference of the two observed
depressions.

Not uncommonly the actual phenomenon which we wish to measure is
considerably less than various disturbing effects which enter into
the question. Thus the compressibility of mercury is considerably
less than the expansion of the vessels in which it is measured under
pressure, so that the attention of the experimentalist has chiefly
to be concentrated on the change of magnitude of the vessels. Many
astronomical phenomena, such as the parallax or the proper motions of
the fixed stars, are far less than the errors caused by instrumental
imperfections, or motions arising from precession, nutation, and
aberration. We need not be surprised that astronomers have from time to
time mistaken one phenomenon for another, as when Flamsteed imagined
that he had discovered the parallax of the Pole star.[236]

  [236] Baily’s *Account of the Rev. John Flamsteed*, p. 58.


*Methods of Eliminating Error.*

In any particular experiment it is the object of the experimentalist to
measure a single effect only, and he endeavours to obtain that effect
free from interfering effects. If this cannot be, as it seldom or
never can really be, he makes the effect as considerable as possible
compared with the other effects, which he reduces to a minimum, and
treats as noxious errors. Those quantities, which are called *errors*
in one case, may really be most important and interesting phenomena in
another investigation. When we speak of eliminating error we really
mean disentangling the complicated phenomena of nature. The physicist
rightly wishes to treat one thing at a time, but as this object can
seldom be rigorously carried into practice, he has to seek some mode of
counteracting the irrelevant and interfering causes.

The general principle is that a single observation can render known
only a single quantity. Hence, if several different quantitative
effects are known to enter into any investigation, we must have at
least as many distinct observations as there are quantities to be
determined. Every complete experiment will therefore consist in general
of several operations. Guided if possible by previous knowledge of the
causes in action, we must arrange the determinations, so that by a
simple mathematical process we may distinguish the separate quantities.
There appear to be five principal methods by which we may accomplish
this object; these methods are specified below and illustrated in the
succeeding sections.

(1) *The Method of Avoidance.* The physicist may seek for some special
mode of experiment or opportunity of observation, in which the error is
non-existent or inappreciable.

(2) *The Differential Method.* He may find opportunities of observation
when all interfering phenomena remain constant, and only the subject
of observation is at one time present and another time absent; the
difference between two observations then gives its amount.

(3) *The Method of Correction.* He may endeavour to estimate the amount
of the interfering effect by the best available mode, and then make a
corresponding correction in the results of observation.

(4) *The Method of Compensation.* He may invent some mode of
neutralising the interfering cause by balancing against it an exactly
equal and opposite cause of unknown amount.

(5) *The Method of Reversal.* He may so conduct the experiment that
the interfering cause may act in opposite directions, in alternate
observations, the mean result being free from interference.


I. *Method of Avoidance of Error.*

Astronomers seek opportunities of observation when errors will
be as small as possible. In spite of elaborate observations and
long-continued theoretical investigation, it is not practicable to
assign any satisfactory law to the refractive power of the atmosphere.
Although the apparent change of place of a heavenly body produced by
refraction may be more or less accurately calculated yet the error
depends upon the temperature and pressure of the atmosphere, and, when
a ray is highly inclined to the perpendicular, the uncertainty in the
refraction becomes very considerable. Hence astronomers always make
their observations, if possible, when the object is at the highest
point of its daily course, *i.e.* on the meridian. In some kinds of
investigation, as, for instance, in the determination of the latitude
of an observatory, the astronomer is at liberty to select one or
more stars out of the countless number visible. There is an evident
advantage in such a case, in selecting a star which passes close to
the zenith, so that it may be observed almost entirely free from
atmospheric refraction, as was done by Hooke.

Astronomers endeavour to render their clocks as accurate as
possible, by removing the source of variation. The pendulum is
perfectly isochronous so long as its length remains invariable, and
the vibrations are exactly of equal length. They render it nearly
invariable in length, that is in the distance between the centres of
suspension and oscillation, by a compensatory arrangement for the
change of temperature. But as this compensation may not be perfectly
accomplished, some astronomers place their chief controlling clock in
a cellar, or other apartment, where the changes of temperature may
be as slight as possible. At the Paris Observatory a clock has been
placed in the caves beneath the building, where there is no appreciable
difference between the summer and winter temperature.

To avoid the effect of unequal oscillations Huyghens made his beautiful
investigations, which resulted in the discovery that a pendulum, of
which the centre of oscillation moved upon a cycloidal path, would
be perfectly isochronous, whatever the variation in the length of
oscillations. But though a pendulum may be easily rendered in some
degree cycloidal by the use of a steel suspension spring, it is found
that the mechanical arrangements requisite to produce a truly cycloidal
motion introduce more error than they remove. Hence astronomers seek
to reduce the error to the smallest amount by maintaining their clock
pendulums in uniform movement; in fact, while a clock is in good order
and has the same weights, there need be little change in the length
of oscillation. When a pendulum cannot be made to swing uniformly,
as in experiments upon the force of gravity, it becomes requisite to
resort to the third method, and a correction is introduced, calculated
on theoretical grounds from the amount of the observed change in the
length of vibration.

It has been mentioned that the apparent expansion of a liquid by heat,
when contained in a thermometer tube or other vessel, is the difference
between the real expansion of the liquid and that of the containing
vessel. The effects can be accurately distinguished provided that we
can learn the real expansion by heat of any one convenient liquid;
for by observing the apparent expansion of the same liquid in any
required vessel we can by difference learn the amount of expansion of
the vessel due to any given change of temperature. When we once know
the change of dimensions of the vessel, we can of course determine the
absolute expansion of any other liquid tested in it. Thus it became an
all-important object in scientific research to measure with accuracy
the absolute dilatation by heat of some one liquid, and mercury owing
to several circumstances was by far the most suitable. Dulong and
Petit devised a beautiful mode of effecting this by simply avoiding
altogether the effect of the change of size of the vessel. Two upright
tubes full of mercury were connected by a fine tube at the bottom, and
were maintained at two different temperatures. As mercury was free to
flow from one tube to the other by the connecting tube, the two columns
necessarily exerted equal pressures by the principles of hydrostatics.
Hence it was only necessary to measure very accurately by a
cathetometer the difference of level of the surfaces of the two columns
of mercury, to learn the difference of length of columns of equal
hydrostatic pressure, which at once gives the difference of density of
the mercury, and the dilatation by heat. The changes of dimension in
the containing tubes became a matter of entire indifference, and the
length of a column of mercury at different temperatures was measured
as easily as if it had formed a solid bar. The experiment was carried
out by Regnault with many improvements of detail, and the absolute
dilatation of mercury, at temperatures between 0° Cent. and 350°, was
determined almost as accurately as was needful.[237]

  [237] Jamin, *Cours de Physique*, vol. ii. pp. 15–28.

The presence of a large and uncertain amount of error may render a
method of experiment valueless. Foucault devised a beautiful experiment
with the pendulum for demonstrating popularly the rotation of the
earth, but it could be of no use for measuring the rotation exactly. It
is impossible to make the pendulum swing in a perfect plane, and the
slightest lateral motion gives it an elliptic path with a progressive
motion of the axis of the ellipse, which disguises and often entirely
overpowers that due to the rotation of the earth.[238]

  [238] *Philosophical Magazine*, 1851, 4th Series, vol. ii. *passim*.

Faraday’s laborious experiments on the relation of gravity and
electricity were much obstructed by the fact that it is impossible
to move a large weight of metal without generating currents of
electricity, either by friction or induction. To distinguish the
electricity, if any, directly due to the action of gravity from the
greater quantities indirectly produced was a problem of excessive
difficulty. Baily in his experiments on the density of the earth was
aware of the existence of inexplicable disturbances which have since
been referred with much probability to the action of electricity.[239]
The skill and ingenuity of the experimentalist are often exhausted
in trying to devise a form of apparatus in which such causes of error
shall be reduced to a minimum.

  [239] Hearn, *Philosophical Transactions*, 1847, vol. cxxxvii.
  pp. 217–221.

In some rudimentary experiments we wish merely to establish the
existence of a quantitative effect without precisely measuring its
amount; if there exist causes of error of which we can neither
render the amount known or inappreciable, the best way is to make
them all negative so that the quantitative effects will be less than
the truth rather than greater. Grove, for instance, in proving that
the magnetisation or demagnetisation of a piece of iron raises its
temperature, took care to maintain the electro-magnet by which the iron
was magnetised at a lower temperature than the iron, so that it would
cool rather than warm the iron by radiation or conduction.[240]

  [240] *The Correlation of Physical Forces*, 3rd ed. p. 159.

Rumford’s celebrated experiment to prove that heat was generated out
of mechanical force in the boring of a cannon was subject to the
difficulty that heat might be brought to the cannon by conduction
from neighbouring bodies. It was an ingenious device of Davy to
produce friction by a piece of clock-work resting upon a block of
ice in an exhausted receiver; as the machine rose in temperature
above 32°, it was certain that no heat was received by conduction
from the support.[241] In many other experiments ice may be employed
to prevent the access of heat by conduction, and this device, first
put in practice by Murray,[242] is beautifully employed in Bunsen’s
calorimeter.

  [241] *Collected Works of Sir H. Davy*, vol. ii. pp. 12–14. *Elements
  of Chemical Philosophy*, p. 94.

  [242] *Nicholson’s Journal*, vol. i. p. 241; quoted in *Treatise on
  Heat*, Useful Knowledge Society, p. 24.

To observe the true temperature of the air, though apparently so easy,
is really a very difficult matter, because the thermometer is sure to
be affected either by the sun’s rays, the radiation from neighbouring
objects, or the escape of heat into space. These sources of error are
too fluctuating to allow of correction, so that the only accurate
mode of procedure is that devised by Dr. Joule, of surrounding the
thermometer with a copper cylinder ingeniously adjusted to the
temperature of the air, as described by him, so that the effect of
radiation shall be nullified.[243]

  [243] Clerk Maxwell, *Theory of Heat*, p. 228. *Proceedings of the
  Manchester Philosophical Society*, Nov. 26, 1867, vol. vii. p. 35.

When the avoidance of error is not practicable, it will yet be
desirable to reduce the absolute amount of the interfering error as
much as possible before employing the succeeding methods to correct
the result. As a general rule we can determine a quantity with less
inaccuracy as it is smaller, so that if the error itself be small
the error in determining that error will be of a still lower order
of magnitude. But in some cases the absolute amount of an error is
of no consequence, as in the index error of a divided circle, or the
difference between a chronometer and astronomical time. Even the rate
at which a clock gains or loses is a matter of little importance
provided it remain constant, so that a sure calculation of its amount
can be made.


2. *Differential Method.*

When we cannot avoid the existence of error, we can often resort
with success to the second mode by measuring phenomena under such
circumstances that the error shall remain very nearly the same in all
the observations, and neutralise itself as regards the purposes in
view. This mode is available whenever we want a difference between
quantities and not the absolute quantity of either. The determination
of the parallax of the fixed stars is exceedingly difficult, because
the amount of parallax is far less than most of the corrections for
atmospheric refraction, nutation, aberration, precession, instrumental
irregularities, &c., and can with difficulty be detected among these
phenomena of various magnitude. But, as Galileo long ago suggested,
all such difficulties would be avoided by the differential observation
of stars, which, though apparently close together, are really far
separated on the line of sight. Two such stars in close apparent
proximity will be subject to almost exactly equal errors, so that all
we need do is to observe the apparent change of place of the nearer
star as referred to the more distant one. A good telescope furnished
with an accurate micrometer is alone needed for the application of
the method. Huyghens appears to have been the first observer who
actually tried to employ the method practically, but it was not until
1835 that the improvement of telescopes and micrometers enabled
Struve to detect in this way the parallax of the star α Lyræ. It is
one of the many advantages of the observation of transits of Venus
for the determination of the solar parallax that the refraction of
the atmosphere affects in an exactly equal degree the planet and
the portion of the sun’s face over which it is passing. Thus the
observations are strictly of a differential nature.

By the process of substitutive weighing it is possible to ascertain
the equality or inequality of two weights with almost perfect freedom
from error. If two weights A and B be placed in the scales of the
best balance we cannot be sure that the equilibrium of the beam
indicates exact equality, because the arms of the beam may be unequal
or unbalanced. But if we take B out and put another weight C in, and
equilibrium still exists, it is apparent that the same causes of
erroneous weighing exist in both cases, supposing that the balance has
not been disarranged; B then must be exactly equal to C, since it has
exactly the same effect under the same circumstances. In like manner it
is a general rule that, if by any uniform mechanical process we get a
copy of an object, it is unlikely that this copy will be precisely the
same as the original in magnitude and form, but two copies will equally
diverge from the original, and will therefore almost exactly resemble
each other.

Leslie’s Differential Thermometer[244] was well adapted to the
experiments for which it was invented. Having two equal bulbs any
alteration in the temperature of the air will act equally by conduction
on each and produce no change in the indications of the instrument.
Only that radiant heat which is purposely thrown upon one of the bulbs
will produce any effect. This thermometer in short carries out the
principle of the differential method in a mechanical manner.

  [244] Leslie, *Inquiry into the Nature of Heat*, p. 10.


3. *Method of Correction.*

Whenever the result of an experiment is affected by an interfering
cause to a calculable amount, it is sufficient to add or subtract this
amount. We are said to correct observations when we thus eliminate
what is due to extraneous causes, although of course we are only
separating the correct effects of several agents. The variation in the
height of the barometer is partly due to the change of temperature,
but since the coefficient of absolute dilatation of mercury has been
exactly determined, as already described (p. 341), we have only to make
calculations of a simple character, or, what is better still, tabulate
a series of such calculations for general use, and the correction for
temperature can be made with all desired accuracy. The height of the
mercury in the barometer is also affected by capillary attraction,
which depresses it by a constant amount depending mainly on the
diameter of the tube. The requisite corrections can be estimated with
accuracy sufficient for most purposes, more especially as we can check
the correctness of the reading of a barometer by comparison with a
standard barometer, and introduce if need be an index error including
both the error in the affixing of the scale and the effect due to
capillarity. But in constructing the standard barometer itself we must
take greater precautions; the capillary depression depends somewhat
upon the quality of the glass, the absence of air, and the perfect
cleanliness of the mercury, so that we cannot assign the exact amount
of the effect. Hence a standard barometer is constructed with a wide
tube, sometimes even an inch in diameter, so that the capillary effect
may be rendered almost zero.[245] Gay-Lussac made barometers in the
form of a uniform siphon tube, so that the capillary forces acting at
the upper and lower surfaces should balance and destroy each other;
but the method fails in practice because the lower surface, being
open to the air, becomes sullied and subject to a different force of
capillarity.

  [245] Jevons, Watts’ *Dictionary of Chemistry*, vol. i. pp. 513–515.

In mechanical experiments friction is an interfering condition, and
drains away a portion of the energy intended to be operated upon in a
definite manner. We should of course reduce the friction in the first
place to the lowest possible amount, but as it cannot be altogether
prevented, and is not calculable with certainty from any general
laws, we must determine it separately for each apparatus by suitable
experiments. Thus Smeaton, in his admirable but almost forgotten
researches concerning water-wheels, eliminated friction in the most
simple manner by determining by trial what weight, acting by a cord
and roller upon his model water-wheel, would make it turn without
water as rapidly as the water made it turn. In short, he ascertained
what weight concurring with the water would exactly compensate for the
friction.[246] In Dr. Joule’s experiments to determine the mechanical
equivalent of heat by the condensation of air, a considerable amount
of heat was produced by friction of the condensing pump, and a small
portion by stirring the water employed to absorb the heat. This heat of
friction was measured by simply repeating the experiment in an exactly
similar manner except that no condensation was effected, and observing
the change of temperature then produced.[247]

  [246] *Philosophical Transactions*, vol. li. p. 100.

  [247] *Philosophical Magazine*, 3rd Series, vol. xxvi. p. 372.

We may describe as *test experiments* any in which we perform
operations not intended to give the quantity of the principal
phenomenon, but some quantity which would otherwise remain as an
error in the result. Thus in astronomical observations almost every
instrumental error may be avoided by increasing the number of
observations and distributing them in such a manner as to produce in
the final mean as much error in one way as in the other. But there
is one source of error, first discovered by Maskelyne, which cannot
be thus avoided, because it affects all observations in the same
direction and to the same average amount, namely the Personal Error of
the observer or the inclination to record the passage of a star across
the wires of the telescope a little too soon or a little too late.
This personal error was first carefully described in the *Edinburgh
Journal of Science*, vol. i. p. 178. The difference between the
judgment of observers at the Greenwich Observatory usually varies from
1/100 to 1/3 of a second, and remains pretty constant for the same
observers.[248] One practised observer in Sir George Airy’s pendulum
experiments recorded all his time observations half a second too early
on the average as compared with the chief observer.[249] In some
observers it has amounted to seven or eight-tenths of a second.[250]
De Morgan appears to have entertained the opinion that this source of
error was essentially incapable of elimination or correction.[251]
But it seems clear, as I suggested without knowing what had been
done,[252] that this personal error might be determined absolutely with
any desirable degree of accuracy by test experiments, consisting in
making an artificial star move at a considerable distance and recording
by electricity the exact moment of its passage over the wire. This
method has in fact been successfully employed in Leyden, Paris, and
Neuchatel.[253] More recently, observers were trained for the Transit
of Venus Expeditions by means of a mechanical model representing the
motion of Venus over the sun, this model being placed at a little
distance and viewed through a telescope, so that differences in the
judgments of different observers would become apparent. It seems likely
that tests of this nature might be employed with advantage in other
cases.

  [248] *Greenwich Observations for* 1866, p. xlix.

  [249] *Philosophical Transactions*, 1856, p. 309.

  [250] Penny *Cyclopædia*, art. *Transit*, vol. xxv. pp. 129, 130.

  [251] Ibid. art. *Observation*, p. 390.

  [252] *Nature*, vol. i. p. 85.

  [253] *Nature*, vol. i. p 337. See references to the Memoirs
  describing the method.

Newton employed the pendulum for making experiments on the impact of
balls. Two balls were hung in contact, and one of them, being drawn
aside through a measured arc, was then allowed to strike the other,
the arcs of vibration giving sufficient data for calculating the
distribution of energy at the moment of impact. The resistance of the
air was an interfering cause which he estimated very simply by causing
one of the balls to make several complete vibrations without impact
and then marking the reduction in the lengths of the arcs, a proper
fraction of which reduction was added to each of the other arcs of
vibration when impact took place.[254]

  [254] *Principia*, Book I. Law III. Corollary VI. Scholium. Motte’s
  translation, vol. i. p. 33.

The exact definition of the standard of length is one of the most
important, as it is one of the most difficult questions in physical
science, and the different practice of different nations introduces
needless confusion. Were all standards constructed so as to give
the true length at a fixed uniform temperature, for instance the
freezing-point, then any two standards could be compared without the
interference of temperature by bringing them both to exactly the same
fixed temperature. Unfortunately the French metre was defined by a
bar of platinum at 0°C, while our yard was defined by a bronze bar at
62°F. It is quite impossible, then, to make a comparison of the yard
and metre without the introduction of a correction, either for the
expansion of platinum or bronze, or both. Bars of metal differ too so
much in their rates of expansion according to their molecular condition
that it is dangerous to infer from one bar to another.

When we come to use instruments with great accuracy there are many
minute sources of error which must be guarded against. If a thermometer
has been graduated when perpendicular, it will read somewhat
differently when laid flat, as the pressure of a column of mercury is
removed from the bulb. The reading may also be somewhat altered if it
has recently been raised to a higher temperature than usual, if it be
placed under a vacuous receiver, or if the tube be unequally heated
as compared with the bulb. For these minute causes of error we may
have to introduce troublesome corrections, unless we adopt the simple
precaution of using the thermometer in circumstances of position, &c.,
exactly similar to those in which it was graduated. There is no end to
the number of minute corrections which may ultimately be required. A
large number of experiments on gases, standard weights and measures,
&c., depend upon the height of the barometer; but when experiments
in different parts of the world are compared together we ought as a
further refinement to take into account the varying force of gravity,
which even between London and Paris makes a difference of ·008 inch of
mercury.

The measurement of quantities of heat is a matter of great difficulty,
because there is no known substance impervious to heat, and the problem
is therefore as difficult as to measure liquids in porous vessels.
To determine the latent heat of steam we must condense a certain
amount of the steam in a known weight of water, and then observe the
rise of temperature of the water. But while we are carrying out the
experiment, part of the heat will escape by radiation and conduction
from the condensing vessel or calorimeter. We may indeed reduce the
loss of heat by using vessels with double sides and bright surfaces,
surrounded with swans-down wool or other non-conducting materials; and
we may also avoid raising the temperature of the water much above that
of the surrounding air. Yet we cannot by any such means render the
loss of heat inconsiderable. Rumford ingeniously proposed to reduce
the loss to zero by commencing the experiment when the temperature
of the calorimeter is as much below that of the air as it is at the
end of the experiment above it. Thus the vessel will first gain and
then lose by radiation and conduction, and these opposite errors will
approximately balance each other. But Regnault has shown that the loss
and gain do not proceed by exactly the same laws, so that in very
accurate investigations Rumford’s method is not sufficient. There
remains the method of correction which was beautifully carried out by
Regnault in his determination of the latent heat of steam. He employed
two calorimeters, made in exactly the same way and alternately used to
condense a certain amount of steam, so that while one was measuring
the latent heat, the other calorimeter was engaged in determining
the corrections to be applied, whether on account of radiation and
conduction from the vessel or on account of heat reaching the vessel by
means of the connecting pipes.[255]

  [255] Graham’s *Chemical Reports and Memoirs*, Cavendish Society, pp.
  247, 268, &c.


4. *Method of Compensation.*

There are many cases in which a cause of error cannot conveniently be
rendered null, and is yet beyond the reach of the third method, that
of calculating the requisite correction from independent observations.
The magnitude of an error may be subject to continual variations, on
account of change of weather, or other fickle circumstances beyond
our control. It may either be impracticable to observe the variation
of those circumstances in sufficient detail, or, if observed, the
calculation of the amount of error may be subject to doubt. In these
cases, and only in these cases, it will be desirable to invent some
artificial mode of counterpoising the variable error against an equal
error subject to exactly the same variation.

We cannot weigh an object with great accuracy unless we make a
correction for the weight of the air displaced by the object, and add
this to the apparent weight. In very accurate investigations relating
to standard weights, it is usual to note the barometer and thermometer
at the time of making a weighing, and, from the measured bulks of
the objects compared, to calculate the weight of air displaced; the
third method in fact is adopted. To make these calculations in the
frequent weighings requisite in chemical analysis would be exceedingly
laborious, hence the correction is usually neglected. But when the
chemist wishes to weigh gas contained in a large glass globe for the
purpose of determining its specific gravity, the correction becomes of
much importance. Hence chemists avoid at once the error, and the labour
of correcting it, by attaching to the opposite scale of the balance a
dummy sealed glass globe of equal capacity to that containing the gas
to be weighed, noting only the difference of weight when the operating
globe is full and empty. The correction, being the same for both
globes, may be entirely neglected.[256]

  [256] Regnault’s *Cours Elémentaire de Chimie*, 1851, vol i. p. 141.

A device of nearly the same kind is employed in the construction of
galvanometers which measure the force of an electric current by the
deflection of a suspended magnetic needle. The resistance of the needle
is partly due to the directive influence of the earth’s magnetism, and
partly to the torsion of the thread. But the former force may often be
inconveniently great as well as troublesome to determine for different
inclinations. Hence it is customary to connect together two equally
magnetised needles, with their poles pointing in opposite directions,
one needle being within and another without the coil of wire. As
regards the earth’s magnetism, the needles are now *astatic* or
indifferent, the tendency of one needle towards the pole being balanced
by that of the other.

An elegant instance of the elimination of a disturbing force by
compensation is found in Faraday’s researches upon the magnetism of
gases. To observe the magnetic attraction or repulsion of a gas seems
impossible unless we enclose the gas in an envelope, probably best made
of glass. But any such envelope is sure to be more or less affected
by the magnet, so that it becomes difficult to distinguish between
three forces which enter into the problem, namely, the magnetism of
the gas in question, that of the envelope, and that of the surrounding
atmospheric air. Faraday avoided all difficulties by employing two
equal and similar glass tubes connected together, and so suspended from
the arm of a torsion balance that the tubes were in similar parts of
the magnetic field. One tube being filled with nitrogen and the other
with oxygen, it was found that the oxygen seemed to be attracted and
the nitrogen repelled. The suspending thread of the balance was then
turned until the force of torsion restored the tubes to their original
places, where the magnetism of the tubes as well as that of the
surrounding air, being the same and in the opposite directions upon the
two tubes, could not produce any interference. The force required to
restore the tubes was measured by the amount of torsion of the thread,
and it indicated correctly the difference between the attractive powers
of oxygen and nitrogen. The oxygen was then withdrawn from one of the
tubes, and a second experiment made, so as to compare a vacuum with
nitrogen. No force was now required to maintain the tubes in their
places, so that nitrogen was found to be, approximately speaking,
indifferent to the magnet, that is, neither magnetic nor diamagnetic,
while oxygen was proved to be positively magnetic.[257] It required
the highest experimental skill on the part of Faraday and Tyndall, to
distinguish between what is apparent and real in magnetic attraction
and repulsion.

  [257] Tyndall’s *Faraday*, pp. 114, 115.

Experience alone can finally decide when a compensating arrangement
is conducive to accuracy. As a general rule mechanical compensation
is the last resource, and in the more accurate observations it is
likely to introduce more uncertainty than it removes. A multitude
of instruments involving mechanical compensation have been devised,
but they are usually of an unscientific character,[258] because the
errors compensated can be more accurately determined and allowed for.
But there are exceptions to this rule, and it seems to be proved that
in the delicate and tiresome operation of measuring a base line,
invariable bars, compensated for expansion by heat, give the most
accurate results. This arises from the fact that it is very difficult
to determine accurately the temperature of the measuring bars under
varying conditions of weather and manipulation.[259] Again, the last
refinement in the measurement of time at Greenwich Observatory depends
upon mechanical compensation. Sir George Airy, observing that the
standard clock increased its losing rate 0·30 second for an increase of
one inch in atmospheric pressure, placed a magnet moved by a barometer
in such a position below the pendulum, as almost entirely to neutralise
this cause of irregularity. The thorough remedy, however, would be to
remove the cause of error altogether by placing the clock in a vacuous
case.

  [258] See, for instance, the Compensated Sympiesometer,
  *Philosophical Magazine*, 4th Series, vol. xxxix. p. 371.

  [259] Grant, *History of Physical Astronomy*, pp. 146, 147.

We thus see that the choice of one or other mode of eliminating an
error depends entirely upon circumstances and the object in view; but
we may safely lay down the following conclusions. First of all, seek
to avoid the source of error altogether if it can be conveniently
done; if not, make the experiment so that the error may be as small,
but more especially as constant, as possible. If the means are at hand
for determining its amount by calculation from other experiments and
principles of science, allow the error to exist and make a correction
in the result. If this cannot be accurately done or involves too
much labour for the purposes in view, then throw in a counteracting
error which shall as nearly as possible be of equal amount in all
circumstances with that to be eliminated. There yet remains, however,
one important method, that of Reversal, which will form an appropriate
transition to the succeeding chapters on the Method of Mean Results and
the Law of Error.


5. *Method of Reversal.*

The fifth method of eliminating error is most potent and satisfactory
when it can be applied, but it requires that we shall be able to
reverse the apparatus and mode of procedure, so as to make the
interfering cause act alternately in opposite directions. If we can
get two experimental results, one of which is as much too great as
the other is too small, the error is equal to half the difference,
and the true result is the mean of the two apparent results. It is an
unavoidable defect of the chemical balance, for instance, that the
points of suspension of the pans cannot be fixed at exactly equal
distances from the centre of suspension of the beam. Hence two weights
which seem to balance each other will never be quite equal in reality.
The difference is detected by reversing the weights, and it may be
estimated by adding small weights to the deficient side to restore
equilibrium, and then taking as the true weight the geometric mean
of the two apparent weights of the same object. If the difference is
small, the arithmetic mean, that is half the sum, may be substituted
for the geometric mean, from which it will not appreciably differ.

This method of reversal is most extensively employed in practical
astronomy. The apparent elevation of a heavenly body is observed by a
telescope moving upon a divided circle, upon which the inclination of
the telescope is read off. Now this reading will be erroneous if the
circle and the telescope have not accurately the same centre. But if we
read off at the same time both ends of the telescope, the one reading
will be about as much too small as the other is too great, and the
mean will be nearly free from error. In practice the observation is
differently conducted, but the principle is the same; the telescope is
fixed to the circle, which moves with it, and the angle through which
it moves is read off at three, six, or more points, disposed at equal
intervals round the circle. The older astronomers, down even to the
time of Flamsteed, were accustomed to use portions only of a divided
circle, generally quadrants, and Römer made a vast improvement when he
introduced the complete circle.

The transit circle, employed to determine the meridian passage of
heavenly bodies, is so constructed that the telescope and the axis
bearing it, in fact the whole moving part of the instrument, can be
taken out of the bearing sockets and turned over, so that what was
formerly the western pivot becomes the eastern one, and *vice versâ*.
It is impossible that the instrument could have been so perfectly
constructed, mounted, and adjusted that the telescope should point
exactly to the meridian, but the effect of the reversal is that it will
point as much to the west in one position as it does to the east in the
other, and the mean result of observations in the two positions must be
free from such cause of error.

The accuracy with which the inclination of the compass needle can be
determined depends almost entirely on the method of reversal. The
dip needle consists of a bar of magnetised steel, suspended somewhat
like the beam of a delicate balance on a slender axis passing through
the centre of gravity of the bar, so that it is at liberty to rest
in that exact degree of inclination in the magnetic meridian which
the magnetism of the earth induces. The inclination is read off
upon a vertical divided circle, but to avoid error arising from the
centring of the needle and circle, both ends are read, and the mean
of the results is taken. The whole instrument is now turned carefully
round through 180°, which causes the needle to assume a new position
relatively to the circle and gives two new readings, in which any error
due to the wrong position of the zero of the division will be reversed.
As the axis of the needle may not be exactly horizontal, it is now
reversed in the same manner as the transit instrument, the end of the
axis which formerly pointed east being made to point west, and a new
set of four readings is taken.

Finally, error may arise from the axis not passing accurately through
the centre of gravity of the bar, and this error can only be detected
and eliminated on changing the magnetic poles of the bar by the
application of a strong magnet. The error is thus made to act in
opposite directions. To ensure all possible accuracy each reversal
ought to be combined with each other reversal, so that the needle will
be observed in eight different positions by sixteen readings, the mean
of the whole of which will give the required inclination free from all
eliminable errors.[260]

  [260] Quetelet, *Sur la Physique du Globe*, p. 174. Jamin, *Cours de
  Physique*, vol. i. p. 504.

There are certain cases in which a disturbing cause can with ease
be made to act in opposite directions, in alternate observations,
so that the mean of the results will be free from disturbance. Thus
in direct experiments upon the velocity of sound in passing through
the air between stations two or three miles apart, the wind is a
cause of error. It will be well, in the first place, to choose a
time for the experiment when the air is very nearly at rest, and the
disturbance slight, but if at the same moment signal sounds be made
at each station and observed at the other, two sounds will be passing
in opposite directions through the same body of air and the wind will
accelerate one sound almost exactly as it retards the other. Again, in
trigonometrical surveys the apparent height of a point will be affected
by atmospheric refraction and the curvature of the earth. But if in
the case of two points the apparent elevation of each as seen from
the other be observed, the corrections will be the same in amount,
but reversed in direction, and the mean between the two apparent
differences of altitude will give the true difference of level.

In the next two chapters we really pursue the Method of Reversal into
more complicated applications.




