CHAPTER XI.

PHILOSOPHY OF INDUCTIVE INFERENCE.


We have inquired into the nature of perfect induction, whereby we pass
backwards from certain observed combinations of events, to the logical
conditions governing such combinations. We have also investigated the
grounds of that theory of probability, which must be our guide when we
leave certainty behind, and dilute knowledge with ignorance. There is
now before us the difficult task of endeavouring to decide how, by the
aid of that theory, we can ascend from the facts to the laws of nature;
and may then with more or less success anticipate the future course
of events. All our knowledge of natural objects must be ultimately
derived from observation, and the difficult question arises--How can
we ever know anything which we have not directly observed through one
of our senses, the apertures of the mind? The utility of reasoning is
to assure ourselves that, at a determinate time and place, or under
specified conditions, a certain phenomenon will be observed. When
we can use our senses and perceive that the phenomenon does occur,
reasoning is superfluous. If the senses cannot be used, because the
event is in the future, or out of reach, how can reasoning take their
place? Apparently, at least, we must infer the unknown from the known,
and the mind must itself create an addition to the sum of knowledge.
But I hold that it is quite impossible to make any real additions to
the contents of our knowledge, except through new impressions upon
the senses, or upon some seat of feeling. I shall attempt to show
that inference, whether inductive or deductive, is never more than
an unfolding of the contents of our experience, and that it always
proceeds upon the assumption that the future and the unperceived will
be governed by the same conditions as the past and the perceived, an
assumption which will often prove to be mistaken.

In inductive as in deductive reasoning the conclusion never passes
beyond the premises. Reasoning adds no more to the implicit contents of
our knowledge, than the arrangement of the specimens in a museum adds
to the number of those specimens. Arrangement adds to our knowledge
in a certain sense: it allows us to perceive the similarities and
peculiarities of the specimens, and on the assumption that the museum
is an adequate representation of nature, it enables us to judge of
the prevailing forms of natural objects. Bacon’s first aphorism holds
perfectly true, that man knows nothing but what he has observed,
provided that we include his whole sources of experience, and the whole
implicit contents of his knowledge. Inference but unfolds the hidden
meaning of our observations, and *the theory of probability shows how
far we go beyond our data in assuming that new specimens will resemble
the old ones*, or that the future may be regarded as proceeding
uniformly with the past.


*Various Classes of Inductive Truths.*

It will be desirable, in the first place, to distinguish between the
several kinds of truths which we endeavour to establish by induction.
Although there is a certain common and universal element in all our
processes of reasoning, yet diversity arises in their application.
Similarity of condition between the events from which we argue, and
those to which we argue, must always be the ground of inference; but
this similarity may have regard either to time or place, or the simple
logical combination of events, or to any conceivable junction of
circumstances involving quality, time, and place. Having met with many
pieces of substance possessing ductility and a bright yellow colour,
and having discovered, by perfect induction, that they all possess a
high specific gravity, and a freedom from the corrosive action of
acids, we are led to expect that every piece of substance, possessing
like ductility and a similar yellow colour, will have an equally high
specific gravity, and a like freedom from corrosion by acids. This
is a case of the coexistence of qualities; for the character of the
specimens examined alters not with time nor place.

In a second class of cases, time will enter as a principal ground of
similarity. When we hear a clock pendulum beat time after time, at
equal intervals, and with a uniform sound, we confidently expect that
the stroke will continue to be repeated uniformly. A comet having
appeared several times at nearly equal intervals, we infer that it will
probably appear again at the end of another like interval. A man who
has returned home evening after evening for many years, and found his
house standing, may, on like grounds, expect that it will be standing
the next evening, and on many succeeding evenings. Even the continuous
existence of an object in an unaltered state, or the finding again of
that which we have hidden, is but a matter of inference depending on
experience.

A still larger and more complex class of cases involves the relations
of space, in addition to those of time and quality. Having observed
that every triangle drawn upon the diameter of a circle, with its
apex upon the circumference, apparently contains a right angle,
we may ascertain that all triangles in similar circumstances will
contain right angles. This is a case of pure space reasoning, apart
from circumstances of time or quality, and it seems to be governed by
different principles of reasoning. I shall endeavour to show, however,
that geometrical reasoning differs but in degree from that which
applies to other natural relations.


*The Relation of Cause and Effect.*

In a very large part of the scientific investigations which must be
considered, we deal with events which follow from previous events, or
with existences which succeed existences. Science, indeed, might arise
even were material nature a fixed and changeless whole. Endow mind
with the power to travel about, and compare part with part, and it
could certainly draw inferences concerning the similarity of forms, the
coexistence of qualities, or the preponderance of a particular kind of
matter in a changeless world. A solid universe, in at least approximate
equilibrium, is not inconceivable, and then the relation of cause and
effect would evidently be no more than the relation of before and
after. As nature exists, however, it is a progressive existence, ever
moving and changing as time, the great independent variable, proceeds.
Hence it arises that we must continually compare what is happening now
with what happened a moment before, and a moment before that moment,
and so on, until we reach indefinite periods of past time. A comet
is seen moving in the sky, or its constituent particles illumine
the heavens with their tails of fire. We cannot explain the present
movements of such a body without supposing its prior existence, with
a definite amount of energy and a definite direction of motion; nor
can we validly suppose that our task is concluded when we find that it
came wandering to our solar system through the unmeasured vastness of
surrounding space. Every event must have a cause, and that cause again
a cause, until we are lost in the obscurity of the past, and are driven
to the belief in one First Cause, by whom the course of nature was
determined.


*Fallacious Use of the Term Cause.*

The words Cause and Causation have given rise to infinite trouble
and obscurity, and have in no slight degree retarded the progress of
science. From the time of Aristotle, the work of philosophy has been
described as the discovery of the causes of things, and Francis Bacon
adopted the notion when he said “*vere scire esse per causas scire*.”
Even now it is not uncommonly supposed that the knowledge of causes is
something different from other knowledge, and consists, as it were, in
getting possession of the keys of nature. A single word may thus act
as a spell, and throw the clearest intellect into confusion, as I have
often thought that Locke was thrown into confusion when endeavouring to
find a meaning for the word *power*.[128] In Mill’s *System of Logic*
the term *cause* seems to have re-asserted its old noxious power. Not
only does Mill treat the Laws of Causation as almost coextensive with
science, but he so uses the expression as to imply that when once we
pass within the circle of causation we deal with certainties.

  [128] *Essay concerning Human Understanding*, bk. ii. chap. xxi.

The philosophical danger which attaches to the use of this word may
be thus described. A cause is defined as the necessary or invariable
antecedent of an event, so that when the cause exists the effect will
also exist or soon follow. If then we know the cause of an event, we
know what will certainly happen; and as it is implied that science,
by a proper experimental method, may attain to a knowledge of causes,
it follows that experience may give us a certain knowledge of future
events. But nothing is more unquestionable than that finite experience
can never give us certain knowledge of the future, so that either
a cause is not an invariable antecedent, or else we can never gain
certain knowledge of causes. The first horn of this dilemma is hardly
to be accepted. Doubtless there is in nature some invariably acting
mechanism, such that from certain fixed conditions an invariable result
always emerges. But we, with our finite minds and short experience, can
never penetrate the mystery of those existences which embody the Will
of the Creator, and evolve it throughout time. We are in the position
of spectators who witness the productions of a complicated machine, but
are not allowed to examine its intimate structure. We learn what does
happen and what does appear, but if we ask for the reason, the answer
would involve an infinite depth of mystery. The simplest bit of matter,
or the most trivial incident, such as the stroke of two billiard balls,
offers infinitely more to learn than ever the human intellect can
fathom. The word cause covers just as much untold meaning as any of the
words *substance*, *matter*, *thought*, *existence*.


*Confusion of Two Questions.*

The subject is much complicated, too, by the confusion of two distinct
questions. An event having happened, we may ask--

  (1) Is there any cause for the event?
  (2) Of what kind is that cause?

No one would assert that the mind possesses any faculty capable of
inferring, prior to experience, that the occurrence of a sudden noise
with flame and smoke indicates the combustion of a black powder, formed
by the mixture of black, white, and yellow powders. The greatest
upholder of *à priori* doctrines will allow that the particular aspect,
shape, size, colour, texture, and other qualities of a cause must be
gathered through the senses.

The question whether there is any cause at all for an event, is of
a totally different kind. If an explosion could happen without any
prior existing conditions, it must be a new creation--a distinct
addition to the universe. It may be plausibly held that we can imagine
neither the creation nor annihilation of anything. As regards matter,
this has long been held true; as regards force, it is now almost
universally assumed as an axiom that energy can neither come into
nor go out of existence without distinct acts of Creative Will. That
there exists any instinctive belief to this effect, indeed, seems
doubtful. We find Lucretius, a philosopher of the utmost intellectual
power and cultivation, gravely assuming that his raining atoms could
turn aside from their straight paths in a self-determining manner,
and by this spontaneous origination of energy determine the form of
the universe.[129] Sir George Airy, too, seriously discussed the
mathematical conditions under which a perpetual motion, that is, a
perpetual source of self-created energy, might exist.[130] The larger
part of the philosophic world has long held that in mental acts there
is free will--in short, self-causation. It is in vain to attempt to
reconcile this doctrine with that of an intuitive belief in causation,
as Sir W. Hamilton candidly allowed.

  [129] *De Rerum Natura*, bk. ii. ll. 216–293.

  [130] *Cambridge Philosophical Transactions* (1830), vol. iii. pp.
  369–372.

It is obvious, moreover, that to assert the existence of a cause for
every event cannot do more than remove into the indefinite past the
inconceivable fact and mystery of creation. At any given moment matter
and energy were equal to what they are at present, or they were not;
if equal, we may make the same inquiry concerning any other moment,
however long prior, and we are thus obliged to accept one horn of the
dilemma--existence from infinity, or creation at some moment. This is
but one of the many cases in which we are compelled to believe in one
or other of two alternatives, both inconceivable. My present purpose,
however, is to point out that we must not confuse this supremely
difficult question with that into which inductive science inquires on
the foundation of facts. By induction we gain no certain knowledge;
but by observation, and the inverse use of deductive reasoning, we
estimate the probability that an event which has occurred was preceded
by conditions of specified character, or that such conditions will be
followed by the event.


*Definition of the Term Cause.*

Clear definitions of the word cause have been given by several
philosophers. Hobbes has said, “A cause is the sum or aggregate of all
such accidents, both in the agents and the patients, as concur in the
producing of the effect propounded; all which existing together, it
cannot be understood but that the effect existeth with them; or that
it can possibly exist if any of them be absent.” Brown, in his *Essay
on Causation*, gave a nearly corresponding statement. “A cause,” he
says,[131] “may be defined to be the object or event which immediately
precedes any change, and which existing again in similar circumstances
will be always immediately followed by a similar change.” Of the
kindred word *power*, he likewise says:[132] “Power is nothing more
than that invariableness of antecedence which is implied in the belief
of causation.”

  [131] *Observations on the Nature and Tendency of the Doctrine of Mr.
  Hume, concerning the Relation of Cause and Effect.* Second ed. p. 44.

  [132] Ibid. p. 97.

These definitions may be accepted with the qualification that our
knowledge of causes in such a sense can be probable only. The work of
science consists in ascertaining the combinations in which phenomena
present themselves. Concerning every event we shall have to determine
its probable conditions, or the group of antecedents from which it
probably follows. An antecedent is anything which exists prior to
an event; a consequent is anything which exists subsequently to an
antecedent. It will not usually happen that there is any probable
connection between an antecedent and consequent. Thus nitrogen is an
antecedent to the lighting of a common fire; but it is so far from
being a cause of the lighting, that it renders the combustion less
active. Daylight is an antecedent to all fires lighted during the day,
but it probably has no appreciable effect upon their burning. But
in the case of any given event it is usually possible to discover a
certain number of antecedents which seem to be always present, and with
more or less probability we conclude that when they exist the event
will follow.

Let it be observed that the utmost latitude is at present enjoyed in
the use of the term *cause*. Not only may a cause be an existent thing
endowed with powers, as oxygen is the cause of combustion, gunpowder
the cause of explosion, but the very absence or removal of a thing may
also be a cause. It is quite correct to speak of the dryness of the
Egyptian atmosphere, or the absence of moisture, as being the cause of
the preservation of mummies, and other remains of antiquity. The cause
of a mountain elevation, Ingleborough for instance, is the excavation
of the surrounding valleys by denudation. It is not so usual to speak
of the existence of a thing at one moment as the cause of its existence
at the next, but to me it seems the commonest case of causation which
can occur. The cause of motion of a billiard ball may be the stroke of
another ball; and recent philosophy leads us to look upon all motions
and changes, as but so many manifestations of prior existing energy.
In all probability there is no creation of energy and no destruction,
so that as regards both mechanical and molecular changes, the cause is
really the manifestation of existing energy. In the same way I see not
why the prior existence of matter is not also a cause as regards its
subsequent existence. All science tends to show us that the existence
of the universe in a particular state at one moment, is the condition
of its existence at the next moment, in an apparently different
state. When we analyse the meaning which we can attribute to the word
*cause*, it amounts to the existence of suitable portions of matter
endowed with suitable quantities of energy. If we may accept Horne
Tooke’s assertion, *cause* has etymologically the meaning of *thing
before*. Though, indeed, the origin of the word is very obscure, its
derivatives, the Italian *cosa*, and the French *chose*, mean simply
*thing*. In the German equivalent *ursache*, we have plainly the
original meaning of *thing before*, the *sache* denoting “interesting
or important object,” the English *sake*, and *ur* being the equivalent
of the English *ere*, *before*. We abandon, then, both etymology and
philosophy, when we attribute to the *laws of causation* any meaning
beyond that of the *conditions* under which an event may be expected to
happen, according to our observation of the previous course of nature.

I have no objection to use the words cause and causation, provided they
are never allowed to lead us to imagine that our knowledge of nature
can attain to certainty. I repeat that if a cause is an invariable
and necessary condition of an event, we can never know certainly
whether the cause exists or not. To us, then, a cause is not to be
distinguished from the group of positive or negative conditions which,
with more or less probability, precede an event. In this sense, there
is no particular difference between knowledge of causes and our general
knowledge of the succession of combinations, in which the phenomena of
nature are presented to us, or found to occur in experimental inquiry.


*Distinction of Inductive and Deductive Results.*

We must carefully avoid confusing together inductive investigations
which terminate in the establishment of general laws, and those which
seem to lead directly to the knowledge of future particular events.
That process only can be called induction which gives general laws,
and it is by the subsequent employment of deduction that we anticipate
particular events. If the observation of a number of cases shows that
alloys of metals fuse at lower temperatures than their constituent
metals, I may with more or less probability draw a general inference
to that effect, and may thence deductively ascertain the probability
that the next alloy examined will fuse at a lower temperature than
its constituents. It has been asserted, indeed, by Mill,[133] and
partially admitted by Mr. Fowler,[134] that we can argue directly from
case to case, so that what is true of some alloys will be true of the
next. Professor Bain has adopted the same view of reasoning. He thinks
that Mill has extricated us from the dead lock of the syllogism and
effected a total revolution in logic. He holds that reasoning from
particulars to particulars is not only the usual, the most obvious and
the most ready method, but that it is the type of reasoning which best
discloses the real process.[135] Doubtless, this is the usual result of
our reasoning, regard being had to degrees of probability; but these
logicians fail entirely to give any explanation of the process by which
we get from case to case.

  [133] *System of Logic*, bk. II. chap, iii.

  [134] *Inductive Logic*, pp. 13, 14.

  [135] Bain, *Deductive Logic*, pp. 208, 209.

It may be allowed that the knowledge of future particular events is
the main purpose of our investigations, and if there were any process
of thought by which we could pass directly from event to event without
ascending into general truths, this method would be sufficient, and
certainly the briefest. It is true, also, that the laws of mental
association lead the mind always to expect the like again in apparently
like circumstances, and even animals of very low intelligence must
have some trace of such powers of association, serving to guide them
more or less correctly, in the absence of true reasoning faculties.
But it is the purpose of logic, according to Mill, to ascertain
whether inferences have been correctly drawn, rather than to discover
them.[136] Even if we can, then, by habit, association, or any rude
process of inference, infer the future directly from the past, it is
the work of logic to analyse the conditions on which the correctness
of this inference depends. Even Mill would admit that such analysis
involves the consideration of general truths,[137] and in this, as in
several other important points, we might controvert Mill’s own views
by his own statements. It seems to me undesirable in a systematic work
like this to enter into controversy at any length, or to attempt to
refute the views of other logicians. But I shall feel bound to state,
in a separate publication, my very deliberate opinion that many of
Mill’s innovations in logical science, and especially his doctrine of
reasoning from particulars to particulars, are entirely groundless and
false.

  [136] *System of Logic.* Introduction, § 4. Fifth ed. pp. 8, 9.

  [137] Ibid. bk. II. chap. iii. § 5, pp. 225, &c.


*The Grounds of Inductive Inference.*

I hold that in all cases of inductive inference we must invent
hypotheses, until we fall upon some hypothesis which yields deductive
results in accordance with experience. Such accordance renders the
chosen hypothesis more or less probable, and we may then deduce, with
some degree of likelihood, the nature of our future experience, on the
assumption that no arbitrary change takes place in the conditions of
nature. We can only argue from the past to the future, on the general
principle set forth in this work, that what is true of a thing will
be true of the like. So far then as one object or event differs from
another, all inference is impossible, particulars as particulars can
no more make an inference than grains of sand can make a rope. We
must always rise to something which is general or same in the cases,
and assuming that sameness to be extended to new cases we learn their
nature. Hearing a clock tick five thousand times without exception or
variation, we adopt the very probable hypothesis that there is some
invariably acting machine which produces those uniform sounds, and
which will, in the absence of change, go on producing them. Meeting
twenty times with a bright yellow ductile substance, and finding it
always to be very heavy and incorrodible, I infer that there was some
natural condition which tended in the creation of things to associate
these properties together, and I expect to find them associated in the
next instance. But there always is the possibility that some unknown
change may take place between past and future cases. The clock may run
down, or be subject to a hundred accidents altering its condition.
There is no reason in the nature of things, so far as known to us, why
yellow colour, ductility, high specific gravity, and incorrodibility,
should always be associated together, and in other cases, if not in
this, men’s expectations have been deceived. Our inferences, therefore,
always retain more or less of a hypothetical character, and are so far
open to doubt. Only in proportion as our induction approximates to the
character of perfect induction, does it approximate to certainty. The
amount of uncertainty corresponds to the probability that other objects
than those examined may exist and falsity our inferences; the amount
of probability corresponds to the amount of information yielded by our
examination; and the theory of probability will be needed to prevent us
from over-estimating or under-estimating the knowledge we possess.


*Illustrations of the Inductive Process.*

To illustrate the passage from the known to the apparently unknown, let
us suppose that the phenomena under investigation consist of numbers,
and that the following six numbers being exhibited to us, we are
required to infer the character of the next in the series:--

  5, 15, 35, 45, 65, 95.

The question first of all arises, How may we describe this series of
numbers? What is uniformly true of them? The reader cannot fail to
perceive at the first glance that they all end in five, and the problem
is, from the properties of these six numbers, to infer the properties
of the next number ending in five. If we test their properties by the
process of perfect induction, we soon perceive that they have another
common property, namely that of being *divisible by five without
remainder*. May we then assert that the next number ending in five is
also divisible by five, and, if so, upon what grounds? Or extending
the question, Is every number ending in five divisible by five? Does
it follow that because six numbers obey a supposed law, therefore
376,685,975 or any other number, however large, obeys the law? I answer
*certainly not*. The law in question is undoubtedly true; but its truth
is not proved by any finite number of examples. All that these six
numbers can do is to suggest to my mind the possible existence of such
a law; and I then ascertain its truth, by proving deductively from the
rules of decimal numeration, that any number ending in five must be
made up of multiples of five, and must therefore be itself a multiple.

To make this more plain, let the reader now examine the numbers--

  7, 17, 37, 47, 67, 97.

They all end in 7 instead of 5, and though not at equal intervals, the
intervals are the same as in the previous case. After consideration,
the reader will perceive that these numbers all agree in being *prime
numbers*, or multiples of unity only. May we then infer that the next,
or any other number ending in 7, is a prime number? Clearly not, for
on trial we find that 27, 57, 117 are not primes. Six instances,
then, treated empirically, lead us to a true and universal law in one
case, and mislead us in another case. We ought, in fact, to have no
confidence in any law until we have treated it deductively, and have
shown that from the conditions supposed the results expected must
ensue. No one can show from the principles of number, that numbers
ending in 7 should be primes.

From the history of the theory of numbers some good examples of false
induction can be adduced. Taking the following series of prime numbers,

  41, 43, 47, 53, 61, 71, 83, 97, 113, 131, 151, &c.,

it will be found that they all agree in being values of the general
expression *x*^{2} + *x* + 41, putting for *x* in succession the
values, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. We seem always to obtain a prime number, and
the induction is apparently strong, to the effect that this expression
always will give primes. Yet a few more trials disprove this false
conclusion. Put *x* = 40, and we obtain 40 × 40 + 40 + 41, or 41 × 41.
Such a failure could never have happened, had we shown any deductive
reason why *x*^{2} + *x* + 41 should give primes.

There can be no doubt that what here happens with forty instances,
might happen with forty thousand or forty million instances. An
apparent law never once failing up to a certain point may then suddenly
break down, so that inductive reasoning, as it has been described by
some writers, can give no sure knowledge of what is to come. Babbage
pointed out, in his Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, that a machine could
be constructed to give a perfectly regular series of numbers through
a vast series of steps, and yet to break the law of progression
suddenly at any required point. No number of particular cases as
particulars enables us to pass by inference to any new case. It is
hardly needful to inquire here what can be inferred from an infinite
series of facts, because they are never practically within our power;
but we may unhesitatingly accept the conclusion, that no finite number
of instances can ever prove a general law, or can give us certain
knowledge of even one other instance.

General mathematical theorems have indeed been discovered by the
observation of particular cases, and may again be so discovered. We
have Newton’s own statement, to the effect that he was thus led to
the all-important Binomial Theorem, the basis of the whole structure
of mathematical analysis. Speaking of a certain series of terms,
expressing the area of a circle or hyperbola, he says: “I reflected
that the denominators were in arithmetical progression; so that
only the numerical co-efficients of the numerators remained to be
investigated. But these, in the alternate areas, were the figures of
the powers of the number eleven, namely 11^{0}, 11^{1}, 11^{2}, 11^{3},
11^{4}; that is, in the first 1; in the second 1, 1; in the third 1,
2, 1; in the fourth 1, 3, 3, 1; in the fifth 1, 4, 6, 4, 1.[138] I
inquired, therefore, in what manner all the remaining figures could
be found from the first two; and I found that if the first figure be
called *m*, all the rest could be found by the continual multiplication
of the terms of the formula

  ((*m* - 0)/1) × ((*m* - 1)/2) × ((*m* - 2)/3) ×
  ((*m* - 3)/4) × &c.”[139]

  [138] These are the figurate numbers considered in pages 183, 187, &c.

  [139] *Commercium Epistolicum.* *Epistola ad Oldenburgum*, Oct. 24,
  1676. Horsley’s *Works of Newton*, vol. iv. p. 541. See De Morgan in
  *Penny Cyclopædia*, art. “Binomial Theorem,” p. 412.

It is pretty evident, from this most interesting statement, that
Newton, having simply observed the succession of the numbers, tried
various formulæ until he found one which agreed with them all. He
was so little satisfied with this process, however, that he verified
particular results of his new theorem by comparison with the results
of common multiplication, and the rule for the extraction of the
square root. Newton, in fact, gave no demonstration of his theorem;
and the greatest mathematicians of the last century, James Bernoulli,
Maclaurin, Landen, Euler, Lagrange, &c., occupied themselves with
discovering a conclusive method of deductive proof.

There can be no doubt that in geometry also discoveries have been
suggested by direct observation. Many of the now trivial propositions
of Euclid’s Elements were probably thus discovered, by the ancient
Greek geometers; and we have pretty clear evidence of this in the
Commentaries of Proclus.[140] Galileo was the first to examine the
remarkable properties of the cycloid, the curve described by a point in
the circumference of a wheel rolling on a plane. By direct observation
he ascertained that the area of the curve is apparently three times
that of the generating circle or wheel, but he was unable to prove this
exactly, or to verify it by strict geometrical reasoning. Sir George
Airy has recorded a curious case, in which he fell accidentally by
trial on a new geometrical property of the sphere.[141] But discovery
in such cases means nothing more than suggestion, and it is always by
pure deduction that the general law is really established. As Proclus
puts it, *we must pass from sense to consideration*.

  [140] Bk. ii. chap. iv.

  [141] *Philosophical Transactions* (1866), vol. 146, p. 334.

[Illustration]

Given, for instance, the series of figures in the accompanying diagram,
measurement will show that the curved lines approximate to semicircles,
and the rectilinear figures to right-angled triangles. These figures
may seem to suggest to the mind the general law that angles inscribed
in semicircles are right angles; but no number of instances, and no
possible accuracy of measurement would really establish the truth of
that general law. Availing ourselves of the suggestion furnished by
the figures, we can only investigate deductively the consequences
which flow from the definition of a circle, until we discover among
them the property of containing right angles. Persons have thought
that they had discovered a method of trisecting angles by plane
geometrical construction, because a certain complex arrangement of
lines and circles had appeared to trisect an angle in every case tried
by them, and they inferred, by a supposed act of induction, that it
would succeed in all other cases. De Morgan has recorded a proposed
mode of trisecting the angle which could not be discriminated by the
senses from a true general solution, except when it was applied to
very obtuse angles.[142] In all such cases, it has always turned out
either that the angle was not trisected at all, or that only certain
particular angles could be thus trisected. The trisectors were misled
by some apparent or special coincidence, and only deductive proof could
establish the truth and generality of the result. In this particular
case, deductive proof shows that the problem attempted is impossible,
and that angles generally cannot be trisected by common geometrical
methods.

  [142] *Budget of Paradoxes*, p. 257.


*Geometrical Reasoning.*

This view of the matter is strongly supported by the further
consideration of geometrical reasoning. No skill and care could ever
enable us to verify absolutely any one geometrical proposition.
Rousseau, in his *Emile*, tells us that we should teach a child
geometry by causing him to measure and compare figures by
superposition. While a child was yet incapable of general reasoning,
this would doubtless be an instructive exercise; but it never could
teach geometry, nor prove the truth of any one proposition. All our
figures are rude approximations, and they may happen to seem unequal
when they should be equal, and equal when they should be unequal.
Moreover figures may from chance be equal in case after case, and yet
there may be no general reason why they should be so. The results of
deductive geometrical reasoning are absolutely certain, and are either
exactly true or capable of being carried to any required degree of
approximation. In a perfect triangle, the angles must be equal to one
half-revolution precisely; even an infinitesimal divergence would be
impossible; and I believe with equal confidence, that however many are
the angles of a figure, provided there are no re-entrant angles, the
sum of the angles will be precisely and absolutely equal to twice as
many right-angles as the figure has sides, less by four right-angles.
In such cases, the deductive proof is absolute and complete; empirical
verification can at the most guard against accidental oversights.

There is a second class of geometrical truths which can only be
proved by approximation; but, as the mind sees no reason why that
approximation should not always go on, we arrive at complete
conviction. We thus learn that the surface of a sphere is equal exactly
to two-thirds of the whole surface of the circumscribing cylinder, or
to four times the area of the generating circle. The area of a parabola
is exactly two-thirds of that of the circumscribing parallelogram.
The area of the cycloid is exactly three times that of the generating
circle. These are truths that we could never ascertain, nor even verify
by observation; for any finite amount of difference, less than what the
senses can discern, would falsify them.

There are geometrical relations again which we cannot assign
exactly, but can carry to any desirable degree of approximation. The
ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle is that of
3·14159265358979323846.... to 1, and the approximation may be carried
to any extent by the expenditure of sufficient labour. Mr. W. Shanks
has given the value of this natural constant, known as π, to the extent
of 707 places of decimals.[143] Some years since, I amused myself
by trying how near I could get to this ratio, by the careful use of
compasses, and I did not come nearer than 1 part in 540. We might
imagine measurements so accurately executed as to give us eight or ten
places correctly. But the power of the hands and senses must soon
stop, whereas the mental powers of deductive reasoning can proceed
to an unlimited degree of approximation. Geometrical truths, then,
are incapable of verification; and, if so, they cannot even be learnt
by observation. How can I have learnt by observation a proposition
of which I cannot even prove the truth by observation, when I am in
possession of it? All that observation or empirical trial can do is
to suggest propositions, of which the truth may afterwards be proved
deductively.

  [143] *Proceedings of the Royal Society* (1872–3), vol. xxi. p. 319.

If Viviani’s story is to be believed, Galileo endeavoured to satisfy
himself about the area of the cycloid by cutting out several large
cycloids in pasteboard, and then comparing the areas of the curve and
the generating circle by weighing them. In every trial the curve seemed
to be rather less than three times the circle, so that Galileo, we are
told, began to suspect that the ratio was not precisely 3 to 1. It is
quite clear, however, that no process of weighing or measuring could
ever prove truths like these, and it remained for Torricelli to show
what his master Galileo had only guessed at.[144]

  [144] *Life of Galileo*, Society for the Diffusion of Useful
  Knowledge, p. 102.

Much has been said about the peculiar certainty of mathematical
reasoning, but it is only certainty of deductive reasoning, and equal
certainty attaches to all correct logical deduction. If a triangle be
right-angled, the square on the hypothenuse will undoubtedly equal the
sum of the two squares on the other sides; but I can never be sure that
a triangle is right-angled: so I can be certain that nitric acid will
not dissolve gold, provided I know that the substances employed really
correspond to those on which I tried the experiment previously. Here is
like certainty of inference, and like doubt as to the facts.


*Discrimination of Certainty and Probability.*

We can never recur too often to the truth that our knowledge of the
laws and future events of the external world is only probable. The mind
itself is quite capable of possessing certain knowledge, and it is well
to discriminate carefully between what we can and cannot know with
certainty. In the first place, whatever feeling is actually present to
the mind is certainly known to that mind. If I see blue sky, I may be
quite sure that I do experience the sensation of blueness. Whatever
I do feel, I do feel beyond all doubt. We are indeed very likely to
confuse what we really feel with what we are inclined to associate with
it, or infer inductively from it; but the whole of our consciousness,
as far as it is the result of pure intuition and free from inference,
is certain knowledge beyond all doubt.

In the second place, we may have certainty of inference; the
fundamental laws of thought, and the rule of substitution (p. 9),
are certainly true; and if my senses could inform me that A was
indistinguishable in colour from B, and B from C, then I should be
equally certain that A was indistinguishable from C. In short, whatever
truth there is in the premises, I can certainly embody in their correct
logical result. But the certainty generally assumes a hypothetical
character. I never can be quite sure that two colours are exactly
alike, that two magnitudes are exactly equal, or that two bodies
whatsoever are identical even in their apparent qualities. Almost all
our judgments involve quantitative relations, and, as will be shown in
succeeding chapters, we can never attain exactness and certainty where
continuous quantity enters. Judgments concerning discontinuous quantity
or numbers, however, allow of certainty; I may establish beyond doubt,
for instance, that the difference of the squares of 17 and 13 is the
product of 17 + 13 and 17 - 13, and is therefore 30 × 4, or 120.

Inferences which we draw concerning natural objects are never certain
except in a hypothetical point of view. It might seem to be certain
that iron is magnetic, or that gold is incapable of solution in
nitric acid; but, if we carefully investigate the meanings of these
statements, they will be found to involve no certainty but that of
consciousness and that of hypothetical inference. For what do I mean
by iron or gold? If I choose a remarkable piece of yellow substance,
call it gold, and then immerse it in a liquid which I call nitric acid,
and find that there is no change called solution, then consciousness
has certainly informed me that, with my meaning of the terms, “Gold is
insoluble in nitric acid.” I may further be certain of something else;
for if this gold and nitric acid remain what they were, I may be sure
there will be no solution on again trying the experiment. If I take
other portions of gold and nitric acid, and am sure that they really
are identical in properties with the former portions, I can be certain
that there will be no solution. But at this point my knowledge becomes
purely hypothetical; for how can I be sure without trial that the gold
and acid are really identical in nature with what I formerly called
gold and nitric acid. How do I know gold when I see it? If I judge by
the apparent qualities--colour, ductility, specific gravity, &c., I
may be misled, because there may always exist a substance which to the
colour, ductility, specific gravity, and other specified qualities,
joins others which we do not expect. Similarly, if iron is magnetic,
as shown by an experiment with objects answering to those names, then
all iron is magnetic, meaning all pieces of matter identical with my
assumed piece. But in trying to identify iron, I am always open to
mistake. Nor is this liability to mistake a matter of speculation
only.[145]

  [145] Professor Bowen has excellently stated this view. *Treatise on
  Logic.* Cambridge, U.S.A., 1866, p. 354.

The history of chemistry shows that the most confident inferences may
have been falsified by the confusion of one substance with another.
Thus strontia was never discriminated from baryta until Klaproth
and Haüy detected differences between some of their properties.
Accordingly chemists must often have inferred concerning strontia what
was only true of baryta, and *vice versâ*. There is now no doubt that
the recently discovered substances, cæsium and rubidium, were long
mistaken for potassium.[146] Other elements have often been confused
together--for instance, tantalum and niobium; sulphur and selenium;
cerium, lanthanum, and didymium; yttrium and erbium.

  [146] Roscoe’s *Spectrum Analysis*, 1st edit., p. 98.

Even the best known laws of physical science do not exclude false
inference. No law of nature has been better established than that of
universal gravitation, and we believe with the utmost confidence that
any body capable of affecting the senses will attract other bodies,
and fall to the earth if not prevented. Euler remarks that, although
he had never made trial of the stones which compose the church of
Magdeburg, yet he had not the least doubt that all of them were heavy,
and would fall if unsupported. But he adds, that it would be extremely
difficult to give any satisfactory explanation of this confident
belief.[147] The fact is, that the belief ought not to amount to
certainty until the experiment has been tried, and in the meantime a
slight amount of uncertainty enters, because we cannot be sure that
the stones of the Magdeburg Church resemble other stones in all their
properties.

  [147] Euler’s *Letters to a German Princess*, translated by Hunter.
  2nd ed., vol. ii. pp. 17, 18.

In like manner, not one of the inductive truths which men have
established, or think they have established, is really safe from
exception or reversal. Lavoisier, when laying the foundations of
chemistry, met with so many instances tending to show the existence
of oxygen in all acids, that he adopted a general conclusion to that
effect, and devised the name oxygen accordingly. He entertained no
appreciable doubt that the acid existing in sea salt also contained
oxygen;[148] yet subsequent experience falsified his expectations. This
instance refers to a science in its infancy, speaking relatively to
the possible achievements of men. But all sciences are and ever will
remain in their infancy, relatively to the extent and complexity of
the universe which they undertake to investigate. Euler expresses no
more than the truth when he says that it would be impossible to fix
on any one thing really existing, of which we could have so perfect
a knowledge as to put us beyond the reach of mistake.[149] We may be
quite certain that a comet will go on moving in a similar path *if*
all circumstances remain the same as before; but if we leave out this
extensive qualification, our predictions will always be subject to the
chance of falsification by some unexpected event, such as the division
of Biela’s comet or the interference of an unknown gravitating body.

  [148] Lavoisier’s *Chemistry*, translated by Kerr. 3rd ed., pp. 114,
  121, 123.

  [149] Euler’s *Letters*, vol. ii. p. 21.

Inductive inference might attain to certainty if our knowledge of the
agents existing throughout the universe were complete, and if we were
at the same time certain that the same Power which created the universe
would allow it to proceed without arbitrary change. There is always
a possibility of causes being in existence without our knowledge,
and these may at any moment produce an unexpected effect. Even when
by the theory of probabilities we succeed in forming some notion of
the comparative confidence with which we should receive inductive
results, it yet appears to me that we must make an assumption. Events
come out like balls from the vast ballot-box of nature, and close
observation will enable us to form some notion, as we shall see in the
next chapter, of the contents of that ballot-box. But we must still
assume that, between the time of an observation and that to which our
inferences relate, no change in the ballot-box has been made.




