CHAPTER XXVI.

CHARACTER OF THE EXPERIMENTALIST.


In the present age there seems to be a tendency to believe that the
importance of individual genius is less than it was--

  “The individual withers, and the world is more and more.”

Society, it is supposed, has now assumed so highly developed a form,
that what was accomplished in past times by the solitary exertions of a
great intellect, may now be worked out by the united labours of an army
of investigators. Just as the well-organised power of a modern army
supersedes the single-handed bravery of the mediæval knights, so we are
to believe that the combination of intellectual labour has superseded
the genius of an Archimedes, a Newton, or a Laplace. So-called original
research is now regarded as a profession, adopted by hundreds of
men, and communicated by a system of training. All that we need to
secure additions to our knowledge of nature is the erection of great
laboratories, museums, and observatories, and the offering of pecuniary
rewards to those who can invent new chemical compounds, detect new
species, or discover new comets. Doubtless this is not the real meaning
of the eminent men who are now urging upon Government the endowment of
physical research. They can only mean that the greater the pecuniary
and material assistance given to men of science, the greater the result
which the available genius of the country may be expected to produce.
Money and opportunities of study can no more produce genius than
sunshine and moisture can generate living beings; the inexplicable
germ is wanting in both cases. But as, when the germ is present, the
plant will grow more or less vigorously according to the circumstances
in which it is placed, so it may be allowed that pecuniary assistance
may favour development of intellect. Public opinion however is not
discriminating, and is likely to interpret the agitation for the
endowment of science as meaning that science can be had for money.

All such notions are erroneous. In no branch of human affairs,
neither in politics, war, literature, industry, nor science, is the
influence of genius less considerable than it was. It is possible
that the extension and organisation of scientific study, assisted by
the printing-press and the accelerated means of communication, has
increased the rapidity with which new discoveries are made known, and
their details worked out by many heads and hands. A Darwin now no
sooner propounds original ideas concerning the evolution of living
creatures, than those ideas are discussed and illustrated, and
applied by naturalists in every part of the world. In former days his
discoveries would have been hidden for decades of years in scarce
manuscripts, and generations would have passed away before his theory
had enjoyed the same amount of criticism and corroboration as it has
already received. The result is that the genius of Darwin is more
valuable, not less valuable, than it would formerly have been. The
advance of military science and the organisation of enormous armies
has not decreased the value of a skilful general; on the contrary,
the rank and file are still more in need than they used to be of the
guiding power of a far-seeing intellect. The swift destruction of the
French military power was not due alone to the perfection of the German
army, nor to the genius of Moltke; it was due to the combination of a
well-disciplined multitude with a leader of the highest powers. So in
every branch of human affairs the influence of the individual is not
withering, but is growing with the extent of the material resources
which are at his command.

Turning to our own subject, it is a work of undiminished interest to
reflect upon those qualities of mind which lead to great advances in
natural knowledge. Nothing, indeed, is less amenable than genius to
scientific analysis and explanation. Even definition is out of the
question. Buffon said that “genius is patience,” and certainly patience
is one of its most requisite components. But no one can suppose that
patient labour alone will invariably lead to those conspicuous results
which we attribute to genius. In every branch of science, literature,
art, or industry, there are thousands of men and women who work with
unceasing patience, and thereby ensure moderate success; but it would
be absurd to suppose that equal amounts of intellectual labour yield
equal results. A Newton may modestly attribute his discoveries to
industry and patient thought, and there is reason to believe that
genius is unconscious and unable to account for its own peculiar
powers. As genius is essentially creative, and consists in divergence
from the ordinary grooves of thought and action, it must necessarily be
a phenomenon beyond the domain of the laws of nature. Nevertheless, it
is always an interesting and instructive work to trace out, as far as
possible, the characteristics of mind by which great discoveries have
been achieved, and we shall find in the analysis much to illustrate the
principles of scientific method.


*Error of the Baconian Method.*

Hundreds of investigators may be constantly engaged in experimental
inquiry; they may compile numberless note-books full of scientific
facts, and endless tables of numerical results; but, if the views of
induction here maintained be true, they can never by such work alone
rise to new and great discoveries. By a system of research they may
work out deductively the details of a previous discovery, but to arrive
at a new principle of nature is another matter. Francis Bacon spread
abroad the notion that to advance science we must begin by accumulating
facts, and then draw from them, by a process of digestion, successive
laws of higher and higher generality. In protesting against the false
method of the scholastic logicians, he exaggerated a partially true
philosophy, until it became as false as that which preceded it. His
notion of scientific method was a kind of scientific bookkeeping.
Facts were to be indiscriminately gathered from every source, and
posted in a ledger, from which would emerge in time a balance of
truth. It is difficult to imagine a less likely way of arriving at
great discoveries. The greater the array of facts, the less is the
probability that they will by any routine system of classification
disclose the laws of nature they embody. Exhaustive classification in
all possible orders is out of the question, because the possible orders
are practically infinite in number.

It is before the glance of the philosophic mind that facts must display
their meaning, and fall into logical order. The natural philosopher
must therefore have, in the first place, a mind of impressionable
character, which is affected by the slightest exceptional phenomenon.
His associating and identifying powers must be great, that is, a
strange fact must suggest to his mind whatever of like nature has
previously come within his experience. His imagination must be active,
and bring before his mind multitudes of relations in which the
unexplained facts may possibly stand with regard to each other, or to
more common facts. Sure and vigorous powers of deductive reasoning
must then come into play, and enable him to infer what will happen
under each supposed condition. Lastly, and above all, there must be the
love of certainty leading him diligently and with perfect candour, to
compare his speculations with the test of fact and experiment.


*Freedom of Theorising.*

It would be an error to suppose that the great discoverer seizes at
once upon the truth, or has any unerring method of divining it. In all
probability the errors of the great mind exceed in number those of the
less vigorous one. Fertility of imagination and abundance of guesses at
truth are among the first requisites of discovery; but the erroneous
guesses must be many times as numerous as those which prove well
founded. The weakest analogies, the most whimsical notions, the most
apparently absurd theories, may pass through the teeming brain, and no
record remain of more than the hundredth part. There is nothing really
absurd except that which proves contrary to logic and experience. The
truest theories involve suppositions which are inconceivable, and no
limit can really be placed to the freedom of hypothesis.

Kepler is an extraordinary instance to this effect. No minor laws
of nature are more firmly established than those which he detected
concerning the orbits and motions of planetary masses, and on these
empirical laws the theory of gravitation was founded. Did we not learn
from his own writings the multitude of errors into which he fell, we
might have imagined that he had some special faculty of seizing on the
truth. But, as is well known, he was full of chimerical notions; his
favourite and long-studied theory was founded on a fanciful analogy
between the planetary orbits and the regular solids. His celebrated
laws were the outcome of a lifetime of speculation, for the most part
vain and groundless. We know this because he had a curious pleasure
in dwelling upon erroneous and futile trains of reasoning, which
most persons consign to oblivion. But Kepler’s name was destined to
be immortal, on account of the patience with which he submitted his
hypotheses to comparison with observation, the candour with which he
acknowledged failure after failure, and the perseverance and ingenuity
with which he renewed his attack upon the riddles of nature.

Next after Kepler perhaps Faraday is the physical philosopher who has
given us the best insight into the progress of discovery, by recording
erroneous as well as successful speculations. The recorded notions,
indeed, are probably but a tithe of the fancies which arose in his
active brain. As Faraday himself said--“The world little knows how
many of the thoughts and theories which have passed through the mind
of a scientific investigator, have been crushed in silence and secrecy
by his own severe criticism and adverse examination; that in the most
successful instances not a tenth of the suggestions, the hopes, the
wishes, the preliminary conclusions have been realised.”

Nevertheless, in Faraday’s researches, published in the *Philosophical
Transactions*, in minor papers, in manuscript note-books, or in other
materials, made known in his interesting life by Dr. Bence Jones, we
find invaluable lessons for the experimentalist. These writings are
full of speculations which we must not judge by the light of subsequent
discovery. It may perhaps be said that Faraday committed to the
printing press crude ideas which a friend would have counselled him to
keep back. There was occasionally even a wildness and vagueness in his
notions, which in a less careful experimentalist would have been fatal
to the attainment of truth. This is especially apparent in a curious
paper concerning Ray-vibrations; but fortunately Faraday was aware of
the shadowy character of his speculations, and expressed the feeling in
words which must be quoted. “I think it likely,” he says,[478] “that
I have made many mistakes in the preceding pages, for even to myself
my ideas on this point appear only as the shadow of a speculation, or
as one of those impressions upon the mind, which are allowable for a
time as guides to thought and research. He who labours in experimental
inquiries knows how numerous these are, and how often their apparent
fitness and beauty vanish before the progress and development of real
natural truth.” If, then, the experimentalist has no royal road to the
discovery of the truth, it is an interesting matter to consider by what
logical procedure he attains the truth.

  [478] *Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics*, p. 372.
  *Philosophical Magazine*, 3rd Series, May 1846, vol. xxviii. p. 350.

If I have taken a correct view of logical method, there is really no
such thing as a distinct process of induction. The probability is
infinitely small that a collection of complicated facts will fall
into an arrangement capable of exhibiting directly the laws obeyed
by them. The mathematician might as well expect to integrate his
functions by a ballot-box, as the experimentalist to draw deep truths
from haphazard trials. All induction is but the inverse application
of deduction, and it is by the inexplicable action of a gifted mind
that a multitude of heterogeneous facts are ranged in luminous order
as the results of some uniformly acting law. So different, indeed,
are the qualities of mind required in different branches of science,
that it would be absurd to attempt to give an exhaustive description
of the character of mind which leads to discovery. The labours of
Newton could not have been accomplished except by a mind of the utmost
mathematical genius; Faraday, on the other hand, has made the most
extensive additions to human knowledge without passing beyond common
arithmetic. I do not remember meeting in Faraday’s writings with a
single algebraic formula or mathematical problem of any complexity.
Professor Clerk Maxwell, indeed, in the preface to his new *Treatise
on Electricity*, has strongly recommended the reading of Faraday’s
researches by all students of science, and has given his opinion
that though Faraday seldom or never employed mathematical formulæ,
his methods and conceptions were not the less mathematical in their
nature.[479] I have myself protested against the prevailing confusion
between a mathematical and an exact science,[480] yet I certainly think
that Faraday’s experiments were for the most part qualitative, and that
his mathematical ideas were of a rudimentary character. It is true that
he could not possibly investigate such a subject as magne-crystallic
action without involving himself in geometrical relations of some
complexity. Nevertheless I think that he was deficient in mathematical
deductive power, that power which is so highly developed by the modern
system of mathematical training at Cambridge.

  [479] See also *Nature*, September 18, 1873; vol. viii. p. 398.

  [480] *Theory of Political Economy*, pp. 3–14.

Faraday was acquainted with the forms of his celebrated lines of force,
but I am not aware that he ever entered into the algebraic nature
of those curves, and I feel sure that he could not have explained
their forms as depending on the resultant attractions of all the
magnetic particles. There are even occasional indications that he did
not understand some of the simpler mathematical doctrines of modern
physical science. Although he so clearly foresaw the correlation of the
physical forces, and laboured so hard with his own hands to connect
gravity with other forces, it is doubtful whether he understood the
doctrine of the conservation of energy as applied to gravitation.
Faraday was probably equal to Newton in experimental skill, and in that
peculiar kind of deductive power which leads to the invention of simple
qualitative experiments; but it must be allowed that he exhibited
little of that mathematical power which enabled Newton to follow out
intuitively the quantitative results of a complicated problem with such
wonderful facility. Two instances, Newton and Faraday, are sufficient
to show that minds of widely different conformation will meet with
suitable regions of research. Nevertheless, there are certain traits
which we may discover in all the highest scientific minds.


*The Newtonian Method, the True Organum.*

Laplace was of opinion that the *Principia* and the *Opticks* of
Newton furnished the best models then available of the delicate art
of experimental and theoretical investigation. In these, as he says,
we meet with the most happy illustrations of the way in which, from
a series of inductions, we may rise to the causes of phenomena, and
thence descend again to all the resulting details.

The popular notion concerning Newton’s discoveries is that in early
life, when driven into the country by the Great Plague, a falling apple
accidentally suggested to him the existence of gravitation, and that,
availing himself of this hint, he was led to the discovery of the law
of gravitation, the explanation of which constitutes the *Principia*.
It is difficult to imagine a more ludicrous and inadequate picture of
Newton’s labours. No originality, or at least priority, was claimed
by Newton as regards the discovery of the law of the inverse square,
so closely associated with his name. In a well-known Scholium[481]
he acknowledges that Sir Christopher Wren, Hooke, and Halley, had
severally observed the accordance of Kepler’s third law of motion with
the principle of the inverse square.

  [481] *Principia*, bk. i. Prop. iv.

Newton’s work was really that of developing the methods of deductive
reasoning and experimental verification, by which alone great
hypotheses can be brought to the touchstone of fact. Archimedes was the
greatest of ancient philosophers, for he showed how mathematical theory
could be wedded to physical experiments; and his works are the first
true Organum. Newton is the modern Archimedes, and the *Principia*
forms the true Novum Organum of scientific method. The laws which he
established are great, but his example of the manner of establishing
them is greater still. Excepting perhaps chemistry and electricity,
there is hardly a progressive branch of physical and mathematical
science, which has not been developed from the germs of true scientific
procedure which he disclosed in the *Principia* or the *Opticks*.
Overcome by the success of his theory of universal gravitation, we
are apt to forget that in his theory of sound he originated the
mathematical investigation of waves and the mutual action of particles;
that in his corpuscular theory of light, however mistaken, he first
ventured to apply mathematical calculation to molecular attractions
and repulsions; that in his prismatic experiments he showed how far
experimental verification could be pushed; that in his examination
of the coloured rings named after him, he accomplished the most
remarkable instance of minute measurement yet known, a mere practical
application of which by Fizeau was recently deemed worthy of a medal
by the Royal Society. We only learn by degrees how complete was his
scientific insight; a few words in his third law of motion display his
acquaintance with the fundamental principles of modern thermodynamics
and the conservation of energy, while manuscripts long overlooked prove
that in his inquiries concerning atmospheric refraction he had overcome
the main difficulties of applying theory to one of the most complex of
physical problems.

After all, it is only by examining the way in which he effected
discoveries, that we can rightly appreciate his greatness. The
*Principia* treats not of gravity so much as of forces in general, and
the methods of reasoning about them. He investigates not one hypothesis
only, but mechanical hypotheses in general. Nothing so much strikes
the reader of the work as the exhaustiveness of his treatment, and the
unbounded power of his insight. If he treats of central forces, it
is not one law of force which he discusses, but many, or almost all
imaginable laws, the results of each of which he sketches out in a few
pregnant words. If his subject is a resisting medium, it is not air or
water alone, but resisting media in general. We have a good example
of his method in the scholium to the twenty-second proposition of the
second book, in which he runs rapidly over many suppositions as to
the laws of the compressing forces which might conceivably act in an
atmosphere of gas, a consequence being drawn from each case, and that
one hypothesis ultimately selected which yields results agreeing with
experiments upon the pressure and density of the terrestrial atmosphere.

Newton said that he did not frame hypotheses, but, in reality, the
greater part of the *Principia* is purely hypothetical, endless
varieties of causes and laws being imagined which have no counterpart
in nature. The most grotesque hypotheses of Kepler or Descartes were
not more imaginary. But Newton’s comprehension of logical method was
perfect; no hypothesis was entertained unless it was definite in
conditions, and admitted of unquestionable deductive reasoning; and the
value of each hypothesis was entirely decided by the comparison of its
consequences with facts. I do not entertain a doubt that the general
course of his procedure is identical with that view of the nature of
induction, as the inverse application of deduction, which I advocate
throughout this book. Francis Bacon held that science should be founded
on experience, but he mistook the true mode of using experience,
and, in attempting to apply his method, ludicrously failed. Newton
did not less found his method on experience, but he seized the true
method of treating it, and applied it with a power and success never
since equalled. It is a great mistake to say that modern science is
the result of the Baconian philosophy; it is the Newtonian philosophy
and the Newtonian method which have led to all the great triumphs of
physical science, and I repeat that the *Principia* forms the true
“Novum Organum.”

In bringing his theories to a decisive experimental verification,
Newton showed, as a general rule, exquisite skill and ingenuity.
In his hands a few simple pieces of apparatus were made to give
results involving an unsuspected depth of meaning. His most beautiful
experimental inquiry was that by which he proved the differing
refrangibility of rays of light. To suppose that he originally
discovered the power of a prism to break up a beam of white light
would be a mistake, for he speaks of procuring a glass prism to
try the “celebrated phenomena of colours.” But we certainly owe to
him the theory that white light is a mixture of rays differing in
refrangibility, and that lights which differ in colour, differ also in
refrangibility. Other persons might have conceived this theory; in
fact, any person regarding refraction as a quantitative effect must see
that different parts of the spectrum have suffered different amounts
of refraction. But the power of Newton is shown in the tenacity with
which he followed his theory into every consequence, and tested each
result by a simple but conclusive experiment. He first shows that
different coloured spots are displaced by different amounts when viewed
through a prism, and that their images come to a focus at different
distances from the lense, as they should do, if the refrangibility
differed. After excluding by many experiments a variety of indifferent
circumstances, he fixes his attention upon the question whether the
rays are merely shattered, disturbed, and spread out in a chance
manner, as Grimaldi supposed, or whether there is a constant relation
between the colour and the refrangibility.

If Grimaldi was right, it might be expected that a part of the spectrum
taken separately, and subjected to a second refraction, would suffer a
new breaking up, and produce some new spectrum. Newton inferred from
his own theory that a particular ray of the spectrum would have a
constant refrangibility, so that a second prism would merely bend it
more or less, but not further disperse it in any considerable degree.
By simply cutting off most of the rays of the spectrum by a screen,
and allowing the remaining narrow ray to fall on a second prism, he
proved the truth of this conclusion; and then slowly turning the first
prism, so as to vary the colour of the ray falling on the second
one, he found that the spot of light formed by the twice-refracted
ray travelled up and down, a palpable proof that the amount of
refrangibility varies with the colour. For his further satisfaction,
he sometimes refracted the light a third or fourth time, and he found
that it might be refracted upwards or downwards or sideways, and yet
for each colour there was a definite amount of refraction through each
prism. He completed the proof by showing that the separated rays may
again be gathered together into white light by an inverted prism, so
that no number of refractions alters the character of the light. The
conclusion thus obtained serves to explain the confusion arising in the
use of a common lense; he shows that with homogeneous light there is
one distinct focus, with mixed light an infinite number of foci, which
prevent a clear view from being obtained at any point.

What astonishes the reader of the *Opticks* is the persistence with
which Newton follows out the consequences of a preconceived theory, and
tests the one notion by a wonderful variety of simple comparisons with
fact. The ease with which he invents new combinations, and foresees
the results, subsequently verified, produces an insuperable conviction
in the reader that he has possession of the truth. And it is certainly
the theory which leads him to the experiments, most of which could
hardly be devised by accident. Newton actually remarks that it was by
mathematically determining all kinds of phenomena of colours which
could be produced by refraction that he had “invented” almost all the
experiments in the book, and he promises that others who shall “argue
truly,” and try the experiments with care, will not be disappointed in
the results.[482]

  [482] *Opticks*, bk. i. part ii. Prop. 3. 3rd ed. p. 115.

The philosophic method of Huyghens was the same as that of Newton,
and Huyghens’ investigation of double refraction furnishes almost
equally beautiful instances of theory guiding experiment. So far as
we know double refraction was first discovered by accident, and was
described by Erasmus Bartholinus in 1669. The phenomenon then appeared
to be entirely exceptional, and the laws governing the two paths of
the refracted rays were so unapparent and complicated, that Newton
altogether misunderstood the phenomenon, and it was only at the latter
end of the last century that scientific men began to comprehend its
laws.

Nevertheless, Huyghens had, with rare genius, arrived at the true
theory as early as 1678. He regarded light as an undulatory motion of
some medium, and in his *Traité de la Lumière* he pointed out that,
in ordinary refraction, the velocity of propagation of the wave is
equal in all directions, so that the front of an advancing wave is
spherical, and reaches equal distances in equal times. But in crystals,
as he supposed, the medium would be of unequal elasticity in different
directions, so that a disturbance would reach unequal distances in
equal times, and the wave produced would have a spheroidal form.
Huyghens was not satisfied with an unverified theory. He calculated
what might be expected to happen when a crystal of calc-spar was cut
in various directions, and he says: “I have examined in detail the
properties of the extraordinary refraction of this crystal, to see if
each phenomenon which is deduced from theory would agree with what is
really observed. And this being so, it is no slight proof of the truth
of our suppositions and principles; but what I am going to add here
confirms them still more wonderfully; that is, the different modes
of cutting this crystal, in which the surfaces produced give rise to
refraction exactly such as they ought to be, and as I had foreseen
them, according to the preceding theory.”

Newton’s mistaken corpuscular theory of light caused the theories and
experiments of Huyghens to be disregarded for more than a century; but
it is not easy to imagine a more beautiful or successful application of
the true method of inductive investigation, theory guiding experiment,
and yet wholly relying on experiment for confirmation.


*Candour and Courage of the Philosophic Mind.*

Perfect readiness to reject a theory inconsistent with fact is a
primary requisite of the philosophic mind. But it would be a mistake
to suppose that this candour has anything akin to fickleness; on the
contrary, readiness to reject a false theory may be combined with a
peculiar pertinacity and courage in maintaining an hypothesis as long
as its falsity is not actually apparent. There must, indeed, be no
prejudice or bias distorting the mind, and causing it to pass over the
unwelcome results of experiment. There must be that scrupulous honesty
and flexibility of mind, which assigns adequate value to all evidence;
indeed, the more a man loves his theory, the more scrupulous should be
his attention to its faults. It is common in life to meet with some
theorist, who, by long cogitation over a single theory, has allowed it
to mould his mind, and render him incapable of receiving anything but
as a contribution to the truth of his one theory. A narrow and intense
course of thought may sometimes lead to great results, but the adoption
of a wrong theory at the outset is in such a mind irretrievable.
The man of one idea has but a single chance of truth. The fertile
discoverer, on the contrary, chooses between many theories, and is
never wedded to any one, unless impartial and repeated comparison has
convinced him of its validity. He does not choose and then compare; but
he compares time after time, and then chooses.

Having once deliberately chosen, the philosopher may rightly entertain
his theory with the strongest fidelity. He will neglect no objection;
for he may chance at any time to meet a fatal one; but he will bear
in mind the inconsiderable powers of the human mind compared with the
tasks it has to undertake. He will see that no theory can at first be
reconciled with all objections, because there may be many interfering
causes, and the very consequences of the theory may have a complexity
which prolonged investigation by successive generations of men may not
exhaust. If, then, a theory exhibit a number of striking coincidences
with fact, it must not be thrown aside until at least one *conclusive
discordance* is proved, regard being had to possible error in
establishing that discordance. In science and philosophy something must
be risked. He who quails at the least difficulty will never establish a
new truth, and it was not unphilosophic in Leslie to remark concerning
his own inquiries into the nature of heat--

“In the course of investigation, I have found myself compelled to
relinquish some preconceived notions; but I have not abandoned them
hastily, nor, till after a warm and obstinate defence, I was driven
from every post.”[483]

  [483] *Experimental Inquiry into the Nature of Heat.* Preface, p. xv.

Faraday’s life, again, furnishes most interesting illustrations of this
tenacity of the philosophic mind. Though so candid in rejecting some
theories, there were others to which he clung through everything. One
of his favourite notions resulted in a brilliant discovery; another
remains in doubt to the present day.


*The Philosophic Character of Faraday.*

In Faraday’s researches concerning the connection of magnetism and
light, we find an excellent instance of the pertinacity with which a
favourite theory may be pursued, so long as the results of experiment
do not clearly negative the notions entertained. In purely quantitative
questions, as we have seen, the absence of apparent effect can seldom
be regarded as proving the absence of all effect. Now Faraday was
convinced that some mutual relation must exist between magnetism and
light. As early as 1822, he attempted to produce an effect upon a ray
of polarised light, by passing it through water placed between the
poles of a voltaic battery; but he was obliged to record that not the
slightest effect was observable. During many years the subject, we are
told,[484] rose again and again to his mind, and no failure could make
him relinquish his search after this unknown relation. It was in the
year 1845 that he gained the first success; on August 30th he began
to work with common electricity, vainly trying glass, quartz, Iceland
spar, &c. Several days of labour gave no result; yet he did not desist.
Heavy glass, a transparent medium of great refractive powers, composed
of borate of lead, was now tried, being placed between the poles of a
powerful electro-magnet while a ray of polarised light was transmitted
through it. When the poles of the electro-magnet were arranged in
certain positions with regard to the substance under trial, no effects
were apparent; but at last Faraday happened fortunately to place a
piece of heavy glass so that contrary magnetic poles were on the same
side, and now an effect was witnessed. The glass was found to have the
power of twisting the plane of polarisation of the ray of light.

  [484] Bence Jones, *Life of Faraday*, vol. i. p. 362.

All Faraday’s recorded thoughts upon this great experiment are replete
with curious interest. He attributes his success to the opinion,
almost amounting to a conviction, that the various forms, under which
the forces of matter are made manifest, have one common origin,
and are so directly related and mutually dependent that they are
convertible. “This strong persuasion,” he says,[485] “extended to the
powers of light, and led to many exertions having for their object
the discovery of the direct relation of light and electricity. These
ineffectual exertions could not remove my strong persuasion, and I
have at last succeeded.” He describes the phenomenon in somewhat
figurative language as *the magnetisation of a ray of light*, and
also as *the illumination of a magnetic curve or line of force*. He
has no sooner got the effect in one case, than he proceeds, with his
characteristic comprehensiveness of research, to test the existence
of a like phenomenon in all the substances available. He finds that
not only heavy glass, but solids and liquids, acids and alkalis, oils,
water, alcohol, ether, all possess this power; but he was not able to
detect its existence in any gaseous substance. His thoughts cannot be
restrained from running into curious speculations as to the possible
results of the power in certain cases. “What effect,” he says, “does
this force have in the earth where the magnetic curves of the earth
traverse its substance? Also what effect in a magnet?” And then he
falls upon the strange notion that perhaps this force tends to make
iron and oxide of iron transparent, a phenomenon never observed. We can
meet with nothing more instructive as to the course of mind by which
great discoveries are made, than these records of Faraday’s patient
labours, and his varied success and failure. Nor are his unsuccessful
experiments upon the relation of gravity and electricity less
interesting, or less worthy of study.

  [485] Ibid. vol. ii. p. 199.

Throughout a large part of his life, Faraday was possessed by the idea
that gravity cannot be unconnected with the other forces of nature. On
March 19th, 1849, he wrote in his laboratory book,--“Gravity. Surely
this force must be capable of an experimental relation to electricity,
magnetism, and the other forces, so as to bind it up with them in
reciprocal action and equivalent effect?”[486] He filled twenty
paragraphs or more with reflections and suggestions, as to the mode
of treating the subject by experiment. He anticipated that the mutual
approach of two bodies would develop electricity in them, or that a
body falling through a conducting helix would excite a current changing
in direction as the motion was reversed. “*All this is a dream*,”
he remarks; “still examine it by a few experiments. Nothing is too
wonderful to be true, if it be consistent with the laws of nature;
and in such things as these, experiment is the best test of such
consistency.”

  [486] See also his more formal statement in the *Experimental
  Researches in Electricity*, 24th Series, § 2702, vol. iii. p. 161.

He executed many difficult and tedious experiments, which are described
in the 24th Series of Experimental Researches. The result was *nil*,
and yet he concludes: “Here end my trials for the present. The results
are negative; they do not shake my strong feeling of the existence of
a relation between gravity and electricity, though they give no proof
that such a relation exists.”

He returned to the work when he was ten years older, and in 1858–9
recorded many remarkable reflections and experiments. He was much
struck by the fact that electricity is essentially a *dual force*,
and it had always been a conviction of Faraday that no body could be
electrified positively without some other body becoming electrified
negatively; some of his researches had been simple developments of
this relation. But observing that between two mutually gravitating
bodies there was no apparent circumstance to determine which should be
positive and which negative, he does not hesitate to call in question
an old opinion. “The evolution of *one* electricity would be a new
and very remarkable thing. The idea throws a doubt on the whole; but
still try, for who knows what is possible in dealing with gravity?”
We cannot but notice the candour with which he thus acknowledges in
his laboratory book the doubtfulness of the whole thing, and is yet
prepared as a forlorn hope to frame experiments in opposition to
all his previous experience of the course of nature. For a time his
thoughts flow on as if the strange detection were already made, and he
had only to trace out its consequences throughout the universe. “Let us
encourage ourselves by a little more imagination prior to experiment,”
he says; and then he reflects upon the infinity of actions in nature,
in which the mutual relations of electricity and gravity would come
into play; he pictures to himself the planets and the comets charging
themselves as they approach the sun; cascades, rain, rising vapour,
circulating currents of the atmosphere, the fumes of a volcano, the
smoke in a chimney become so many electrical machines. A multitude of
events and changes in the atmosphere seem to be at once elucidated by
such actions; for a moment his reveries have the vividness of fact.
“I think we have been dull and blind not to have suspected some such
results,” and he sums up rapidly the consequences of his great but
imaginary theory; an entirely new mode of exciting heat or electricity,
an entirely new relation of the natural forces, an analysis of
gravitation, and a justification of the conservation of force.

Such were Faraday’s fondest dreams of what might be, and to many a
philosopher they would have been sufficient basis for the writing of
a great book. But Faraday’s imagination was within his full control;
as he himself says, “Let the imagination go, guarding it by judgment
and principle, and holding it in and directing it by experiment.” His
dreams soon took a very practical form, and for many days he laboured
with ceaseless energy, on the staircase of the Royal Institution, in
the clock tower of the Houses of Parliament, or at the top of the Shot
Tower in Southwark, raising and lowering heavy weights, and combining
electrical helices and wires in every conceivable way. His skill and
long experience in experiment were severely taxed to eliminate the
effects of the earth’s magnetism, and time after time he saved himself
from accepting mistaken indications, which to another man might have
seemed conclusive verifications of his theory. When all was done there
remained absolutely no results. “The experiments,” he says, “were well
made, but the results are negative;” and yet, he adds, “I cannot accept
them as conclusive.” In this position the question remains to the
present day; it may be that the effect was too slight to be detected,
or it may be that the arrangements adopted were not suited to develop
the particular relation which exists, just as Oersted could not detect
electro-magnetism, so long as his wire was perpendicular to the plane
of motion of his needle. But these are not matters which concern us
further here. We have only to notice the profound conviction in the
unity of natural laws, the active powers of inference and imagination,
the unbounded licence of theorising, combined above all with the utmost
diligence in experimental verification which this remarkable research
exhibits.


*Reservation of Judgment.*

There is yet another characteristic needed in the philosophic mind; it
is that of suspending judgment when the data are insufficient. Many
people will express a confident opinion on almost any question which is
put before them, but they thereby manifest not strength, but narrowness
of mind. To see all sides of a complicated subject, and to weigh all
the different facts and probabilities correctly, require no ordinary
powers of comprehension. Hence it is most frequently the philosophic
mind which is in doubt, and the ignorant mind which is ready with a
positive decision. Faraday has himself said, in a very interesting
lecture:[487] “Occasionally and frequently the exercise of the judgment
ought to end in *absolute reservation*. It may be very distasteful, and
great fatigue, to suspend a conclusion; but as we are not infallible,
so we ought to be cautious; we shall eventually find our advantage, for
the man who rests in his position is not so far from right as he who,
proceeding in a wrong direction, is ever increasing his distance.”

  [487] Printed in *Modern Culture*, edited by Youmans, p. 219.

Arago presented a conspicuous example of this high quality of mind, as
Faraday remarks; for when he made known his curious discovery of the
relation of a magnetic needle to a revolving copper plate, a number
of supposed men of science in different countries gave immediate and
confident explanations of it, which were all wrong. But Arago, who
had both discovered the phenomenon and personally investigated its
conditions, declined to put forward publicly any theory at all.

At the same time we must not suppose that the truly philosophic mind
can tolerate a state of doubt, while a chance of decision remains open.
In science nothing like compromise is possible, and truth must be one.
Hence, doubt is the confession of ignorance, and involves a painful
feeling of incapacity. But doubt lies between error and truth, so that
if we choose wrongly we are further away than ever from our goal.

Summing up, then, it would seem as if the mind of the great discoverer
must combine contradictory attributes. He must be fertile in
theories and hypotheses, and yet full of facts and precise results of
experience. He must entertain the feeblest analogies, and the merest
guesses at truth, and yet he must hold them as worthless till they are
verified in experiment. When there are any grounds of probability he
must hold tenaciously to an old opinion, and yet he must be prepared
at any moment to relinquish it when a clearly contradictory fact is
encountered. “The philosopher,” says Faraday,[488] “should be a man
willing to listen to every suggestion, but determined to judge for
himself. He should not be biased by appearances; have no favourite
hypothesis; be of no school; and in doctrine have no master. He should
not be a respecter of persons, but of things. Truth should be his
primary object. If to these qualities be added industry, he may indeed
hope to walk within the veil of the temple of nature.”

  [488] *Life of Faraday*, vol. i. p. 225.




