CHAPTER II.

TERMS.


Every proposition expresses the resemblance or difference of the things
denoted by its terms. As inference treats of the relation between two
or more propositions, so a proposition expresses a relation between two
or more terms. In the portion of this work which treats of deduction
it will be convenient to follow the usual order of exposition. We will
consider in succession the various kinds of terms, propositions, and
arguments, and we commence in this chapter with terms.

The simplest and most palpable meaning which can belong to a term
consists of some single material object, such as Westminster Abbey,
Stonehenge, the Sun, Sirius, &c. It is probable that in early stages of
intellect only concrete and palpable things are the objects of thought.
The youngest child knows the difference between a hot and a cold body.
The dog can recognise his master among a hundred other persons, and
animals of much lower intelligence know and discriminate their haunts.
In all such acts there is judgment concerning the likeness of physical
objects, but there is little or no power of analysing each object and
regarding it as a group of qualities.

The dignity of intellect begins with the power of separating points of
agreement from those of difference. Comparison of two objects may lead
us to perceive that they are at once like and unlike. Two fragments of
rock may differ entirely in outward form, yet they may have the same
colour, hardness, and texture. Flowers which agree in colour may differ
in odour. The mind learns to regard each object as an aggregate of
qualities, and acquires the power of dwelling at will upon one or other
of those qualities to the exclusion of the rest. Logical abstraction,
in short, comes into play, and the mind becomes capable of reasoning,
not merely about objects which are physically complete and concrete,
but about things which may be thought of separately in the mind though
they exist not separately in nature. We can think of the hardness of
a rock, or the colour of a flower, and thus produce abstract notions,
denoted by abstract terms, which will form a subject for further
consideration.

At the same time arise general notions and classes of objects. We
cannot fail to observe that the quality *hardness* exists in many
objects, for instance in many fragments of rock; mentally joining these
together, we create the class *hard object*, which will include, not
only the actual objects examined, but all others which may happen to
agree with them, as they agree with each other. As our senses cannot
possibly report to us all the contents of space, we cannot usually
set any limits to the number of objects which may fall into any such
class. At this point we begin to perceive the power and generality of
thought, which enables us in a single act to treat of indefinitely or
even infinitely numerous objects. We can safely assert that whatever is
true of any one object coming under a class is true of any of the other
objects so far as they possess the common qualities implied in their
belonging to the class. We must not place a thing in a class unless
we are prepared to believe of it all that is believed of the class in
general; but it remains a matter of important consideration to decide
how far and in what manner we can safely undertake thus to assign
the place of objects in that general system of classification which
constitutes the body of science.


*Twofold Meaning of General Names.*

Etymologically the *meaning* of a name is that which we are caused
to think of when the name is used. Now every general name causes us
to think of some one or more of the objects belonging to a class; it
may also cause us to think of the common qualities possessed by those
objects. A name is said to *denote* the object of thought to which it
may be applied; it *implies* at the same time the possession of certain
qualities or circumstances. The objects denoted form the *extent*
of meaning of the term; the qualities implied form the *intent* of
meaning. Crystal is the name of any substance of which the molecules
are arranged in a regular geometrical manner. The substances or objects
in question form the extent of meaning; the circumstance of having the
molecules so arranged forms the intent of meaning.

When we compare general terms together, it may often be found that
the meaning of one is included in the meaning of another. Thus
all *crystals* are included among *material substances*, and all
*opaque crystals* are included among *crystals*; here the inclusion
is in extension. We may also have inclusion of meaning in regard to
intension. For, as all crystals are material substances, the qualities
implied by the term material substance must be among those implied by
crystal. Again, it is obvious that while in extension of meaning opaque
crystals are but a part of crystals, in intension of meaning crystal
is but part of opaque crystal. We increase the intent of meaning of a
term by joining to it adjectives, or phrases equivalent to adjectives,
and the removal of such adjectives of course decreases the intensive
meaning. Now, concerning such changes of meaning, the following
all-important law holds universally true:--*When the intent of meaning
of a term is increased the extent is decreased; and* vice versâ, *when
the extent is increased the intent is decreased*. In short, as one is
increased the other is decreased.

This law refers only to logical changes. The number of steam-engines
in the world may be undergoing a rapid increase without the intensive
meaning of the name being altered. The law will only be verified,
again, when there is a real change in the intensive meaning, and an
adjective may often be joined to a noun without making a change.
*Elementary metal* is identical with *metal*; *mortal man* with *man*;
it being a *property* of all metals to be elements, and of all men to
be mortals.

There is no limit to the amount of meaning which a term may have. A
term may denote one object, or many, or an infinite number; it may
imply a single quality, if such there be, or a group of any number
of qualities, and yet the law connecting the extension and intension
will infallibly apply. Taking the general name *planet*, we increase
its intension and decrease its extension by prefixing the adjective
*exterior*; and if we further add *nearest to the earth*, there remains
but one planet, *Mars*, to which the name can then be applied. Singular
terms, which denote a single individual only, come under the same law
of meaning as general names. They may be regarded as general names of
which the meaning in extension is reduced to a minimum. Logicians have
erroneously asserted, as it seems to me, that singular terms are devoid
of meaning in intension, the fact being that they exceed all other
terms in that kind of meaning, as I have elsewhere tried to show.[44]

  [44] Jevons’ *Elementary Lessons in Logic*, pp. 41–43; *Pure Logic*,
  p. 6. See also J. S. Mill, *System of Logic*, Book I. chap. ii.
  section 5, and Shedden’s *Elements of Logic*, London, 1864, pp. 14,
  &c. Professor Robertson objects (*Mind*, vol. i. p. 210) that I
  confuse *singular* and *proper* names; if so, it is because I hold
  that the same remarks apply to proper names, which do not seem to me
  to differ logically from singular names.


*Abstract Terms.*

Comparison of objects, and analysis of the complex resemblances and
differences which they present, lead us to the conception of *abstract
qualities*. We learn to think of one object as not only different from
another, but as differing in some particular point, such as colour, or
weight, or size. We may then convert points of agreement or difference
into separate objects of thought which we call qualities and denote by
*abstract terms*. Thus the term *redness* means something in which a
number of objects agree as to colour, and in virtue of which they are
called red. Redness forms, in fact, the intensive meaning of the term
red.

Abstract terms are strongly distinguished from general terms by
possessing only one kind of meaning; for as they denote qualities
there is nothing which they cannot in addition imply. The adjective
“red” is the name of red objects, but it implies the possession by
them of the quality *redness*; but this latter term has one single
meaning--the quality alone. Thus it arises that abstract terms are
incapable of plurality. Red objects are numerically distinct each
from each, and there are multitudes of such objects; but redness is a
single quality which runs through all those objects, and is the same in
one as it is in another. It is true that we may speak of *rednesses*,
meaning different kinds or tints of redness, just as we may speak of
*colours*, meaning different kinds of colours. But in distinguishing
kinds, degrees, or other differences, we render the terms so far
concrete. In that they are merely red there is but a single nature in
red objects, and so far as things are merely coloured, colour is a
single indivisible quality. Redness, so far as it is redness merely,
is one and the same everywhere, and possesses absolute oneness. In
virtue of this unity we acquire the power of treating all instances of
such quality as we may treat any one. We possess, in short, general
knowledge.


*Substantial Terms.*

Logicians appear to have taken little notice of a class of terms which
partake in certain respects of the character of abstract terms and yet
are undoubtedly the names of concrete existing things. These terms are
the names of substances, such as gold, carbonate of lime, nitrogen, &c.
We cannot speak of two golds, twenty carbonates of lime, or a hundred
nitrogens. There is no such distinction between the parts of a uniform
substance as will allow of a discrimination of numerous individuals.
The qualities of colour, lustre, malleability, density, &c., by which
we recognise gold, extend through its substance irrespective of
particular size or shape. So far as a substance is gold, it is one and
the same everywhere; so that terms of this kind, which I propose to
call *substantial terms*, possess the peculiar unity of abstract terms.
Yet they are not abstract; for gold is of course a tangible visible
body, entirely concrete, and existing independently of other bodies.

It is only when, by actual mechanical division, we break up the uniform
whole which forms the meaning of a substantial term, that we introduce
number. *Piece of gold* is a term capable of plurality; for there may
be a great many pieces discriminated either by their various shapes and
sizes, or, in the absence of such marks, by simultaneously occupying
different parts of space. In substance they are one; as regards the
properties of space they are many.[45] We need not further pursue this
question, which involves the distinction between unity and plurality,
until we consider the principles of number in a subsequent chapter.

  [45] Professor Robertson has criticised my introduction of
  “Substantial Terms” (*Mind*, vol. i. p. 210), and objects, perhaps
  correctly, that the distinction if valid is extra-logical. I am
  inclined to think, however, that the doctrine of terms is, strictly
  speaking, for the most part extra-logical.


*Collective Terms.*

We must clearly distinguish between the *collective* and the *general
meanings* of terms. The same name may be used to denote the whole body
of existing objects of a certain kind, or any one of those objects
taken separately. “Man” may mean the aggregate of existing men, which
we sometimes describe as *mankind*; it is also the general name
applying to any man. The vegetable kingdom is the name of the whole
aggregate of *plants*, but “plant” itself is a general name applying
to any one or other plant. Every material object may be conceived as
divisible into parts, and is therefore collective as regards those
parts. The animal body is made up of cells and fibres, a crystal
of molecules; wherever physical division, or as it has been called
*partition*, is possible, there we deal in reality with a collective
whole. Thus the greater number of general terms are at the same time
collective as regards each individual whole which they denote.

It need hardly be pointed out that we must not infer of a collective
whole what we know only of the parts, nor of the parts what we know
only of the whole. The relation of whole and part is not one of
identity, and does not allow of substitution. There may nevertheless be
qualities which are true alike of the whole and of its parts. A number
of organ-pipes tuned in unison produce an aggregate of sound which
is of exactly the same pitch as each separate sound. In the case of
substantial terms, certain qualities may be present equally in each
minutest part as in the whole. The chemical nature of the largest mass
of pure carbonate of lime is the same as the nature of the smallest
particle. In the case of abstract terms, again, we cannot draw a
distinction between whole and part; what is true of redness in any case
is always true of redness, so far as it is merely red.


*Synthesis of Terms.*

We continually combine simple terms together so as to form new terms
of more complex meaning. Thus, to increase the intension of meaning of
a term we write it with an adjective or a phrase of adjectival nature.
By joining “brittle” to “metal,” we obtain a combined term, “brittle
metal,” which denotes a certain portion of the metals, namely, such as
are selected on account of possessing the quality of *brittleness*.
As we have already seen, “brittle metal” possesses less extension and
greater intension than metal. Nouns, prepositional phrases, participial
phrases and subordinate propositions may also be added to terms so as
to increase their intension and decrease their extension.

In our symbolic language we need some mode of indicating this junction
of terms, and the most convenient device will be the juxtaposition of
the letter-terms. Thus if A mean brittle, and B mean metal, then AB
will mean brittle metal. Nor need there be any limit to the number of
letters thus joined together, or the complexity of the notions which
they may represent.

Thus if we take the letters

  P = metal,
  Q = white,
  R = monovalent,
  S = of specific gravity 10·5,
  T = melting above 1000° C.,
  V = good conductor of heat and electricity,

then we can form a combined term PQRSTV, which will denote “a white
monovalent metal, of specific gravity 10·5, melting above 1000° C., and
a good conductor of heat and electricity.”

There are many grammatical usages concerning the junction of words and
phrases to which we need pay no attention in logic. We can never say
in ordinary language “of wood table,” meaning “table of wood;” but we
may consider “of wood” as logically an exact equivalent of “wooden”; so
that if

  X = of wood,
  Y = table,

there is no reason why, in our symbols, XY should not be just as
correct an expression for “table of wood ” as YX. In this case indeed
we might substitute for “of wood ” the corresponding adjective
“wooden,” but we should often fail to find any adjective answering
exactly to a phrase. There is no single word by which we could express
the notion “of specific gravity 10·5:” but logically we may consider
these words as forming an adjective; and denoting this by S and metal
by P, we may say that SP means “metal of specific gravity 10·5.” It
is one of many advantages in these blank letter-symbols that they
enable us completely to neglect all grammatical peculiarities and to
fix our attention solely on the purely logical relations involved.
Investigation will probably show that the rules of grammar are mainly
founded upon traditional usage and have little logical signification.
This indeed is sufficiently proved by the wide grammatical differences
which exist between languages, though the logical foundation must be
the same.


*Symbolic Expression of the Law of Contradiction.*

The synthesis of terms is subject to the all-important Law of
Thought, described in a previous section (p. 5) and called the Law of
Contradiction, It is self-evident that no quality can be both present
and absent at the same time and place. This fundamental condition
of all thought and of all existence is expressed symbolically by a
rule that a term and its negative shall never be allowed to come
into combination. Such combined terms as A*a*, B*b*, C*c*, &c., are
self-contradictory and devoid of all intelligible meaning. If they
could represent anything, it would be what cannot exist, and cannot
even be imagined in the mind. They can therefore only enter into our
consideration to suffer immediate exclusion. The criterion of false
reasoning, as we shall find, is that it involves self-contradiction,
the affirming and denying of the same statement. We might represent
the object of all reasoning as the separation of the consistent and
possible from the inconsistent and impossible; and we cannot make any
statement except a truism without implying that certain combinations of
terms are contradictory and excluded from thought. To assert that “all
A’s are B’s” is equivalent to the assertion that “A’s which are not B’s
cannot exist.”

It will be convenient to have the means of indicating the exclusion of
the self-contradictory, and we may use the familiar sign for *nothing*,
the cipher 0. Thus the second law of thought may be symbolised in the
forms

  A*a* = 0     AB*b* = 0     ABC*a* = 0

We may variously describe the meaning of 0 in logic as the
*non-existent*, the *impossible*, the *self-inconsistent*, the
*inconceivable*. Close analogy exists between this meaning and its
mathematical signification.


*Certain Special Conditions of Logical Symbols.*

In order that we may argue and infer truly we must treat our logical
symbols according to the fundamental laws of Identity and Difference.
But in thus using our symbols we shall frequently meet with
combinations of which the meaning will not at first sight be apparent.
If in one case we learn that an object is “yellow and round,” and in
another case that it is “round and yellow,” there arises the question
whether these two descriptions are identical in meaning or not. Again,
if we proved that an object was “round round,” the meaning of such an
expression would be open to doubt. Accordingly we must take notice,
before proceeding further, of certain special laws which govern the
combination of logical terms.

In the first place the combination of a logical term with itself is
without effect, just as the repetition of a statement does not alter
the meaning of the statement; “a round round object” is simply “a round
object.” What is yellow yellow is merely yellow; metallic metals cannot
differ from metals, nor circular circles from circles. In our symbolic
language we may similarly hold that AA is identical with A, or

  A = AA = AAA = &c.

The late Professor Boole is the only logician in modern times who has
drawn attention to this remarkable property of logical terms;[46]
but in place of the name which he gave to the law, I have proposed
to call it The Law of Simplicity.[47] Its high importance will only
become apparent when we attempt to determine the relations of logical
and mathematical science. Two symbols of quantity, and only two, seem
to obey this law; we may say that 1 × 1 = 1, and 0 × 0 = 0 (taking 0
to mean absolute zero or 1 – 1); there is apparently no other number
which combined with itself gives an unchanged result. I shall point
out, however, in the chapter upon Number, that in reality all numerical
symbols obey this logical principle.

  [46] *Mathematical Analysis of Logic*, Cambridge, 1847, p. 17. *An
  Investigation of the Laws of Thought*, London, 1854, p. 31.

  [47] *Pure Logic*, p. 15.

It is curious that this Law of Simplicity, though almost unnoticed
in modern times, was known to Boëthius, who makes a singular remark
in his treatise *De Trinitate et Unitate Dei* (p. 959). He says: “If
I should say sun, sun, sun, I should not have made three suns, but I
should have named one sun so many times.”[48] Ancient discussions about
the doctrine of the Trinity drew more attention to subtle questions
concerning the nature of unity and plurality than has ever since been
given to them.

  [48] “Velut si dicam, Sol, Sol, Sol, non tres soles effecerim, sed
  uno toties prædicaverim.”

It is a second law of logical symbols that order of combination is a
matter of indifference. “Rich and rare gems” are the same as “rare and
rich gems,” or even as “gems, rich and rare.” Grammatical, rhetorical,
or poetic usage may give considerable significance to order of
expression. The limited power of our minds prevents our grasping many
ideas at once, and thus the order of statement may produce some effect,
but not in a simply logical manner. All life proceeds in the succession
of time, and we are obliged to write, speak, or even think of things
and their qualities one after the other; but between the things and
their qualities there need be no such relation of order in time or
space. The sweetness of sugar is neither before nor after its weight
and solubility. The hardness of a metal, its colour, weight, opacity,
malleability, electric and chemical properties, are all coexistent
and coextensive, pervading the metal and every part of it in perfect
community, none before nor after the others. In our words and symbols
we cannot observe this natural condition; we must name one quality
first and another second, just as some one must be the first to sign a
petition, or to walk foremost in a procession. In nature there is no
such precedence.

I find that the opinion here stated, to the effect that relations of
space and time do not apply to many of our ideas, is clearly adopted by
Hume in his celebrated *Treatise on Human Nature* (vol. i. p. 410). He
says:[49]--“An object may be said to be no where, when its parts are
not so situated with respect to each other, as to form any figure or
quantity; nor the whole with respect to other bodies so as to answer
to our notions of contiguity or distance. Now this is evidently the
case with all our perceptions and objects, except those of sight and
feeling. A moral reflection cannot be placed on the right hand or on
the left hand of a passion, nor can a smell or sound be either of a
circular or a square figure. These objects and perceptions, so far from
requiring any particular place, are absolutely incompatible with it,
and even the imagination cannot attribute it to them.”

  [49] Book i., Part iv., Section 5.

A little reflection will show that knowledge in the highest perfection
would consist in the *simultaneous* possession of a multitude of
facts. To comprehend a science perfectly we should have every fact
present with every other fact. We must write a book and we must read
it successively word by word, but how infinitely higher would be
our powers of thought if we could grasp the whole in one collective
act of consciousness! Compared with the brutes we do possess some
slight approximation to such power, and it is conceivable that in the
indefinite future mind may acquire an increase of capacity, and be less
restricted to the piecemeal examination of a subject. But I wish here
to make plain that there is no logical foundation for the successive
character of thought and reasoning unavoidable under our present mental
conditions. *We are logically weak and imperfect in respect of the
fact that we are obliged to think of one thing after another.* We must
describe metal as “hard and opaque,” or “opaque and hard,” but in the
metal itself there is no such difference of order; the properties are
simultaneous and coextensive in existence.

Setting aside all grammatical peculiarities which render a substantive
less moveable than an adjective, and disregarding any meaning indicated
by emphasis or marked order of words, we may state, as a general law of
logic, that AB is identical with BA, or AB = BA. Similarly, ABC = ACB =
BCA = &c.

Boole first drew attention in recent years to this property of logical
terms, and he called it the property of Commutativeness.[50] He not
only stated the law with the utmost clearness, but pointed out that
it is a Law of Thought rather than a Law of Things. I shall have in
various parts of this work to show how the necessary imperfection of
our symbols expressed in this law clings to our modes of expression,
and introduces complication into the whole body of mathematical
formulæ, which are really founded on a logical basis.

  [50] *Laws of Thought*, p. 29. It is pointed out in the preface to
  this Second Edition that Leibnitz was acquainted with the Laws of
  Simplicity and of Commutativeness.

It is of course apparent that the power of commutation belongs only
to terms related in the simple logical mode of synthesis. No one can
confuse “a house of bricks” with “bricks of a house,” “twelve square
feet” with “twelve feet square,” “the water of crystallization” with
“the crystallization of water.” All relations which involve differences
of time and space are inconvertible; the higher must not be made to
change places with the lower, nor the first with the last. For the
parties concerned there is all the difference in the world between A
killing B and B killing A. The law of commutativeness simply asserts
that difference of order does not attach to the connection between the
properties and circumstances of a thing--to what I call *simple logical
relation*.




