CHAPTER XXVIII.

ANALOGY.


As we have seen in the previous chapter, generalisation passes
insensibly into reasoning by analogy, and the difference is one of
degree. We are said to generalise when we view many objects as agreeing
in a few properties, so that the resemblance is extensive rather
than deep. When we have only a few objects of thought, but are able
to discover many points of resemblance, we argue by analogy that the
correspondence will be even deeper than appears. It may not be true
that the words are always used in such distinct senses, and there is
great vagueness in the employment of these and many logical terms; but
if any clear discrimination can be drawn between generalisation and
analogy, it is as indicated above.

It has been said, indeed, that analogy denotes not a resemblance
between things, but between the relations of things. A pilot is a very
different man from a prime minister, but he bears the same relation to
a ship that the minister does to the state, so that we may analogically
describe the prime minister as the pilot of the state. A man differs
still more from a horse, nevertheless four men bear to three men the
same relation as four horses bear to three horses. There is a real
analogy between the tones of the Monochord, the Sages of Greece, and
the Gates of Thebes, but it does not extend beyond the fact that they
were all seven in number. Between the most discrete notions, as, for
instance, those of time and space, analogy may exist, arising from
the fact that the mathematical conditions of the lapse of time and
of motion along a line are similar. There is no identity of nature
between a word and the thing it signifies; the substance *iron* is
a heavy solid, the word *iron* is either a momentary disturbance of
the air, or a film of black pigment on white paper; but there is
analogy between words and their significates. The substance iron is
to the substance iron-carbonate, as the name iron is to the name
iron-carbonate, when these names are used according to their scientific
definitions. The whole structure of language and the whole utility
of signs, marks, symbols, pictures, and representations of various
kinds, rest upon analogy. I may hope perhaps to enter more fully upon
this important subject at some future time, and to attempt to show how
the invention of signs enables us to express, guide, and register our
thoughts. It will be sufficient to observe here that the use of words
constantly involves analogies of a subtle kind; we should often be at
a loss how to describe a notion, were we not at liberty to employ in
a metaphorical sense the name of anything sufficiently resembling it.
There would be no expression for the sweetness of a melody, or the
brilliancy of an harangue, unless it were furnished by the taste of
honey and the brightness of a torch.

A cursory examination of the way in which we popularly use the
word analogy, shows that it includes all degrees of resemblance or
similarity. The analogy may consist only in similarity of number or
ratio, or in like relations of time and space. It may also consist in
simple resemblance between physical properties. We should not be using
the word inconsistently with custom, if we said that there was an
analogy between iron, nickel, and cobalt, manifested in the strength of
their magnetic powers. There is a still more perfect analogy between
iodine and chlorine; not that every property of iodine is identical
with the corresponding property of chlorine; for then they would
be one and the same kind of substance, and not two substances; but
every property of iodine resembles in all but degree some property of
chlorine. For almost every substance in which iodine forms a component,
a corresponding substance may be discovered containing chlorine, so
that we may confidently infer from the compounds of the one to the
compounds of the other substance. Potassium iodide crystallises in
cubes; therefore it is to be expected that potassium chloride will
also crystallise in cubes. The science of chemistry as now developed
rests almost entirely upon a careful and extensive comparison of the
properties of substances, bringing deep-lying analogies to light.
When any new substance is encountered, the chemist is guided in his
treatment of it by the analogies which it seems to present with
previously known substances.

In this chapter I cannot hope to illustrate the all-pervading influence
of analogy in human thought and science. All science, it has been said,
at the outset, arises from the discovery of identity, and analogy is
but one name by which we denote the deeper-lying cases of resemblance.
I shall only try to point out at present how analogy between apparently
diverse classes of phenomena often serves as a guide in discovery. We
thus commonly gain the first insight into the nature of an apparently
unique object, and thus, in the progress of a science, we often
discover that we are treating over again, in a new form, phenomena
which were well known to us in another form.


*Analogy as a Guide in Discovery.*

There can be no doubt that discovery is most frequently accomplished
by following up hints received from analogy, as Jeremy Bentham
remarked.[524] Whenever a phenomenon is perceived, the first impulse
of the mind is to connect it with the most nearly similar phenomenon.
If we could ever meet a thing wholly *sui generis*, presenting no
analogy to anything else, we should be incapable of investigating its
nature, except by purely haphazard trial. The probability of success
by such a process is so slight, that it is preferable to follow up the
faintest clue. As I have pointed out already (p. 418), the possible
experiments are almost infinite in number, and very numerous also are
the hypotheses upon which we may proceed. Now it is self-evident that,
however slightly superior the probability of success by one course of
procedure may be over another, the most probable one should always be
adopted first.

  [524] *Essay on Logic*, *Works*, vol. viii. p. 276.

The chemist having discovered what he believes to be a new element,
will have before him an infinite variety of modes of treating and
investigating it. If in any of its qualities the substance displays
a resemblance to an alkaline metal, for instance, he will naturally
proceed to try whether it possesses other properties of the alkaline
metals. Even the simplest phenomenon presents so many points for notice
that we have a choice from among many hypotheses.

It would be difficult to find a more instructive instance of the way in
which the mind is guided by analogy than in the description by Sir John
Herschel of the course of thought by which he was led to anticipate in
theory one of Faraday’s greatest discoveries. Herschel noticed that
a screw-like form, technically called helicoidal dissymmetry, was
observed in three cases, namely, in electrical helices, plagihedral
quartz crystals, and the rotation of the plane of polarisation of
light. As he said,[525] “I reasoned thus: Here are three phenomena
agreeing in a *very strange peculiarity*. Probably, this peculiarity
is a connecting link, physically speaking, among them. Now, in the
case of the crystals and the light, this probability has been turned
into certainty by my own experiments. Therefore, induction led me to
conclude that a similar connection exists, and must turn up, somehow
or other, between the electric current and polarised light, and that
the plane of polarisation would be deflected by magneto-electricity.”
By this course of analogical thought Herschel had actually been led
to anticipate Faraday’s great discovery of the influence of magnetic
strain upon polarised light. He had tried in 1822–25 to discover the
influence of electricity on light, by sending a ray of polarised light
through a helix, or near a long wire conveying an electric current.
Such a course of inquiry, followed up with the persistency of Faraday,
and with his experimental resources, would doubtless have effected the
discovery. Herschel also suggests that the plagihedral form of quartz
crystals must be due to a screw-like strain during crystallisation; but
the notion remains unverified by experiment.

  [525] *Life of Faraday*, by Bence Jones, vol. ii. p. 206.


*Analogy in the Mathematical Sciences.*

Whoever wishes to acquire a deep acquaintance with Nature must observe
that there are analogies which connect whole branches of science in a
parallel manner, and enable us to infer of one class of phenomena what
we know of another. It has thus happened on several occasions that the
discovery of an unsuspected analogy between two branches of knowledge
has been the starting-point for a rapid course of discovery. The truths
readily observed in the one may be of a different character from those
which present themselves in the other. The analogy, once pointed out,
leads us to discover regions of one science yet undeveloped, to which
the key is furnished by the corresponding truths in the other science.
An interchange of aid most wonderful in its results may thus take
place, and at the same time the mind rises to a higher generalisation,
and a more comprehensive view of nature.

No two sciences might seem at first sight more different in their
subject matter than geometry and algebra. The first deals with circles,
squares, parallelograms, and other forms in space; the latter with
mere symbols of number. Prior to the time of Descartes, the sciences
were developed slowly and painfully in almost entire independence of
each other. The Greek philosophers indeed could not avoid noticing
occasional analogies, as when Plato in the Thæetetus describes a square
number as *equally equal*, and a number produced by multiplying two
unequal factors as *oblong*. Euclid, in the 7th and 8th books of his
Elements, continually uses expressions displaying a consciousness
of the same analogies, as when he calls a number of two factors a
*plane number*, ἐπίπεδος ἀριθμός, and distinguishes a square number of
which the two factors are equal as an equal-sided and plane number,
ἰσόπλευρος καὶ ἐπίπεδος ἀριθμός. He also calls the root of a cubic
number its side, πλευρά. In the Diophantine algebra many problems of a
geometrical character were solved by algebraic or numerical processes;
but there was no general system, so that the solutions were of an
isolated character. In general the ancients were far more advanced in
geometric than symbolic methods; thus Euclid in his 4th book gives the
means of dividing a circle by purely geometric means into 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, 20, 24, 30 parts, but he was totally unacquainted
with the theory of the roots of unity exactly corresponding to this
division of the circle.

During the middle ages, on the contrary, algebra advanced beyond
geometry, and modes of solving equations were gradually discovered
by those who had no notion that at every step they were implicitly
solving geometric problems. It is true that Regiomontanus, Tartaglia,
Bombelli, and possibly other early algebraists, solved isolated
geometrical problems by the aid of algebra, but particular numbers were
always used, and no consciousness of a general method was displayed.
Vieta in some degree anticipated the final discovery, and occasionally
represented the roots of an equation geometrically, but it was
reserved for Descartes to show, in the most general manner, that every
equation may be represented by a curve or figure in space, and that
every bend, point, cusp, or other peculiarity in the curve indicates
some peculiarity in the equation. It is impossible to describe in any
adequate manner the importance of this discovery. The advantage was
two-fold: algebra aided geometry, and geometry gave reciprocal aid
to algebra. Curves such as the well-known sections of the cone were
found to correspond to quadratic equations; and it was impossible
to manipulate the equations without discovering properties of those
all-important curves. The way was thus opened for the algebraic
treatment of motions and forces, without which Newton’s *Principia*
could never have been worked out. Newton indeed was possessed by a
strong infatuation in favour of the ancient geometrical methods; but
it is well known that he employed symbolic methods to discover his
theorems, and he now and then, by some accidental use of algebraic
expression, confessed its greater power and generality.

Geometry, on the other hand, gave great assistance to algebra, by
affording concrete representations of relations which would otherwise
be too abstract for easy comprehension. A curve of no great complexity
may give the whole history of the variations of value of a troublesome
mathematical expression. As soon as we know, too, that every regular
geometrical curve represents some algebraic equation, we are presented
by observation of mechanical movements with abundant suggestions
towards the discovery of mathematical problems. Every particle of a
carriage-wheel when moving on a level road is constantly describing
a cycloidal curve, the curious properties of which exercised the
ingenuity of all the most skilful mathematicians of the seventeenth
century, and led to important advancements in algebraic power. It may
be held that the discovery of the Differential Calculus was mainly
due to geometrical analogy, because mathematicians, in attempting to
treat algebraically the tangent of a curve, were obliged to entertain
the notion of infinitely small quantities.[526] There can be no doubt
that Newton’s fluxional, that is, geometrical mode of stating the
differential calculus, however much it subsequently retarded its
progress in England, facilitated its apprehension at first, and I
should think it almost certain that Newton discovered the principles of
the calculus geometrically.

  [526] Lacroix, *Traité Élémentaire de Calcul Différentiel et de
  Calcul Intégral*, 5^{me} édit. p. 699.

We may accordingly look upon this discovery of analogy, this happy
alliance, as Bossut calls it,[527] between geometry and algebra,
as the chief source of discoveries which have been made for three
centuries past in mathematical methods. This is certainly the opinion
of Lagrange, who says, “So long as algebra and geometry have been
separate, their progress was slow, and their employment limited; but
since these two sciences have been united, they have lent each other
mutual strength, and have marched together with a rapid step towards
perfection.”

  [527] *Histoire des Mathématiques*, vol. i. p. 298.

The advancement of mechanical science has also been greatly aided by
analogy. An abstract and intangible existence like force demands much
power of conception, but it has a perfect concrete representative in
a line, the end of which may denote the point of application, and
the direction the line of action of the force, while the length can
be made arbitrarily to denote the amount of the force. Nor does the
analogy end here; for the moment of the force about any point, or its
product into the perpendicular distance of its line of action from the
point, is found to be represented by an area, namely twice the area
of the triangle contained between the point and the ends of the line
representing the force. Of late years a great generalisation has been
effected; the Double Algebra of De Morgan is true not only of space
relations, but of forces, so that the triangle of forces is reduced
to a case of pure geometrical addition. Nay, the triangle of lines,
the triangle of velocities, the triangle of forces, the triangle of
couples, and perhaps other cognate theorems, are reduced by analogy to
one simple theorem, which amounts to this, that there are two ways of
getting from one angular point of a triangle to another, which ways,
though different in length, are identical in their final results.[528]
In the system of quaternions of the late Sir W. R. Hamilton, these
analogies are embodied and carried out in the most general manner, so
that whatever problem involves the threefold dimensions of space, or
relations analogous to those of space, is treated by a symbolic method
of the most comprehensive simplicity.

  [528] See Goodwin, *Cambridge Philosophical Transactions* (1845),
  vol. viii. p. 269. O’Brien, “On Symbolical Statics,” *Philosophical
  Magazine*, 4th Series, vol. i. pp. 491, &c. See also Professor
  Clerk Maxwell’s delightful *Manual of Elementary Science*, called
  *Matter and Motion*, published by the Society for Promoting Christian
  Knowledge. In this admirable little work some of the most advanced
  results of mechanical and physical science are explained according
  to the method of quaternions, but with hardly any use of algebraic
  symbols.

It ought to be added that to the discovery of analogy between the forms
of mathematical and logical expressions, we owe the greatest advance
in logical science. Boole based his extension of logical processes
upon the notion that logic is an algebra of two quantities 0 and 1.
His profound genius for symbolic investigation led him to perceive by
analogy that there must exist a general system of logical deduction, of
which the old logicians had seized only a few fragments. Mistaken as
he was in placing algebra as a higher science than logic, no one can
deny that the development of the more complex and dependent science
had advanced far beyond that of the simpler science, and that Boole,
in drawing attention to the connection, made one of the most important
discoveries in the history of science. As Descartes had wedded algebra
and geometry, so did Boole accomplish the marriage of logic and
algebra.


*Analogy in the Theory of Undulations.*

There is no class of phenomena which more thoroughly illustrates alike
the power and weakness of analogy than the waves which agitate every
kind of medium. All waves, whatsoever be the matter through which
they pass, obey the principles of rhythmical or harmonic motion,
and the subject therefore presents a fine field for mathematical
generalisation. Each kind of medium may allow of waves peculiar in
their conditions, so that it is a beautiful exercise in analogical
reasoning to decide how, in making inferences from one kind of medium
to another, we must make allowance for difference of circumstances. The
waves of the ocean are large and visible, and there are the yet greater
tidal waves which extend around the globe. From such palpable cases of
rhythmical movement we pass to waves of sound, varying in length from
about 32 feet to a small fraction of an inch. We have but to imagine,
if we can, the fortieth octave of the middle C of a piano, and we reach
the undulations of yellow light, the ultra-violet being about the
forty-first octave. Thus we pass from the palpable and evident to that
which is obscure, if not incomprehensible. Yet the same phenomena of
reflection, interference, and refraction, which we find in some kinds
of waves, may be expected to occur, *mutatis mutandis*, in other kinds.

From the great to the small, from the evident to the obscure, is not
only the natural order of inference, but it is the historical order of
discovery. The physical science of the Greek philosophers must have
remained incomplete, and their theories groundless, because they did
not understand the nature of undulations. Their systems were based
upon the notion of movement of translation from place to place. Modern
science tends to the opposite notion that all motion is alternating or
rhythmical, energy flowing onwards but matter remaining comparatively
fixed in position. Diogenes Laertius indeed correctly compared the
propagation of sound with the spreading of waves on the surface of
water when disturbed by a stone, and Vitruvius displayed a more
complete comprehension of the same analogy. It remained for Newton
to create the theory of undulatory motion in showing by mathematical
deductive reasoning that the particles of an elastic fluid by vibrating
backwards and forwards, might carry a pulse or wave moving from
the source of disturbance, while the disturbed particles return to
their place of rest. He was even able to make a first approximation
by theoretical calculation to the velocity of sound-waves in the
atmosphere. His theory of sound formed a hardly less important epoch in
science than his far more celebrated theory of gravitation. It opened
the way to all the subsequent applications of mechanical principles
to the insensible motion of molecules. He seems to have been, too,
upon the brink of another application of the same principles which
would have advanced science by a century of progress, and made him the
undisputed founder of all the theories of matter. He expressed opinions
at various times that light might be due to undulatory movements of
a medium occupying space, and in one intensely interesting sentence
remarks[529] that colours are probably vibrations of different lengths,
“much after the manner that, in the sense of hearing, nature makes
use of aërial vibrations of several bignesses to generate sounds
of divers tones, for the analogy of nature is to be observed.” He
correctly foresaw that red and yellow light would consist of the longer
undulations, and blue and violet of the shorter, while white light
would be composed of an indiscriminate mixture of waves of various
lengths. Newton almost overcame the strongest apparent difficulty of
the undulatory theory of light, namely, the propagation of light in
straight lines. For he observed that though waves of sound bend round
an obstacle to some extent, they do not do so in the same degree as
water-waves.[530] He had but to extend the analogy proportionally to
light-waves, and not only would the difficulty have vanished, but the
true theory of diffraction would have been open to him. Unfortunately
he had a preconceived theory that rays of light are bent from and
not towards the shadow of a body, a theory which for once he did not
sufficiently compare with observation to detect its falsity. I am
not aware, too, that Newton has, in any of his works, displayed an
understanding of the phenomena of interference without which his notion
of waves must have been imperfect.

  [529] Birch, *History of the Royal Society*, vol. iii. p. 262, quoted
  by Young, *Works*, vol. i. p. 246.

  [530] *Opticks*, Query 28, 3rd edit. p. 337.

While the general principles of undulatory motion will be the same
in whatever medium the motion takes place, the circumstances may be
excessively different. Between light travelling 186,000 miles per
second and sound travelling in air only about 1,100 feet in the same
time, or almost 900,000 times as slowly, we cannot expect a close
outward resemblance. There are great differences, too, in the character
of the vibrations. Gases scarcely admit of transverse vibration, so
that sound travelling in air is a longitudinal wave, the particles of
air moving backwards and forwards in the same line in which the wave
moves onwards. Light, on the other hand, appears to consist entirely
in the movement of points of force transversely to the direction of
propagation of the ray. The light-wave is partially analogous to the
bending of a rod or of a stretched cord agitated at one end. Now this
bending motion may take place in any one of an infinite number of
planes, and waves of which the planes are perpendicular to each other
cannot interfere any more than two perpendicular forces can interfere.
The complicated phenomena of polarised light arise out of this
transverse character of the luminous wave, and we must not expect to
meet analogous phenomena in atmospheric sound-waves. It is conceivable
that in solids we might produce transverse sound undulations, in which
phenomena of polarisation might be reproduced. But it would appear that
even between transverse sound and light-waves the analogy holds true
rather of the principles of harmonic motion than the circumstances of
the vibrating medium; from experiment and theory it is inferred that
the plane of polarisation in plane polarised light is perpendicular
to instead of being coincident with the direction of vibration, as it
would be in the case of transverse sound undulations. If so the laws
of elastic forces are essentially different in application to the
luminiferous ether and to ordinary solid bodies.[531]

  [531] Rankine, *Philosophical Transactions* (1856), vol. cxlvi.
  p. 282.


*Analogy in Astronomy.*

We shall be much assisted in gaining a true appreciation of the value
of analogy in its feebler degrees, by considering how much it has
contributed to the progress of astronomical science. Our point of
observation is so fixed with regard to the universe, and our means of
examining distant bodies are so restricted, that we are necessarily
guided by limited and apparently feeble resemblances. In many cases the
result has been confirmed by subsequent direct evidence of the most
forcible character.

While the scientific world was divided in opinion between the
Copernican and Ptolemaic systems, it was analogy which furnished the
most satisfactory argument. Galileo discovered, by the use of his new
telescope, the four small satellites which circulate round Jupiter,
and make a miniature planetary world. These four Medicean Stars, as
they were called, were plainly seen to revolve round Jupiter in various
periods, but approximately in one plane, and astronomers irresistibly
inferred that what might happen on the smaller scale might also be
found true of the greater planetary system. This discovery gave “the
holding turn,” as Herschel expressed it, to the opinions of mankind.
Even Francis Bacon, who, little to the credit of his scientific
sagacity, had previously opposed the Copernican views, now became
convinced, saying “We affirm the solisequium of Venus and Mercury;
since it has been found by Galileo that Jupiter also has attendants.”
Nor did Huyghens think it superfluous to adopt the analogy as a valid
argument.[532] Even in an advanced stage of physical astronomy, the
Jovian system has not lost its analogical interest; for the mutual
perturbations of the four satellites pass through all their phases
within a few centuries, and thus enable us to verify in a miniature
case the principles of stability, which Laplace established for the
great planetary system. Oscillations or disturbances which in the
motions of the planets appear to be secular, because their periods
extend over millions of years, can be watched, in the case of Jupiter’s
satellites, through complete revolutions within the historical period
of astronomy.[533]

  [532] *Cosmotheoros* (1699), p. 16.

  [533] Laplace, *System of the World*, vol. ii. p. 316.

In obtaining a knowledge of the stellar universe we must sometimes
depend upon precarious analogies. We still hold upon this ground the
opinion, entertained by Bruno as long ago as 1591, that the stars may
be suns attended by planets like our earth. This is the most probable
first assumption, and it is supported by spectrum observations, which
show the similarity of light derived from many stars with that of the
sun. But at the same time we learn by the prism that there are nebulæ
and stars in conditions widely different from anything known in our
system. In the course of time the analogy may perhaps be restored to
comparative completeness by the discovery of suns in various stages
of nebulous condensation. The history of the evolution of our own
world may be traced back in bodies less developed, or traced forwards
in systems more advanced towards the dissipation of energy, and the
extinction of life. As in a great workshop, we may perhaps see the
material work of Creation as it has progressed through thousands of
millions of years.

In speculations concerning the physical condition of the planets and
their satellites, we depend upon analogies of a weak character. We may
be said to know that the moon has mountains and valleys, plains and
ridges, volcanoes and streams of lava, and, in spite of the absence of
air and water, the rocky surface of the moon presents so many familiar
appearances that we do not hesitate to compare them with the features
of our globe. We infer with high probability that Mars has polar snow
and an atmosphere absorbing blue rays like our own; Jupiter undoubtedly
possesses a cloudy atmosphere, possibly not unlike a magnified copy
of that surrounding the earth, but our tendency to adopt analogies
receives a salutary correction in the recently discovered fact that the
atmosphere of Uranus contains hydrogen.

Philosophers have not stopped at these comparatively safe inferences,
but have speculated on the existence of living creatures in other
planets. Huyghens remarked that as we infer by analogy from the
dissected body of a dog to that of a pig and ox or other animal of
the same general form, and as we expect to find the same viscera, the
heart, stomach, lungs, intestines, &c., in corresponding positions,
so when we notice the similarity of the planets in many respects,
we must expect to find them alike in other respects.[534] He even
enters into an inquiry whether the inhabitants of other planets would
possess reason and knowledge of the same sort as ours, concluding in
the affirmative. Although the power of intellect might be different,
he considers that they would have the same geometry if they had any
at all, and that what is true with us would be true with them.[535]
As regards the sun, he wisely observes that every conjecture fails.
Laplace entertained a strong belief in the existence of inhabitants on
other planets. The benign influence of the sun gives birth to animals
and plants upon the surface of the earth, and analogy induces us to
believe that his rays would tend to have a similar effect elsewhere.
It is not probable that matter which is here so fruitful of life would
be sterile upon so great a globe as Jupiter, which, like the earth,
has its days and nights and years, and changes which indicate active
forces. Man indeed is formed for the temperature and atmosphere in
which he lives, and, so far as appears, could not live upon the other
planets. But there might be an infinity of organisations relative to
the diverse constitutions of the bodies of the universe. The most
active imagination cannot form any idea of such various creatures, but
their existence is not unlikely.[536]

  [534] *Cosmotheoros* (1699), p. 17.

  [535] Ibid. p. 36.

  [536] *System of the World*, vol. ii. p. 326. *Essai Philosophique*,
  p. 87.

We now know that many metals and other elements never found in organic
structures are yet capable of forming compounds with substances of
vegetable or animal origin. It is therefore just possible that at
different temperatures creatures formed of different yet analogous
compounds might exist, but it would seem indispensable that carbon
should form the basis of organic structures. We have no analogies to
lead us to suppose that in the absence of that complex element life
can exist. Could we find globes surrounded by atmospheres resembling
our own in temperature and composition, we should be almost forced to
believe them inhabited, but the probability of any analogical argument
decreases rapidly as the condition of a globe diverges from that of our
own. The Cardinal Nicholas de Cusa held long ago that the moon was
inhabited, but the absence of any appreciable atmosphere renders the
existence of inhabitants highly improbable. Speculations resting upon
weak analogies hardly belong to the scope of true science, and can only
be tolerated as an antidote to the far worse dogmas which assert that
the thousand million of persons on earth, or rather a small fraction
of them, are the sole objects of care of the Power which designed this
limitless Universe.


*Failures of Analogy.*

So constant is the aid which we derive from the use of analogy in all
attempts at discovery or explanation, that it is most important to
observe in what cases it may lead us into difficulties. That which we
expect by analogy to exist

(1) May be found to exist;

(2) May seem not to exist, but nevertheless may really exist;

(3) May actually be non-existent.

In the second case the failure is only apparent, and arises from
our obtuseness of perception, the smallness of the phenomenon to be
noticed, or the disguised character in which it appears. I have already
pointed out that the analogy of sound and light seems to fail because
light does not apparently bend round a corner, the fact being that it
does so bend in the phenomena of diffraction, which present the effect,
however, in such an unexpected and minute form, that even Newton was
misled, and turned from the correct hypothesis of undulations which he
had partially entertained.

In the third class of cases analogy fails us altogether, and we
expect that to exist which really does not exist. Thus we fail to
discover the phenomena of polarisation in sound travelling through the
atmosphere, since air is not capable of any appreciable transverse
undulations. These failures of analogy are of peculiar interest,
because they make the mind aware of its superior powers. There have
been many philosophers who said that we can conceive nothing in the
intellect which we have not previously received through the senses.
This is true in the sense that we cannot *image* them to the mind in
the concrete form of a shape or a colour; but we can speak of them
and reason concerning them; in short, we often know them in everything
but a sensuous manner. Accurate investigation shows that all material
substances retard the motion of bodies through them by subtracting
energy by impact. By the law of continuity we can frame the notion of
a vacuous space in which there is no resistance whatever, nor need we
stop there; for we have only to proceed by analogy to the case where
a medium should accelerate the motion of bodies passing through it,
somewhat in the mode which Aristotelians attributed falsely to the air.
Thus we can frame the notion of *negative density*, and Newton could
reason exactly concerning it, although no such thing exists.[537]

  [537] *Principia*, bk. ii. Section ii. Prop. x.

In every direction of thought we may meet ultimately with similar
failures of analogy. A moving point generates a line, a moving line
generates a surface, a moving surface generates a solid, but what does
a moving solid generate? When we compare a polyhedron, or many-sided
solid, with a polygon, or plane figure of many sides, the volume of the
first is analogous to the area of the second; the face of the solid
answers to the side of the polygon; the edge of the solid to the point
of the figure; but the corner, or junction of edges in the polyhedron,
is left wholly unrepresented in the plane of the polygon. Even if
we attempted to draw the analogies in some other manner, we should
still find a geometrical notion embodied in the solid which has no
representative in the figure of two dimensions.[538]

  [538] De Morgan, *Cambridge Philosophical Transactions*, vol. xi.
  Part ii. p. 246.

Faraday was able to frame some notion of matter in a fourth condition,
which should be to gas what gas is to liquid.[539] Such substance,
he thought, would not fall far short of *radiant matter*, by which
apparently he meant the supposed caloric or matter assumed to
constitute heat, according to the corpuscular theory. Even if we could
frame the notion, matter in such a state cannot be known to exist, and
recent discoveries concerning the continuity of the solid, liquid, and
gaseous states remove the basis of the speculation.

  [539] *Life of Faraday*, vol. i. p. 216.

From these and many other instances which might be adduced, we learn
that analogical reasoning leads us to the conception of many things
which, so far as we can ascertain, do not exist. In this way great
perplexities have arisen in the use of language and mathematical
symbols. All language depends upon analogy; for we join and arrange
words so that they may represent the corresponding junctions or
arrangements of things and their equalities. But in the use of language
we are obviously capable of forming many combinations of words to which
no corresponding meaning apparently exists. The same difficulty arises
in the use of mathematical signs, and mathematicians have needlessly
puzzled themselves about the square root of a negative quantity, which
is, in many applications of algebraic calculation, simply a sign
without any analogous meaning, there being a failure of analogy.




