BOOK III.

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE EXACT MEASUREMENT OF PHENOMENA.


As physical science advances, it becomes more and more accurately
quantitative. Questions of simple logical fact after a time resolve
themselves into questions of degree, time, distance, or weight. Forces
hardly suspected to exist by one generation, are clearly recognised
by the next, and precisely measured by the third generation. But
one condition of this rapid advance is the invention of suitable
instruments of measurement. We need what Francis Bacon called
*Instantiæ citantes*, or *evocantes*, methods of rendering minute
phenomena perceptible to the senses; and we also require *Instantiæ
radii* or *curriculi*, that is measuring instruments. Accordingly,
the introduction of a new instrument often forms an epoch in the
history of science. As Davy said, “Nothing tends so much to the
advancement of knowledge as the application of a new instrument. The
native intellectual powers of men in different times are not so much
the causes of the different success of their labours, as the peculiar
nature of the means and artificial resources in their possession.”

In the absence indeed of advanced theory and analytical power, a
very precise instrument would be useless. Measuring apparatus and
mathematical theory should advance *pari passu*, and with just such
precision as the theorist can anticipate results, the experimentalist
should be able to compare them with experience. The scrupulously
accurate observations of Flamsteed were the proper complement to the
intense mathematical powers of Newton.

Every branch of knowledge commences with quantitative notions of a
very rude character. After we have far progressed, it is often amusing
to look back into the infancy of the science, and contrast present
with past methods. At Greenwich Observatory in the present day, the
hundredth part of a second is not thought an inconsiderable portion
of time. The ancient Chaldæans recorded an eclipse to the nearest
hour, and the early Alexandrian astronomers thought it superfluous to
distinguish between the edge and centre of the sun. By the introduction
of the astrolabe, Ptolemy and the later Alexandrian astronomers could
determine the places of the heavenly bodies within about ten minutes
of arc. Little progress then ensued for thirteen centuries, until
Tycho Brahe made the first great step towards accuracy, not only by
employing better instruments, but even more by ceasing to regard an
instrument as correct. Tycho, in fact, determined the errors of his
instruments, and corrected his observations. He also took notice of
the effects of atmospheric refraction, and succeeded in attaining an
accuracy often sixty times as great as that of Ptolemy. Yet Tycho and
Hevelius often erred several minutes in the determination of a star’s
place, and it was a great achievement of Rœmer and Flamsteed to reduce
this error to seconds. Bradley, the modern Hipparchus, carried on the
improvement, his errors in right ascension, according to Bessel, being
under one second of time, and those of declination under four seconds
of arc. In the present day the average error of a single observation
is probably reduced to the half or quarter of what it was in Bradley’s
time; and further extreme accuracy is attained by the multiplication
of observations, and their skilful combination according to the theory
of error. Some of the more important constants, for instance that of
nutation, have been determined within the tenth part of a second of
space.[180]

  [180] Baily, *British Association Catalogue of Stars*, pp. 7, 23.

It would be a matter of great interest to trace out the dependence of
this progress upon the introduction of new instruments. The astrolabe
of Ptolemy, the telescope of Galileo, the pendulum of Galileo and
Huyghens, the micrometer of Horrocks, and the telescopic sights and
micrometer of Gascoygne and Picard, Rœmer’s transit instrument,
Newton’s and Hadley’s quadrant, Dollond’s achromatic lenses, Harrison’s
chronometer, and Ramsden’s dividing engine--such were some of the
principal additions to astronomical apparatus. The result is, that we
now take note of quantities, 300,000 or 400,000 times as small as in
the time of the Chaldæans.

It would be interesting again to compare the scrupulous accuracy of a
modern trigonometrical survey with Eratosthenes’ rude but ingenious
guess at the difference of latitude between Alexandria and Syene--or
with Norwood’s measurement of a degree of latitude in 1635. “Sometimes
I measured, sometimes I paced,” said Norwood; “and I believe I am
within a scantling of the truth.” Such was the germ of those elaborate
geodesical measurements which have made the dimensions of the globe
known to us within a few hundred yards.

In other branches of science, the invention of an instrument has
usually marked, if it has not made, an epoch. The science of heat might
be said to commence with the construction of the thermometer, and it
has recently been advanced by the introduction of the thermo-electric
pile. Chemistry has been created chiefly by the careful use of the
balance, which forms a unique instance of an instrument remaining
substantially in the form in which it was first applied to scientific
purposes by Archimedes. The balance never has been and probably never
can be improved, except in details of construction. The torsion
balance, introduced by Coulomb towards the end of last century, has
rapidly become essential in many branches of investigation. In the
hands of Cavendish and Baily, it gave a determination of the earth’s
density; applied in the galvanometer, it gave a delicate measure of
electrical forces, and is indispensable in the thermo-electric pile.
This balance is made by simply suspending any light rod by a thin wire
or thread attached to the middle point. And we owe to it almost all the
more delicate investigations in the theories of heat, electricity, and
magnetism.

Though we can now take note of the millionth of an inch in space,
and the millionth of a second in time, we must not overlook the fact
that in other operations of science we are yet in the position of the
Chaldæans. Not many years have elapsed since the magnitudes of the
stars, meaning the amounts of light they send to the observer’s eye,
were guessed at in the rudest manner, and the astronomer adjudged a
star to this or that order of magnitude by a rough comparison with
other stars of the same order. To Sir John Herschel we owe an attempt
to introduce a uniform method of measurement and expression, bearing
some relation to the real photometric magnitudes of the stars.[181]
Previous to the researches of Bunsen and Roscoe on the chemical action
of light, we were devoid of any mode of measuring the energy of light;
even now the methods are tedious, and it is not clear that they give
the energy of light so much as one of its special effects. Many natural
phenomena have hardly yet been made the subject of measurement at all,
such as the intensity of sound, the phenomena of taste and smell, the
magnitude of atoms, the temperature of the electric spark or of the
sun’s photosphere.

  [181] *Outlines of Astronomy*, 4th ed. sect. 781, p. 522. *Results of
  Observations at the Cape of Good Hope*, &c., p. 37.

To suppose, then, that quantitative science treats only of exactly
measurable quantities, is a gross if it be a common mistake. Whenever
we are treating of an event which either happens altogether or does
not happen at all, we are engaged with a non-quantitative phenomenon,
a matter of fact, not of degree; but whenever a thing may be greater
or less, or twice or thrice as great as another, whenever, in short,
ratio enters even in the rudest manner, there science will have a
quantitative character. There can be little doubt, indeed, that
every science as it progresses will become gradually more and more
quantitative. Numerical precision is the soul of science, as Herschel
said, and as all natural objects exist in space, and involve molecular
movements, measurable in velocity and extent, there is no apparent
limit to the ultimate extension of quantitative science. But the reader
must not for a moment suppose that, because we depend more and more
upon mathematical methods, we leave logical methods behind us. Number,
as I have endeavoured to show, is logical in its origin, and quantity
is but a development of number, or analogous thereto.


*Division of the Subject.*

The general subject of quantitative investigation will have to be
divided into several parts. We shall firstly consider the means at
our disposal for measuring phenomena, and thus rendering them more or
less amenable to mathematical treatment. This task will involve an
analysis of the principles on which accurate methods of measurement are
founded, forming the subject of the remainder of the present chapter.
As measurement, however, only yields ratios, we have in the next
chapter to consider the establishment of unit magnitudes, in terms of
which our results may be expressed. As every phenomenon is usually the
sum of several distinct quantities depending upon different causes,
we have next to investigate in Chapter XV. the methods by which we
may disentangle complicated effects, and refer each part of the joint
effect to its separate cause.

It yet remains for us in subsequent chapters to treat of quantitative
induction, properly so called. We must follow out the inverse logical
method, as it presents itself in problems of a far higher degree of
difficulty than those which treat of objects related in a simple
logical manner, and incapable of merging into each other by addition
and subtraction.


*Continuous Quantity.*

The phenomena of nature are for the most part manifested in quantities
which increase or decrease continuously. When we inquire into the
precise meaning of continuous quantity, we find that it can only be
described as that which is divisible without limit. We can divide
a millimetre into ten, or a hundred, or a thousand, or ten thousand
parts, and mentally at any rate we can carry on the division *ad
infinitum*. Any finite space, then, must be conceived as made up of an
infinite number of parts each infinitely small. We cannot entertain the
simplest geometrical notions without allowing this. The conception of a
square involves the conception of a side and diagonal, which, as Euclid
beautifully proves in the 117th proposition of his tenth book, have no
common measure,[182] meaning no finite common measure. Incommensurable
quantities are, in fact, those which have for their only common measure
an infinitely small quantity. It is somewhat startling to find, too,
that in theory incommensurable quantities will be infinitely more
frequent than commensurable. Let any two lines be drawn haphazard;
it is infinitely unlikely that they will be commensurable, so that
the commensurable quantities, which we are supposed to deal with in
practice, are but singular cases among an infinitely greater number of
incommensurable cases.

  [182] See De Morgan, *Study of Mathematics*, in U.K.S. Library, p. 81.

Practically, however, we treat all quantities as made up of the
least quantities which our senses, assisted by the best measuring
instruments, can perceive. So long as microscopes were uninvented, it
was sufficient to regard an inch as made up of a thousand thousandths
of an inch; now we must treat it as composed of a million millionths.
We might apparently avoid all mention of infinitely small quantities,
by never carrying our approximations beyond quantities which the
senses can appreciate. In geometry, as thus treated, we should never
assert two quantities to be equal, but only to be *apparently* equal.
Legendre really adopts this mode of treatment in the twentieth
proposition of the first book of his Geometry; and it is practically
adopted throughout the physical sciences, as we shall afterwards
see. But though our fingers, and senses, and instruments must stop
somewhere, there is no reason why the mind should not go on. We can
see that a proof which is only carried through a few steps in fact,
might be carried on without limit, and it is this consciousness of no
stopping-place, which renders Euclid’s proof of his 117th proposition
so impressive. Try how we will to circumvent the matter, we cannot
really avoid the consideration of the infinitely small and the
infinitely great. The same methods of approximation which seem confined
to the finite, mentally extend themselves to the infinite.

One result of these considerations is, that we cannot possibly adjust
two quantities in absolute equality. The suspension of Mahomet’s coffin
between two precisely equal magnets is theoretically conceivable but
practically impossible. The story of the *Merchant of Venice* turns
upon the infinite improbability that an exact quantity of flesh could
be cut. Unstable equilibrium cannot exist in nature, for it is that
which is destroyed by an infinitely small displacement. It might be
possible to balance an egg on its end practically, because no egg has
a surface of perfect curvature. Suppose the egg shell to be perfectly
smooth, and the feat would become impossible.


*The Fallacious Indications of the Senses.*

I may briefly remind the reader how little we can trust to our
unassisted senses in estimating the degree or magnitude of any
phenomenon. The eye cannot correctly estimate the comparative
brightness of two luminous bodies which differ much in brilliancy;
for we know that the iris is constantly adjusting itself to the
intensity of the light received, and thus admits more or less light
according to circumstances. The moon which shines with almost dazzling
brightness by night, is pale and nearly imperceptible while the eye is
yet affected by the vastly more powerful light of day. Much has been
recorded concerning the comparative brightness of the zodiacal light at
different times, but it would be difficult to prove that these changes
are not due to the varying darkness at the time, or the different
acuteness of the observer’s eye. For a like reason it is exceedingly
difficult to establish the existence of any change in the form or
comparative brightness of nebulæ; the appearance of a nebula greatly
depends upon the keenness of sight of the observer, or the accidental
condition of freshness or fatigue of his eye. The same is true of
lunar observations; and even the use of the best telescope fails to
remove this difficulty. In judging of colours, again, we must remember
that light of any given colour tends to dull the sensibility of the eye
for light of the same colour.

Nor is the eye when unassisted by instruments a much better judge
of magnitude. Our estimates of the size of minute bright points,
such as the fixed stars, are completely falsified by the effects of
irradiation. Tycho calculated from the apparent size of the star-discs,
that no one of the principal fixed stars could be contained within the
area of the earth’s orbit. Apart, however, from irradiation or other
distinct causes of error our visual estimates of sizes and shapes are
often astonishingly incorrect. Artists almost invariably draw distant
mountains in ludicrous disproportion to nearer objects, as a comparison
of a sketch with a photograph at once shows. The extraordinary apparent
difference of size of the sun or moon, according as it is high in the
heavens or near the horizon, should be sufficient to make us cautious
in accepting the plainest indications of our senses, unassisted by
instrumental measurement. As to statements concerning the height of the
aurora and the distance of meteors, they are to be utterly distrusted.
When Captain Parry says that a ray of the aurora shot suddenly
downwards between him and the land which was only 3,000 yards distant,
we must consider him subject to an illusion of sense.[183]

  [183] Loomis, *On the Aurora Borealis*. Smithsonian Transactions,
  quoting Parry’s Third Voyage, p. 61.

It is true that errors of observation are more often errors of judgment
than of sense. That which is actually seen must be so far truly seen;
and if we correctly interpret the meaning of the phenomenon, there
would be no error at all. But the weakness of the bare senses as
measuring instruments, arises from the fact that they import varying
conditions of unknown amount, and we cannot make the requisite
corrections and allowances as in the case of a solid and invariable
instrument.

Bacon has excellently stated the insufficiency of the senses for
estimating the magnitudes of objects, or detecting the degrees in which
phenomena present themselves. “Things escape the senses,” he says,
“because the object is not sufficient in quantity to strike the sense:
as all minute bodies; because the percussion of the object is too
great to be endured by the senses: as the form of the sun when looking
directly at it in mid-day; because the time is not proportionate to
actuate the sense: as the motion of a bullet in the air, or the quick
circular motion of a firebrand, which are too fast, or the hour-hand of
a common clock, which is too slow; from the distance of the object as
to place: as the size of the celestial bodies, and the size and nature
of all distant bodies; from prepossession by another object: as one
powerful smell renders other smells in the same room imperceptible;
from the interruption of interposing bodies: as the internal parts of
animals; and because the object is unfit to make an impression upon
the sense: as the air or the invisible and untangible spirit which is
included in every living body.”


*Complexity of Quantitative Questions.*

One remark which we may well make in entering upon quantitative
questions, has regard to the great variety and extent of phenomena
presented to our notice. So long as we deal only with a simply logical
question, that question is merely, Does a certain event happen? or,
Does a certain object exist? No sooner do we regard the event or object
as capable of more and less, than the question branches out into many.
We must now ask, How much is it compared with its cause? Does it change
when the amount of the cause changes? If so, does it change in the same
or opposite direction? Is the change in simple proportion to that of
the cause? If not, what more complex law of connection holds true? This
law determined satisfactorily in one series of circumstances may be
varied under new conditions, and the most complex relations of several
quantities may ultimately be established.

In every question of physical science there is thus a series of steps
the first one or two of which are usually made with ease while the
succeeding ones demand more and more careful measurement. We cannot
lay down any invariable series of questions which must be asked from
nature. The exact character of the questions will vary according
to the nature of the case, but they will usually be of an evident
kind, and we may readily illustrate them by examples. Suppose that
we are investigating the solution of some salt in water. The first
is a purely logical question: Is there solution, or is there not?
Assuming the answer to be in the affirmative, we next inquire, Does
the solubility vary with the temperature, or not? In all probability
some variation will exist, and we must have an answer to the further
question, Does the quantity dissolved increase, or does it diminish
with the temperature? In by far the greatest number of cases salts and
substances of all kinds dissolve more freely the higher the temperature
of the water; but there are a few salts, such as calcium sulphate,
which follow the opposite rule. A considerable number of salts resemble
sodium sulphate in becoming more soluble up to a certain temperature,
and then varying in the opposite direction. We next require to assign
the amount of variation as compared with that of the temperature,
assuming at first that the increase of solubility is proportional to
the increase of temperature. Common salt is an instance of very slight
variation, and potassium nitrate of very considerable increase with
temperature. Accurate observations will probably show, however, that
the simple law of proportionate variation is only approximately true,
and some more complicated law involving the second, third, or higher
powers of the temperature may ultimately be established. All these
investigations have to be carried out for each salt separately, since
no distinct principles by which we may infer from one substance to
another have yet been detected. There is still an indefinite field
for further research open; for the solubility of salts will probably
vary with the pressure under which the medium is placed; the presence
of other salts already dissolved may have effects yet unknown. The
researches already effected as regards the solvent power of water must
be repeated with alcohol, ether, carbon bisulphide, and other media,
so that unless general laws can be detected, this one phenomenon of
solution can never be exhaustively treated. The same kind of questions
recur as regards the solution or absorption of gases in liquids, the
pressure as well as the temperature having then a most decided effect,
and Professor Roscoe’s researches on the subject present an excellent
example of the successive determination of various complicated
laws.[184]

  [184] Watts’ *Dictionary of Chemistry*, vol. ii. p. 790.

There is hardly a branch of physical science in which similar
complications are not ultimately encountered. In the case of gravity,
indeed, we arrive at the final law, that the force is the same for
all kinds of matter, and varies only with the distance of action.
But in other subjects the laws, if simple in their ultimate nature,
are disguised and complicated in their apparent results. Thus the
effect of heat in expanding solids, and the reverse effect of forcible
extension or compression upon the temperature of a body, will vary
from one substance to another, will vary as the temperature is already
higher or lower, and, will probably follow a highly complex law, which
in some cases gives negative or exceptional results. In crystalline
substances the same researches have to be repeated in each distinct
axial direction.

In the sciences of pure observation, such as those of astronomy,
meteorology, and terrestrial magnetism, we meet with many interesting
series of quantitative determinations. The so-called fixed stars, as
Giordano Bruno divined, are not really fixed, and may be more truly
described as vast wandering orbs, each pursuing its own path through
space. We must then determine separately for each star the following
questions:--

1. Does it move?

2. In what direction?

3. At what velocity?

4. Is this velocity variable or uniform?

5. If variable, according to what law?

6. Is the direction uniform?

7. If not, what is the form of the apparent path?

8. Does it approach or recede? 9. What is the form of the real path?

The successive answers to such questions in the case of certain binary
stars, have afforded a proof that the motions are due to a central
force coinciding in law with gravity, and doubtless identical with it.
In other cases the motions are usually so small that it is exceedingly
difficult to distinguish them with certainty. And the time is yet
far off when any general results as regards stellar motions can be
established.

The variation in the brightness of stars opens an unlimited field for
curious observation. There is not a star in the heavens concerning
which we might not have to determine:--

1. Does it vary in brightness?

2. Is the brightness increasing or decreasing?

3. Is the variation uniform?

4. If not, according to what law does it vary?

In a majority of cases the change will probably be found to have a
periodic character, in which case several other questions will arise,
such as--

5. What is the length of the period?

6. Are there minor periods?

7. What is the law of variation within the period?

8. Is there any change in the amount of variation?

9. If so, is it a secular, *i.e.* a continually growing change, or does
it give evidence of a greater period?

Already the periodic changes of a certain number of stars have been
determined with accuracy, and the lengths of the periods vary from less
than three days up to intervals of time at least 250 times as great.
Periods within periods have also been detected.

There is, perhaps, no subject in which more complicated quantitative
conditions have to be determined than terrestrial magnetism. Since
the time when the declination of the compass was first noticed, as
some suppose by Columbus, we have had successive discoveries from
time to time of the progressive change of declination from century to
century; of the periodic character of this change; of the difference
of the declination in various parts of the earth’s surface; of the
varying laws of the change of declination; of the dip or inclination
of the needle, and the corresponding laws of its periodic changes; the
horizontal and perpendicular intensities have also been the subject of
exact measurement, and have been found to vary with place and time,
like the directions of the needle; daily and yearly periodic changes
have also been detected, and all the elements are found to be subject
to occasional storms or abnormal perturbations, in which the eleven
year period, now known to be common to many planetary relations,
is apparent. The complete solution of these motions of the compass
needle involves nothing less than a determination of its position
and oscillations in every part of the world at any epoch, the like
determination for another epoch, and so on, time after time, until the
periods of all changes are ascertained. This one subject offers to men
of science an almost inexhaustible field for interesting quantitative
research, in which we shall doubtless at some future time discover the
operation of causes now most mysterious and unaccountable.


*The Methods of Accurate Measurement.*

In studying the modes by which physicists have accomplished very exact
measurements, we find that they are very various, but that they may
perhaps be reduced under the following three classes:--

1. The increase or decrease, in some determinate ratio, of the quantity
to be measured, so as to bring it within the scope of our senses, and
to equate it with the standard unit, or some determinate multiple or
sub-multiple of this unit.

2. The discovery of some natural conjunction of events which will
enable us to compare directly the multiples of the quantity with those
of the unit, or a quantity related in a definite ratio to that unit.

3. Indirect measurement, which gives us not the quantity itself, but
some other quantity connected with it by known mathematical relations.


*Conditions of Accurate Measurement.*

Several conditions are requisite in order that a measurement may be
made with great accuracy, and that the results may be closely accordant
when several independent measurements are made.

In the first place the magnitude must be exactly defined by sharp
terminations, or precise marks of inconsiderable thickness. When a
boundary is vague and graduated, like the penumbra in a lunar eclipse,
it is impossible to say where the end really is, and different people
will come to different results. We may sometimes overcome this
difficulty to a certain extent, by observations repeated in a special
manner, as we shall afterwards see; but when possible, we should choose
opportunities for measurement when precise definition is easy. The
moment of occultation of a star by the moon can be observed with great
accuracy, because the star disappears with perfect suddenness; but
there are other astronomical conjunctions, eclipses, transits, &c.,
which occupy a certain length of time in happening, and thus open the
way to differences of opinion. It would be impossible to observe with
precision the movements of a body possessing no definite points of
reference. The colours of the complete spectrum shade into each other
so continuously that exact determinations of refractive indices would
have been impossible, had we not the dark lines of the solar spectrum
as precise points for measurement, or various kinds of homogeneous
light, such as that of sodium, possessing a nearly uniform length of
vibration.

In the second place, we cannot measure accurately unless we have the
means of multiplying or dividing a quantity without considerable error,
so that we may correctly equate one magnitude with the multiple or
submultiple of the other. In some cases we operate upon the quantity
to be measured, and bring it into accurate coincidence with the actual
standard, as when in photometry we vary the distance of our luminous
body, until its illuminating power at a certain point is equal to
that of a standard lamp. In other cases we repeat the unit until it
equals the object, as in surveying land, or determining a weight by
the balance. The requisites of accuracy now are:--(1) That we can
repeat unit after unit of exactly equal magnitude; (2) That these
can be joined together so that the aggregate shall really be the sum
of the parts. The same conditions apply to subdivision, which may be
regarded as a multiplication of subordinate units. In order to measure
to the thousandth of an inch, we must be able to add thousandth after
thousandth without error in the magnitude of these spaces, or in their
conjunction.


*Measuring Instruments.*

To consider the mechanical construction of scientific instruments, is
no part of my purpose in this book. I wish to point out merely the
general purpose of such instruments, and the methods adopted to carry
out that purpose with great precision. In the first place we must
distinguish between the instrument which effects a comparison between
two quantities, and the standard magnitude which often forms one of
the quantities compared. The astronomer’s clock, for instance, is
no standard of the efflux of time; it serves but to subdivide, with
approximate accuracy, the interval of successive passages of a star
across the meridian, which it may effect perhaps to the tenth part of
a second, or 1/864000 part of the whole. The moving globe itself is
the real standard clock, and the transit instrument the finger of the
clock, while the stars are the hour, minute, and second marks, none
the less accurate because they are disposed at unequal intervals. The
photometer is a simple instrument, by which we compare the relative
intensity of rays of light falling upon a given spot. The galvanometer
shows the comparative intensity of electric currents passing through a
wire. The calorimeter gauges the quantity of heat passing from a given
object. But no such instruments furnish the standard unit in terms of
which our results are to be expressed. In one peculiar case alone does
the same instrument combine the unit of measurement and the means of
comparison. A theodolite, mural circle, sextant, or other instrument
for the measurement of angular magnitudes has no need of an additional
physical unit; for the circle itself, or complete revolution, is
the natural unit to which all greater or lesser amounts of angular
magnitude are referred.

The result of every measurement is to make known the purely numerical
ratio existing between the magnitude to be measured, and a certain
other magnitude, which should, when possible, be a fixed unit or
standard magnitude, or at least an intermediate unit of which the
value can be ascertained in terms of the ultimate standard. But though
a ratio is the required result, an equation is the mode in which the
ratio is determined and expressed. In every measurement we equate
some multiple or submultiple of one quantity, with some multiple or
submultiple of another, and equality is always the fact which we
ascertain by the senses. By the eye, the ear, or the touch, we judge
whether there is a discrepancy or not between two lights, two sounds,
two intervals of time, two bars of metal. Often indeed we substitute
one sense for the other, as when the efflux of time is judged by
the marks upon a moving slip of paper, so that equal intervals of
time are represented by equal lengths. There is a tendency to reduce
all comparisons to the comparison of space magnitudes, but in every
case one of the senses must be the ultimate judge of coincidence or
non-coincidence.

Since the equation to be established may exist between any multiples or
submultiples of the quantities compared, there naturally arise several
different modes of comparison adapted to different cases. Let *p* be
the magnitude to be measured, and *q* that in terms of which it is to
be expressed. Then we wish to find such numbers *x* and *y*, that the
equation *p = (x/y)q* may be true. This equation may be presented in
four forms, namely:--

   First Form.    Second Form.    Third Form.    Fourth Form.
  *p = (x/y)q*    *p(y/x) = q*     *py = qx*     *p/x = q/y*

Each of these modes of expressing the same equation corresponds to one
mode of effecting a measurement.

When the standard quantity is greater than that to be measured, we
often adopt the first mode, and subdivide the unit until we get a
magnitude equal to that measured. The angles observed in surveying,
in astronomy, or in goniometry are usually smaller than a whole
revolution, and the measuring circle is divided by the use of the
screw and microscope, until we obtain an angle undistinguishable from
that observed. The dimensions of minute objects are determined by
subdividing the inch or centimetre, the screw micrometer being the most
accurate means of subdivision. Ordinary temperatures are estimated by
division of the standard interval between the freezing and boiling
points of water, as marked on a thermometer tube.

In a still greater number of cases, perhaps, we multiply the standard
unit until we get a magnitude equal to that to be measured. Ordinary
measurement by a foot rule, a surveyor’s chain, or the excessively
careful measurements of the base line of a trigonometrical survey by
standard bars, are sufficient instances of this procedure.

In the second case, where *p(y/x) = q*, we multiply or divide a
magnitude until we get what is equal to the unit, or to some magnitude
easily comparable with it. As a general rule the quantities which we
desire to measure in physical science are too small rather than too
great for easy determination, and the problem consists in multiplying
them without introducing error. Thus the expansion of a metallic bar
when heated from 0°C to 100° may be multiplied by a train of levers or
cog wheels. In the common thermometer the expansion of the mercury,
though slight, is rendered very apparent, and easily measurable by the
fineness of the tube, and many other cases might be quoted. There are
some phenomena, on the contrary, which are too great or rapid to come
within the easy range of our senses, and our task is then the opposite
one of diminution. Galileo found it difficult to measure the velocity
of a falling body, owing to the considerable velocity acquired in a
single second. He adopted the elegant device, therefore, of lessening
the rapidity by letting the body roll down an inclined plane, which
enables us to reduce the accelerating force in any required ratio.
The same purpose is effected in the well-known experiments performed
on Attwood’s machine, and the measurement of gravity by the pendulum
really depends on the same principle applied in a far more advantageous
manner. Wheatstone invented a beautiful method of galvanometry for
strong currents, which consists in drawing off from the main current a
certain determinate portion, which is equated by the galvanometer to a
standard current. In short, he measures not the current itself but a
known fraction of it.

In many electrical and other experiments, we wish to measure the
movements of a needle or other body, which are not only very slight
in themselves, but the manifestations of exceedingly small forces. We
cannot even approach a delicately balanced needle without disturbing
it. Under these circumstances the only mode of proceeding with
accuracy, is to attach a very small mirror to the moving body, and
employ a ray of light reflected from the mirror as an index of its
movements. The ray may be considered quite incapable of affecting the
body, and yet by allowing the ray to pass to a sufficient distance, the
motions of the mirror may be increased to almost any extent. A ray of
light is in fact a perfectly weightless finger or index of indefinite
length, with the additional advantage that the angular deviation is
by the law of reflection double that of the mirror. This method was
introduced by Gauss, and is now of great importance; but in Wollaston’s
reflecting goniometer a ray of light had previously been employed as an
index. Lavoisier and Laplace had also used a telescope in connection
with the pyrometer.

It is a great advantage in some instruments that they can be readily
made to manifest a phenomenon in a greater or less degree, by a very
slight change in the construction. Thus either by enlarging the bulb
or contracting the tube of the thermometer, we can make it give
more conspicuous indications of change of temperature. The ordinary
barometer, on the other hand, always gives the variations of pressure
on one scale. The torsion balance is remarkable for the extreme
delicacy which may be attained by increasing the length and lightness
of the rod, and the length and thinness of the supporting thread.
Forces so minute as the attraction of gravitation between two balls, or
the magnetic and diamagnetic attraction of common liquids and gases,
may thus be made apparent, and even measured. The common chemical
balance, too, is capable theoretically of unlimited sensibility.

The third mode of measurement, which may be called the Method of
Repetition, is of such great importance and interest that we must
consider it in a separate section. It consists in multiplying both
magnitudes to be compared until some multiple of the first is found
to coincide very nearly with some multiple of the second. If the
multiplication can be effected to an unlimited extent, without the
introduction of countervailing errors, the accuracy with which the
required ratio can be determined is unlimited, and we thus account for
the extraordinary precision with which intervals of time in astronomy
are compared together.

The fourth mode of measurement, in which we equate submultiples of
two magnitudes, is comparatively seldom employed, because it does not
conduce to accuracy. In the photometer, perhaps, we may be said to use
it; we compare the intensity of two sources of light, by placing them
both at such distances from a given surface, that the light falling
on the surface is tolerable to the eye, and equally intense from each
source. Since the intensity of light varies inversely as the square
of the distance, the relative intensities of the luminous bodies are
proportional to the squares of their distances. The equal intensity of
two rays of similarly coloured light may be most accurately ascertained
in the mode suggested by Arago, namely, by causing the rays to pass in
opposite directions through two nearly flat lenses pressed together.
There is an exact equation between the intensities of the beams when
Newton’s rings disappear, the ring created by one ray being exactly the
complement of that created by the other.


*The Method of Repetition.*

The ratio of two quantities can be determined with unlimited accuracy,
if we can multiply both the object of measurement and the standard unit
without error, and then observe what multiple of the one coincides or
nearly coincides with some multiple of the other. Although perfect
coincidence can never be really attained, the error thus arising
may be indefinitely reduced. For if the equation *py* = *qx* be
uncertain to the amount *e*, so that *py* = *qx* ± *e*, then we have
*p* = *q(x/y)* ± *e/y* , and as we are supposed to be able to make *y*
as great as we like without increasing the error *e*, it follows that
we can make *e* ÷ *y* as small as we like, and thus approximate within
an inconsiderable quantity to the required ratio *x* ÷ *y*.

This method of repetition is naturally employed whenever quantities
can be repeated, or repeat themselves without error of juxtaposition,
which is especially the case with the motions of the earth and heavenly
bodies. In determining the length of the sidereal day, we determine the
ratio between the earth’s revolution round the sun, and its rotation on
its own axis. We might ascertain the ratio by observing the successive
passages of a star across the zenith, and comparing the interval by a
good clock with that between two passages of the sun, the difference
being due to the angular movement of the earth round the sun. In such
observations we should have an error of a considerable part of a second
at each observation, in addition to the irregularities of the clock.
But the revolutions of the earth repeat themselves day after day, and
year after year, without the slightest interval between the end of one
period and the beginning of another. The operation of multiplication
is perfectly performed for us by nature. If, then, we can find an
observation of the passage of a star across the meridian a hundred
years ago, that is of the interval of time between the passage of the
sun and the star, the instrumental errors in measuring this interval by
a clock and telescope may be greater than in the present day, but will
be divided by about 36,524 days, and rendered excessively small. It is
thus that astronomers have been able to ascertain the ratio of the mean
solar to the sidereal day to the 8th place of decimals (1·00273791 to
1), or to the hundred millionth part, probably the most accurate result
of measurement in the whole range of science.

The antiquity of this mode of comparison is almost as great as that of
astronomy itself. Hipparchus made the first clear application of it,
when he compared his own observations with those of Aristarchus, made
145 years previously, and thus ascertained the length of the year.
This calculation may in fact be regarded as the earliest attempt at
an exact determination of the constants of nature. The method is the
main resource of astronomers; Tycho, for instance, detected the slow
diminution of the obliquity of the earth’s axis, by the comparison of
observations at long intervals. Living astronomers use the method as
much as earlier ones; but so superior in accuracy are all observations
taken during the last hundred years to all previous ones, that it is
often found preferable to take a shorter interval, rather than incur
the risk of greater instrumental errors in the earlier observations.

It is obvious that many of the slower changes of the heavenly bodies
must require the lapse of large intervals of time to render their
amount perceptible. Hipparchus could not possibly have discovered the
smaller inequalities of the heavenly motions, because there were no
previous observations of sufficient age or exactness to exhibit them.
And just as the observations of Hipparchus formed the starting-point
for subsequent comparisons, so a large part of the labour of present
astronomers is directed to recording the present state of the heavens
so exactly, that future generations of astronomers may detect changes,
which cannot possibly become known in the present age.

The principle of repetition was very ingeniously employed in an
instrument first proposed by Mayer in 1767, and carried into practice
in the Repeating Circle of Borda. The exact measurement of angles
is indispensable, not only in astronomy but also in trigonometrical
surveys, and the highest skill in the mechanical execution of the
graduated circle and telescope will not prevent terminal errors of
considerable amount. If instead of one telescope, the circle be
provided with two similar telescopes, these may be alternately directed
to two distant points, say the marks in a trigonometrical survey, so
that the circle shall be turned through any multiple of the angle
subtended by those marks, before the amount of the angular revolution
is read off upon the graduated circle. Theoretically speaking, all
error arising from imperfect graduation might thus be indefinitely
reduced, being divided by the number of repetitions. In practice, the
advantage of the invention is not found to be very great, probably
because a certain error is introduced at each observation in the
changing and fixing of the telescopes. It is moreover inapplicable to
moving objects like the heavenly bodies, so that its use is confined to
important trigonometrical surveys.

The pendulum is the most perfect of all instruments, chiefly because
it admits of almost endless repetition. Since the force of gravity
never ceases, one swing of the pendulum is no sooner ended than the
other is begun, so that the juxtaposition of successive units is
absolutely perfect. Provided that the oscillations be equal, one
thousand oscillations will occupy exactly one thousand times as great
an interval of time as one oscillation. Not only is the subdivision of
time entirely dependent on this fact, but in the accurate measurement
of gravity, and many other important determinations, it is of the
greatest service. In the deepest mine, we could not observe the
rapidity of fall of a body for more than a quarter of a minute, and
the measurement of its velocity would be difficult, and subject to
uncertain errors from resistance of air, &c. In the pendulum, we have a
body which can be kept rising and falling for many hours, in a medium
entirely under our command or if desirable in a vacuum. Moreover, the
comparative force of gravity at different points, at the top and bottom
of a mine for instance, can be determined with wonderful precision, by
comparing the oscillations of two exactly similar pendulums, with the
aid of electric clock signals.

To ascertain the comparative times of vibration of two pendulums, it
is only requisite to swing them one in front of the other, to record
by a clock the moment when they coincide in swing, so that one hides
the other, and then count the number of vibrations until they again
come to coincidence. If one pendulum makes *m* vibrations and the other
*n*, we at once have our equation *pn* = *qm*; which gives the length
of vibration of either pendulum in terms of the other. This method of
coincidence, embodying the principle of repetition in perfection, was
employed with wonderful skill by Sir George Airy, in his experiments on
the Density of the Earth at the Harton Colliery, the pendulums above
and below being compared with clocks, which again were compared with
each other by electric signals. So exceedingly accurate was this method
of observation, as carried out by Sir George Airy, that he was able to
measure a total difference in the vibrations at the top and bottom of
the shaft, amounting to only 2·24 seconds in the twenty-four hours,
with an error of less than one hundredth part of a second, or one part
in 8,640,000 of the whole day.[185]

  [185] *Philosophical Transactions*, (1856) vol. 146, Part i. p. 297.

The principle of repetition has been elegantly applied in observing
the motion of waves in water. If the canal in which the experiments are
made be short, say twenty feet long, the waves will pass through it
so rapidly that an observation of one length, as practised by Walker,
will be subject to much terminal error, even when the observer is very
skilful. But it is a result of the undulatory theory that a wave is
unaltered, and loses no time by complete reflection, so that it may be
allowed to travel backwards and forwards in the same canal, and its
motion, say through sixty lengths, or 1200 feet, may be observed with
the same accuracy as in a canal 1200 feet long, with the advantage of
greater uniformity in the condition of the canal and water.[186] It
is always desirable, if possible, to bring an experiment into a small
compass, so that it may be well under command, and yet we may often by
repetition enjoy at the same time the advantage of extensive trial.

  [186] Airy, *On Tides and Waves*, Encyclopædia Metropolitana, p. 345.
  Scott Russell, *British Association Report*, 1837, p. 432.

One reason of the great accuracy of weighing with a good balance is
the fact, that weights placed in the same scale are naturally added
together without the slightest error. There is no difficulty in the
precise juxtaposition of two grams, but the juxtaposition of two metre
measures can only be effected with tolerable accuracy, by the use of
microscopes and many precautions. Hence, the extreme trouble and cost
attaching to the exact measurement of a base line for a survey, the
risk of error entering at every juxtaposition of the measuring bars,
and indefatigable attention to all the requisite precautions being
necessary throughout the operation.


*Measurements by Natural Coincidence.*

In certain cases a peculiar conjunction of circumstances enables us to
dispense more or less with instrumental aids, and to obtain very exact
numerical results in the simplest manner. The mere fact, for instance,
that no human being has ever seen a different face of the moon from
that familiar to us, conclusively proves that the period of rotation
of the moon on its own axis is equal to that of its revolution round
the earth. Not only have we the repetition of these movements during
1000 or 2000 years at least, but we have observations made for us
at very remote periods, free from instrumental error, no instrument
being needed. We learn that the seventh satellite of Saturn is subject
to a similar law, because its light undergoes a variation in each
revolution, owing to the existence of some dark tract of land; now
this failure of light always occurs while it is in the same position
relative to Saturn, clearly proving the equality of the axial and
revolutional periods, as Huygens perceived.[187] A like peculiarity in
the motions of Jupiter’s fourth satellite was similarly detected by
Maraldi in 1713.

  [187] *Hugenii Cosmotheoros*, pp. 117, 118. Laplace’s *Système*,
  translated, vol. i. p. 67.

Remarkable conjunctions of the planets may sometimes allow us to
compare their periods of revolution, through great intervals of time,
with much accuracy. Laplace in explaining the long inequality in the
motions of Jupiter and Saturn, was assisted by a conjunction of these
planets, observed at Cairo, towards the close of the eleventh century.
Laplace calculated that such a conjunction must have happened on the
31st of October, A.D. 1087; and the discordance between the distances
of the planets as recorded, and as assigned by theory, was less than
one-fifth part of the apparent diameter of the sun. This difference
being less than the probable error of the early record, the theory was
confirmed as far as facts were available.[188]

  [188] Grant’s *History of Physical Astronomy*, p. 129.

Ancient astronomers often showed the highest ingenuity in turning
any opportunities of measurement which occurred to good account.
Eratosthenes, as early as 250 B.C., happening to hear that the sun at
Syene, in Upper Egypt, was visible at the summer solstice at the bottom
of a well, proving that it was in the zenith, proposed to determine
the dimensions of the earth, by measuring the length of the shadow of
a rod at Alexandria on the same day of the year. He thus learnt in a
rude manner the difference of latitude between Alexandria and Syene and
finding it to be about one fiftieth part of the whole circumference, he
ascertained the dimensions of the earth within about one sixth part
of the truth. The use of wells in astronomical observation appears to
have been occasionally practised in comparatively recent times as by
Flamsteed in 1679.[189] The Alexandrian astronomers employed the moon
as an instrument of measurement in several sagacious modes. When the
moon is exactly half full, the moon, sun, and earth, are at the angles
of a right-angled triangle. Aristarchus measured at such a time the
moon’s elongation from the sun, which gave him the two other angles of
the triangle, and enabled him to judge of the comparative distances
of the moon and sun from the earth. His result, though very rude, was
far more accurate than any notions previously entertained, and enabled
him to form some estimate of the comparative magnitudes of the bodies.
Eclipses of the moon were very useful to Hipparchus in ascertaining
the longitude of the stars, which are invisible when the sun is above
the horizon. For the moon when eclipsed must be 180° distant from the
sun; hence it is only requisite to measure the distance of a fixed star
in longitude from the eclipsed moon to obtain with ease its angular
distance from the sun.

  [189] Baily’s *Account of Flamsteed*, p. lix.

In later times the eclipses of Jupiter have served to measure an angle;
for at the middle moment of the eclipse the satellite must be in the
same straight line with the planet and sun, so that we can learn from
the known laws of movement of the satellite the longitude of Jupiter
as seen from the sun. If at the same time we measure the elongation or
apparent angular distance of Jupiter from the sun, as seen from the
earth, we have all the angles of the triangle between Jupiter, the sun,
and the earth, and can calculate the comparative magnitudes of the
sides of the triangle by trigonometry.

The transits of Venus over the sun’s face are other natural events
which give most accurate measurements of the sun’s parallax, or
apparent difference of position as seen from distant points of the
earth’s surface. The sun forms a kind of background on which the place
of the planet is marked, and serves as a measuring instrument free
from all the errors of construction which affect human instruments.
The rotation of the earth, too, by variously affecting the apparent
velocity of ingress or egress of Venus, as seen from different places,
discloses the amount of the parallax. It has been sufficiently shown
that by rightly choosing the moments of observation, the planetary
bodies may often be made to reveal their relative distance, to measure
their own position, to record their own movements with a high degree
of accuracy. With the improvement of astronomical instruments, such
conjunctions become less necessary to the progress of the science,
but it will always remain advantageous to choose those moments for
observation when instrumental errors enter with the least effect.

In other sciences, exact quantitative laws can occasionally be obtained
without instrumental measurement, as when we learn the exactly equal
velocity of sounds of different pitch, by observing that a peal of
bells or a musical performance is heard harmoniously at any distance
to which the sound penetrates; this could not be the case, as Newton
remarked, if one sound overtook the other. One of the most important
principles of the atomic theory, was proved by implication before the
use of the balance was introduced into chemistry. Wenzel observed,
before 1777, that when two neutral substances decompose each other,
the resulting salts are also neutral. In mixing sodium sulphate and
barium nitrate, we obtain insoluble barium sulphate and neutral sodium
nitrate. This result could not follow unless the nitric acid, requisite
to saturate one atom of sodium, were exactly equal to that required
by one atom of barium, so that an exchange could take place without
leaving either acid or base in excess.

An important principle of mechanics may also be established by a simple
acoustical observation. When a rod or tongue of metal fixed at one
end is set in vibration, the pitch of the sound may be observed to
be exactly the same, whether the vibrations be small or great; hence
the oscillations are isochronous, or equally rapid, independently of
their magnitude. On the ground of theory, it can be shown that such a
result only happens when the flexure is proportional to the deflecting
force. Thus the simple observation that the pitch of the sound of a
harmonium, for instance, does not change with its loudness establishes
an exact law of nature.[190]

  [190] Jamin, *Cours de Physique*, vol. i. p. 152.

A closely similar instance is found in the proof that the intensity
of light or heat rays varies inversely as the square of the distance
increases. For the apparent magnitude certainly varies according to
this law; hence, if the intensity of light varied according to any
other law, the brightness of an object would be different at different
distances, which is not observed to be the case. Melloni applied the
same kind of reasoning, in a somewhat different form, to the radiation
of heat-rays.


*Modes of Indirect Measurement.*

Some of the most conspicuously beautiful experiments in the whole range
of science, have been devised for the purpose of indirectly measuring
quantities, which in their extreme greatness or smallness surpass the
powers of sense. All that we need to do, is to discover some other
conveniently measurable phenomenon, which is related in a known ratio
or according to a known law, however complicated, with that to be
measured. Having once obtained experimental data, there is no further
difficulty beyond that of arithmetic or algebraic calculation.

Gold is reduced by the gold-beater to leaves so thin, that the most
powerful microscope would not detect any measurable thickness. If we
laid several hundred leaves upon each other to multiply the thickness,
we should still have no more than 1/100th of an inch at the most to
measure, and the errors arising in the superposition and measurement
would be considerable. But we can readily obtain an exact result
through the connected amount of weight. Faraday weighed 2000 leaves of
gold, each 3-3/8 inch square, and found them equal to 384 grains. From
the known specific gravity of gold it was easy to calculate that the
average thickness of the leaves was 1/282,000 of an inch.[191]

  [191] Faraday, *Chemical Researches*, p. 393.

We must ascribe to Newton the honour of leading the way in methods of
minute measurement. He did not call waves of light by their right name,
and did not understand their nature; yet he measured their length,
though it did not exceed the 2,000,000th part of a metre or the one
fifty-thousandth part of an inch. He pressed together two lenses of
large but known radii. It was easy to calculate the interval between
the lenses at any point, by measuring the distance from the central
point of contact. Now, with homogeneous rays the successive rings of
light and darkness mark the points at which the interval between the
lenses is equal to one half, or any multiple of half a vibration of
the light, so that the length of the vibration became known. In a
similar manner many phenomena of interference of rays of light admit
of the measurement of the wave lengths. Fringes of interference arise
from rays of light which cross each other at a small angle, and an
excessively minute difference in the lengths of the waves makes a very
perceptible difference in the position of the point at which two rays
will interfere and produce darkness.

Fizeau has recently employed Newton’s rings to measure small amounts of
motion. By merely counting the number of rings of sodium monochromatic
light passing a certain point where two glass plates are in close
proximity, he is able to ascertain with the greatest accuracy and ease
the change of distance between these glasses, produced, for instance,
by the expansion of a metallic bar, connected with one of the glass
plates.[192]

  [192] *Proceedings of the Royal Society*, 30th November, 1866.

Nothing excites more admiration than the mode in which scientific
observers can occasionally measure quantities, which seem beyond
the bounds of human observation. We know the *average* depth of the
Pacific Ocean to be 14,190 feet, not by actual sounding, which would
be impracticable in sufficient detail, but by noticing the rate of
transmission of earthquake waves from the South American to the
opposite coasts, the rate of movement being connected by theory with
the depth of the water.[193] In the same way the average depth of
the Atlantic Ocean is inferred to be no less than 22,157 feet, from
the velocity of the ordinary tidal waves. A tidal wave again gives
beautiful evidence of an effect of the law of gravity, which we could
never in any other way detect. Newton estimated that the moon’s force
in moving the ocean is only one part in 2,871,400 of the whole force of
gravity, so that even the pendulum, used with the utmost skill, would
fail to render it apparent. Yet, the immense extent of the ocean allows
the accumulation of the effect into a very palpable amount; and from
the comparative heights of the lunar and solar tides, Newton roughly
estimated the comparative forces of the moon’s and sun’s gravity at the
earth.[194]

  [193] Herschel, *Physical Geography*, § 40.

  [194] *Principia*, bk. iii. Prop. 37, *Corollaries*, 2 and 3. Motte’s
  translation, vol. ii. p. 310.

A few years ago it might have seemed impossible that we should ever
measure the velocity with which a star approaches or recedes from the
earth, since the apparent position of the star is thereby unaltered.
But the spectroscope now enables us to detect and even measure such
motions with considerable accuracy, by the alteration which it
causes in the apparent rapidity of vibration, and consequently in
the refrangibility of rays of light of definite colour. And while
our estimates of the lateral movements of stars depend upon our very
uncertain knowledge of their distances, the spectroscope gives the
motions of approach and recess irrespective of other motions excepting
that of the earth. It gives in short the motions of approach and recess
of the stars relatively to the earth.[195]

  [195] Roscoe’s *Spectrum Analysis*, 1st ed. p. 296.

The rapidity of vibration for each musical tone, having been accurately
determined by comparison with the Syren (p. 10), we can use sounds as
indirect indications of rapid vibrations. It is now known that the
contraction of a muscle arises from the periodical contractions of each
separate fibre, and from a faint sound or susurrus which accompanies
the action of a muscle, it is inferred that each contraction lasts for
about one 300th part of a second. Minute quantities of radiant heat are
now always measured indirectly by the electricity which they produce
when falling upon a thermopile. The extreme delicacy of the method
seems to be due to the power of multiplication at several points in the
apparatus. The number of elements or junctions of different metals in
the thermopile can be increased so that the tension of the electric
current derived from the same intensity of radiation is multiplied;
the effect of the current upon the magnetic needle can be multiplied
within certain bounds, by passing the current many times round it in
a coil; the excursions of the needle can be increased by rendering it
astatic and increasing the delicacy of its suspension; lastly, the
angular divergence can be observed, with any required accuracy, by the
use of an attached mirror and distant scale viewed through a telescope
(p. 287). Such is the delicacy of this method of measuring heat, that
Dr. Joule succeeded in making a thermopile which would indicate a
difference of 0°·000114 Cent.[196]

  [196] *Philosophical Transactions* (1859), vol. cxlix. p. 94.

A striking case of indirect measurement is furnished by the revolving
mirror of Wheatstone and Foucault, whereby a minute interval of time
is estimated in the form of an angular deviation. Wheatstone viewed an
electric spark in a mirror rotating so rapidly, that if the duration
of the spark had been more than one 72,000th part of a second, the
point of light would have appeared elongated to an angular extent
of one-half degree. In the spark, as drawn directly from a Leyden
jar, no elongation was apparent, so that the duration of the spark
was immeasurably small; but when the discharge took place through
a bad conductor, the elongation of the spark denoted a sensible
duration.[197] In the hands of Foucault the rotating mirror gave a
measure of the time occupied by light in passing through a few metres
of space.

  [197] Watts’ *Dictionary of Chemistry*, vol. ii. p. 393.


*Comparative Use of Measuring Instruments.*

In almost every case a measuring instrument serves, and should serve
only as a means of comparison between two or more magnitudes. As a
general rule, we should not attempt to make the divisions of the
measuring scale exact multiples or submultiples of the unit, but,
regarding them as arbitrary marks, should determine their values by
comparison with the standard itself. The perpendicular wires in the
field of a transit telescope, are fixed at nearly equal but arbitrary
distances, and those distances are afterwards determined, as first
suggested by Malvasia, by watching the passage of star after star
across them, and noting the intervals of time by the clock. Owing
to the perfectly regular motion of the earth, these time intervals
give exact determinations of the angular intervals. In the same way,
the angular value of each turn of the screw micrometer attached to a
telescope, can be easily and accurately ascertained.

When a thermopile is used to observe radiant heat, it would be almost
impossible to calculate on *à priori* grounds what is the value of
each division of the galvanometer circle, and still more difficult
to construct a galvanometer, so that each division should have a
given value. But this is quite unnecessary, because by placing the
thermopile before a body of known dimensions, at a known distance, with
a known temperature and radiating power, we measure a known amount
of radiant heat, and inversely measure the value of the indications
of the thermopile. In a similar way Dr. Joule ascertained the actual
temperature produced by the compression of bars of metal. For having
inserted a small thermopile composed of a single junction of copper and
iron wire, and noted the deflections of the galvanometer, he had only
to dip the bars into water of different temperatures, until he produced
a like deflection, in order to ascertain the temperature developed by
pressure.[198]

  [198] *Philosophical Transactions* (1859), vol. cxlix. p. 119, &c.

In some cases we are obliged to accept a very carefully constructed
instrument as a standard, as in the case of a standard barometer or
thermometer. But it is then best to treat all inferior instruments
comparatively only, and determine the values of their scales by
comparison with the assumed standard.


*Systematic Performance of Measurements.*

When a large number of accurate measurements have to be effected, it
is usually desirable to make a certain number of determinations with
scrupulous care, and afterwards use them as points of reference for the
remaining determinations. In the trigonometrical survey of a country,
the principal triangulation fixes the relative positions and distances
of a few points with rigid accuracy. A minor triangulation refers every
prominent hill or village to one of the principal points, and then the
details are filled in by reference to the secondary points. The survey
of the heavens is effected in a like manner. The ancient astronomers
compared the right ascensions of a few principal stars with the moon,
and thus ascertained their positions with regard to the sun; the minor
stars were afterwards referred to the principal stars. Tycho followed
the same method, except that he used the more slowly moving planet
Venus instead of the moon. Flamsteed was in the habit of using about
seven stars, favourably situated at points all round the heavens. In
his early observations the distances of the other stars from these
standard points were determined by the use of the quadrant.[199] Even
since the introduction of the transit telescope and the mural circle,
tables of standard stars are formed at Greenwich, the positions being
determined with all possible accuracy, so that they can be employed for
purposes of reference by astronomers.

  [199] Baily’s *Account of Flamsteed*, pp. 378–380.

In ascertaining the specific gravities of substances, all gases are
referred to atmospheric air at a given temperature and pressure;
all liquids and solids are referred to water. We require to compare
the densities of water and air with great care, and the comparative
densities of any two substances whatever can then be ascertained.

In comparing a very great with a very small magnitude, it is
usually desirable to break up the process into several steps, using
intermediate terms of comparison. We should never think of measuring
the distance from London to Edinburgh by laying down measuring rods,
throughout the whole length. A base of several miles is selected on
level ground, and compared on the one hand with the standard yard,
and on the other with the distance of London and Edinburgh, or any
other two points, by trigonometrical survey. Again, it would be
exceedingly difficult to compare the light of a star with that of the
sun, which would be about thirty thousand million times greater; but
Herschel[200] effected the comparison by using the full moon as an
intermediate unit. Wollaston ascertained that the sun gave 801,072
times as much light as the full moon, and Herschel determined that the
light of the latter exceeded that of α Centauri 27,408 times, so that
we find the ratio between the light of the sun and star to be that of
about 22,000,000,000 to 1.

  [200] Herschel’s *Astronomy*, § 817, 4th. ed. p. 553.


*The Pendulum.*

By far the most perfect and beautiful of all instruments of measurement
is the pendulum. Consisting merely of a heavy body suspended freely
at an invariable distance from a fixed point, it is most simple in
construction; yet all the highest problems of physical measurement
depend upon its careful use. Its excessive value arises from two
circumstances.

(1) The method of repetition is eminently applicable to it, as already
described (p. 290).

(2) Unlike other instruments, it connects together three different
quantities, those of space, time, and force.

In most works on natural philosophy it is shown, that when the
oscillations of the pendulum are infinitely small, the square of the
time occupied by an oscillation is directly proportional to the length
of the pendulum, and indirectly proportional to the force affecting it,
of whatever kind. The whole theory of the pendulum is contained in the
formula, first given by Huygens in his *Horologium Oscillatorium*.

  Time of oscillation = 3·14159 × √(length of pendulum/force).

The quantity 3·14159 is the constant ratio of the circumference and
radius of a circle, and is of course known with accuracy. Hence, any
two of the three quantities concerned being given, the third may be
found; or any two being maintained invariable, the third will be
invariable. Thus a pendulum of invariable length suspended at the
same place, where the force of gravity may be considered constant,
furnishes a measure of time. The same invariable pendulum being made
to vibrate at different points of the earth’s surface, and the times
of vibration being astronomically determined, the force of gravity
becomes accurately known. Finally, with a known force of gravity, and
time of vibration ascertained by reference to the stars, the length is
determinate.

All astronomical observations depend upon the first manner of using the
pendulum, namely, in the astronomical clock. In the second employment
it has been almost equally indispensable. The primary principle that
gravity is equal in all matter was proved by Newton’s and Gauss’
pendulum experiments. The torsion pendulum of Michell, Cavendish, and
Baily, depending upon exactly the same principles as the ordinary
pendulum, gave the density of the earth, one of the foremost natural
constants. Kater and Sabine, by pendulum observations in different
parts of the earth, ascertained the variation of gravity, whence comes
a determination of the earth’s ellipticity. The laws of electric
and magnetic attraction have also been determined by the method
of vibrations, which is in constant use in the measurement of the
horizontal force of terrestrial magnetism.

We must not confuse with the ordinary use of the pendulum its
application by Newton, to show the absence of internal friction against
space,[201] or to ascertain the laws of motion and elasticity.[202] In
these cases the extent of vibration is the quantity measured, and the
principles of the instrument are different.

  [201] *Principia*, bk. ii. Sect. 6. Prop. 31. Motte’s Translation,
  vol. ii. p. 107.

  [202] Ibid. bk. i. Law iii. Corollary 6. Motte’s Translation, vol. i.
  p. 33.


*Attainable Accuracy of Measurement.*

It is a matter of some interest to compare the degrees of accuracy
which can be attained in the measurement of different kinds of
magnitude. Few measurements of any kind are exact to more than six
significant figures,[203] but it is seldom that such accuracy can be
hoped for. Time is the magnitude which seems to be capable of the most
exact estimation, owing to the properties of the pendulum, and the
principle of repetition described in previous sections. As regards
short intervals of time, it has already been stated that Sir George
Airy was able to estimate one part in 8,640,000, an exactness, as he
truly remarks, “almost beyond conception.”[204] The ratio between the
mean solar and the sidereal day is known to be about one part in one
hundred millions, or to the eighth place of decimals, (p. 289).

  [203] Thomson and Tait’s *Natural Philosophy*, vol. i. p. 333.

  [204] *Philosophical Transactions*, (1856), vol. cxlvi. pp. 330, 331.

Determinations of weight seem to come next in exactness, owing to the
fact that repetition without error is applicable to them. An ordinary
good balance should show about one part in 500,000 of the load. The
finest balance employed by M. Stas, turned with one part in 825,000 of
the load.[205] But balances have certainly been constructed to show
one part in a million,[206] and Ramsden is said to have constructed a
balance for the Royal Society, to indicate one part in seven millions,
though this is hardly credible. Professor Clerk Maxwell takes it for
granted that one part in five millions can be detected, but we ought to
discriminate between what a balance can do when first constructed, and
when in continuous use.

  [205] *First Annual Report of the Mint*, p. 106.

  [206] Jevons, in Watts’ *Dictionary of Chemistry*, vol. i. p. 483.

Determinations of length, unless performed with extraordinary care,
are open to much error in the junction of the measuring bars. Even
in measuring the base line of a trigonometrical survey, the accuracy
generally attained is only that of about one part in 60,000, or an
inch in the mile; but it is said that in four measurements of a base
line carried out very recently at Cape Comorin, the greatest error was
0·077 inch in 1·68 mile, or one part in 1,382,400, an almost incredible
degree of accuracy. Sir J. Whitworth has shown that touch is even a
more delicate mode of measuring lengths than sight, and by means of
a splendidly executed screw, and a small cube of iron placed between
two flat-ended iron bars, so as to be suspended when touching them, he
can detect a change of dimension in a bar, amounting to no more than
one-millionth of an inch.[207]

  [207] British Association, Glasgow, 1856. *Address of the President
  of the Mechanical Section*.




