CHAPTER III.

PROPOSITIONS.


We now proceed to consider the variety of forms of propositions in
which the truths of science must be expressed. I shall endeavour to
show that, however diverse these forms may be, they all admit the
application of the one same principle of inference that what is true of
a thing is true of the like or same. This principle holds true whatever
be the kind or manner of the likeness, provided proper regard be had to
its nature. Propositions may assert an identity of time, space, manner,
quantity, degree, or any other circumstance in which things may agree
or differ.

We find an instance of a proposition concerning time in the
following:--“The year in which Newton was born, was the year in which
Galileo died.” This proposition expresses an approximate identity of
time between two events; hence whatever is true of the year in which
Galileo died is true of that in which Newton was born, and *vice
versâ*. “Tower Hill is the place where Raleigh was executed” expresses
an identity of place; and whatever is true of the one spot is true
of the spot otherwise defined, but in reality the same. In ordinary
language we have many propositions obscurely expressing identities
of number, quantity, or degree. “So many men, so many minds,” is a
proposition concerning number, that is to say, an equation; whatever
is true of the number of men is true of the number of minds, and
*vice versâ*. “The density of Mars is (nearly) the same as that of
the Earth,” “The force of gravity is directly as the product of the
masses, and inversely as the square of the distance,” are propositions
concerning magnitude or degree. Logicians have not paid adequate
attention to the great variety of propositions which can be stated by
the use of the little conjunction *as*, together with *so*. “As the
home so the people,” is a proposition expressing identity of manner;
and a great number of similar propositions all indicating some kind of
resemblance might be quoted. Whatever be the special kind of identity,
all such expressions are subject to the great principle of inference;
but as we shall in later parts of this work treat more particularly of
inference in cases of number and magnitude, we will here confine our
attention to logical propositions which involve only notions of quality.


*Simple Identities.*

The most important class of propositions consists of those which fall
under the formula

  A = B,

and may be called *simple identities*. I may instance, in the first
place, those most elementary propositions which express the exact
similarity of a quality encountered in two or more objects. I may
compare the colour of the Pacific Ocean with that of the Atlantic, and
declare them identical. I may assert that “the smell of a rotten egg
is like that of hydrogen sulphide;” “the taste of silver hyposulphite
is like that of cane sugar;” “the sound of an earthquake resembles
that of distant artillery.” Such are propositions stating, accurately
or otherwise, the identity of simple physical sensations. Judgments of
this kind are necessarily pre-supposed in more complex judgments. If
I declare that “this coin is made of gold,” I must base the judgment
upon the exact likeness of the substance in several qualities to
other pieces of substance which are undoubtedly gold. I must make
judgments of the colour, the specific gravity, the hardness, and of
other mechanical and chemical properties; each of these judgments is
expressed in an elementary proposition, “the colour of this coin is the
colour of gold,” and so on. Even when we establish the identity of a
thing with itself under a different name or aspect, it is by distinct
judgments concerning single circumstances. To prove that the Homeric
χαλκός is copper we must show the identity of each quality recorded of
χαλκός with a quality of copper. To establish Deal as the landing-place
of Cæsar all material circumstances must be shown to agree. If the
modern Wroxeter is the ancient Uriconium, there must be the like
agreement of all features of the country not subject to alteration by
time.

Such identities must be expressed in the form A = B. We may say

  Colour of Pacific Ocean = Colour of Atlantic Ocean.
  Smell of rotten egg = Smell of hydrogen sulphide.

In these and similar propositions we assert identity of single
qualities or causes of sensation. In the same form we may also express
identity of any group of qualities, as in

  χαλκός = Copper.
  Deal = Landing-place of Cæsar.

A multitude of propositions involving singular terms fall into the same
form, as in

  The Pole star = The slowest-moving star.
  Jupiter = The greatest of the planets.
  The ringed planet = The planet having seven satellites.
  The Queen of England = The Empress of India.
  The number two = The even prime number.
  Honesty = The best policy.

In mathematical and scientific theories we often meet with simple
identities capable of expression in the same form. Thus in mechanical
science “The process for finding the resultant of forces = the process
for finding the resultant of simultaneous velocities.” Theorems in
geometry often give results in this form, as

  Equilateral triangles = Equiangular triangles.
  Circle = Finite plane curve of constant curvature.
  Circle = Curve of least perimeter.

The more profound and important laws of nature are often expressible in
the form of simple identities; in addition to some instances which have
already been given, I may suggest,

  Crystals of cubical system = Crystals not possessing the power of
  double refraction.

All definitions are necessarily of this form, whether the objects
defined be many, few, or singular. Thus we may say,

  Common salt = Sodium chloride.
  Chlorophyl = Green colouring matter of leaves.
  Square = Equal-sided rectangle.

It is an extraordinary fact that propositions of this elementary form,
all-important and very numerous as they are, had no recognised place
in Aristotle’s system of Logic. Accordingly their importance was
overlooked until very recent times, and logic was the most deformed
of sciences. But it is impossible that Aristotle or any other person
should avoid constantly using them; not a term could be defined
without their use. In one place at least Aristotle actually notices a
proposition of the kind. He observes: “We sometimes say that that white
thing is Socrates, or that the object approaching is Callias.”[51] Here
we certainly have simple identity of terms; but he considered such
propositions purely accidental, and came to the unfortunate conclusion,
that “Singulars cannot be predicated of other terms.”

  [51] *Prior Analytics*, i. cap. xxvii. 3.

Propositions may also express the identity of extensive groups of
objects taken collectively or in one connected whole; as when we say,

  The Queen, Lords, and Commons = The Legislature of the United Kingdom.

When Blackstone asserts that “The only true and natural foundation of
society are the wants and fears of individuals,” we must interpret him
as meaning that the whole of the wants and fears of individuals in the
aggregate form the foundation of society. But many propositions which
might seem to be collective are but groups of singular propositions or
identities. When we say “Potassium and sodium are the metallic bases of
potash and soda,” we obviously mean,

  Potassium = Metallic base of potash;
  Sodium = Metallic base of soda.

It is the work of grammatical analysis to separate the various
propositions often combined into a single sentence. Logic cannot be
properly required to interpret the forms and devices of language, but
only to treat the meaning when clearly exhibited.


*Partial Identities.*

A second highly important kind of proposition is that which I propose
to call *a partial identity*. When we say that “All mammalia are
vertebrata,” we do not mean that mammalian animals are identical with
vertebrate animals, but only that the mammalia form a *part of the
class vertebrata*. Such a proposition was regarded in the old logic as
asserting the inclusion of one class in another, or of an object in a
class. It was called a universal affirmative proposition, because the
attribute *vertebrate* was affirmed of the whole subject *mammalia*;
but the attribute was said to be *undistributed*, because not all
vertebrata were of necessity involved in the proposition. Aristotle,
overlooking the importance of simple identities, and indeed almost
denying their existence, unfortunately founded his system upon the
notion of inclusion in a class, instead of adopting the basis of
identity. He regarded inference as resting upon the rule that what is
true of the containing class is true of the contained, in place of the
vastly more general rule that what is true of a class or thing is true
of the like. Thus he not only reduced logic to a fragment of its proper
self, but destroyed the deep analogies which bind together logical and
mathematical reasoning. Hence a crowd of defects, difficulties and
errors which will long disfigure the first and simplest of the sciences.

It is surely evident that the relation of inclusion rests upon the
relation of identity. Mammalian animals cannot be included among
vertebrates unless they be identical with part of the vertebrates.
Cabinet Ministers are included almost always in the class Members of
Parliament, because they are identical with some who sit in Parliament.
We may indicate this identity with a part of the larger class in
various ways; as for instance,

  Mammalia = part of the vertebrata.
  Diatomaceæ = a class of plants.
  Cabinet Ministers = some members of Parliament.
  Iron = a metal.

In ordinary language the verbs *is* and *are* express mere inclusion
more often than not. *Men are mortals*, means that *men* form a part
of the class *mortal*; but great confusion exists between this sense
of the verb and that in which it expresses identity, as in “The sun is
the centre of the planetary system.” The introduction of the indefinite
article *a* often expresses partiality; when we say “Iron is a metal”
we clearly mean that iron is *one only* of several metals.

Certain recent logicians have proposed to avoid the indefiniteness
in question by what is called the Quantification of the Predicate,
and they have generally used the little word *some* to show that only
a part of the predicate is identical with the subject. *Some* is an
*indeterminate adjective*; it implies unknown qualities by which we
might select the part in question if the qualities were known, but
it gives no hint as to their nature. I might make use of such an
indeterminate sign to express partial identities in this work. Thus,
taking the special symbol V = Some, the general form of a partial
identity would be A = VB, and in Boole’s Logic expressions of the
kind were much used. But I believe that indeterminate symbols only
introduce complexity, and destroy the beauty and simple universality
of the system which may be created without their use. A vague word
like *some* is only used in ordinary language by *ellipsis*, and to
avoid the trouble of attaining accuracy. We can always employ more
definite expressions if we like; but when once the indefinite *some* is
introduced we cannot replace it by the special description. We do not
know whether *some* colour is red, yellow, blue, or what it is; but on
the other hand *red* colour is certainly *some* colour.

Throughout this system of logic I shall dispense with such indefinite
expressions; and this can readily be done by substituting one of the
other terms. To express the proposition “All A’s are some B’s” I shall
not use the form A = VB, but

  A = AB.

This formula states that the class A is identical with the class AB;
and as the latter must be a part at least of the class B, it implies
the inclusion of the class A in that of B. We might represent our
former example thus,

  Mammalia = Mammalian vertebrata.

This proposition asserts identity between a part (or it may be the
whole) of the vertebrata and the mammalia. If it is asked What part?
the proposition affords no answer, except that it is the part which is
mammalian; but the assertion “mammalia = some vertebrata” tells us no
more.

It is quite likely that some readers will think this mode of
representing the universal affirmative proposition artificial and
complicated. I will not undertake to convince them of the opposite
at this point of my exposition. Justification for it will be found,
not so much in the immediate treatment of this proposition, as in the
general harmony which it will enable us to disclose between all parts
of reasoning. I have no doubt that this is the critical difficulty in
the relation of logical to other forms of reasoning. Grant this mode of
denoting that “all A’s are B’s,” and I fear no further difficulties;
refuse it, and we find want of analogy and endless anomaly in every
direction. It is on general grounds that I hope to show overwhelming
reasons for seeking to reduce every kind of proposition to the form of
an identity.

I may add that not a few logicians have accepted this view of the
universal affirmative proposition. Leibnitz, in his *Difficultates
Quædam Logicæ*, adopts it, saying, “Omne A est B; id est æquivalent AB
et A, seu A non B est nonens.” Boole employed the logical equation *x*
= *xy* concurrently with *x* = *vy*; and Spalding[52] distinctly
says that the proposition “all metals are minerals” might be described
as an assertion of *partial identity* between the two classes. Hence
the name which I have adopted for the proposition.

  [52] *Encyclopædia Britannica*, Eighth Ed. art. Logic, sect. 37,
  note. 8vo. reprint, p. 79.


*Limited Identities.*

An important class of propositions have the form

  AB = AC,

expressing the identity of the class AB with the class AC. In other
words, “Within the sphere of the class A, all the B’s are all the
C’s;” or again, “The B’s and C’s, which are A’s, are identical.” But
it will be observed that nothing is asserted concerning things which
are outside of the class A; and thus the identity is of limited extent.
It is the proposition B = C limited to the sphere of things called A.
Thus we may say, with some approximation to truth, that “Large plants
are plants devoid of locomotive power.”

A barrister may make numbers of most general statements concerning
the relations of persons and things in the course of an argument, but
it is of course to be understood that he speaks only of persons and
things under the English Law. Even mathematicians make statements which
are not true with absolute generality. They say that imaginary roots
enter into equations by pairs; but this is only true under the tacit
condition that the equations in question shall not have imaginary
coefficients.[53] The universe, in short, within which they habitually
discourse is that of equations with real coefficients. These implied
limitations form part of that great mass of tacit knowledge which
accompanies all special arguments.

  [53] De Morgan, *On the Root of any Function*. Cambridge
  Philosophical Transactions, 1867, vol. xi. p. 25.

To De Morgan is due the remark, that we do usually think and argue in
a limited universe or sphere of notions, even when it is not expressly
stated.[54]

  [54] *Syllabus of a proposed System of Logic*, §§ 122, 123.

It is worthy of inquiry whether all identities are not really limited
to an implied sphere of meaning. When we make such a plain statement as
“Gold is malleable” we obviously speak of gold only in its solid state;
when we say that “Mercury is a liquid metal” we must be understood to
exclude the frozen condition to which it may be reduced in the Arctic
regions. Even when we take such a fundamental law of nature as “All
substances gravitate,” we must mean by substance, material substance,
not including that basis of heat, light, and electrical undulations
which occupies space and possesses many wonderful mechanical
properties, but not gravity. The proposition then is really of the form

  Material substance = Material gravitating substance.


*Negative Propositions.*

In every act of intellect we are engaged with a certain identity or
difference between things or sensations compared together. Hitherto
I have treated only of identities; and yet it might seem that the
relation of difference must be infinitely more common than that of
likeness. One thing may resemble a great many other things, but then it
differs from all remaining things in the world. Diversity may almost be
said to constitute life, being to thought what motion is to a river.
The perception of an object involves its discrimination from all other
objects. But we may nevertheless be said to detect resemblance as often
as we detect difference. We cannot, in fact, assert the existence of
a difference, without at the same time implying the existence of an
agreement.

If I compare mercury, for instance, with other metals, and decide that
it is *not solid*, here is a difference between mercury and solid
things, expressed in a negative proposition; but there must be implied,
at the same time, an agreement between mercury and the other substances
which are not solid. As it is impossible to separate the vowels of the
alphabet from the consonants without at the same time separating the
consonants from the vowels, so I cannot select as the object of thought
*solid things*, without thereby throwing together into another class
all things which are *not solid*. The very fact of not possessing a
quality, constitutes a new quality which may be the ground of judgment
and classification. In this point of view, agreement and difference are
ever the two sides of the same act of intellect, and it becomes equally
possible to express the same judgment in the one or other aspect.

Between affirmation and negation there is accordingly a perfect
equilibrium. Every affirmative proposition implies a negative one, and
*vice versâ*. It is even a matter of indifference, in a logical point
of view, whether a positive or negative term be used to denote a given
quality and the class of things possessing it. If the ordinary state
of a man’s body be called *good health*, then in other circumstances
he is said *not to be in good health*; but we might equally describe
him in the latter state as *sickly*, and in his normal condition he
would be *not sickly*. Animal and vegetable substances are now called
*organic*, so that the other substances, forming an immensely greater
part of the globe, are described negatively as *inorganic*. But we
might, with at least equal logical correctness, have described the
preponderating class of substances as *mineral*, and then vegetable and
animal substances would have been *non-mineral*.

It is plain that any positive term and its corresponding negative
divide between them the whole universe of thought: whatever does not
fall into one must fall into the other, by the third fundamental Law
of Thought, the Law of Duality. It follows at once that there are
two modes of representing a difference. Supposing that the things
represented by A and B are found to differ, we may indicate (see p. 17)
the result of the judgment by the notation

  A ~ B.

We may now represent the same judgment by the assertion that A agrees
with those things which differ from B, or that A agrees with the
not-B’s. Using our notation for negative terms (see p. 14), we obtain

  A = A*b*

as the expression of the ordinary negative proposition. Thus if we
take A to mean quicksilver, and B solid, then we have the following
proposition:--

  Quicksilver = Quicksilver not-solid.

There may also be several other classes of negative propositions, of
which no notice was taken in the old logic. We may have cases where
all A’s are not-B’s, and at the same time all not-B’s are A’s; there
may, in short, be a simple identity between A and not-B, which may be
expressed in the form

  A = *b*.

An example of this form would be

  Conductors of electricity = non-electrics.

We shall also frequently have to deal as results of deduction, with
simple, partial, or limited identities between negative terms, as in
the forms

  *a* = *b*,   *a* = *a**b*,   *a*C = *b*C, etc.

It would be possible to represent affirmative propositions in the
negative form. Thus “Iron is solid,” might be expressed as “Iron is not
not-solid,” or “Iron is not fluid;” or, taking A and *b* for the terms
“iron,” and “not-solid,” the form would be A ~ *b*.

But there are very strong reasons why we should employ all propositions
in their affirmative form. All inference proceeds by the substitution
of equivalents, and a proposition expressed in the form of an identity
is ready to yield all its consequences in the most direct manner. As
will be more fully shown, we can infer *in* a negative proposition,
but not *by* it. Difference is incapable of becoming the ground of
inference; it is only the implied agreement with other differing
objects which admits of deductive reasoning; and it will always be
found advantageous to employ propositions in the form which exhibits
clearly the implied agreements.


*Conversion of Propositions.*

The old books of logic contain many rules concerning the conversion of
propositions, that is, the transposition of the subject and predicate
in such a way as to obtain a new proposition which will be true when
the original proposition is true. The reduction of every proposition to
the form of an identity renders all such rules and processes needless.
Identity is essentially reciprocal. If the colour of the Atlantic Ocean
is the same as that of the Pacific Ocean, that of the Pacific must
be the same as that of the Atlantic. Sodium chloride being identical
with common salt, common salt must be identical with sodium chloride.
If the number of windows in Salisbury Cathedral equals the number of
days in the year, the number of days in the year must equal the number
of the windows. Lord Chesterfield was not wrong when he said, “I will
give anybody their choice of these two truths, which amount to the
same thing; He who loves himself best is the honestest man; or, The
honestest man loves himself best.” Scotus Erigena exactly expresses
this reciprocal character of identity in saying, “There are not two
studies, one of philosophy and the other of religion; true philosophy
is true religion, and true religion is true philosophy.”

A mathematician would not think it worth while to mention that if
*x* = *y* then also *y* = *x*. He would not consider these to be
two equations at all, but one equation accidentally written in two
different manners. In written symbols one of two names must come first,
and the other second, and a like succession must perhaps be observed
in our thoughts: but in the relation of identity there is no need for
succession in order (see p. 33), each is simultaneously equal and
identical to the other. These remarks will hold true both of logical
and mathematical identity; so that I shall consider the two forms

  A = B and B = A

to express exactly the same identity differently written. All need for
rules of conversion disappears, and there will be no single proposition
in the system which may not be written with either end foremost. Thus A
= AB is the same as AB = A, *a*C = *b*C is the same as *b*C = *a*C, and
so forth.

The same remarks are partially true of differences and inequalities,
which are also reciprocal to the extent that one thing cannot differ
from a second without the second differing from the first. Mars differs
in colour from Venus, and Venus must differ from Mars. The Earth
differs from Jupiter in density; therefore Jupiter must differ from the
Earth. Speaking generally, if A ~ B we shall also have B ~ A, and these
two forms may be considered expressions of the same difference. But
the relation of differing things is not wholly reciprocal. The density
of Jupiter does not differ from that of the Earth in the same way that
that of the Earth differs from that of Jupiter. The change of sensation
which we experience in passing from Venus to Mars is not the same as
what we experience in passing back to Venus, but just the opposite
in nature. The colour of the sky is lighter than that of the ocean;
therefore that of the ocean cannot be lighter than that of the sky, but
darker. In these and all similar cases we gain a notion of *direction*
or character of change, and results of immense importance may be shown
to rest on this notion. For the present we shall be concerned with the
mere fact of identity existing or not existing.


*Twofold Interpretation of Propositions.*

Terms, as we have seen (p. 25), may have a meaning either in extension
or intension; and according as one or the other meaning is attributed
to the terms of a proposition, so may a different interpretation be
assigned to the proposition itself. When the terms are abstract we
must read them in intension, and a proposition connecting such terms
must denote the identity or non-identity of the qualities respectively
denoted by the terms. Thus if we say

  Equality = Identity of magnitude,

the assertion means that the circumstance of being equal exactly
corresponds with the circumstance of being identical in magnitude.
Similarly in

  Opacity = Incapability of transmitting light,

the quality of being incapable of transmitting light is declared to be
the same as the intended meaning of the word opacity.

When general names form the terms of a proposition we may apply a
double interpretation. Thus

  Exogens = Dicotyledons

means either that the qualities which belong to all exogens are the
same as those which belong to all dicotyledons, or else that every
individual falling under one name falls equally under the other.
Hence it may be said that there are two distinct fields of logical
thought. We may argue either by the qualitative meaning of names or
by the quantitative, that is, the extensive meaning. Every argument
involving concrete plural terms might be converted into one involving
only abstract singular terms, and *vice versâ*. But there are reasons
for believing that the intensive or qualitative form of reasoning is
the primary and fundamental one. It is sufficient to point out that the
extensive meaning of a name is a changeable and fleeting thing, while
the intensive meaning may nevertheless remain fixed. Very numerous
additions have been lately made to the extensive meanings both of
planet and element. Every iron steam-ship which is made or destroyed
adds to or subtracts from the extensive meaning of the name steam-ship,
without necessarily affecting the intensive meaning. Stage coach means
as much as ever in one way, but in extension the class is nearly
extinct. Chinese railway, on the other hand, is a term represented only
by a single instance; in twenty years it may be the name of a large
class.




