CHAPTER VII

MODERN ALCHEMY


“Modern Alchemy.”

§ =85.= Correctly speaking, there is no such thing as “Modern Alchemy”;
not that Mysticism is dead, or that men no longer seek to apply the
principles of Mysticism to phenomena on the physical plane, but they do
so after another manner from that of the alchemists. A new science,
however, is born amongst us, closely related on the one hand to
Chemistry, on the other to Physics, but dealing with changes more
profound and reactions more deeply seated than are dealt with by either
of these; a science as yet without a name, unless it be the not
altogether satisfactory one of “Radioactivity.” It is this science, or,
perhaps we should say, a certain aspect of it, to which we refer (it may
be fantastically) by the expression “Modern Alchemy”: the aptness of the
title we hope to make plain in the course of the present chapter.


X-rays and Becquerel rays.

§ =86.= As is commonly known, what are called X-rays are produced when
an electric discharge is passed through a high-vacuum tube. It has been
shown that these rays are a series of irregular pulses in the ether,
which are set up when the kathode particles strike the walls of the
glass vacuum tube,[101] and it was found that more powerful effects can
be produced by inserting a disc of platinum in the path of the kathode
particles. It was M. Becquerel who first discovered that there are
substances which naturally emit radiations similar to X-rays. He found
that uranium compounds affected a photographic plate from which they
were carefully screened, and he also showed that these uranium
radiations, or “Becquerel rays,” resemble X-rays in other particulars.
It was already known that certain substances fluoresce (emit light) in
the dark after having been exposed to sunlight, and it was thought at
first that the above phenomenon exhibited by uranium salts was of a like
nature, since certain uranium salts are fluorescent; but M. Becquerel
found that uranium salts which had never been exposed to sunlight were
still capable of affecting a photographic plate, and that this
remarkable property was possessed by all uranium salts, whether
fluorescent or not. This phenomenon is known as “radioactivity,” and
bodies which exhibit it are said to be “radioactive.” Schmidt found that
thorium compounds possess a similar property, and Professor Rutherford
showed that thorium compounds evolved also something resembling a gas.
He called this an “emanation.”

    [101] They must not be confused with the greenish-yellow
    phosphorescence which is also produced: the X-rays are invisible.


The Discovery of Radium.

§ =87.= Mme. Curie[102] determined the radioactivity of many uranium and
thorium compounds, and found that there was a proportion between the
radioactivity of such compounds and the quantity of uranium or thorium
in them, with the remarkable exception of certain natural ores, which
had a radioactivity much in excess of the normal, and, indeed, in
certain cases, much greater than pure uranium. In order to throw some
light on this matter, Mme. Curie prepared one of these ores by a
chemical process and found that it possessed a normal radioactivity. The
only logical conclusion to be drawn from these facts was that the ores
in question must contain some unknown, highly radioactive substance, and
the Curies were able, after very considerable labour, to extract from
pitchblende (the ore with the greatest radioactivity) minute quantities
of the salts of two new elements--which they named “Polonium” and
“Radium” respectively--both of which were extremely radioactive.

    [102] See Madame SKLODOWSKA CURIE’S _Radio-active Substances_ (2nd
    ed., 1904).

M. Debierne has obtained a third radioactive substance from pitchblende,
which he has called “Actinium.”


Chemical Properties of Radium.

§ =88.= Radium is an element resembling calcium, strontium, and barium
in chemical properties; its atomic weight was determined by Mme. Curie,
and found to be about 225, according to her first experiments; a
redetermination gave a slightly higher value, which has been confirmed
by a further investigation carried out by Sir T. E. Thorpe.[103] Radium
gives a characteristic spectrum, and is intensely radioactive. It
should be noted that up to the middle of the year 1910 the element
radium itself had not been prepared; in all the experiments carried out
radium salts were employed (_i.e._, certain compounds of radium with
other elements), generally radium chloride and radium bromide. In that
year, however, Mme. Curie, in conjunction with M. Debierne, obtained the
free metal. It is described as a white, shining metal resembling the
other alkaline earth metals. It reacts very violently with water, chars
paper with which it is allowed to come in contact, and blackens in the
air, probably owing to the formation of a nitride. It fuses at 700° C.,
and is more volatile than barium.[104]

    [103] See Sir T. E. THORPE: “On the Atomic Weight of Radium”
    (Bakerian Lecture for 1907. Delivered before the Royal Society, June
    20, 1907), _Proceedings of the Royal Society of London_, vol. lxxx.
    pp. 298 _et seq._; reprinted in _The Chemical News_, vol. xcvii. pp.
    229 _et seq._ (May 15, 1908).

    [104] Madame P. CURIE and M. A. DEBIERNE: “Sur le radium
    métallique,” _Comptes Rendus hebdomadaires des Séances de l’Académie
    des Sciences_, vol. cli. (1910), pp. 523-525. (For an English
    translation of this paper see _The Chemical News_, vol. cii. p.
    175.)


The Radioactivity of Radium.

§ =89.= Radium salts give off three distinct sorts of rays, referred to
by the Greek letters α, β, γ. The α-rays have been shown to consist of
electrically charged (positive) particles, with a mass approximately
equal to that of four hydrogen atoms; they are slightly deviated by a
magnetic field, and do not possess great penetrative power. The β-rays
are similar to the kathode rays, and consist of (negative) electrons;
they are strongly deviated by a magnetic field, in a direction opposite
to that in which the α-particles are deviated, and possess medium
penetrative power, passing for the most part through a thin sheet of
metal. The γ-rays resemble X-rays; they possess great penetrative
power, and are not deviated by a magnetic field. The difference in the
effect of the magnetic field on these rays, and the difference in their
penetrative power, led to their detection and allows of their separate
examination. Radium salts emit also an emanation, which tends to become
occluded in the solid salt, but can be conveniently liberated by
dissolving the salt in water, or by heating it. The emanation exhibits
the characteristic properties of a gas, it obeys Boyle’s Law (_i.e._,
its volume varies inversely with its pressure), and it can be condensed
to a liquid at low temperatures; its density as determined by the
diffusion method is about 100. Attempts to prepare chemical compounds of
the emanation have failed, and in this respect it resembles the rare
gases of the atmosphere--helium, neon, argon, krypton, and xenon--whence
it is probable that its molecules are monatomic, so that a density of
100 would give its atomic weight as 200.[105] As can be seen from the
table on pp. 106, 107, an atomic weight of about 220 corresponds to a
position in the column containing the rare gases in the periodic system.
That the emanation actually has an atomic weight of these dimensions was
confirmed by further experiments carried out by the late Sir William
Ramsay and Dr. R. W. Gray.[106] These chemists determined the density of
the emanation by actually weighing minute quantities of known volume of
the substance, sealed up in small capillary tubes, a specially
sensitive balance being employed. Values for the density varying from
108 to 113½, corresponding to values for the atomic weight varying from
216 to 227, were thereby obtained. Sir William Ramsay, therefore,
considered that there could no longer be any doubt that the emanation
was one of the elements of the group of chemically inert gases. He
proposed to call it _Niton_, and, for reasons which we shall note later,
considered that in all probability it had an atomic weight of about
222½.

    [105] This follows from Avogadro’s Hypothesis, see § 76.

    [106] Sir WILLIAM RAMSAY and Dr. R. W. GRAY: “La densité de
    l’émanation du radium,” _Comptes Rendus hebdomadaires des Séances de
    l’Académie des Sciences_, vol. cvi. (1910), pp. 126 _et seq._


The Disintegration of the Radium Atom.

§ =90.= Radium salts possess another very remarkable property, namely,
that of continuously emitting light and heat. It seemed, at first, that
here was a startling contradiction to the law of the conservation of
energy, but the whole mystery becomes comparatively clear in terms of
the corpuscular or the electronic theory of matter. The radium-atom is a
system of a large number (see § 81) of corpuscles or electrons, and
contains in virtue of their motion an enormous amount of energy. But it
is known from Chemistry that atomic systems (_i.e._, molecules) which
contain very much energy are unstable and liable to explode. The same
law holds good on the more interior plane--the radium-atom is liable to,
and actually does, explode. And the result? Energy is set free, and
manifests itself partly as heat and light. Some free electrons are shot
off (the β-rays), which, striking the undecomposed particles of salt,
give rise to pulses in the ether (the γ-rays),[107] just as the kathode
particles give rise to X-rays when they strike the walls of the vacuum
tube or a platinum disc placed in their path. The β- and γ-rays do not,
however, result immediately from the exploding radium-atoms, the initial
products being the emanation and one α-particle from each radium-atom
destroyed.

    [107] This view regarding the γ-rays is not, however, universally
    accepted, some scientists regarding them as consisting of a stream
    of particles moving with very high velocities.


“Induced Radioactivity.”

§ =91.= Radium salts have the property of causing surrounding objects to
become temporally radioactive. This “induced radioactivity,” as it may
be called, is found to be due to the emanation, which is itself
radioactive (it emits α-rays only), and is decomposed into minute traces
of solid radioactive deposits. By examining the rate of decay of the
activity of the deposit, it has been found that it is undergoing a
series of sub-atomic changes, the products being termed Radium A, B, C,
&c. It has been proved that all the β- and γ-rays emitted by radium
salts are really due to certain of these secondary products. Radium F is
thought to be identical with Polonium (§ 87). Another product is also
obtained by these decompositions, with which we shall deal later (§ 94).


Properties of Uranium and Thorium.

§ =92.= Uranium and thorium differ in one important respect from radium,
inasmuch as the first product of the decomposition of the uranium and
thorium atoms is in both cases solid. Sir William Crookes[108] was able
to separate from uranium salts by chemical means a small quantity of an
intensely radioactive substance, which he called Uranium X, the residual
uranium having lost most of its activity; and M. Becquerel, on
repeating the experiment, found that the activity of the residual
uranium was slowly regained, whilst that of the uranium X decayed. This
is most simply explained by the theory that uranium first changes into
uranium X. It has been suggested that radium may be the final product of
the breaking up of the uranium-atom; at any rate, it is quite certain
that radium must be evolved in some way, as otherwise there would be
none in existence--it would all have decomposed. This suggestion has
been experimentally confirmed, the growth of radium in large quantities
of a solution of purified uranyl nitrate having been observed. Uranium
gives no emanation. Thorium probably gives at least three solid
products--Meso-thorium, Radio-thorium, and Thorium X, the last of which
yields an emanation resembling that obtained from radium, but not
identical with it.

    [108] Sir WILLIAM CROOKES, F.R.S.: “Radio-activity of Uranium,”
    _Proceedings of the Royal Society of London_, vol. lxvi. (1900), pp.
    409 _et seq._


The Radium Emanation.

§ =93.= We must now more fully consider the radium emanation--a
substance with more astounding properties than even the radium compounds
themselves. By distilling off the emanation from some radium bromide,
and measuring the quantities of heat given off by the emanation and the
radium salt respectively, Professors Rutherford and Barnes[109] proved
that nearly three-fourths of the total amount of heat given out by a
radium salt comes from the minute quantity of emanation that it
contains. The amount of energy liberated as heat during the decay of the
emanation is enormous; one cubic centimetre liberates about four
million times as much heat as is obtained by the combustion of an equal
volume of hydrogen. Undoubtedly this must indicate some profound change,
and one may well ask, What is the ultimate product of the decomposition
of the emanation?

    [109] E. RUTHERFORD, F.R.S., and H. T. BARNES, D.Sc.: “Heating
    Effect of the Radium Emanation,” _Philosophical Magazine_ [6], vol.
    vii. (1904), pp. 202 _et seq._


The Production of Helium from Radium.

§ =94.= It had been observed already that the radioactive minerals on
heating give off Helium--a gaseous element, characterised by a
particular yellow line in its spectrum--and it seemed not unlikely that
helium might be the ultimate decomposition product of the emanation. A
research to settle this point was undertaken by Sir William Ramsay and
Mr. Soddy,[110] and a preliminary experiment having confirmed the above
speculation, they carried out further very careful experiments. “The
maximum amount of the emanation obtained from 50 milligrams of radium
bromide was conveyed by means of oxygen into a [U]-tube cooled in liquid
air, and the latter was then extracted by the pump.” The spectrum was
observed; it “was apparently a new one, probably that of the emanation
itself. . . . After standing from July 17 to 21 the helium spectrum
appeared, and the characteristic lines were observed.” Sir William
Ramsay performed a further experiment with a similar result, in which
the radium salt had been first of all heated in a vacuum for some time,
proving that the helium obtained could not have been occluded in it;
though the fact that the helium spectrum did not immediately appear, in
itself proves this point. Sir William Ramsay’s results were confirmed
by further careful experiments by Sir James Dewar and other chemists. It
was suggested, therefore, that the α-particle consists of an
electrically charged helium-atom, and not only is this view in agreement
with the value of the mass of this particle as determined
experimentally, but it has been completely demonstrated by Professor
Rutherford and Mr. Royds. These chemists performed an experiment in
which the emanation from about one-seventh of a gramme of radium was
enclosed in a thin-walled tube, through the walls of which the
α-particles could pass, but which were impervious to gases. This tube
was surrounded by an outer jacket, which was evacuated. After a time the
presence of helium in the space between the inner tube and the outer
jacket was observed spectroscopically.[111] Now, the emanation-atom
results from the radium-atom by the expulsion of one α-particle; and
since this latter consists of an electrically charged helium-atom, it
follows that the emanation must have an atomic weight of 226 - 4,
_i.e._, 222. This value is in agreement with Sir William Ramsay’s
determination of the density of the emanation. We may represent the
degradation of the radium-atom, therefore, by the following scheme:--

               α-particle (Helium-atom)
              /           4
  Radium-atom                          α-particle (Helium-atom)
      226     \                       /           4
                Emanation (Niton-atom)
                         222          \
                                       Radium-A, &c.

    [110] Sir WILLIAM RAMSAY and FREDERICK SODDY: “Experiments in
    Radioactivity and the Production of Helium from Radium,”
    _Proceedings of the Royal Society of London_, vol. lxxii. (1903),
    pp. 204 _et seq._

    [111] E. RUTHERFORD, F.R.S., and T. ROYDS, M.Sc.: “The Nature of the
    α-Particle from Radio-active Substances,” _Philosophical Magazine_
    [6], vol. xvii. (1909), pp. 281 _et seq._


Nature of this Change.

§ =95.= Here, then, for the first time in the history of Chemistry, we
have the undoubted formation of one chemical element from another, for,
leaving out of the question the nature of the emanation, there can be no
doubt that radium is a chemical element. This is a point which must be
insisted upon, for it has been suggested that radium may be a compound
of helium with some unknown element; or, perhaps, a compound of helium
with lead, since it has been shown that lead is probably one of the end
products of the decomposition of radium. The following considerations,
however, show this view to be altogether untenable: (i.) All attempts to
prepare compounds of helium with other elements have failed. (ii.)
Radium possesses all the properties of a chemical element; it has a
characteristic spectrum, and falls in that column in the Periodic Table
with those elements which it resembles as to its chemical properties.
(iii.) The quantity of heat liberated on the decomposition of the
emanation is, as we have already indicated, out of all proportion to
that obtained even in the most violent chemical reactions; and (iv.) one
very important fact has been observed, namely, that the rate of decay of
the emanation is unaffected by even extreme changes of temperature,
whereas chemical actions are always affected in rate by changes of
temperature. It will also be advisable, perhaps, to indicate some of the
differences between helium and the emanation. The latter is a heavy gas,
condensable to a liquid by liquid air (recently it has been
solidified[112]); whereas helium is the lightest of all known gases
with the exception of hydrogen and has been liquefied only by the most
persistent effort.[113] The emanation, moreover, is radioactive, giving
off α-particles, whereas helium does not possess this property.

    [112] By Ramsay. See _Proceedings of the Chemical Society_, vol.
    xxv. (1909), pp. 82 and 83.

    [113] By Professor Onnes. See _Chemical News_, vol. xcviii. p. 37
    (July 24, 1908).


Is this Change a true Transmutation?

§ =96.= It has been pointed out, however, that (in a sense) this change
(viz., of emanation into helium) is not quite what has been meant by the
expression “transmutation of the elements”; for the reason that it is a
_spontaneous_ change; no effort of ours can bring it about or cause it
to cease.[114] But the fact of the change does go to prove that the
chemical elements are not the discrete units of matter that they were
supposed to be. And since it appears that all matter is radioactive,
although (save in these exceptional cases) in a very slight degree,[115]
we here have evidence of a process of evolution at work among the
chemical elements. The chemical elements are not permanent; they are all
undergoing change; and the common elements merely mark those points
where the rate of the evolutionary process is at its slowest. (See also
§§ 78 and 83.) Thus, the essential truth in the old alchemistic doctrine
of the growth of metals is vindicated, for the metals do grow in the
womb of Nature, although the process may be far slower than appears to
have been imagined by certain of the alchemists,[116] and although gold
may not be the end product. As writes Professor Sir W. Tilden: “. . . It
appears that modern ideas as to the genesis of the elements, and hence
of all matter, stand in strong contrast with those which chiefly
prevailed among experimental philosophers from the time of Newton, and
seem to reflect in an altered form the speculative views of the
ancients.” “. . . It seems probable,” he adds, “that the chemical
elements, and hence all material substances of which the earth, the sea,
the air, and the host of heavenly bodies are all composed, resulted from
a change, corresponding to condensation, in something of which we have
no direct and intimate knowledge. Some have imagined this primal essence
of all things to be identical with the ether of space. As yet we know
nothing with certainty, but it is thought that by means of the
spectroscope some stages of the operation may be seen in progress in the
nebulæ and stars. . . .”[117] We have next to consider whether there is
any experimental evidence showing it to be possible (using the
phraseology of the alchemists) for man to assist in Nature’s work.

    [114] See Professor H. C. JONES: _The Electrical Nature of Matter
    and Radioactivity_ (1906), pp. 125-126.

    [115] It has been definitely proved, for example, that the common
    element potassium is radioactive, though very feebly so (it emits
    β-rays). It is also interesting to note that many common substances
    emit corpuscles at high temperatures.

    [116] Says Peter Bonus, however, “. . . we know that the generation
    of metals occupies thousands of years . . . in Nature’s workshop.
    . . .” (see _The New Pearl of Great Price_, Mr. A. E. Waite’s
    translation, p. 55), and certain others of the alchemists expressed
    a similar view.

    [117] Sir WILLIAM A. TILDEN: _The Elements: Speculations as to their
    Nature and Origin_ (1910), pp. 108, 109, 133 and 134. With regard to
    Sir William Tilden’s remarks, it is very interesting to note that
    Swedenborg (who was born when Newton was between forty and fifty
    years old) not only differed from that great philosopher on those
    very points on which modern scientific philosophy is at variance
    with Newton, but, as is now recognised by scientific men,
    anticipated many modern discoveries and scientific theories. It
    would be a most interesting task to set forth the agreement existing
    between Swedenborg’s theories and the latest products of scientific
    thought concerning the nature of the physical universe. Such,
    however, would lie without the confines of the present work.


The Production of Neon from Emanation.

§ =97.= As we have already indicated above (§ 93), the radium emanation
contains a vast store of potential energy, and it was with the idea of
utilising this energy for bringing about chemical changes that Sir
William Ramsay[118] undertook a research on the chemical action of this
substance--a research with the most surprising and the most interesting
results, for the energy contained within the radium emanation appeared
to behave like a veritable Philosopher’s Stone. The first experiments
were carried out on distilled water. It had already been observed that
the emanation decomposes water into its gaseous elements, oxygen and
hydrogen, and that the latter is always produced in excess. These
results were confirmed and the presence of hydrogen peroxide was
detected, explaining the formation of an excess of hydrogen; it was also
shown that the emanation brings about the reverse change to some extent,
causing oxygen and hydrogen to unite with the production of water, until
a position of equilibrium is attained. On examining spectroscopically
the gas obtained by the action of the emanation on water, after the
removal of the ordinary gases, a most surprising result was
observed--the gas showed a brilliant spectrum of neon, accompanied with
some faint helium lines. A more careful experiment was carried out later
by Sir William Ramsay and Mr. Cameron, in which a silica bulb was
employed instead of glass. The spectrum of the residual gas after
removing ordinary gases was successfully photographed, and a large
number of the neon lines identified; helium was also present. The
presence of neon could not be explained, in Ramsay’s opinion, by leakage
of air into the apparatus, as the percentage of neon in the air is not
sufficiently high, whereas this suggestion might be put forward in the
case of argon. Moreover, the neon could not have come from the aluminium
of the electrodes (in which it might be thought to have been occluded),
as the sparking tube had been used and tested before the experiment was
carried out. The authors conclude: “We must regard the transformation of
emanation into neon, in presence of water, as indisputably proved, and,
if a transmutation be defined as a transformation brought about at will,
by change of conditions, then _this is the first case of transmutation
of which conclusive evidence is put forward_.”[119] However, Professor
Rutherford and Mr. Royds have been unable to confirm this result. They
describe[120] attempts to obtain neon by the action of emanation on
water. Out of five experiments no neon was obtained, save in one case in
which a small air leak was discovered; and, since the authors find that
very minute quantities of this gas are sufficient to give a clearly
visible spectrum, they conclude that Ramsay’s positive results are due,
after all, to leakage of air into the apparatus. But if this is the true
explanation of Ramsay’s results, it is difficult to understand why, in
the case of the experiment with a solution of a copper salt described
below, the presence of neon was not detected, for, if due to leakage,
the proportions of the rare gases present should presumably have been
the same in all the experiments. Further research seems necessary
conclusively to settle the question.

    [118] Sir WILLIAM RAMSAY: “The Chemical Action of the Radium
    Emanation. Pt. I., Action on Distilled Water,” _Journal of the
    Chemical Society_, vol. xci. (1907), pp. 931 _et seq._ ALEXANDER T.
    CAMERON and Sir WILLIAM RAMSAY, _ibid._ “Pt. II., On Solutions
    containing Copper, and Lead, and on Water,” _ibid._ pp. 1593 _et
    seq._ “Pt. III., On Water and Certain Gases,” _ibid._ vol. xciii.
    (1908), pp. 966 _et seq._ “Pt. IV., On Water,” _ibid._ pp. 992 _et
    seq._

    [119] _Journal of the Chemical Society_, vol. xciii. (1908), p. 997.

    [120] E. RUTHERFORD, F.R.S., and T. ROYDS, M.Sc.: “The Action of
    Radium Emanation on Water,” _Philosophical Magazine_ [6], vol. xvi.
    (1908), pp. 812 _et seq._


Ramsay’s Experiments on Copper.

§ =98.= The fact that an excess of hydrogen was produced when water was
decomposed by the emanation suggested to Sir William Ramsay and Mr.
Cameron that if a solution of a metallic salt was employed in place of
pure water, the free metal might be obtained. These “modern alchemists,”
therefore, proceeded to investigate the action of radium emanation on
solutions of copper and lead salts, and again apparently effected
transmutations. They found on removing the copper from a solution of a
copper-salt which had been subjected to the action of the emanation, and
spectroscopically examining the residue, that a considerable quantity of
sodium was present, together with traces of lithium; and the gas evolved
in the case of a solution of copper nitrate contained, along with much
nitric oxide and a little nitrogen, argon (which was detected
spectroscopically), but no helium. It certainly seemed like a dual
transformation of copper into lithium and sodium, and emanation into
argon. They also observed that apparently carbon-dioxide is continually
evolved from an acid solution of thorium nitrate (see below, § 100). It
is worth while noticing that helium, neon and argon occur in the same
column in the Periodic Table with emanation; lithium and sodium with
copper, and carbon with thorium; in each case the elements produced
being of lighter atomic weight than those decomposed.[121] The authors
make the following suggestions: “(1) That helium and the α-particle are
not identical; (2) that helium results from the ‘degradation’ of the
large molecule of emanation by its bombardment with α-particles; (3)
that this ‘degradation,’ when the emanation is alone or mixed with
oxygen and hydrogen, results in the lowest member of the inactive
series, namely, helium; (4) that if particles of greater mass than
hydrogen or oxygen are associated with the emanation, namely, liquid
water, then the ‘degradation’ of the emanation is less complete, and
neon is produced; (5) that when molecules of still greater weight and
complexity are present, as is the case when the emanation is dissolved
in a solution of copper sulphate, the product of ‘degradation’ of the
emanation is argon. We are inclined to believe too [they say] that (6)
the copper also is involved in this process of degradation, and is
reduced to the lowest term of its series, namely, lithium; and at the
same time, inasmuch as the weight of the residue of alkali, produced
when copper nitrate is present, is double that obtained from the blank
experiment, or from water alone, the supposition is not excluded that
the chief product of the ‘degradation’ of copper is sodium.”[122]

    [121] See pp. 106, 107.

    [122] _Journal of the Chemical Society_, vol. xci. (1907), pp.
    1605-1606. More recent experiments, however, proved that the
    α-particle does consist of an electrically charged helium-atom, and
    this view was latterly accepted by Sir William Ramsay, so that the
    above suggestions must be modified in accordance therewith. (See §
    94.)


Further Experiments on Radium and Copper.

§ =99.= A little later Madame Curie and Mademoiselle Gleditsch[123]
repeated Cameron and Ramsay’s experiments on copper salts, using,
however, platinum apparatus. They failed to detect lithium after the
action of the emanation, and think that Cameron and Ramsay’s results may
be due to the glass vessels employed. Dr. Perman[124] has investigated
the direct action of the emanation on copper and gold, and has failed to
detect any trace of lithium. The transmutation of copper into lithium,
therefore, must be regarded as unproved, but further research is
necessary before any conclusive statements can be made on the subject.

    [123] Madame CURIE and Mademoiselle GLEDITSCH: “Action de
    l’émanation du radium sur les solutions des sels de cuivre,”
    _Comptes Rendus hebdomadaires des Séances de l’Académie des
    Sciences_, vol. cxlvii. (1908), pp. 345 _et seq._ (For an English
    translation of this paper, see _The Chemical News_, vol. xcviii. pp.
    157 and 158.)

    [124] EDGAR PHILIP PERMAN: “The Direct Action of Radium on Copper
    and Gold,” _Proceedings of the Chemical Society_, vol. xxiv. (1908),
    p. 214.


Ramsay’s Experiments on Thorium and allied Metals.

§ =100.= In his presidential address to the Chemical Society, March 25,
1909, after having brought forward some exceedingly interesting
arguments for the possibility of transmutation, Sir William Ramsay
described some experiments which he had carried out on thorium and
allied elements.[125] It was found, as we have already stated (§ 98),
that, apparently, carbon-dioxide was continually evolved from an acid
solution of thorium nitrate, precautions being taken that the gas was
not produced from the grease on the stop-cock employed, and it also
appeared that carbon-dioxide was produced by the action of radium
emanation on thorium nitrate. The action of radium emanation on
compounds (not containing carbon) of other members of the carbon group,
namely, silicon, zirconium and lead, was then investigated; in the cases
of zirconium nitrate and hydro-fluosilicic acid, carbon-dioxide was
obtained; but in the case of lead chlorate the amount of carbon dioxide
was quite insignificant. Curiously enough, the perchlorate of bismuth, a
metal which belongs to the nitrogen group of elements, also yielded
carbon-dioxide when acted on by emanation. Sir William Ramsay concludes
his discussion of these experiments as follows: “Such are the facts. No
one is better aware than I how insufficient the proof is. Many other
experiments must be made before it can confidently be asserted that
certain elements, when exposed to ‘concentrated energy,’ undergo
degradation into carbon.” Some such confirmatory experiments were
carried out by Sir William Ramsay and Mr. Francis L. Usher, and they
also described an experiment with a compound of titanium. Their results
confirm Sir William Ramsay’s former experiments. Carbon-dioxide was
obtained in appreciable quantities by the action of emanation on
compounds of silicon, titanium, zirconium and thorium. In the case of
lead, the amount of carbon dioxide obtained was inappreciable.[126]

    [125] Sir WILLIAM RAMSAY: “Elements and Electrons,” _Journal of the
    Chemical Society_, vol. xcv. (1909), pp. 624 _et seq._

    [126] For a brief account in English of these later experiments see
    _The Chemical News_, vol. c. p. 209 (October 29, 1909).


The Possibility of Making Gold.

§ =101.= It does not seem unlikely that if it is possible to “degrade”
elements, it may be possible to build them up. It has been suggested
that it might be possible to obtain, in this way, gold from silver,
since these two elements occur in the same column in the Periodic Table;
but the suggestion still awaits experimental confirmation. The question
arises, What would be the result if gold could be cheaply produced? That
gold is a metal admirably adapted for many purposes, for which its
scarcity prevents its use, must be admitted. But the financial chaos
which would follow if it were to be cheaply obtained surpasses the
ordinary imagination. It is a theme that ought to appeal to a novelist
of exceptional imaginative power. However, we need not fear these
results, for not only is radium extremely rare, far dearer than gold,
and on account of its instability will never be obtained in large
quantities, but, judging from the above-described experiments, if,
indeed, the radium emanation is the true Philosopher’s Stone, the
quantity of gold that may be hoped for by its aid is extremely small.


The Significance of “Allotropy.”

§ =102.= A very suggestive argument for the transmutation of the metals
was put forward by Professor Henry M. Howe, LL.D., in a paper entitled
“Allotropy or Transmutation?” read before the British Association
(Section B), Sheffield Meeting, 1910. Certain substances are known
which, although differing in their physical properties very markedly,
behave chemically as if they were one and the same element, giving rise
to the same series of compounds. Such substances, of which we may
mention diamond, graphite and charcoal (_e.g._, lampblack)--all of which
are known chemically as “carbon”--or, to take another example, yellow
phosphorus (a yellow, waxy, highly inflammable solid) and red phosphorus
(a difficultly-inflammable, dark red substance, probably possessing a
minutely crystalline structure), are, moreover, convertible one into the
other.[127] It has been customary to refer to such substances as
different forms or allotropic modifications of the same element, and not
to regard them as being different elements. As Professor Howe says, “If
after defining ‘elements’ as substances hitherto indivisible, and
different elements as those which differ in at least some one property,
and after asserting that the elements cannot be transmuted into each
other, we are confronted with the change from diamond into lampblack,
and with the facts, first, that each is clearly indivisible hitherto
and hence an element, and, second, that they differ in every property,
we try to escape in a circle by saying that they are not different
elements because they do change into each other. In short, we limit the
name ‘element’ to indivisible substances which cannot be transmuted into
each other, and we define those which do transmute as _ipso facto_ one
element, and then we say that the elements cannot be transmuted. Is not
this very like saying that, if you call a calf’s tail a leg, then a calf
has five legs? And if it is just to reply that calling a tail a leg does
not make it a leg, is it not equally just to reply that calling two
transmutable elements one element does not make them so?

    [127] Diamond is transformed into graphite when heated by a powerful
    electric current between carbon poles, and both diamond and graphite
    can be indirectly converted into charcoal. The artificial production
    of the diamond, however, is a more difficult process; but the late
    Professor Moissan succeeded in effecting it, so far as very small
    diamonds are concerned, by dissolving charcoal in molten iron or
    silver and allowing it to crystallise from the solution under high
    pressure. Graphite was also obtained. Red phosphorus is produced
    from yellow phosphorus by heating the latter in absence of air. The
    temperature 240-250° C. is the most suitable; at higher temperatures
    the reverse change sets in, red phosphorus being converted into
    yellow phosphorus.

“Is it philosophical to point to the fact that two such transmutable
elements yield but a single line of derivatives as proof that they are
one element? Is not this rather proof of the readiness, indeed
irresistibleness, of their transmutation? Does not this simply mean that
the derivativeless element, whenever it enters into combination,
inevitably transmutes into its mate which has derivatives?”[128]

    [128] Professor HENRY M. HOWE, LL.D.: “Allotropy or Transmutation.”
    (See _The Chemical News_, vol. cii. pp. 153 and 154, September 23,
    1910.)

According to the atomic theory the differences between what are termed
“allotropic modifications” are generally ascribed to differences in the
number and arrangement of the atoms constituting the molecules of such
“modifications,” and not to any differences in the atoms themselves. But
we cannot argue that two such “allotropic modifications” or elements
which are transmutable into one another are one and the same element,
because they possess the same atomic weight, and different elements are
distinguished by different atomic weights; for the reason that, in the
determination of atomic weights, derivatives of such bodies are
employed; hence, the value obtained is the atomic weight of the element
which forms derivatives, from which that of its derivativeless mate may
differ considerably for all we know to the contrary, if we do, indeed,
regard the atomic weights of the elements as having any meaning beyond
expressing the inertia-ratios in which they combine one with another.

If we wish to distinguish between two such “allotropic modifications”
apart from any theoretical views concerning the nature and constitution
of matter, we can say that such “modifications” are different because
equal weights of them contain, or are equivalent to, different
quantities of energy,[129] since the change of one “form” to another
takes place only with the evolution or absorption (as the case may be)
of heat.[130] But, according to modern views regarding the nature of
matter, this is the sole fundamental difference between two different
elements--such are different because equal weights of them contain or
are equivalent to different quantities of energy. The so-called
“allotropic modifications of an element,” therefore, are just as much
different elements as any other different elements, and the change from
one “modification” to another is a true transmutation of the elements;
the only distinction being that what are called “allotropic
modifications of the same element” differ only slightly in respect of
the energy they contain, and hence are comparatively easy to convert one
into the other, whereas different elements (so called) differ very
greatly from one another in this respect, whence it is to be concluded
that the transmutation of one such element into another will only be
attained by the utilisation of energy in a very highly concentrated
form, such as is evolved simultaneously with the spontaneous
decomposition of the radium emanation.

    [129] For a defence of the view that chemical substances may be
    regarded as energy-complexes, and that this view is equally as valid
    as the older notion of a chemical substance as an inertia-complex,
    _i.e._, as something made up entirely of different units or atoms
    each characterised by the possession of a definite and constant
    weight at a fixed point on the earth’s surface, see an article by
    the present writer, entitled “The Claims of Thermochemistry,”
    _Knowledge and Scientific News_, vol. vii. (New Series), pp. 227 _et
    seq._ (July, 1910).

    [130] In some cases the heat change accompanying the transformation
    of an element into an “allotropic modification” can be measured
    directly. More frequently, however, it is calculated as the
    difference between the quantities of heat obtained when the two
    “forms” are converted into one and the same compound.


Conclusion.

§ =103.= We have shown that modern science indicates the essential truth
of alchemistic doctrine, and our task is ended. Writing in 1904, Sir
William Ramsay said: “If these hypotheses [concerning the possibility of
causing the atoms of ordinary elements to absorb energy] are just, then
the transmutations of the elements no longer appears an idle dream. The
philosopher’s stone will have been discovered, and it is not beyond the
bounds of possibility that it may lead to that other goal of the
philosophers of the dark ages--the _elixir vitæ_. For the action of
living cells is also dependent on the nature and direction of the energy
which they contain; and who can say that it will be impossible to
control their action, when the means of imparting and controlling energy
shall have been investigated?”[131] Whatever may be the final verdict
concerning his own experiments, those of Sir Ernest Rutherford, referred
to in the Preface to the present edition, demonstrate the fact of
transmutation; and it is worth noticing how many of the alchemists’
obscure descriptions of their Magistery well apply to that marvellous
something which we call Energy, the true “First Matter” of the Universe.
And of the other problem, the _Elixir Vitæ_, who knows?

    [131] Sir WILLIAM RAMSAY: “Radium and its Products,” _Harper’s
    Magazine_ (December 1904), vol. xlix. (European Edition), p. 57.


THE END.
