BOOK V.




423.


IN THE GREAT SILENCE.—Here is the sea, here may we forget the town. It is
true that its bells are still ringing the Angelus—that solemn and foolish
yet sweet sound at the junction between day and night,—but one moment
more! now all is silent. Yonder lies the ocean, pale and brilliant; it
cannot speak. The sky is glistening with its eternal mute evening hues,
red, yellow, and green: it cannot speak. The small cliffs and rocks which
stretch out into the sea as if each one of them were endeavouring to find
the loneliest spot—they too are dumb. Beautiful and awful indeed is this
vast silence, which so suddenly overcomes us and makes our heart swell.

Alas! what deceit lies in this dumb beauty! How well could it speak, and
how evilly, too, if it wished! Its tongue, tied up and fastened, and its
face of suffering happiness—all this is but malice, mocking at your
sympathy: be it so! I do not feel ashamed to be the plaything of such
powers! but I pity thee, oh nature, because thou must be silent, even
though it be only malice that binds thy tongue: nay, I pity thee for the
sake of thy malice!

Alas! the silence deepens, and once again my heart swells within me: it is
startled by a fresh truth—it, too, is dumb; it likewise sneers when the
mouth calls out something to this beauty; it also enjoys the sweet malice
of its silence. I come to hate speaking; yea, even thinking. Behind every
word I utter do I not hear the laughter of error, imagination, and
insanity? Must I not laugh at my pity and mock my own mockery? Oh sea, oh
evening, ye are bad teachers! Ye teach man how to cease to be a man. Is he
to give himself up to you? Shall he become as you now are, pale,
brilliant, dumb, immense, reposing calmly upon himself?—exalted above
himself?




424.


FOR WHOM THE TRUTH EXISTS.—Up to the present time errors have been the
power most fruitful in consolations: we now expect the same effects from
accepted truths, and we have been waiting rather too long for them. What
if these truths could not give us this consolation we are looking for?
Would that be an argument against them? What have these truths in common
with the sick condition of suffering and degenerate men that they should
be useful to them? It is, of course, no proof against the truth of a plant
when it is clearly established that it does not contribute in any way to
the recovery of sick people. Formerly, however, people were so convinced
that man was the ultimate end of nature that they believed that knowledge
could reveal nothing that was not beneficial and useful to man—nay, there
could not, should not be, any other things in existence.

Perhaps all this leads to the conclusion that truth as an entity and a
coherent whole exists only for those natures who, like Aristotle, are at
once powerful and harmless, joyous and peaceful: just as none but these
would be in a position to seek such truths; for the others seek remedies
for themselves—however proud they may be of their intellect and its
freedom, they do not seek truth. Hence it comes about that these others
take no real joy in science, but reproach it for its coldness, dryness,
and inhumanity. This is the judgment of sick people about the games of the
healthy.—Even the Greek gods were unable to administer consolation; and
when at length the entire Greek world fell ill, this was a reason for the
destruction of such gods.




425.


WE GODS IN EXILE.—Owing to errors regarding their descent, their
uniqueness, their mission, and by claims based upon these errors, men have
again and again “surpassed themselves”; but through these same errors the
world has been filled with unspeakable suffering, mutual persecution,
suspicion, misunderstanding, and an even greater amount of individual
misery. Men have become suffering creatures in consequence of their
morals, and the sum-total of what they have obtained by those morals is
simply the feeling that they are far too good and great for this world,
and that they are enjoying merely a transitory existence on it. As yet the
“proud sufferer” is the highest type of mankind.




426.


THE COLOUR-BLINDNESS OF THINKERS.—How differently from us the Greeks must
have viewed nature, since, as we cannot help admitting, they were quite
colour-blind in regard to blue and green, believing the former to be a
deeper brown, and the latter to be yellow. Thus, for instance, they used
the same word to describe the colour of dark hair, of the corn-flower, and
the southern sea; and again they employed exactly the same expression for
the colour of the greenest herbs, the human skin, honey, and yellow
raisins: whence it follows that their greatest painters reproduced the
world they lived in only in black, white, red, and yellow. How different
and how much nearer to mankind, therefore, must nature have seemed to
them, since in their eyes the tints of mankind predominated also in
nature, and nature was, as it were, floating in the coloured ether of
humanity! (blue and green more than anything else dehumanise nature). It
is this defect which developed the playful facility that characterised the
Greeks of seeing the phenomena of nature as gods and demi-gods—that is to
say, as human forms.

Let this, however, merely serve as a simile for another supposition. Every
thinker paints his world and the things that surround him in fewer colours
than really exist, and he is blind to individual colours. This is
something more than a mere deficiency. Thanks to this nearer approach and
simplification, he imagines he sees in things those harmonies of colours
which possess a great charm, and may greatly enrich nature. Perhaps,
indeed, it was in this way that men first learnt to take delight in
viewing existence, owing to its being first of all presented to them in
one or two shades, and consequently harmonised. They practised these few
shades, so to speak, before they could pass on to any more. And even now
certain individuals endeavour to get rid of a partial colour-blindness
that they may obtain a richer faculty of sight and discernment, in the
course of which they find that they not only discover new pleasures, but
are also obliged to lose and give up some of their former ones.




427.


THE EMBELLISHMENT OF SCIENCE.—In the same way that the feeling that
“nature is ugly, wild, tedious—we must embellish it (_embellir la
nature_)”—brought about rococo horticulture, so does the view that
“science is ugly, difficult, dry, dreary and weary, we must embellish it,”
invariably gives rise to something called philosophy. This philosophy sets
out to do what all art and poetry endeavour to do, viz., giving amusement
above all else; but it wishes to do this, in conformity with its
hereditary pride, in a higher and more sublime fashion before an audience
of superior intellects. It is no small ambition to create for these
intellects a kind of horticulture, the principal charm of which—like that
of the usual gardening—is to bring about an optical illusion (by means of
temples, perspective, grottos, winding walks, and waterfalls, to speak in
similes), exhibiting science in a condensed form and in all kinds of
strange and unexpected illuminations, infusing into it as much indecision,
irrationality, and dreaminess as will enable us to walk about in it “as in
savage nature,” but without trouble and boredom.

Those who are possessed of this ambition even dream of making religion
superfluous—religion, which among men of former times served as the
highest kind of entertainment. All this is now running its course, and
will one day attain its highest tide. Even now hostile voices are being
raised against philosophy, exclaiming: “Return to science, to nature, and
the naturalness of science!” and thus an age may begin which may discover
the most powerful beauty precisely in the “savage and ugly” domains of
science, just as it is only since the time of Rousseau that we have
discovered the sense for the beauty of high mountains and deserts.




428.


TWO KINDS OF MORALISTS.—To see a law of nature for the first time, and to
see it whole (for example, the law of gravity or the reflection of light
and sound), and afterwards to explain such a law, are two different things
and concern different classes of minds. In the same way, those moralists
who observe and exhibit human laws and habits—moralists with
discriminating ears, noses, and eyes—differ entirely from those who
interpret their observations. These latter must above all be inventive,
and must possess an imagination untrammelled by sagacity and knowledge.




429.


THE NEW PASSION.—Why do we fear and dread a possible return to barbarism?
Is it because it would make people less happy than they are now? Certainly
not! the barbarians of all ages possessed more happiness than we do: let
us not deceive ourselves on this point!—but our impulse towards knowledge
is too widely developed to allow us to value happiness without knowledge,
or the happiness of a strong and fixed delusion: it is painful to us even
to imagine such a state of things! Our restless pursuit of discoveries and
divinations has become for us as attractive and indispensable as hapless
love to the lover, which on no account would he exchange for
indifference,—nay, perhaps we, too, are hapless lovers! Knowledge within
us has developed into a passion, which does not shrink from any sacrifice,
and at bottom fears nothing but its own extinction. We sincerely believe
that all humanity, weighed down as it is by the burden of this passion,
are bound to feel more exalted and comforted than formerly, when they had
not yet overcome the longing for the coarser satisfaction which
accompanies barbarism.

It may be that mankind may perish eventually from this passion for
knowledge!—but even that does not daunt us. Did Christianity ever shrink
from a similar thought? Are not love and death brother and sister? Yes, we
detest barbarism,—we all prefer that humanity should perish rather than
that knowledge should enter into a stage of retrogression. And, finally,
if mankind does not perish through some passion it will perish through
some weakness: which would we prefer? This is the main question. Do we
wish its end to be in fire and light, or in the sands?




430.


LIKEWISE HEROIC.—To do things of the worst possible odour, things of which
we scarcely dare to speak, but which are nevertheless useful and
necessary, is also heroic. The Greeks were not ashamed of numbering even
the cleansing of a stable among the great tasks of Hercules.




431.


THE OPINIONS OF OPPONENTS.—In order to measure the natural subtlety or
weakness of even the cleverest heads, we must consider the manner in which
they take up and reproduce the opinions of their adversaries, for the
natural measure of any intellect is thereby revealed. The perfect sage
involuntarily idealises his opponent and frees his inconsistencies from
all defects and accidentalities: he only takes up arms against him when he
has thus turned his opponent into a god with shining weapons.




432.


INVESTIGATOR AND ATTEMPTER.—There is no exclusive method of knowing in
science. We must deal with things tentatively, treating them by turns
harshly or justly, passionately or coldly. One investigator deals with
things like a policeman, another like a confessor, and yet a third like an
inquisitive traveller. We force something from them now by sympathy and
now by violence: the one is urged onward and led to see clearly by the
veneration which the secrets of the things inspire in him, and the other
again by the indiscretion and malice met with in the explanation of these
secrets. We investigators, like all conquerors, explorers, navigators, and
adventurers, are men of a daring morality, and we must put up with our
liability to be in the main looked upon as evil.




433.


SEEING WITH NEW EYES.—Presuming that by the term “beauty in art” is always
implied the imitation of something that is happy—and this I consider to be
true—according as an age or a people or a great autocratic individuality
represents happiness: what then is disclosed by the so-called realism of
our modern artists in regard to the happiness of our epoch? It is
undoubtedly its type of beauty which we now understand most easily and
enjoy best of any. As a consequence, we are induced to believe that this
happiness which is now peculiar to us is based on realism, on the sharpest
possible senses, and on the true conception of the actual—that is to say,
not upon reality, but upon what we know of reality. The results of science
have already gained so much in depth and extent that the artists of our
century have involuntarily become the glorifiers of scientific “blessings”
_per se_.




434.


INTERCESSION.—Unpretentious regions are subjects for great landscape
painters; remarkable and rare regions for inferior painters: for the great
things of nature and humanity must intercede in favour of their little,
mediocre, and vain admirers—whereas the great man intercedes in favour of
unassuming things.




435.


NOT TO PERISH UNNOTICED.—It is not only once but continuously that our
excellence and greatness are constantly crumbling away; the weeds that
grow among everything and cling to everything ruin all that is great in
us—the wretchedness of our surroundings, which we always try to overlook
and which is before our eyes at every hour of the day, the innumerable
little roots of mean and petty feelings which we allow to grow up all
about us, in our office, among our companions, or our daily labours. If we
permit these small weeds to escape our notice we shall perish through them
unnoticed!—And, if you must perish, then do so immediately and suddenly;
for in that case you will perhaps leave proud ruins behind you! and not,
as is now to be feared, merely molehills, covered with grass and
weeds—these petty and miserable conquerors, as humble as ever, and too
wretched even to triumph.




436.


CASUISTIC.—We are confronted with a very bitter and painful dilemma, for
the solution of which not every one’s bravery and character are equal:
when, as passengers on board a steamer, we discover that the captain and
the helmsman are making dangerous mistakes, and that we are their
superiors in nautical science—and then we ask ourselves: “What would
happen if we organised a mutiny against them, and made them both
prisoners? Is it not our duty to do so in view of our superiority? and
would not they in their turn be justified in putting us in irons for
encouraging disobedience?”

This is a simile for higher and worse situations; and the final question
to be decided is, What guarantees our superiority and our faith in
ourselves in such a case? Success? but in order to do that we must do the
very thing in which all the danger lies—not only dangerous for ourselves,
but also for the ship.




437.


PRIVILEGES.—The man who really owns himself, that is to say, he who has
finally conquered himself, regards it as his own right to punish, to
pardon, or to pity himself: he need not concede this privilege to any one,
though he may freely bestow it upon some one else—a friend, for
example—but he knows that in doing this he is conferring a right, and that
rights can only be conferred by one who is in full possession of power.




438.


MAN AND THINGS.—Why does the man not see the things? He himself is in the
way: he conceals the things.




439.


CHARACTERISTICS OF HAPPINESS.—There are two things common to all
sensations of happiness: a profusion of feelings, accompanied by animal
spirits, so that, like the fishes, we feel ourselves to be in our element
and play about in it. Good Christians will understand what Christian
exuberance means.




440.


NEVER RENOUNCE.—Renouncing the world without knowing it, like a nun,
results in a fruitless and perhaps melancholy solitude. This has nothing
in common with the solitude of the _vita contemplativa_ of the thinker:
when he chooses this form of solitude he wishes to renounce nothing; but
he would on the contrary regard it as a renunciation, a melancholy
destruction of his own self, if he were obliged to continue in the _vita
practica_. He forgoes this latter because he knows it, because he knows
himself. So he jumps into _his_ water, and thus gains _his_ cheerfulness.




441.


WHY THE NEAREST THINGS BECOME EVER MORE DISTANT FOR US.—The more we give
up our minds to all that has been and will be, the paler will become that
which actually is. When we live with the dead and participate in their
death, what are our “neighbours” to us? We grow lonelier simply because
the entire flood of humanity is surging round about us. The fire that
burns within us, and glows for all that is human, is continually
increasing—and hence we look upon everything that surrounds us as if it
had become more indifferent, more shadowy,—but our cold glance is
offensive.




442.


THE RULE.—“The rule always appears to me to be more interesting than the
exception”—whoever thinks thus has made considerable progress in
knowledge, and is one of the initiated.




443.


ON EDUCATION.—I have gradually come to see daylight in regard to the most
general defect in our methods of education and training: nobody learns,
nobody teaches, nobody wishes, to endure solitude.




444.


SURPRISE AT RESISTANCE.—Because we have reached the point of being able to
see through a thing we believe that henceforth it can offer us no further
resistance—and then we are surprised to find that we can see through it
and yet cannot penetrate through it. This is the same kind of foolishness
and surprise as that of the fly on a pane of glass.




445.


WHERE THE NOBLEST ARE MISTAKEN.—We give some one at length our dearest and
most valued possession, and then love has nothing more to give: but the
recipient of the gift will certainly not consider it as his dearest
possession, and will consequently be wanting in that full and complete
gratitude which we expect from him.




446.


HIERARCHY.—First and foremost, there are the superficial thinkers, and
secondly the profound thinkers—such as dive into the depths of a
thing,—thirdly, the thorough thinkers, who get to the bottom of a
thing—which is of much greater importance than merely diving into its
depths,—and, finally, those who leap head foremost into the marsh: though
this must not be looked upon as indicating either depth or thoroughness!
these are the lovers of obscurity.(13)




447.


MASTER AND PUPIL.—By cautioning his pupils against himself the teacher
shows his humanity.




448.


HONOURING REALITY.—How can we look at this exulting multitude without
tears and acquiescence? at one time we thought little of the object of
their exultation, and we should still think so if we ourselves had not
come through a similar experience. And what may these experiences lead us
to! what are our opinions! In order that we may not lose ourselves and our
reason we must fly from experiences. It was thus that Plato fled from
actuality, and wished to contemplate things only in their pale mental
concepts: he was full of sensitiveness, and knew how easily the waves of
this sensitiveness would drown his reason.—Must the sage therefore say, “I
will honour reality, but I will at the same time turn my back to it
because I know and dread it?” Ought he to behave as certain African tribes
do in the presence of their sovereign, whom they approach backwards, thus
showing their reverence at the same time as their dread?




449.


WHERE ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT?—Oh, how greatly it goes against my grain to
impose my own thoughts upon others! How I rejoice over every mood and
secret change within me as the result of which the thoughts of others are
victorious over my own! but from time to time I enjoy an even greater
satisfaction, when I am allowed to give away my intellectual possessions,
like the confessor sitting in his box and anxiously awaiting the arrival
of some distressed person who stands in need of consolation, and will be
only too glad to relate the full misery of his thoughts so that the
listener’s hand and heart will once again be filled, and the troubled soul
eased! Not only has the confessor no desire for renown: he would fain shun
gratitude as well, for it is obtrusive, and does not stand in awe of
solitude or silence.

But to live without a name, and even to be slightly sneered at; too
obscure to arouse envy or enmity; with a head free from fever, a handful
of knowledge, and a pocketful of experience; a physician, as it were, of
the poor in spirit, helping this one or that one whose head is troubled
with opinions, without the latter perceiving who has actually helped him!
without any desire to appear to be in the right in the presence of his
patient, or to carry off a victory. To speak to him in such a way that,
after a short and almost imperceptible hint or objection, the listener may
find out for himself what is right and proudly walk away! To be like an
obscure and unknown inn which turns no one away who is in need, but which
is afterwards forgotten and laughed at! To be without any advantages over
others—neither possessing better food nor purer air, nor a more cheerful
mind—but always to be giving away, returning, communicating, and becoming
poorer! To know how to be humble in order to be accessible to many people
and humiliating to none! To take a great deal of injustice on his
shoulders and creep through the cracks and crannies of all kinds of
errors, in order that we may reach many obscure souls on their secret
paths! ever in possession of some kind of love, and some kind of egoism
and self-enjoyment! in possession of power, and yet at the same time
hidden and resigned! constantly basking in the sunshine and sweetness of
grace, and yet knowing that quite near to us stands the ladder leading to
the sublime!—that would be life! that would indeed be a reason for a long
life!




450.


THE TEMPTATIONS OF KNOWLEDGE.—A glance through the gate of science acts
upon passionate spirits as the charm of charms: they will probably become
dreamers, or in the most favourable cases poets, so great is their desire
for the happiness of the man who can discern. Does it not enter into all
your senses, this note of sweet temptation by which science has announced
its joyful message in a thousand ways, and in the thousand and first way,
the noblest of all, “Begone, illusion! for then ‘Woe is me’ also vanished,
and with it woe itself is gone” (Marcus Aurelius).




451.


FOR WHOM A COURT JESTER IS NEEDFUL.—Those who are very beautiful, very
good, and very powerful scarcely ever learn the full and naked truth about
anything,—for in their presence we involuntarily lie a little, because we
feel their influence, and in view of this influence convey a truth in the
form of an adaptation (by falsifying the shades and degrees of facts, by
omitting or adding details, and withholding that which is insusceptible of
adaptation). If, however, in spite of all this, people of this description
insist upon hearing the truth, they must keep a court jester—a being with
the madman’s privilege of being unable to adapt himself.




452.


IMPATIENCE.—There is a certain degree of impatience in men of thought and
action, which in cases of failure at once drives them to the opposite
camp, induces them to take a great interest in it, and to give themselves
up to new undertakings—until here again the slowness of their success
drives them away. Thus they rove about, like so many reckless adventurers,
through the practices of many kingdoms and natures; and in the end, as the
result of their wide knowledge of men and things, acquired by their
unheard of travel and practice, and with a certain moderation of their
craving, they become powerful practical men. Hence a defect in character
may become the school of genius.




453.


A MORAL INTERREGNUM.—Who is now in a position to describe that which will
one day supplant moral feelings and judgments!—however certain we may be
that these are founded on error, and that the building erected upon such
foundations cannot be repaired: their obligation must gradually diminish
from day to day, in so far as the obligation of reason does not diminish!
To carry out the task of re-establishing the laws of life and action is
still beyond the power of our sciences of physiology and medicine, society
and solitude: though it is only from them that we can borrow the
foundation-stones of new ideals (but not the ideals themselves). Thus we
live a preliminary or after existence, according to our tastes and
talents, and the best we can do in this interregnum is to be as much as
possible our own “_reges_,” and to establish small experimental states. We
are experiments: if we want to be so!




454.


A DIGRESSION.—A book like this is not intended to be read through at once,
or to be read aloud. It is intended more particularly for reference,
especially on our walks and travels: we must take it up and put it down
again after a short reading, and, more especially, we ought not to be
amongst our usual surroundings.




455.


THE PRIMARY NATURE.—As we are now brought up, we begin by acquiring a
secondary nature, and we possess it when the world calls us mature, of
age, efficient. A few have sufficient of the serpent about them to cast
this skin some day, when their primary nature has come to maturity under
it. But in the majority of people the germ of it withers away.




456.


A VIRTUE IN PROCESS OF BECOMING.—Such assertions and promises as those of
the ancient philosophers on the unity of virtue and felicity, or that of
Christianity, “Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and
all these things shall be added unto you,” have never been made with
absolute sincerity, but always without a bad conscience nevertheless.
People were in the habit of boldly laying down principles—which they
wished to be true—exactly as if they were truth itself, in spite of all
appearances to the contrary, and in doing this they felt neither religious
nor moral compunction; for it was _in honorem maiorem_ of virtue or of God
that one had gone beyond truth, without, however, any selfish intention!

Many good people still act up to this degree of truthfulness: when they
feel unselfish they think it permissible to treat truth more lightly. Let
it be remembered that the word honesty is neither to be found among the
Socratic nor the Christian virtues: it is one of our most recent virtues,
not yet quite mature, frequently misconstrued and misunderstood, scarcely
conscious of itself—something in embryo, which we may either promote or
check according to our inclination.




457.


FINAL TACITURNITY.—There are some men who fare like the digger after
hidden treasures: they quite accidentally discover the carefully-preserved
secrets of another’s soul, and as a result come into the possession of
knowledge which it is often a heavy burden to bear. In certain
circumstances we may know the living and the dead, and sound their inmost
thoughts to such an extent that it becomes painful to us to speak to
others about them: at every word we utter we are afraid of being
indiscreet.—I can easily imagine a sudden silence on the part of the
wisest historian.




458.


THE GREAT PRIZE.—There is a very rare thing, but a very delightful one,
viz. the man with a nobly-formed intellect who possesses at the same time
the character and inclinations, and even meets with the experiences,
suited to such an intellect.




459.


THE MAGNANIMITY OF THE THINKER.—Both Rousseau and Schopenhauer were proud
enough to inscribe upon their lives the motto, _Vitam impendere vero_. And
how they both must have suffered in their pride because they could not
succeed in _verum impendere vitæ!_—_verum_, such as each of them
understood it,—when their lives ran side by side with their knowledge like
an uncouth bass which is not in tune with the melody.

Knowledge, however, would be in a bad way if it were measured out to every
thinker only in proportion as it can be adapted to his own person. And
thinkers would be in a bad way if their vanity were so great that they
could only endure such an adaptation, for the noblest virtue of a great
thinker is his magnanimity, which urges him on in his search for knowledge
to sacrifice himself and his life unshrinkingly, often shamefacedly, and
often with sublime scorn, and smiling.




460.


UTILISING OUR HOURS OF DANGER.—Those men and conditions whose every
movement may mean danger to our possessions, honour, and life or death,
and to those most dear to us, we shall naturally learn to know thoroughly.
Tiberius, for instance, must have meditated much more deeply on the
character and methods of government of the Emperor Augustus, and must have
known far more about them than even the wisest historian.

At the present day we all live, relatively speaking, in a security which
is much too great to make us true psychologists: some survey their
fellow-men as a hobby, others out of ennui, and others again merely from
habit; but never to the extent they would do if they were told “Discern or
perish!” As long as truths do not cut us to the quick we assume an
attitude of contempt towards them: they still appear to us too much like
the “winged dreams,” as if we could or could not have them at our
discretion, as if we could likewise be aroused from these truths as from a
dream!




461.


_HIC RHODUS, HIC SALTA._—Our music, which can and must change into
everything, because like the demon of the sea, it has no character of its
own: this music in former times devoted its attention to the Christian
savant, and transposed his ideals into sounds: why cannot it likewise find
those brighter, more cheerful, and universal sounds which correspond to
the ideal thinker?—a music which could rock itself at ease in the vast
floating vaults of the soul? So far our music has been so great and so
good; nothing seemed impossible to its powers. May it therefore prove
possible to create these three sensations at one time: sublimity, deep and
warm light, and rapture of the greatest possible consistency!




462.


SLOW CURES.—Chronic illnesses of the soul, like those of the body, are
very rarely due to one gross offence against physical and mental reason,
but as a general rule they arise from innumerable and petty negligences of
a minor order.—A man, for example, whose breathing becomes a trifle weaker
every day, and whose lungs, by inhaling too little air, are deprived of
their proper amount of exercise, will end by being struck down by some
chronic disease of the lungs. The only remedy for cases like these is a
countless number of minor exercises of a contrary tendency—making it a
rule, for example, to take a long and deep breath every quarter of an
hour, lying flat on the ground if possible. For this purpose a clock which
strikes the quarters should be chosen as a lifelong companion.

All these remedies are slow and trifling; but yet the man who wishes to
cure his soul will carefully consider a change, even in his least
important habits. Many a man will utter a cold and angry word to his
surroundings ten times a day without thinking about it, and he will forget
that after a few years it will have become a regular habit with him to put
his surroundings out of temper ten times a day. But he can also acquire
the habit of doing good to them ten times.




463.


ON THE SEVENTH DAY.—“You praise this as my creation? but I have only put
aside what was a burden to me! my soul is above the vanity of
creators.—You praise this as my resignation? but I have only stripped
myself of what had become burdensome! My soul is above the vanity of the
resigned ones!”




464.


THE DONOR’S MODESTY.—There is such a want of generosity in always posing
as the donor and benefactor, and showing one’s face when doing so! But to
give and bestow, and at the same time to conceal one’s name and favour! or
not to have a name at all, like nature, in whom this fact is more
refreshing to us than anything else—here at last we no more meet with the
giver and bestower, no more with a “gracious countenance.”—It is true that
you have now forfeited even this comfort, for you have placed a God in
this nature—and now everything is once again fettered and oppressed! Well?
are we never to have the right of remaining alone with ourselves? are we
always to be watched, guarded, surrounded by leading strings and gifts? If
there is always some one round about us, the best part of courage and
kindness will ever remain impossible of attainment in this world. Are we
not tempted to fly to hell before this continual obtrusiveness of heaven,
this inevitable supernatural neighbour? Never mind, it was only a dream;
let us wake up!




465.


AT A MEETING.—

_A._ What are you looking at? you have been standing here for a very long
time.

_B._ Always the new and the old over again! the helplessness of a thing
urges me on to plunge into it so deeply that I end by penetrating to its
deepest depths, and perceive that in reality it is not worth so very much.
At the end of all experiences of this kind we meet with a kind of sorrow
and stupor. I experience this on a small scale several times a day.




466.


A LOSS OF RENOWN.—What an advantage it is to be able to speak as a
stranger to mankind! When they take away our anonymity, and make us
famous, the gods deprive us of “half our virtue.”




467.


DOUBLY PATIENT.—“By doing this you will hurt many people.”—I know that,
and I also know that I shall have to suffer for it doubly: in the first
place out of pity for their suffering, and secondly from the revenge they
will take on me. But in spite of this I cannot help doing what I do.




468.


THE KINGDOM OF BEAUTY IS GREATER.—We move about in nature, cunning and
cheerful, in order that we may surprise everything in the beauty peculiar
to it; we make an effort, whether in sunshine or under a stormy sky, to
see a distant part of the coast with its rocks, bays, and olive and pine
trees under an aspect in which it achieves its perfection and
consummation. Thus also we should walk about among men as their
discoverers and explorers, meting out to them good and evil in order that
we may unveil the peculiar beauty which is seen with some in the sunshine,
in others under thunder-clouds, or with others again only in twilight and
under a rainy sky.

Are we then forbidden to enjoy the evil man like some savage landscape
which possesses its own bold and daring lines and luminous effects, while
this same man, so long as he behaves well, and in conformity with the law,
appears to us to be an error of drawing, and a mere caricature which
offends us like a defect in nature?—Yes, this is forbidden: for as yet we
have only been permitted to seek beauty in anything that is morally
good,—and this is sufficient to explain why we have found so little and
have been compelled to look for beauty without either flesh or bones!—in
the same way as evil men are familiar with innumerable kinds of happiness
which the virtuous never dream of, we may also find among them innumerable
types of beauty, many of them as yet undiscovered.




469.


THE INHUMANITY OF THE SAGE.—The heavy and grinding progress of the sage,
who in the words of the Buddhist song, “Wanders lonely like the
rhinoceros,” now and again stands in need of proofs of a conciliatory and
softened humanity, and not only proofs of those accelerated steps, those
polite and sociable witticisms; not only of humour and a certain
self-mockery, but likewise of contradictions and occasional returns to the
predominating inconsistencies. In order that he may not resemble the heavy
roller that rolls along like fate, the sage who wishes to teach must take
advantage of his defects, and utilise them for his own adornment; and when
saying “despise me” he will implore permission to be the advocate of a
presumptuous truth.

This sage wishes to lead you to the mountains, and he will perhaps
endanger your life: therefore as the price of his enjoyment he willingly
authorises you to take your revenge either before or afterwards on such a
guide. Do you remember what thoughts came into your head when he once led
you to a gloomy cavern over a slippery path? Your distrustful heart beat
rapidly, and said inwardly, “This guide might surely do something better
than crawl about here! he is one of those idle people who are full of
curiosity—is it not doing him too much honour to appear to attach any
value at all to him by following him?”




470.


MANY AT THE BANQUET.—How happy we are when we are fed like the birds by
the hand of some one who throws them their crumbs without examining them
too closely, or inquiring into their worthiness! To live like a bird which
comes and flies away, and does not carry its name on its beak! I take
great pleasure in satisfying my appetite at the banquet of the many.




471.


ANOTHER TYPE OF LOVE FOR ONE’S NEIGHBOUR.—Everything that is agitated,
noisy, fitful, and nervous forms a contrast to the great passion which,
glowing in the heart of man like a quiet and gloomy flame, and gathering
about it all that is flaming and ardent, gives to man the appearance of
coldness and indifference, and stamps a certain impassiveness on his
features. Such men are occasionally capable of showing their love for
their neighbour, but this love is different from that of sociable people
who are anxious to please. It is a mild, contemplative, and calm
amiability: these people, as it were, look out of the windows of the
castle which serves them as a stronghold, and consequently as a prison;
for the outlook into the far distance, the open air, and a different world
is so pleasant for them!




472.


NOT JUSTIFYING ONESELF.—

_A._ But why are you not willing to justify yourself?

_B._ I could do it in this instance, as in dozens of others; but I despise
the pleasure which lies in justification, for all that matters little to
me, and I would rather bear a stained reputation than give those petty
folks the spiteful pleasure of saying, “He takes these things very
seriously.” This is not true. Perhaps I ought to have more consideration
for myself, and look upon it as a duty to rectify erroneous opinions about
myself—I am too indifferent and too indolent regarding myself, and
consequently also regarding everything that is brought about through my
agency.




473.


WHERE TO BUILD ONE’S HOUSE.—If you feel great and productive in solitude,
society will belittle and isolate you, and _vice versa_. A powerful
mildness such as that of a father:—wherever this feeling takes possession
of you, _there_ build your house, whether in the midst of the multitude,
or on some silent spot. _Ubi pater sum, ibi patria._(14)




474.


THE ONLY MEANS.—“Dialectic is the only means of reaching the divine
essence, and penetrating behind the veil of appearance.” This declaration
of Plato in regard to dialectic is as solemn and passionate as that of
Schopenhauer in regard to the contrary of dialectic—and both are wrong.
For that to which they wish to point out the way to us does not exist.—And
so far have not all the great passions of mankind been passions for
something non-existent?—and all their ceremonies—ceremonies for something
non-existent also?




475.


BECOMING HEAVY.—You know him not; whatever weights he may attach to
himself he will nevertheless be able to raise them all with him. But you,
judging from the weak flapping of your own wings, come to the conclusion
that he wishes to remain below, merely because he does burden himself with
those weights.




476.


AT THE HARVEST THANKSGIVING OF THE INTELLECT.—There is a daily increase
and accumulation of experiences, events, opinions upon these experiences
and events, and dreams upon these opinions—a boundless and delightful
display of wealth! its aspect dazzles the eyes: I can no longer understand
how the poor in spirit can be called blessed! Occasionally, however, I
envy them when I am tired: for the superintendence of such vast wealth is
no easy task, and its weight frequently crushes all happiness.—Alas, if
only the mere sight of it were sufficient! If only we could be misers of
our knowledge!




477.


FREED FROM SCEPTICISM.—

_A._ Some men emerge from a general moral scepticism bad-tempered and
feeble, corroded, worm-eaten, and even partly consumed—but I on the other
hand, more courageous and healthier than ever, and with my instincts
conquered once more. Where a strong wind blows, where the waves are
rolling angrily, and where more than usual danger is to be faced, there I
feel happy. I did not become a worm, although I often had to work and dig
like a worm.

_B._ You have just ceased to be a sceptic; for you deny!

_A._ And in doing so I have learnt to say yea again.




478.


LET US PASS BY.—Spare him! Leave him in his solitude! Do you wish to crush
him down entirely? He became cracked like a glass into which some hot
liquid was poured suddenly—and he was such a precious glass!




479.


LOVE AND TRUTHFULNESS.—Through our love we have become dire offenders
against truth, and even habitual dissimulators and thieves, who give out
more things as true than seem to us to be true. On this account the
thinker must from time to time drive away those whom he loves (not
necessarily those who love him), so that they may show their sting and
wickedness, and cease to tempt him. Consequently the kindness of the
thinker will have its waning and waxing moon.




480.


INEVITABLE.—No matter what your experience may be, any one who does not
feel well disposed towards you will find in this experience some pretext
for disparaging you! You may undergo the greatest possible revolutions of
mind and knowledge, and at length, with the melancholy smile of the
convalescent, you may be able to step out into freedom and bright
stillness, and yet some one will say: “This fellow looks upon his illness
as an argument, and takes his impotence to be a proof of the impotence of
all others—he is vain enough to fall ill that he may feel the superiority
of the sufferer.” And again, if somebody were to break the chains that
bound him down, and wounded himself severely in doing so, some one else
would point at him mockingly and cry: “How awkward he is! there is a man
who had got accustomed to his chains, and yet he is fool enough to burst
them asunder!”




481.


TWO GERMANS.—If we compare Kant and Schopenhauer with Plato, Spinoza,
Pascal, Rousseau, and Goethe, with reference to their souls and not their
intellects, we shall see that the two first-named thinkers are at a
disadvantage: their thoughts do not constitute a passionate history of
their souls—we are not led to expect in them romance, crises,
catastrophies, or death struggles. Their thinking is not at the same time
the involuntary biography of a soul, but in the case of Kant merely of a
head; and in the case of Schopenhauer again merely the description and
reflection of a character (“the invariable”) and the pleasure which this
reflection causes, that is to say, the pleasure of meeting with an
intellect of the first order.

Kant, when he shimmers through his thoughts, appears to us as an honest
and honourable man in the best sense of the words, but likewise as an
insignificant one: he is wanting in breadth and power; he had not come
through many experiences, and his method of working did not allow him
sufficient time to undergo experiences. Of course, in speaking of
experiences, I do not refer to the ordinary external events of life, but
to those fatalities and convulsions which occur in the course of the most
solitary and quiet life which has some leisure and glows with the passion
for thinking. Schopenhauer has at all events one advantage over him; for
he at least was distinguished by a certain fierce ugliness of disposition,
which showed itself in hatred, desire, vanity, and suspicion: he was of a
rather more ferocious disposition, and had both time and leisure to
indulge this ferocity. But he lacked “development,” which was also wanting
in his range of thought: he had no “history.”




482.


SEEKING ONE’S COMPANY.—Are we then looking for too much when we seek the
company of men who have grown mild, agreeable to the taste, and nutritive,
like chestnuts which have been put into the fire and taken out just at the
right moment? Of men who expect little from life, and prefer to accept
this little as a present rather than as a merit of their own, as if it
were carried to them by birds and bees? Of men who are too proud ever to
feel themselves rewarded, and too serious in their passion for knowledge
and honesty to have time for or pleasure in fame? Such men we should call
philosophers; but they themselves will always find some more modest
designation.




483.


SATIATED WITH MANKIND.—

_A._ Seek for knowledge! Yes! but always as a man! What? must I always be
a spectator of the same comedy, and always play a part in the same comedy,
without ever being able to observe things with other eyes than those? and
yet there may be countless types of beings whose organs are better adapted
for knowledge than ours! At the end of all their searching for knowledge
what will men at length come to know? Their organs! which perhaps is as
much as to say: the impossibility of knowledge! misery and disgust!

_B._ This is a bad attack you have—reason is attacking you! to-morrow,
however, you will again be in the midst of knowledge, and hence of
irrationality—that is to say, delighted about all that is human. Let us go
to the sea!




484.


GOING OUR OWN WAY.—When we take the decisive step, and make up our minds
to follow our own path, a secret is suddenly revealed to us: it is clear
that all those who had hitherto been friendly to us and on intimate terms
with us judged themselves to be superior to us, and are offended now. The
best among them are indulgent, and are content to wait patiently until we
once more find the “right path”—they know it, apparently. Others make fun
of us, and pretend that we have been seized with a temporary attack of
mild insanity, or spitefully point out some seducer. The more malicious
say we are vain fools, and do their best to blacken our motives; while the
worst of all see in us their greatest enemy, some one who is thirsting for
revenge after many years of dependence,—and are afraid of us. What, then,
are we to do? My own opinion is that we should begin our sovereignty by
promising to all our acquaintances in advance a whole year’s amnesty for
sins of every kind.




485.


FAR-OFF PERSPECTIVES.—

_A._ But why this solitude?

_B._ I am not angry with anybody. But when I am alone it seems to me that
I can see my friends in a clearer and rosier light than when I am with
them; and when I loved and felt music best I lived far from it. It would
seem that I must have distant perspectives in order that I may think well
of things.




486.


GOLD AND HUNGER.—Here and there we meet with a man who changes into gold
everything that he touches. But some fine evil day he will discover that
he himself must starve through this gift of his. Everything around him is
brilliant, superb, and unapproachable in its ideal beauty, and now he
eagerly longs for things which it is impossible for him to turn into
gold—and how intense is this longing! like that of a starving man for a
meal! Query: What will he seize?




487.


SHAME.—Look at that noble steed pawing the ground, snorting, longing for a
ride, and loving its accustomed rider—but, shameful to relate, the rider
cannot mount to-day, he is tired.—Such is the shame felt by the weary
thinker in the presence of his own philosophy!




488.


AGAINST THE WASTE OF LOVE.—Do we not blush when we surprise ourselves in a
state of violent aversion? Well, then, we should also blush when we find
ourselves possessed of strong affections on account of the injustice
contained in them. More: there are people who feel their hearts weighed
down and oppressed when some one gives them the benefit of his love and
sympathy to the extent that he deprives others of a share. The tone of his
voice reveals to us the fact that we have been specially selected and
preferred! but, alas! I am not thankful for being thus selected: I
experience within myself a certain feeling of resentment against him who
wishes to distinguish me in this way—he shall not love me at the expense
of others! I shall always try to look after myself and to endure myself,
and my heart is often filled to overflowing, and with some reason. To such
a man nothing ought to be given of which others stand so greatly in need.




489.


FRIENDS IN NEED.—We may occasionally remark that one of our friends
sympathises with another more than with us. His delicacy is troubled
thereby, and his selfishness is not equal to the task of breaking down his
feelings of affection: in such a case we should facilitate the separation
for him, and estrange him in some way in order to widen the distance
between us.—This is also necessary when we fall into a habit of thinking
which might be detrimental to him: our affection for him should induce us
to ease his conscience in separating himself from us by means of some
injustice which we voluntarily take upon ourselves.




490.


THOSE PETTY TRUTHS.—“You know all that, but you have never lived through
it—so I will not accept your evidence. Those ‘petty truths’—you deem them
petty because you have not paid for them with your blood!”—But are they
really great, simply because they have been bought at so high a price? and
blood is always too high a price!—“Do you really think so? How stingy you
are with your blood!”




491.


SOLITUDE, THEREFORE!—

_A._ So you wish to go back to your desert?

_B._ I am not a quick thinker; I must wait for myself a long time—it is
always later and later before the water from the fountain of my own ego
spurts forth, and I have often to go thirsty longer than suits my
patience. That is why I retire into solitude in order that I may not have
to drink from the common cisterns. When I live in the midst of the
multitude my life is like theirs, and I do not think like myself; but
after some time it always seems to me as if the multitude wished to banish
me from myself and to rob me of my soul. Then I get angry with all these
people, and afraid of them; and I must have the desert to become well
disposed again.




492.


UNDER THE SOUTH WIND.—

_A._ I can no longer understand myself! It was only yesterday that I felt
myself so tempestuous and ardent, and at the same time so warm and sunny
and exceptionally bright! but to-day! Now everything is calm, wide,
oppressive, and dark like the lagoon at Venice. I wish for nothing, and
draw a deep breath, and yet I feel inwardly indignant at this “wish for
nothing”—so the waves rise and fall in the ocean of my melancholy.

_B._ You describe a petty, agreeable illness. The next wind from the
north-east will blow it away.

_A._ Why so?




493.


ON ONE’S OWN TREE.—

_A._ No thinker’s thoughts give me so much pleasure as my own: this, of
course, proves nothing in favour of their value; but I should be foolish
to neglect fruits which are tasteful to me only because they happen to
grow on my own tree!—and I was once such a fool.

_B._ Others have the contrary feeling: which likewise proves nothing in
favour of their thoughts, nor yet is it any argument against their value.




494.


THE LAST ARGUMENT OF THE BRAVE MAN.—There are snakes in this little clump
of trees.—Very well, I will rush into the thicket and kill them.—But by
doing that you will run the risk of falling a victim to them, and not they
to you.—But what do I matter?




495.


OUR TEACHERS.—During our period of youth we select our teachers and guides
from our own times, and from those circles which we happen to meet with:
we have the thoughtless conviction that the present age must have teachers
who will suit us better than any others, and that we are sure to find them
without having to look very far. Later on we find that we have to pay a
heavy penalty for this childishness: we have to expiate our teachers in
ourselves, and then perhaps we begin to look for the proper guides. We
look for them throughout the whole world, including even present and past
ages—but perhaps it may be too late, and at the worst we discover that
they lived when we were young—and that at that time we lost our
opportunity.




496.


THE EVIL PRINCIPLE.—Plato has marvellously described how the philosophic
thinker must necessarily be regarded as the essence of depravity in the
midst of every existing society: for as the critic of all its morals he is
naturally the antagonist of the moral man, and, unless he succeeds in
becoming the legislator of new morals, he lives long in the memory of men
as an instance of the “evil principle.” From this we may judge to how
great an extent the city of Athens, although fairly liberal and fond of
innovations, abused the reputation of Plato during his lifetime. What
wonder then that he—who, as he has himself recorded, had the “political
instinct” in his body—made three different attempts in Sicily, where at
that time a united Mediterranean Greek State appeared to be in process of
formation?

It was in this State, and with its assistance, that Plato thought he could
do for the Greeks what Mohammed did for the Arabs several centuries later:
viz. establishing both minor and more important customs, and especially
regulating the daily life of every man. His ideas were quite practicable
just as certainly as those of Mohammed were practicable; for even much
more incredible ideas, those of Christianity, proved themselves to be
practicable! a few hazards less and a few hazards more—and then the world
would have witnessed the Platonisation of Southern Europe; and, if we
suppose that this state of things had continued to our own days, we should
probably be worshipping Plato now as the “good principle.” But he was
unsuccessful, and so his traditional character remains that of a dreamer
and a Utopian—stronger epithets than these passed away with ancient
Athens.




497.


THE PURIFYING EYE.—We have the best reason for speaking of “genius” in
men—for example, Plato, Spinoza, and Goethe—whose minds appear to be but
loosely linked to their character and temperament, like winged beings
which easily separate themselves from them, and then rise far above them.
On the other hand, those who never succeeded in cutting themselves loose
from their temperament, and who knew how to give to it the most
intellectual, lofty, and at times even cosmic expression (Schopenhauer,
for instance) have always been very fond of speaking about their genius.

These geniuses could not rise above themselves, but they believed that,
fly where they would, they would always find and recover themselves—this
is their “greatness,” and this can be greatness!—The others who are
entitled to this name possess the pure and purifying eye which does not
seem to have sprung out of their temperament and character, but separately
from them, and generally in contradiction to them, and looks out upon the
world as on a God whom it loves. But even people like these do not come
into possession of such an eye all at once: they require practice and a
preliminary school of sight, and he who is really fortunate will at the
right moment also fall in with a teacher of pure sight.




498.


NEVER DEMAND!—You do not know him! it is true that he easily and readily
submits both to men and things, and that he is kind to both—his only wish
is to be left in peace—but only in so far as men and things do not
_demand_ his submission. Any demand makes him proud, bashful, and warlike.




499.


THE EVIL ONE.—“Only the solitary are evil!”—thus spake Diderot, and
Rousseau at once felt deeply offended. Thus he proved that Diderot was
right. Indeed, in society, or amid social life, every evil instinct is
compelled to restrain itself, to assume so many masks, and to press itself
so often into the Procrustean bed of virtue, that we are quite justified
in speaking of the martyrdom of the evil man. In solitude, however, all
this disappears. The evil man is still more evil in solitude—and
consequently for him whose eye sees only a drama everywhere he is also
more beautiful.




500.


AGAINST THE GRAIN.—A thinker may for years at a time force himself to
think against the grain: that is, not to pursue the thoughts that spring
up within him, but, instead, those which he is compelled to follow by the
exigencies of his office, an established division of time, or any
arbitrary duty which he may find it necessary to fulfil. In the long run,
however, he will fall ill; for this apparently moral self-command will
destroy his nervous system as thoroughly and completely as regular
debauchery.




501.


MORTAL SOULS.—Where knowledge is concerned perhaps the most useful
conquest that has ever been made is the abandonment of the belief in the
immortality of the soul. Humanity is henceforth at liberty to wait: men
need no longer be in a hurry to swallow badly-tested ideas as they had to
do in former times. For in those times the salvation of this poor
“immortal soul” depended upon the extent of the knowledge which could be
acquired in the course of a short existence: decisions had to be reached
from one day to another, and “knowledge” was a matter of dreadful
importance!

Now we have acquired good courage for errors, experiments, and the
provisional acceptance of ideas—all this is not so very important!—and for
this very reason individuals and whole races may now face tasks so vast in
extent that in former years they would have looked like madness, and
defiance of heaven and hell. Now we have the right to experiment upon
ourselves! Yes, men have the right to do so! the greatest sacrifices have
not yet been offered up to knowledge—nay, in earlier periods it would have
been sacrilege, and a sacrifice of our eternal salvation, even to surmise
such ideas as now precede our actions.




502.


ONE WORD FOR THREE DIFFERENT CONDITIONS.—When in a state of passion one
man will be forced to let loose the savage, dreadful, unbearable animal.
Another when under the influence of passion will raise himself to a high,
noble, and lofty demeanour, in comparison with which his usual self
appears petty. A third, whose whole person is permeated with nobility of
feeling, has also the most noble storm and stress: and in this state he
represents Nature in her state of savageness and beauty, and stands only
one degree lower than Nature in her periods of greatness and serenity,
which he usually represents. It is while in this state of passion,
however, that men understand him better, and venerate him more highly at
these moments—for then he is one step nearer and more akin to them. They
feel at once delighted and horrified at such a sight and call it—divine.




503.


FRIENDSHIP.—The objection to a philosophic life that it renders us useless
to our friends would never have arisen in a modern mind: it belongs rather
to classical antiquity. Antiquity knew the stronger bonds of friendship,
meditated upon it, and almost took it to the grave with it. This is the
advantage it has over us: we, on the other hand, can point to our
idealisation of sexual love. All the great excellencies of ancient
humanity owed their stability to the fact that man was standing side by
side with man, and that no woman was allowed to put forward the claim of
being the nearest and highest, nay even sole object of his love, as the
feeling of passion would teach. Perhaps our trees do not grow so high now
owing to the ivy and the vines that cling round them.




504.


RECONCILIATION.—Should it then be the task of philosophy to reconcile what
the child has learnt with what the man has come to recognise? Should
philosophy be the task of young men because they stand midway between
child and man and possess intermediate necessities? It would almost appear
to be so if you consider at what ages of their life philosophers are now
in the habit of setting forth their conceptions: at a time when it is too
late for faith and too early for knowledge.




505.


PRACTICAL PEOPLE.—We thinkers have the right of deciding good taste in all
things, and if necessary of decreeing it. The practical people finally
receive it from us: their dependence upon us is incredibly great, and is
one of the most ridiculous spectacles in the world, little though they
themselves know it and however proudly they like to carp at us unpractical
people. Nay, they would even go so far as to belittle their practical life
if we should show a tendency to despise it—whereto at times we might be
urged on by a slightly vindictive feeling.




506.


THE NECESSARY DESICCATION OF EVERYTHING GOOD.—What! must we conceive of a
work exactly in the spirit of the age that has produced it? but we
experience greater delight and surprise, and get more information out of
it when we do not conceive it in this spirit! Have you not remarked that
every new and good work, so long as it is exposed to the damp air of its
own age is least valuable—just because it still has about it all the odour
of the market, of opposition, of modern ideas, and of all that is
transient from day to day? Later on, however, it dries up, its “actuality”
dies away: and then only does it obtain its deep lustre and its
perfume—and also, if it is destined for it, the calm eye of eternity.




507.


AGAINST THE TYRANNY OF TRUTH.—Even if we were mad enough to consider all
our opinions as truth, we should nevertheless not wish them alone to
exist. I cannot see why we should ask for an autocracy and omnipotence of
truth: it is sufficient for me to know that it is a great power. Truth,
however, must meet with opposition and be able to fight, and we must be
able to rest from it at times in falsehood—otherwise truth will grow
tiresome, powerless, and insipid, and will render us equally so.




508.


NOT TO TAKE A THING PATHETICALLY.—What we do to benefit ourselves should
not bring us in any moral praise, either from others or from ourselves,
and the same remark applies to those things which we do to please
ourselves. It is looked upon as _bon ton_ among superior men to refrain
from taking things pathetically in such cases, and to refrain from all
pathetic feelings: the man who has accustomed himself to this has
retrieved his _naïveté_.




509.


THE THIRD EYE.—What! You are still in need of the theatre! are you still
so young? Be wise, and seek tragedy and comedy where they are better
acted, and where the incidents are more interesting, and the actors more
eager. It is indeed by no means easy to be merely a spectator in these
cases—but learn! and then, amid all difficult or painful situations, you
will have a little gate leading to joy and refuge, even when your passions
attack you. Open your stage eye, that big third eye of yours, which looks
out into the world through the other two.




510.


ESCAPING FROM ONE’S VIRTUES.—Of what account is a thinker who does not
know how to escape from his own virtues occasionally! Surely a thinker
should be more than “a moral being”!




511.


THE TEMPTRESS.—Honesty is the great temptress of all fanatics.(15) What
seemed to tempt Luther in the guise of the devil or a beautiful woman, and
from which he defended himself in that uncouth way of his, was probably
nothing but honesty, and perhaps in a few rarer cases even truth.




512.


BOLD TOWARDS THINGS.—The man who, in accordance with his character, is
considerate and timid towards persons, but is courageous and bold towards
things, is afraid of new and closer acquaintances, and limits his old ones
in order that he may thus make his incognito and his inconsiderateness
coincide with truth.




513.


LIMITS AND BEAUTY.—Are you looking for men with a fine culture? Then you
will have to be satisfied with restricted views and sights, exactly as
when you are looking for fine countries.—There are, of course, such
panoramic men: they are like panoramic regions, instructive and
marvellous: but not beautiful.




514.


TO THE STRONGER.—Ye stronger and arrogant intellects, we ask you for only
one thing: throw no further burdens upon our shoulders, but take some of
our burdens upon your own, since ye are stronger! but ye delight in doing
the exact contrary: for ye wish to soar, so that we must carry your burden
in addition to our own—we must crawl!




515.


THE INCREASE OF BEAUTY.—Why has beauty increased by the progress of
civilisation? because the three occasions for ugliness appear ever more
rarely among civilised men: first, the wildest outbursts of ecstasy;
secondly, extreme bodily exertion, and, thirdly, the necessity of inducing
fear by one’s very sight and presence—a matter which is so frequent and of
so great importance in the lower and more dangerous stages of culture that
it even lays down the proper gestures and ceremonials and makes ugliness a
duty.




516.


NOT TO IMBUE OUR NEIGHBOURS WITH OUR OWN DEMON.—Let us in our age continue
to hold the belief that benevolence and beneficence are the
characteristics of a good man; but let us not fail to add “provided that
in the first place he exhibits his benevolence and beneficence towards
himself.” For if he acts otherwise—that is to say, if he shuns, hates, or
injures himself—he is certainly not a good man. He then merely saves
himself through others: and let these others take care that they do not
come to grief through him, however well disposed he may appear to be to
them!—but to shun and hate one’s own ego, and to live in and for others,
this has up to the present, with as much thoughtlessness as conviction,
been looked upon as “unselfish,” and consequently as “good.”




517.


TEMPTING INTO LOVE.—We ought to fear a man who hates himself; for we are
liable to become the victims of his anger and revenge. Let us therefore
try to tempt him into self-love.




518.


RESIGNATION.—What is resignation? It is the most comfortable position of a
patient, who, after having suffered a long time from tormenting pains in
order to find it, at last became tired—and then found it.




519.


DECEPTION.—When you wish to act you must close the door upon doubt, said a
man of action.—And are you not afraid of being deceived in doing so?
replied the man of a contemplative mind.




520.


ETERNAL OBSEQUIES.—Both within and beyond the confines of history we might
imagine that we were listening to a continual funeral oration: we have
buried, and are still burying, all that we have loved best, our thoughts,
and our hopes, receiving in exchange pride, _gloria mundi_—that is, the
pomp of the graveside speech. It is thus that everything is made good!
Even at the present time the funeral orator remains the greatest public
benefactor.




521.


EXCEPTIONAL VANITY.—Yonder man possesses one great quality which serves as
a consolation for him: his look passes with contempt over the remainder of
his being, and almost his entire character is included in this. But he
recovers from himself when, as it were, he approaches his sanctuary;
already the road leading to it appears to him to be an ascent on broad
soft steps—and yet, ye cruel ones, ye call him vain on this account!




522.


WISDOM WITHOUT EARS.—To hear every day what is said about us, or even to
endeavour to discover what people think of us, will in the end kill even
the strongest man. Our neighbours permit us to live only that they may
exercise a daily claim upon us! They certainly would not tolerate us if we
wished to claim rights over them, and still less if we wished to be right!
In short, let us offer up a sacrifice to the general peace, let us not
listen when they speak of us, when they praise us, blame us, wish for us,
or hope for us—nay, let us not even think of it.




523.


A QUESTION OF PENETRATION.—When we are confronted with any manifestation
which some one has permitted us to see, we may ask: what is it meant to
conceal? What is it meant to draw our attention from? What prejudices does
it seek to raise? and again, how far does the subtlety of the
dissimulation go? and in what respect is the man mistaken?




524.


THE JEALOUSY OF THE LONELY ONES.—This is the difference between sociable
and solitary natures, provided that both possess an intellect: the former
are satisfied, or nearly satisfied, with almost anything whatever; from
the moment that their minds have discovered a communicable and happy
version of it they will be reconciled even with the devil himself! But the
lonely souls have their silent rapture, and their speechless agony about a
thing: they hate the ingenious and brilliant display of their inmost
problems as much as they dislike to see the women they love too loudly
dressed—they watch her mournfully in such a case, as if they were just
beginning to suspect that she was desirous of pleasing others. This is the
jealousy which all lonely thinkers and passionate dreamers exhibit with
regard to the _esprit_.




525.


THE EFFECT OF PRAISE.—Some people become modest when highly praised,
others insolent.




526.


UNWILLING TO BE A SYMBOL.—I sympathise with princes: they are not at
liberty to discard their high rank even for a short time, and thus they
come to know people only from the very uncomfortable position of constant
dissimulation—their continual compulsion to represent something actually
ends by making solemn ciphers of them.—Such is the fate of all those who
deem it their duty to be symbols.




527.


THE HIDDEN MEN.—Have you never come across those people who check and
restrain even their enraptured hearts, and who would rather become mute
than lose the modesty of moderation? and have you never met those
embarrassing, and yet so often good-natured people who do not wish to be
recognised, and who time and again efface the tracks they have made in the
sand? and who even deceive others as well as themselves in order to remain
obscure and hidden?




528.


UNUSUAL FORBEARANCE.—It is often no small indication of kindness to be
unwilling to criticise some one, and even to refuse to think of him.




529.


HOW MEN AND NATIONS GAIN LUSTRE.—How many really individual actions are
left undone merely because before performing them we perceive or suspect
that they will be misunderstood!—those actions, for example, which have
some intrinsic value, both in good and evil. The more highly an age or a
nation values its individuals, therefore, and the more right and
ascendancy we accord them, the more will actions of this kind venture to
make themselves known,—and thus in the long run a lustre of honesty, of
genuineness in good and evil, will spread over entire ages and nations, so
that they—the Greeks, for example—like certain stars, will continue to
shed light for thousands of years after their sinking.




530.


DIGRESSIONS OF THE THINKER.—The course of thought in certain men is strict
and inflexibly bold. At times it is even cruel towards such men, although
considered individually they may be gentle and pliable. With well-meaning
hesitation they will turn the matter ten times over in their heads, but
will at length continue their strict course. They are like streams that
wind their way past solitary hermitages: there are places in their course
where the stream plays hide and seek with itself, and indulges in short
idylls with islets, trees, grottos, and cascades—and then it rushes ahead
once more, passes by the rocks, and forces its way through the hardest
stones.




531.


DIFFERENT FEELINGS TOWARDS ART.—From the time when we begin to live as a
hermit, consuming and consumed, our only company being deep and prolific
thoughts, we expect from art either nothing more, or else something quite
different from what we formerly expected—in a word, we change our taste.
For in former times we wished to penetrate for a moment by means of art
into the element in which we are now living permanently: at that time we
dreamt ourselves into the rapture of a possession which we now actually
possess. Indeed, flinging away from us for the time being what we now
have, and imagining ourselves to be poor, or to be a child, a beggar, or a
fool, may now at times fill us with delight.




532.


“LOVE EQUALISES.”—Love wishes to spare the other to whom it devotes itself
any feeling of strangeness: as a consequence it is permeated with disguise
and simulation; it keeps on deceiving continuously, and feigns an equality
which in reality does not exist. And all this is done so instinctively
that women who love deny this simulation and constant tender trickery, and
have even the audacity to assert that love equalises (in other words that
it performs a miracle)!

This phenomenon is a simple matter if one of the two permits himself or
herself to be loved, and does not deem it necessary to feign, but leaves
this to the other. No drama, however, could offer a more intricate and
confused instance than when both persons are passionately in love with one
another; for in this case both are anxious to surrender and to endeavour
to conform to the other, and finally they are both at a loss to know what
to imitate and what to feign. The beautiful madness of this spectacle is
too good for this world, and too subtle for human eyes.




533.


WE BEGINNERS.—How many things does an actor see and divine when he watches
another on the stage! He notices at once when a muscle fails in some
gesture; he can distinguish those little artificial tricks which are so
calmly practised separately before the mirror, and are not in conformity
with the whole; he feels when the actor is surprised on the stage by his
own invention, and when he spoils it amid this surprise.—How differently,
again, does a painter look at some one who happens to be moving before
him! He will see a great deal that does not actually exist in order to
complete the actual appearance of the person, and to give it its full
effect. In his mind he attempts several different illuminations of the
same object, and divides the whole by an additional contrast.—Oh, that we
now possessed the eyes of such an actor and such a painter for the
province of the human soul!




534.


SMALL DOSES.—If we wish a change to be as deep and radical as possible, we
must apply the remedy in minute doses, but unremittingly for long periods.
What great action can be performed all at once? Let us therefore be
careful not to exchange violently and precipitately the moral conditions
with which we are familiar for a new valuation of things,—nay, we may even
wish to continue living in the old way for a long time to come, until
probably at some very remote period we become aware of the fact that the
new valuation has made itself the predominating power within us, and that
its minute doses to which we must henceforth become accustomed have set up
a new nature within us.—We now also begin to understand that the last
attempt at a great change of valuations—that which concerned itself with
political affairs (the “great revolution”)—was nothing more than a
pathetic and sanguinary piece of quackery which, by means of sudden
crises, was able to inspire a credulous Europe with the hope of a sudden
recovery, and has therefore made all political invalids impatient and
dangerous up to this very moment.




535.


TRUTH REQUIRES POWER.—Truth in itself is no power at all, in spite of all
that flattering rationalists are in the habit of saying to the contrary.
Truth must either attract power to its side, or else side with power, for
otherwise it will perish again and again. This has already been
sufficiently demonstrated, and more than sufficiently!




536.


THE THUMBSCREW.—It is disgusting to observe with what cruelty every one
charges his two or three private virtues to the account of others who may
perhaps not possess them, and whom he torments and worries with them. Let
us therefore deal humanely with the “sense of honesty,” although we may
possess in it a thumbscrew with which we can worry to death all these
presumptuous egoists who even yet wish to impose their own beliefs upon
the whole world—we have tried this thumbscrew on ourselves!




537.


MASTERY.—We have reached mastery when we neither mistake nor hesitate in
the achievement.




538.


THE MORAL INSANITY OF GENIUS.—In a certain category of great intellects we
may observe a painful and partly horrible spectacle: in their most
productive moments their flights aloft and into the far distance appear to
be out of harmony with their general constitution and to exceed their
power in one way or another, so that each time there remains a deficiency,
and also in the long run a defectiveness in the entire machinery, which
latter is manifested among those highly intellectual natures by various
kinds of moral and intellectual symptoms more regularly than by conditions
of bodily distress.

Thus those incomprehensible characteristics of their nature—all their
timidity, vanity, hatefulness, envy, their narrow and narrowing
disposition—and that too personal and awkward element in natures like
those of Rousseau and Schopenhauer, may very well be the consequences of a
periodical attack of heart disease; and this in its turn may be the result
of a nervous complaint, and this latter the consequence of ——(16)

So long as genius dwells within us we are full of audacity, yea, almost
mad, and heedless of health, life, and honour; we fly through the day as
free and swift as an eagle, and in the darkness we feel as confident as an
owl.—But let genius once leave us and we are instantly overcome by a
feeling of the most profound despondency: we can no longer understand
ourselves; we suffer from everything that we experience and do not
experience; we feel as if we were in the midst of shelterless rocks with
the tempest raging round us, and we are at the same time like pitiful
childish souls, afraid of a rustle or a shadow.—Three-fourths of all the
evil committed in the world is due to timidity; and this is above all a
physiological process.




539.


DO YOU KNOW WHAT YOU WANT?—Have you never been troubled by the fear that
you might not be at all fitted for recognising what is true? by the fear
that your senses might be too dull, and even your delicacy of sight far
too blunt? If you could only perceive, even once, to what extent your
volition dominates your sight! How, for example, you wished yesterday to
see more than some one else, while to-day you wish to see it differently!
and how from the start you were anxious to see something which would be in
conformity with or in opposition to anything that people thought they had
observed up to the present. Oh, those shameful cravings! How often you
keep your eyes open for what is efficacious, for what is soothing, just
because you happen to be tired at the moment! Always full of secret
predeterminations of what truth should be like, so that you—you,
forsooth!—might accept it! or do you think that to-day, because you are as
frozen and dry as a bright winter morning, and because nothing is weighing
on your mind, you have better eyesight! Are not ardour and enthusiasm
necessary to do justice to the creations of thought?—and this indeed is
what is called sight! as if you could treat matters of thought any
differently from the manner in which you treat men. In all relations with
thought there is the same morality, the same honesty of purpose, the same
_arrière-pensée_, the same slackness, the same faint-heartedness—your
whole lovable and hateful self! Your physical exhaustion will lend the
things pale colours whilst your feverishness will turn them into monsters!
Does not your morning show the things in a different light from the
evening? Are you not afraid of finding in the cave of all knowledge your
own phantom, the veil in which truth is wrapped up and hidden from your
sight? Is it not a dreadful comedy in which you so thoughtlessly wish to
take part?




540.


LEARNING.—Michelangelo considered Raphael’s genius as having been acquired
by study, and upon his own as a natural gift: learning as opposed to
talent; though this is mere pedantry, with all due respect to the great
pedant himself. For what is talent but a name for an older piece of
learning, experience, exercise, appropriation, and incorporation, perhaps
as far back as the times of our ancestors, or even earlier! And again: he
who learns forms his own talents, only learning is not such an easy matter
and depends not only upon our willingness, but also upon our being able to
learn at all.

Jealousy often prevents this in an artist, or that pride which, when it
experiences any strange feeling, at once assumes an attitude of defence
instead of an attitude of scholarly receptiveness. Raphael, like Goethe,
lacked this pride, on which account they were great learners, and not
merely the exploiters of those quarries which had been formed by the
manifold genealogy of their forefathers. Raphael vanishes before our eyes
as a learner in the midst of that assimilation of what his great rival
called _his_ “nature”: this noblest of all thieves daily carried off a
portion of it; but before he had appropriated all the genius of
Michelangelo he died—and the final series of his works, because it is the
beginning of a new plan of study, is less perfect and good, for the simple
reason that the great student was interrupted by death in the midst of his
most difficult task, and took away with him that justifying and final goal
which he had in view.




541.


HOW WE SHOULD TURN TO STONE.—By slowly, very, very slowly, becoming hard
like a precious stone, and at last lie still, a joy to all eternity.




542.


THE PHILOSOPHER AND OLD AGE.—It is not wise to permit evening to act as a
judge of the day; for only too often in this case weariness becomes the
judge of success and good will. We should also take the greatest
precautions in regard to everything connected with old age and its
judgment upon life, more especially since old age, like the evening, is
fond of assuming a new and charming morality, and knows well enough how to
humiliate the day by the glow of the evening skies, twilight and a
peaceful and wistful silence. The reverence which we feel for an old man,
especially if he is an old thinker and sage, easily blinds us to the
deterioration of his intellect, and it is always necessary to bring to
light the hidden symptoms of such a deterioration and lassitude, that is
to say, to uncover the physiological phenomenon which is still concealed
behind the old man’s moral judgments and prejudices, in case we should be
deceived by our veneration for him, and do something to the disadvantage
of knowledge. For it is not seldom that the illusion of a great moral
renovation and regeneration takes possession of the old man. Basing his
views upon this, he then proceeds to express his opinions on the work and
development of his life as if he had only then for the first time become
clearsighted—and nevertheless it is not wisdom, but fatigue, which prompts
his present state of well-being and his positive judgments.

The most dangerous indication of this weariness is above all the belief in
genius, which as a rule only arises in great and semi-great men of
intellect at this period of their lives: the belief in an exceptional
position, and exceptional rights. The thinker who thus believes himself to
be inspired by genius henceforth deems it permissible for him to take
things more easily, and takes advantage of his position as a genius to
decree rather than to prove. It is probable, however, that the need felt
by the weary intellect for alleviation is the main source of this
belief—it precedes it in time, though appearances may indicate the
contrary.

At this time too, as the result of the love which all weary and old people
feel for enjoyment, such men as those I am speaking of wish to enjoy the
results of their thinking instead of again testing them and scattering the
seeds abroad once more. This leads them to make their thoughts palatable
and enjoyable, and to take away their dryness, coldness, and want of
flavour; and thus it comes about that the old thinker apparently raises
himself above his life’s work, while in reality he spoils it by infusing
into it a certain amount of fantasy, sweetness, flavour, poetic mists, and
mystic lights. This is how Plato ended, as did also that great and honest
Frenchman, Auguste Comte, who, as a conqueror of the exact sciences,
cannot be matched either among the Germans or the Englishmen of this
century.

There is a third symptom of fatigue: that ambition which actuated the
great thinker when he was young, and which could not then find anything to
satisfy it, has also grown old, and, like one that has no more time to
lose, it begins to snatch at the coarser and more immediate means of its
gratification, means which are peculiar to active, dominating, violent,
and conquering dispositions. From this time onwards the thinker wishes to
found institutions which shall bear his name, instead of erecting mere
brain-structures. What are now to him the ethereal victories and honours
to be met with in the realm of proofs and refutations, or the perpetuation
of his fame in books, or the thrill of exultation in the soul of the
reader? But the institution, on the other hand, is a temple, as he well
knows—a temple of stone, a durable edifice, which will keep its god alive
with more certainty than the sacrifices of rare and tender souls.(17)

Perhaps, too, at this period of his life the old thinker will for the
first time meet with that love which is fitted for a god rather than for a
human being, and his whole nature becomes softened and sweetened in the
rays of such a sun, like fruit in autumn. Yes, he grows more divine and
beautiful, this great old man,—and nevertheless it is old age and
weariness which permit him to ripen in this way, to grow more silent, and
to repose in the luminous adulation of a woman. Now it is all up with his
former desire—a desire which was superior even to his own ego—for real
disciples, followers who would carry on his thought, that is, true
opponents. This desire arose from his hitherto undiminished energy, the
conscious pride he felt in being able at any time to become an opponent
himself,—nay, even the deadly enemy of his own doctrine,—but now his
desire is for resolute partisans, unwavering comrades, auxiliary forces,
heralds, a pompous train of followers. He is now no longer able to bear
that dreadful isolation in which every intellect that advances beyond the
others is compelled to live. From this time forward he surrounds himself
with objects of veneration, companionship, tenderness, and love; but he
also wishes to enjoy the privileges of all religious people, and to
worship what he venerates most highly in his little community—he will even
go as far as to invent a religion for the purpose of having a community.

Thus lives the wise old man, and in living thus he falls almost
imperceptibly into such a deplorable proximity to priestly and poetic
extravagances that it is difficult to recollect all his wise and severe
period of youth, the former rigid morality of his mind, and his truly
virile dread of fancies and misplaced enthusiasm. When he was formerly in
the habit of comparing himself with the older thinkers, he did so merely
that he might measure his weakness against their strength, and that he
might become colder and more audacious towards himself; but now he only
makes this comparison to intoxicate himself with his own delusions.
Formerly he looked forward with confidence to future thinkers, and he even
took a delight in imagining himself to be cast into the shade by their
brighter light. Now, however, he is mortified to think that he cannot be
the last: he endeavours to discover some way of imposing upon mankind,
together with the inheritance which he is leaving to them, a restriction
of sovereign thinking. He fears and reviles the pride and the love of
freedom of individual minds: after him no one must allow his intellect to
govern with absolute unrestriction: he himself wishes to remain for ever
the bulwark on which the waves of ideas may break—these are his secret
wishes, and perhaps, indeed, they are not always secret.

The hard fact upon which such wishes are based, however, is that he
himself has come to a halt before his teaching, and has set up his
boundary stone, his “thus far and no farther.” In canonising himself he
has drawn up his own death warrant: from now on his mind cannot develop
further. His race is run; the hour-hand stops. Whenever a great thinker
tries to make himself a lasting institution for posterity, we may readily
suppose that he has passed the climax of his powers, and is very tired,
very near the setting of his sun.




543.


WE MUST NOT MAKE PASSION AN ARGUMENT FOR TRUTH.—Oh, you kind-hearted and
even noble enthusiasts, I know you! You wish to seem right in our eyes as
well as in your own, but especially in your own!—and an irritable and
subtle evil conscience so often spurs you on against your very enthusiasm!
How ingenious you then become in deceiving your conscience, and lulling it
to sleep! How you hate honest, simple, and clean souls; how you avoid
their innocent glances! That better knowledge whose representatives they
are, and whose voice you hear only too distinctly within yourselves when
it questions your belief,—how you try to cast suspicion upon it as a bad
habit, as a disease of the age, as the neglect and infection of your own
intellectual health! It drives you on to hate even criticism, science,
reason! You must falsify history to make it testify in your favour; you
must deny virtues in case they should obscure those of your own idols and
ideals.

Coloured images where arguments are needed! Ardour and power of
expression! Silver mists! Ambrosian nights! well do you know how to
enlighten and to darken—to darken by means of light! and indeed when your
passion can no longer be kept within bounds the moment comes when you say
to yourselves, “Now I have won for myself a good conscience, now I am
exalted, courageous, self-denying, magnanimous; now I am honest!” How you
long for these moments when your passion will confer upon you full and
absolute rights, and also, as it were, innocence. How happy you are when
engaged in battle and inspired with ecstasy or courage, when you are
elated beyond yourself, when gnawing doubt has left you, and when you can
even decree: “Any man who is not in ecstasy as we are cannot by any chance
know what or where truth is.” How you long to meet with those who share
your belief in this state—which is a state of intellectual depravity—and
to set your own fire alight with their flames! Oh, for your martyrdom,
your victory of the sanctified lie! Must you really inflict so much pain
upon yourselves?—_Must_ you?




544.


HOW PHILOSOPHY IS NOW PRACTISED.—I can see quite well that our
philosophising youths, women, and artists require from philosophy exactly
the opposite of what the Greeks derived from it. What does he who does not
hear the continual exultation that resounds through every speech and
counter-argument in a Platonic dialogue, this exultation over the new
invention of rational thinking, know about Plato or about ancient
philosophy? At that time souls were filled with enthusiasm when they gave
themselves up to the severe and sober sport of ideas, generalisations,
refutations,—that enthusiasm which perhaps those old, great, severe, and
prudent contrapuntists in music have also known. At that time the Greek
palate still possessed that older and formerly omnipotent taste: and by
the side of this taste their new taste appeared to be enveloped in so much
charm that the divine art of dialectic was sung by hesitating voices as if
its followers were intoxicated with the frenzy of love. That old form of
thinking, however, was thought within the bounds of morality, and for it
nothing existed but fixed judgments and established facts, and it had no
reasons but those of authority. Thinking, therefore, was simply a matter
of repetition, and all the enjoyment of speech and dialogue could only lie
in their form.

Wherever the substance of a thing is looked upon as eternal and
universally approved, there is only one great charm, the charm of variable
forms, that is, of fashion. Even in the poets ever since the time of
Homer, and later on in the case of the sculptors, the Greeks did not enjoy
originality, but its contrary. It was Socrates who discovered another
charm, that of cause and effect, of reason and sequence, and we moderns
have become so used to it, and have been brought up to the necessity of
logic that we look upon it as the normal taste, and as such it cannot but
be repugnant to ardent and presumptuous people. Such people are pleased by
whatever stands out boldly from the normal: their more subtle ambition
leads them to believe only too readily that they are exceptional souls,
not dialectic and rational beings, but, let us say, “intuitive” beings
gifted with an “inner sense,” or with a certain “intellectual perception.”
Above all, however, they wish to be “artistic natures” with a genius in
their heads, and a demon in their bodies, and consequently with special
rights in this world and in the world to come—especially the divine
privilege of being incomprehensible.

And people like these are “going in for” philosophy nowadays! I fear they
will discover one day that they have made a mistake—what they are looking
for is religion!




545.


BUT WE DO NOT BELIEVE YOU.—You would fain pass for psychologists, but we
shall not allow it! Are we not to notice that you pretend to be more
experienced, profound, passionate, and perfect than you actually are?—just
as we notice in yonder painter that there is a trifling presumptuousness
in his manner of wielding the brush, and in yonder musician that he brings
forward his theme with the desire to make it appear superior to what it
really is. Have you experienced history within yourselves, commotions,
earthquakes, long and profound sadness, and sudden flashes of happiness?
Have you acted foolishly with great and little fools? Have you really
undergone the delusions and woe of the good people? and also the woe and
the peculiar happiness of the most evil? Then you may speak to me of
morality, but not otherwise!




546.


SLAVE AND IDEALIST.—The followers of Epictetus would doubtless not be to
the taste of those who are now striving after the ideal. The constant
tension of his being, the indefatigable inward glance, the prudent and
reserved incommunicativeness of his eye whenever it happens to gaze upon
the outer world, and above all, his silence or laconic speech: all these
are characteristics of the strictest fortitude,—and what would our
idealists, who above all else are desirous of expansion, care for this?
But in spite of all this the Stoic is not fanatical. He detests the
display and boasting of our idealists: his pride, however great it may be,
is not eager to disturb others. It permits of a certain gentle approach,
and has no desire to spoil anybody’s good humour—nay, it can even smile. A
great deal of ancient humanity is to be seen exemplified in this ideal.
The most excellent feature about it, however, is that the thinker is
completely free from the fear of God, strictly believes in reason, and is
no preacher of penitence.

Epictetus was a slave: his ideal man is without any particular rank, and
may exist in any grade of society, but above all he is to be sought in the
deepest and lowest social classes, as the silent and self-sufficient man
in the midst of a general state of servitude, a man who defends himself
alone against the outer world, and is constantly living in a state of the
highest fortitude. He is distinguished from the Christian especially,
because the latter lives in hope in the promise of “unspeakable glory,”
permits presents to be made to him, and expects and accepts the best
things from divine love and grace, and not from himself. Epictetus, on the
other hand, neither hopes nor allows his best treasure to be given him—he
possesses it already, holds it bravely in his hand, and defies the world
to take it away from him. Christianity was devised for another class of
ancient slaves, for those who had a weak will and weak reason—that is to
say, for the majority of slaves.




547.


THE TYRANTS OF THE INTELLECT.—The progress of science is at the present
time no longer hindered by the purely accidental fact that man attains to
about seventy years, which was the case far too long. In former times
people wished to master the entire extent of knowledge within this period,
and all the methods of knowledge were valued according to this general
desire. Minor questions and individual experiments were looked upon as
unworthy of notice: people wanted to take the shortest path under the
impression that, since everything in this world seemed to be arranged with
a view to man’s needs, even the acquirement of knowledge was regulated in
view of the limits of human life.

To solve everything at a single stroke, with one word—this was the secret
desire; and the task was represented in the symbol of the Gordian knot or
the egg of Columbus. No one doubted that it was possible to reach the goal
of knowledge after the manner of Alexander or Columbus, and to settle all
questions with one answer. “There is a mystery to be solved,” seemed to be
the aim of life in the eyes of the philosopher: it was necessary in the
first place to find out what this enigma was, and to condense the problem
of the world into the simplest enigmatical formula possible. The boundless
ambition and delight of being the “unraveller of the world” charmed the
dreams of many a thinker: nothing seemed to him worth troubling about in
this world but the means of bringing everything to a satisfactory
conclusion. Philosophy thus became a kind of supreme struggle for the
tyrannical sway over the intellect, and no one doubted that such a
tyrannical domination was reserved for some very happy, subtle, ingenious,
bold, and powerful person—a single individual!—and many (the last was
Schopenhauer) fancied themselves to be this privileged person.

From this it follows that, on the whole, science has up to the present
remained in a rather backward state owing to the moral narrow-mindedness
of its disciples, and that henceforth it will have to be pursued from a
higher and more generous motive. “What do I matter?” is written over the
door of the thinker of the future.




548.


VICTORY OVER POWER.—If we consider all that has been venerated up to the
present as “superhuman intellect” or “genius,” we must come to the sad
conclusion that, considered as a whole, the intellectuality of mankind
must have been extremely low and poor: so little mind has hitherto been
necessary in order to feel at once considerably superior to all this! Alas
for the cheap glory of “genius”! How quickly has it been raised to the
throne, and its worship grown into a custom! We still fall on our knees
before power—according to the old custom of slaves—and nevertheless, when
the degree of venerability comes to be determined, only the degree of
reason in the power will be the deciding factor. We must find out, indeed,
to how great an extent power has been overcome by something higher, which
it now obeys as a tool and instrument.

As yet, however, there have been too few eyes for such investigations:
even in the majority of cases the mere valuation of genius has almost been
looked upon as blasphemy. And thus perhaps everything that is most
beautiful still takes place in the midst of darkness and vanishes in
endless night almost as soon as it has made its appearance,—I refer to the
spectacle of that power which a genius does not lay out upon works, but
upon himself as a work, that is, his own self-control, the purifying of
his own imagination, the order and selection in his inspirations and
tasks. The great man ever remains invisible in the greatest thing that
claims worship, like some distant star: his victory over power remains
without witnesses, and hence also without songs and singers. The hierarchy
of the great men in all the past history of the human race has not yet
been determined.




549.


FLIGHT FROM ONE’S SELF.—Those sufferers from intellectual spasms who are
impatient towards themselves and look upon themselves with a gloomy
eye—such as Byron or Alfred de Musset—and who, in everything that they do,
resemble runaway horses, and from their own works derive only a transient
joy and an ardent passion which almost bursts their veins, followed by
sterility and disenchantment—how are they able to bear up! They would fain
attain to something “beyond themselves.” If we happen to be Christians,
and are seized by such a desire as this, we strive to reach God and to
become one with Him; if we are a Shakespeare we shall be glad to perish in
images of a passionate life; if we are like Byron we long for actions,
because these detach us from ourselves to an even greater extent than
thoughts, feelings, and works.

And should the desire for performing great deeds really be at bottom
nothing but a flight from our own selves?—as Pascal would ask us. And
indeed this assertion might be proved by considering the most noble
representations of this desire for action: in this respect let us
remember, bringing the knowledge of an alienist to our aid, that four of
the greatest men of all ages who were possessed of this lust for action
were epileptics—Alexander the Great, Cæsar, Mohammed, and Napoleon; and
Byron likewise was subject to the same complaint.




550.


KNOWLEDGE AND BEAUTY.—If men, as they are still in the habit of doing,
reserve their veneration and feelings of happiness for works of fancy and
imagination, we should not be surprised if they feel chilled and
displeased by the contrary of fancy and imagination. The rapture which
arises from even the smallest, sure, and definite step in advance into
insight, and which our present state of science yields to so many in such
abundance—this rapture is in the meantime not believed in by all those who
are in the habit of feeling enraptured only when they leave reality
altogether and plunge into the depths of vague appearance—romanticism.
These people look upon reality as ugly, but they entirely overlook the
fact that the knowledge of even the ugliest reality is beautiful, and that
the man who can discern much and often is in the end very far from
considering as ugly the main items of that reality, the discovery of which
has always inspired him with the feeling of happiness.

Is there anything “beautiful in itself”? The happiness of those who can
recognise augments the beauty of the world, bathing everything that exists
in a sunnier light: discernment not only envelops all things in its own
beauty, but in the long run permeates the things themselves with its
beauty—may ages to come bear witness to the truth of this statement! In
the meantime let us recall an old experience: two men so thoroughly
different in every respect as Plato and Aristotle were agreed in regard to
what constituted superior happiness—not merely their own and that of men
in general, but happiness in itself, even the happiness of the gods. They
found this happiness to lie in knowledge, in the activity of a well
practised and inventive understanding (not in “intuition” like the German
theologians and semi-theologians; not in visions, like the mystics; and
not in work, like the merely practical men). Similar opinions were
expressed by Descartes and Spinoza. What great delight must all these men
have felt in knowledge! and how great was the danger that their honesty
might give way, and that they themselves might become panegyrists of
things!




551.


FUTURE VIRTUES.—How has it come about that, the more intelligible the
world has become, the more all kinds of ceremonies have diminished? Was
fear so frequently the fundamental basis of that awe which overcame us at
the sight of anything hitherto unknown and mysterious, and which taught us
to fall upon our knees before the unintelligible, and to beg for mercy?
And has the world, perhaps, through the very fact that we have grown less
timid, lost some of the charms it formerly had for us? Is it not possible
that our own dignity and stateliness, our formidable character, has
decreased together with our spirit of dread? Perhaps we value the world
and ourselves less highly since we have begun to think more boldly about
it and ourselves? Perhaps there will come a moment in the future when this
courageous spirit of thinking will have reached such a point that it will
feel itself soaring in supreme pride, far above men and things—when the
wise man, being also the boldest, will see himself and even more
particularly existence, the lowest of all beneath himself?

This type of courage, which is not far removed from excessive generosity,
has been lacking in humanity up to the present.—Oh, that our poets might
once again become what they once were: seers, telling us something about
what might possibly happen! now that what is real and what is past are
being ever more and more taken from them, and must continue to be taken
from them—for the time of innocent counterfeiting is at an end! Let them
try to enable us to anticipate future virtues, or virtues that will never
be found on earth, although they may exist somewhere in the
world!—purple-glowing constellations and whole Milky Ways of the
beautiful! Where are ye, ye astronomers of the ideal?




552.


IDEAL SELFISHNESS.—Is there a more sacred state than that of pregnancy? To
perform every one of our actions in the silent conviction that in one way
or another it will be to the benefit of that which is being generated
within us—that it must augment its mysterious value, the very thought of
which fills us with rapture? At such a time we refrain from many things
without having to force ourselves to do so: we suppress the angry word, we
grasp the hand forgivingly; our child must be born from all that is best
and gentlest. We shun our own harshness and brusqueness in case it should
instil a drop of unhappiness into the cup of the beloved unknown.
Everything is veiled, ominous; we know nothing about what is going on, but
simply wait and try to be prepared. During this time, too, we experience a
pure and purifying feeling of profound irresponsibility, similar to that
felt by a spectator before a drawn curtain; _it_ is growing, _it_ is
coming to light; we have nothing to do with determining its value, or the
hour of its arrival. We are thrown back altogether upon indirect,
beneficent and defensive influences. “Something greater than we are is
growing here”—such is our most secret hope: we prepare everything with a
view to his birth and prosperity—not merely everything that is useful, but
also the noblest gifts of our souls.

We should, and can, live under the influence of such a blessed
inspiration! Whether what we are looking forward to is a thought or a
deed, our relationship to every essential achievement is none other than
that of pregnancy, and all our vainglorious boasting about “willing” and
“creating” should be cast to the winds! True and ideal selfishness
consists in always watching over and restraining the soul, so that our
productiveness may come to a beautiful termination. Thus in this indirect
manner we must provide for and watch over the good of all; and the frame
of mind, the mood in which we live, is a kind of soothing oil which
spreads far around us on the restless souls.—Still, these pregnant ones
are funny people! let us therefore dare to be funny also, and not reproach
others if they must be the same. And even when this phenomenon becomes
dangerous and evil we must not show less respect to that which is
generating within us or others than ordinary worldly justice, which does
not allow the judge or the hangman to interfere with a pregnant woman.




553.


CIRCUITOUS ROUTES.—Where does all this philosophy mean to end with its
circuitous routes? Does it do more than transpose into reason, so to
speak, a continuous and strong impulse—a craving for a mild sun, a bright
and bracing atmosphere, southern plants, sea breezes, short meals of meat,
eggs, and fruit, hot water to drink, quiet walks for days at a time,
little talking, rare and cautious reading, living alone, pure, simple, and
almost soldier-like habits—a craving, in short, for all things which are
suited to my own personal taste? a philosophy which is in the main the
instinct for a personal regimen—an instinct that longs for my air, my
height, my temperature, and my kind of health, and takes the circuitous
route of my head to persuade me to it!

There are many other and certainly more lofty philosophies, and not only
such as are more gloomy and pretentious than mine—and are they perhaps,
taking them as a whole, nothing but intellectual circuitous routes of the
same kind of personal impulses?—In the meantime I look with a new eye upon
the mysterious and solitary flight of a butterfly high on the rocky banks
of the lake where so many plants are growing: there it flies hither and
thither, heedless of the fact that its life will last only one more day,
and that the night will be too cold for its winged fragility. For it, too,
a philosophy might be found, though it might not be my own.




554.


LEADING.(18)—When we praise progress we only praise the movement and those
who do not let us remain on the same spot, and in the circumstances this
is certainly something, especially if we live among Egyptians. In
changeable Europe, however, where movement is “understood,” to use their
own expression, “as a matter of course”—alas, if _we_ only understood
something about it too!—I praise leaders and forerunners: that is to say,
those who always leave themselves behind, and do not care in the least
whether any one is following them or not. “Wherever I halt I find myself
alone: why should I halt! the desert is still so wide!”—such is the
sentiment of the true leader.




555.


THE LEAST IMPORTANT ARE SUFFICIENT.—We ought to avoid events when we know
that even the least important of them frequently enough leave a strong
impression upon us—and these we cannot avoid.—The thinker must possess an
approximate canon of all the things he still wishes to experience.




556.


THE FOUR VIRTUES.—Honest towards ourselves, and to all and everything
friendly to us; brave in the face of our enemy; generous towards the
vanquished; polite at all times: such do the four cardinal virtues wish us
to be.




557.


MARCHING AGAINST AN ENEMY.—How pleasant is the sound of even bad music and
bad motives when we are setting out to march against an enemy!




558.


NOT CONCEALING ONE’S VIRTUES.—I love those men who are as transparent as
water, and who, to use Pope’s expression, hide not from view the turbid
bottom of their stream. Even they, however, possess a certain vanity,
though of a rare and more sublimated kind: some of them would wish us to
see nothing but the mud, and to take no notice of the clearness of the
water which enables us to look right to the bottom. No less a man than
Gautama Buddha has imagined the vanity of these few in the formula, “Let
your sins appear before men, and conceal your virtues.” But this would
exhibit a disagreeable spectacle to the world—it would be a sin against
good taste.




559.


"NOTHING IN EXCESS!"—How often is the individual recommended to set up a
goal which it is beyond his power to reach, in order that he may at least
attain that which lies within the scope of his abilities and most
strenuous efforts! Is it really so desirable, however, that he should do
so? Do not the best men who try to act according to this doctrine,
together with their best deeds, necessarily assume a somewhat exaggerated
and distorted appearance on account of their excessive tension? and in the
future will not a grey mist of failure envelop the world, owing to the
fact that we may see everywhere struggling athletes and tremendous
gestures, but nowhere a conqueror crowned with the laurel, and rejoicing
in his victory?




560.


WHAT WE ARE FREE TO DO.—We can act as the gardeners of our impulses,
and—which few people know—we may cultivate the seeds of anger, pity,
vanity, or excessive brooding, and make these things fecund and
productive, just as we can train a beautiful plant to grow along
trellis-work. We may do this with the good or bad taste of a gardener, and
as it were, in the French, English, Dutch, or Chinese style. We may let
nature take its own course, only trimming and embellishing a little here
and there; and finally, without any knowledge or consideration, we may
even allow the plants to spring up in accordance with their own natural
growth and limitations, and fight out their battle among themselves,—nay,
we can even take delight in such chaos, though we may possibly have a hard
time with it! All this is at our option: but how many know that it is? Do
not the majority of people believe in themselves as complete and perfect
facts? and have not the great philosophers set their seal on this
prejudice through their doctrine of the unchangeability of character?




561.


LETTING OUR HAPPINESS ALSO SHINE.—In the same way as painters are unable
to reproduce the deep brilliant hue of the natural sky, and are compelled
to use all the colours they require for their landscapes a few shades
deeper than nature has made them—just as they, by means of this trick,
succeed in approaching the brilliancy and harmony of nature’s own hues, so
also must poets and philosophers, for whom the luminous rays of happiness
are inaccessible, endeavour to find an expedient. By picturing all things
a shade or two darker than they really are, their light, in which they
excel, will produce almost exactly the same effect as the sunlight, and
will resemble the light of true happiness.—The pessimist, on the other
hand, who paints all things in the blackest and most sombre hues, only
makes use of bright flames, lightning, celestial glories, and everything
that possesses a glaring, dazzling power, and bewilders our eyes: to him
light only serves the purpose of increasing the horror, and of making us
look upon things as being more dreadful than they really are.




562.


THE SETTLED AND THE FREE.—It is only in the Underworld that we catch a
glimpse of that gloomy background of all that bliss of adventure which
forms an everlasting halo around Ulysses and his like, rivalling the
eternal phosphorescence of the sea,—that background which we can never
forget: the mother of Ulysses died of grief and yearning for her child.
The one is driven on from place to place, and the heart of the other, the
tender stay-at-home friend, breaks through it—so it always is. Affliction
breaks the hearts of those who live to see that those whom they love best
are deserting their former views and faith,—it is a tragedy brought about
by the free spirits,—a tragedy which, indeed, occasionally comes to their
own knowledge. Then, perhaps, they too, like Ulysses, will be forced to
descend among the dead to get rid of their sorrow and to relieve their
affliction.




563.


THE ILLUSION OF THE MORAL ORDER OF THE UNIVERSE.—There is no “eternal
justice” which requires that every fault shall be atoned and paid for,—the
belief that such a justice existed was a terrible delusion, and useful
only to a limited extent; just as it is also a delusion that everything is
guilt which is felt as such. It is not the things themselves, but the
opinions about things that do not exist, which have been such a source of
trouble to mankind.




564.


BY THE SIDE OF EXPERIENCE.—Even great intellects have only a hand-breadth
experience—in the immediate proximity of this experience their reflection
ceases, and its place is taken by unlimited vacuity and stupidity.




565.


DIGNITY AND IGNORANCE.—Wherever we understand we become amiable, happy,
and ingenious; and when we have learnt enough, and have trained our eyes
and ears, our souls show greater plasticity and charm. We understand so
little, however, and are so insufficiently informed, that it rarely
happens that we seize upon a thing and make ourselves lovable at the same
time,—on the contrary we pass through cities, nature, and history with
stiffness and indifference, at the same time taking a pride in our stiff
and indifferent attitude, as if it were simply due to superiority. Thus
our ignorance and our mediocre desire for knowledge understand quite well
how to assume a mask of dignity and character.




566.


LIVING CHEAPLY.—The cheapest and most innocent mode of life is that of the
thinker; for, to mention at once its most important feature, he has the
greatest need of those very things which others neglect and look upon with
contempt. In the second place he is easily pleased and has no desire for
any expensive pleasures. His task is not difficult, but, so to speak,
southern; his days and nights are not wasted by remorse; he moves, eats,
drinks, and sleeps in a manner suited to his intellect, in order that it
may grow calmer, stronger, and clearer. Again, he takes pleasure in his
body and has no reason to fear it; he does not require society, except
from time to time in order that he may afterwards go back to his solitude
with even greater delight. He seeks and finds in the dead compensation for
the living, and can even replace his friends in this way—viz., by seeking
out among the dead the best who have ever lived.—Let us consider whether
it is not the contrary desires and habits which have made the life of man
expensive, and as a consequence difficult and often unbearable. In another
sense, however, the thinker’s life is certainly the most expensive, for
nothing is too good for him; and it would be an intolerable privation for
him to be deprived of the best.




567.


IN THE FIELD.—“We should take things more cheerfully than they deserve;
especially because for a very long time we have taken them more seriously
than they deserved.” So speak the brave soldiers of knowledge.




568.


POET AND BIRD.—The bird Phœnix showed the poet a glowing scroll which was
being gradually consumed in the flames. “Be not alarmed,” said the bird,
“it is your work! It does not contain the spirit of the age, and to a
still less extent the spirit of those who are against the age: so it must
be burnt. But that is a good sign. There is many a dawn of day.”




569.


TO THE LONELY ONES.—If we do not respect the honour of others in our
soliloquies as well as in what we say publicly, we are not gentlemen.




570.


LOSSES.—There are some losses which communicate to the soul a sublimity in
which it ceases from wailing, and wanders about silently, as if in the
shade of some high and dark cypresses.




571.


THE BATTLE-FIELD DISPENSARY OF THE SOUL.—What is the most efficacious
remedy?—Victory.




572.


LIFE SHALL COMFORT US.—If, like the thinker, we live habitually amid the
great current of ideas and feelings, and even our dreams follow this
current, we expect comfort and peacefulness from life, while others wish
to rest from life when they give themselves up to meditation.




573.


CASTING ONE’S SKIN.—The snake that cannot cast its skin perishes. So too
with those minds which are prevented from changing their views: they cease
to be minds.




574.


NEVER FORGET!—The higher we soar the smaller we appear to those who cannot
fly.




575.


WE AERONAUTS OF THE INTELLECT.—All those daring birds that soar far and
ever farther into space, will somewhere or other be certain to find
themselves unable to continue their flight, and they will perch on a mast
or some narrow ledge—and will be grateful even for this miserable
accommodation! But who could conclude from this that there was not an
endless free space stretching far in front of them, and that they had
flown as far as they possibly could? In the end, however, all our great
teachers and predecessors have come to a standstill, and it is by no means
in the noblest or most graceful attitude that their weariness has brought
them to a pause: the same thing will happen to you and me! but what does
this matter to either of us? _Other birds will fly farther!_ Our minds and
hopes vie with them far out and on high; they rise far above our heads and
our failures, and from this height they look far into the distant horizon
and see hundreds of birds much more powerful than we are, striving whither
we ourselves have also striven, and where all is sea, sea, and nothing but
sea!

And where, then, are we aiming at? Do we wish to cross the sea? whither
does this over-powering passion urge us, this passion which we value more
highly than any other delight? Why do we fly precisely in this direction,
where all the suns of humanity have hitherto set? Is it possible that
people may one day say of us that we also steered westward, hoping to
reach India—but that it was our fate to be wrecked on the infinite? Or, my
brethren? or—?






FOOTNOTES


    1 The book was first published in 1881, the preface being added to the
      second edition, 1886.—TR.

    2 This refers, of course, to the different genders of the nouns in
      other languages. In German, for example, the sun is feminine, and in
      French masculine.—TR.

    3 M. Henri Albert points out that this refers to a line of Paul
      Gerhardt’s well-known song: “Befiel du deine Wege.” TR.

    4 “Formal education” is the name given in Germany to those branches of
      learning which tend to develop the logical faculties, as opposed to
      “material” education which deals with the acquisition of facts and
      all kinds of “useful” knowledge.—TR.

    5 The reference is to the _Odyssey_, XX. 18: “Τέτλαθι δή, κραδίη; καὶ
      κύντερον ἄλλο ποτ᾽ ἔτλης...” etc. Κύντερος, from κύων, “a dog,” lit.
      more dog-like, _i.e._ shameless, horrible, audacious.—TR.

    6 If this aphorism seems obscure, the reader may take Tolstoi as an
      example of the first class and Nietzsche as an example of the
      second. Tolstoi’s inconsistencies are generally glossed over,
      because he professed the customary moral theories of the age, while
      Nietzsche has had to endure the most searching criticism because he
      did not. In Nietzsche’s case, however, the scrutiny has been in
      vain; for, having no unworkable Christian theories to uphold, unlike
      Tolstoi, Nietzsche’s life is not a series of compromises. The career
      of the great pagan philosopher was, in essence, much more saintly
      than that of the great Christian. How different from Tolstoi, too,
      was that noble Christian, Pascal, who, from the inevitable clash of
      his creed and his nature, died at thirty-eight, while his weaker
      epigone lived in the fulness of his fame until he was over
      eighty!—TR.

    7 A hit at the German Empire, which Nietzsche always despised, since
      it led to the utter extinction of the old German spirit. “Kingdom”
      (in “Kingdom of God”) and “Empire” are both represented by the one
      German word _Reich_.—TR.

    8 This sentence is a complete refutation of a book which caused so
      much stir in Germany about a decade ago, and in England quite
      recently, Chamberlain’s _Nineteenth Century_, in which a purely
      imaginary Teutonic race is held up as the Chosen People of the
      world. Nietzsche says elsewhere, “Peoples and Countries,” aphorism
      21, “Associate with no man who takes part in the mendacious
      race-swindle.”—TR.

    9 The fiercest protests against Nietzsche’s teaching even now come
      from the “unfeeling people.” Hence the difficulty—now happily
      past—of introducing him into Anglo-Saxon countries.—TR.

   10 The German Jews are well known for their charity, by means of which
      they probably wish to prove that they are not so bad as the
      Anti-Semites paint them.—TR.

   11 That is, do not speak either of God or the devil. The German proverb
      runs: “Man soll den Teufel nicht an die Wand malen, sonst kommt
      er.”—TR.

   12 The case of that other witty Venetian, Casanova.—TR.

   13 The play upon the words _gründlich_ (thorough) thinkers, and
      _Untergründlichen_ (lit. those underground) cannot be rendered in
      English.—TR.

   14 A variation of the well-known proverb, _Ubi bene, ibi patria_.—TR.

   15 Hence the violence of all fanatics, who do not wish to shout down
      the outer world so much as to shout down their own inner enemy, viz.
      truth.—TR.

   16 This omission is in the original.—TR.

   17 This, of course, refers to Richard Wagner, as does also the
      following paragraph.—TR.

   18 The play upon the words _Vorschritt_ (leading) and _Fortschritt_
      (progress) cannot be rendered in English.—TR.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DAWN OF DAY***



CREDITS


June 9, 2012

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Dianna Adair, Joe C, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>. (This
            file was produced from images generously made available by The
            Internet Archive/American Libraries.)



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 39955‐0.txt or 39955‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/9/9/5/39955/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

