LETTER II.

TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO HAD LITERARY AND ARTISTIC TASTES, BUT NO
PROFESSION.

  The world only recognizes performance--Uselessness of
  botch-work--Vastness of the interval between botch-work and
  handicraft--Delusions of the well-to-do--Quotation from Charles
  Lever--Indifference, and even contempt, for skill--Moral contempt for
  skill--The contempt which comes from the pride of
  knowledge--Intellectual value of skill and of professional discipline.

It is not a graceful thing for me to say, nor pleasant for you to hear,
that what you have done hitherto in art and literature is neither of
any value in itself nor likely to lead you to that which is truly and
permanently satisfying. I believe you have natural ability, though it
would not be easy for any critic to measure its degree when it has never
been developed by properly-directed work. Most critics would probably
err on the unfavorable side, for we are easily blind to powers that are
little more than latent. To see anything encouraging in your present
performance, it would need the sympathy and intelligence of the American
sculptor Greenough, of whom it was said that "his recognition was not
limited to achievement, but extended to latent powers." The world,
however, recognizes nothing short of performance, because the
performance is what it needs, and promises are of no use to it.

In this rough justice of the world there is a natural distribution of
rewards. You will be paid, in fame and money, for all excellent work;
and you will be paid, in money, though not in fame, for all work that is
even simply good, provided it be of a kind that the world needs, or
fancies that it needs. But you will never be paid at all for botch-work,
neither in money nor in fame, nor by your own inward approval.

For we all of us either know that our botch-work is worthless, or else
have serious misgivings about it. That which is less commonly realized
by those who have not undergone the test of professional labor is the
vastness of the interval that separates botch-work from handicraft, and
the difficulty of getting over it. "There are few delusions," Charles
Lever said in "The Bramleighs," "more common with well-to-do people than
the belief that if 'put to it' they could earn their own livelihood in a
variety of ways. Almost every man has some two or three or more
accomplishments which he fancies would be quite adequate to his support;
and remembering with what success the exercise of these gifts has ever
been hailed in the society of his friends, he has a sort of generous
dislike to be obliged to eclipse some poor drudge of a professional,
who, of course, will be consigned to utter oblivion after his own
performance. Augustus Bramleigh was certainly not a conceited or a vain
man, and yet he had often in his palmy days imagined how easy it would
be for him to provide for his own support. He was something of a
musician; he sang pleasingly; he drew a little; he knew something of
three or four modern languages; he had that sort of smattering
acquaintance with questions of religion, politics, and literature which
the world calls being 'well-informed,' and yet nothing short of the
grave necessity revealed to him that towards the object of securing a
livelihood a cobbler in his bulk was out-and-out his master. The world
has no need of the man of small acquirements, and would rather have its
shoes mended by the veriest botch of a professional than by the
cleverest amateur that ever studied a Greek sandal."

Something of this illusion, which Charles Lever has touched so truly,
may be due to a peculiarity of the English mind in its present (not
quite satisfactory) stage of development, a peculiarity which I am not
the first to point out, since it has been already indicated by Mr.
Pointer, the distinguished artist; and I think that this peculiarity is
to be found in very great force, perhaps in greater force than
elsewhere, in that well-to-do English middle class in which you have
been born and educated. It consists in a sort of indifference to skill
of all kinds, which passes into something not very far from active
contempt when a call is made for attention, recognition, admiration. The
source of this feeling will probably be found in the inordinate respect
for wealth, between which and highly developed personal skill, in
anything, there is a certain antagonism or incompatibility. The men of
real skill are almost always men who earn their living by their skill.
The feeling of the middle-class capitalists concerning the skilful man
may be expressed, not unjustly, as follows: "Yes, he is very clever; he
may well be clever--it is his trade; he gets his living by it." This is
held to exonerate us from the burden of admiration, and there is not any
serious interest in the achievements of human endeavor as evidence of
the marvellous natural endowments and capabilities of the human
organism. In some minds the indifference to skill is more active and
grows into very real, though not openly expressed contempt. This
contempt is partly moral. The skilful man always rejoices in his skill
with a heaven-bestowed joy and delight--one of the purest and most
divine pleasures given by God to man--an encouragement to labor, and a
reward, the best reward, after his arduous apprenticeship. But there is
a sour and severe spirit, hating all innocent pleasures, which despises
the gladness of the skilful as so much personal vanity.

There is also the contempt for skill which comes from the pride of
knowledge. To attain skill _in_ anything a degree of application is
necessary which absorbs more time than the acquisition of knowledge
_about_ the thing, so that the remarkably skilful man is not likely to
be the erudite man. There have been instances of men who possessed both
skill and learning. The American sculptor Greenough, and the English
painter Dyce, were at the same time both eminently skilful in their
craft and eminently learned out of it; but the combination is very rare.
Therefore the possession of skill has come to be considered presumptive
evidence of a want of general information.

But the truth is that professional skill is knowledge tested and
perfected by practical application, and therefore has a great
intellectual value. Professional life is to private individuals what
active warfare is to a military state. It brings to light every
deficiency, and reveals our truest needs. And therefore it seems to me a
matter for regret that you should pass your existence in irresponsible
privacy, and not have your attainments tested by the exigencies of some
professional career. The discipline which such a career affords, and
which no private resolution can ever adequately replace, may be all that
is wanting to your development.


