LETTER II.

TO A CONSERVATIVE WHO HAD ACCUSED THE AUTHOR OF A WANT OF RESPECT FOR
TRADITION.

  Transition from the ages of tradition to that of
  experiment--Attraction of the future--Joubert--Saint-Marc
  Girardin--Solved and unsolved problems--The introduction of a new
  element--Inapplicability of past experience--An argument against
  Republics--The lessons of history--Mistaken predictions that have been
  based on them--Morality and ecclesiastical authority--Compatibility of
  hopes for the future with gratitude to the past--That we are more
  respectful to the past than previous ages have been--Our feelings
  towards tradition--An incident at Warsaw--The reconstruction of the
  navy.

The astonishing revolution in thought and practice which is taking place
amongst the intelligent Japanese, the throwing away of a traditional
system of living in order to establish in its stead a system which, for
an Asiatic people, is nothing more than a vast experiment, has its
counterpart in many an individual life in Europe. We are like travellers
crossing an isthmus between two seas, who have left one ship behind
them, who have not yet seen the vessel that waits on the distant shore,
and who experience to the full all the discomforts and inconveniences of
the passage from one sea to the other. There is a break between the
existence of our forefathers and that of our posterity, and it is we who
have the misfortune to be situated exactly where the break occurs. We
are leaving behind us the security, I do not say the safety, but the
feeling of tranquillity which belonged to the ages of tradition; we are
entering upon ages whose spirit we foresee but dimly, whose institutions
are the subject of guesses and conjectures. And yet this future, of
which we know so little, attracts us more by the very vastness of its
enigma than the rich history of the past, so full of various incident,
of powerful personages, of grandeur, and suffering, and sorrow. Joubert
already noticed this forward-looking of the modern mind. "The ancients,"
he observed, "said, 'Our ancestors;' we say, 'Posterity.' We do not love
as they did _la patrie_, the country and laws of our forefathers; we
love rather the laws and the country of our children. It is the magic of
the future, and not that of the past, which seduces us." Commenting on
this thought of Joubert's, Saint-Marc Girardin said that we loved the
future because we loved ourselves, and fashioned the future in our own
image; and he added, with partial but not complete injustice, that our
ignorance of the past was a cause of this tendency in our minds, since
it is shorter to despise the past than to study it. These critics and
accusers of the modern spirit are not, however, altogether fair to it.
If the modern spirit looks so much to the future, it is because the
problems of the past are solved problems, whilst those of the future
have the interest of a game that is only just begun. We know what became
of feudalism, we know the work that it accomplished and the services
that it rendered, but we do not yet know what will be the effects of
modern democracy and of the scientific and industrial spirit. It is the
novelty of this element, the scientific spirit and the industrial
development which is a part (but only a part) of its results, that makes
the past so much less reliable as a guide than it would have been if no
new element had intervened, and therefore so much less interesting for
us. As an example of the inapplicability of past experience, I may
mention an argument against Republics which has been much used of late
by the partisans of monarchy in France. They have frequently told us
that Republics had only succeeded in very small States, and this is true
of ancient democracies; but it is not less true that railways, and
telegraphs, and the newspaper press have made great countries like
France and the United States just as capable of feeling and acting
simultaneously as the smallest Republics of antiquity. The parties which
rely on what are called the lessons of history are continually exposed
to great deceptions. In France, what may be called the historical party
would not believe in the possibility of a united Germany, because fifty
years ago, with the imperfect means of communication which then
existed, Germany was not and could not be united. The same historical
party refused to believe that the Italian kingdom could ever hold
together. In England, the historical party predicted the dismemberment
of the United States, and in some other countries it has been a favorite
article of faith that England could not keep her possessions. But
theories of this kind are always of very doubtful applicability to the
present, and their applicability to the future is even more doubtful
still. Steam and electricity have made great modern States practically
like so many great cities, so that Manchester is like a suburb of
London, and Havre the Piræus of Paris, whilst the most trifling
occasions bring the Sovereign of Italy to any of the Italian capitals.

In the intellectual sphere the experience of the past is at least
equally unreliable. If the power of the Catholic Church had been
suddenly removed from the Europe of the fourteenth century, the
consequence would have been a moral anarchy difficult to conceive; but
in our own day the real regulator of morality is not the Church, but
public opinion, in the formation of which the Church has a share, but
only a share. It would therefore be unsafe to conclude that the
weakening of ecclesiastical authority must of necessity, in the future,
be followed by moral anarchy, since it is possible, and even probable,
that the other great influences upon public opinion may gain strength as
this declines. And in point of fact we have already lived long enough
to witness a remarkable decline of ecclesiastical authority, which is
proved by the avowed independence of scientific writers and thinkers,
and by the open opposition of almost all the European Governments. The
secular power resists the ecclesiastical in Germany and Spain. In France
it establishes a form of government which the Church detests. In Ireland
it disestablishes and disendows a hierarchy. In Switzerland it resists
the whole power of the Papacy. In Italy it seizes the sacred territory
and plants itself within the very walls of Rome. And yet the time which
has witnessed this unprecedented self-assertion of the laity has
witnessed a positive increase in the morality of public sentiment,
especially in the love of justice and the willingness to hear truth,
even when truth is not altogether agreeable to the listener, and in the
respect paid by opponents to able and sincere men, merely for their
ability and sincerity. This love of justice, this patient and tolerant
hearing of new truth, in which our age immeasurably exceeds all the ages
that have preceded it, are the direct results of the scientific spirit,
and are not only in themselves eminently moral, but conducive to moral
health generally. And this advancement may be observed in countries
which were least supposed to be capable of it. Even the French, of whose
immorality we have heard so much, have a public opinion which is
gradually gaining a salutary strength, an increasing dislike for
barbarity and injustice, and a more earnest desire that no citizen,
except by his own fault, should be excluded from the benefits of
civilization. The throne which has lately fallen was undermined by the
currents of this public opinion before it sank in military disaster.
"Aussi me contenterai-je," says Littré, "d'appeler l'attention sur la
guerre, dont l'opinion publique ne tolère plus les antiques barbaries;
sur la magistrature, qui répudie avec horreur les tortures et la
question; sur la tolérance, qui a banni les persécutions religieuses;
sur l'équite, qui soumet tout le monde aux charges communes; sur le
sentiment de solidarité qui du sort des classes pauvres fait le plus
pressant et le plus noble problème du temps présent. Pour moi, je ne
sais caractériser ce spectacle si hautement moral qu'en disant que
l'humanité, améliorée, accepte de plus en plus le devoir et la tâche
d'étendre le domaine de la justice et de la bonté."

Yet this partial and comparative satisfaction that we find in the
present, and our larger hopes for the future, are quite compatible with
gratitude to all who in the past have rendered such improvement possible
for us, and the higher improvement that we hope for possible to those
who will come after us. I cannot think that the present age may be
accused with justice of exceptional ignorance or scorn of its
predecessors. We have been told that we scorn our forefathers because
old buildings are removed to suit modern conveniences, because the
walls of old York have been pierced for the railway, and a tower of
Conway Castle has been undermined that the Holyhead mail may pass. But
the truth is, that whilst we care a little for our predecessors, they
cared still less for theirs. The mediæval builders not only used as
quarries any Roman remains that happened to come in their way, but they
spoiled the work of their own fathers and grandfathers by intruding
their new fashions on buildings originally designed in a different style
of art. When an architect in the present day has to restore some
venerable church, he endeavors to do so in harmony with the design of
the first builder; but such humility as this was utterly foreign to the
mediæval mind, which often destroyed the most lovely and necessary
details to replace them with erections in the fashion of the day, but
artistically unsuitable. The same disdain for the labors of other ages
has prevailed until within the memory of living men, and our age is
really the first that has made any attempt to conform itself, in these
things, to the intentions of the dead. I may also observe, that although
history is less relied upon as a guide to the future than it was
formerly, it is more carefully and thoroughly investigated from an
intellectual interest in itself.

To conclude. It seems to me that tradition has much less influence of an
authoritative kind than it had formerly, and that the authority which it
still possesses is everywhere steadily declining; that as a guide to
the future of the world it is more likely to mislead than to enlighten
us, and still that all intellectual and educated people must always take
a great interest in tradition, and have a certain sentiment of respect
for it. Consider what our feelings are towards the Church of Rome, the
living embodiment of tradition. No well-informed person can forget the
immense services that in former ages she has rendered to European
civilization, and yet at the same time such a person would scarcely wish
to place modern thought under her direction, nor would he consult the
Pope about the tendencies of the modern world. When in 1829 the city of
Warsaw erected a monument to Copernicus, a scientific society there
waited in the Church of the Holy Cross for a service that was to have
added solemnity to their commemoration. They waited vainly. Not a single
priest appeared. The clergy did not feel authorized to countenance a
scientific discovery which, in a former age, had been condemned by the
authority of the Church. This incident is delicately and accurately
typical of the relation between the modern and the traditional spirit.
The modern spirit is not hostile to tradition, and would not object to
receive any consecration which tradition might be able to confer, but
there are difficulties in bringing the two elements together.

We need not, however, go so far as Warsaw, or back to the year 1829,
for examples of an unwillingness on the part of the modern mind to break
entirely with the traditional spirit. Our own country is remarkable both
for the steadiness of its advance towards a future widely different from
the past, and for an affectionate respect for the ideas and institutions
that it gradually abandons, as it is forced out of them by new
conditions of existence, I may mention, as one example out of very many,
our feeling about the reconstruction of the navy. Here is a matter in
which science has compelled us to break with tradition absolutely and
irrevocably; we have done so, but we have done so with the greatest
regret. The ships of the line that our hearts and imaginations love are
the ships of Nelson and Collingwood and Cochrane. We think of the
British fleets that bore down upon the enemy with the breeze in their
white sails; we think of the fine qualities of seamanship that were
fostered in our _Agamemnons_, and _Victories_, and _Téméraires_. Will
the navies of the future ever so clothe their dreadful powers with
beauty, as did the ordered columns of Nelson, when they came with a fair
wind and all sails set, at eleven o'clock in the morning into Trafalgar
Bay? We see the smoke of their broadsides rising up to their sails like
mists to the snowy Alps, and high above, against heaven's blue, the
unconquered flag of England! Nor do we perceive now for the first time
that there was poetry in those fleets of old; our forefathers felt it
then, and expressed it in a thousand songs.[7]


