LETTER VII.

TO AN ARDENT FRIEND WHO TOOK NO REST.

  The regret for lost time often a needless one--Tillier's doctrine
  about _flânerie_--How much is gained in idle hours--Sainte-Beuve's
  conviction that whatever he did he studied the infinite book of the
  world and of life--Harness--Free play of the mind necessary--The
  freedom of a grain of desert-sand--The freedom of the wild bee.

If we asked any intellectual workman what he would do if his life were
to be lived over again, I believe the answer, whatever its form, would
amount ultimately to this: "I would economize my time better." Very
likely if the opportunity were granted him he would do nothing of the
sort; very likely he would waste his time in ways more authorized by
custom, yet waste it just as extravagantly as he had done after his own
original fashion; but it always seems to us as if we could use the time
better if we had it over again.

It seems to me in looking back over the last thirty years, that the only
time really wasted has been that spent in laborious obedience to some
external authority. It may be a dangerous doctrine which Claude Tillier
expressed in an immortal sentence, but dangerous or not, it is full of
intellectual truth: "Le temps le mieux employé est celui que l'on
perd."[11] If what we are accustomed to consider lost time could be
removed, as to its effects at least, from the sum of our existence, it
is certain that we should suffer from a great intellectual
impoverishment. All the best knowledge of mankind, to begin with, is
acquired in hours which hard-working people consider lost hours--in
hours, that is, of pleasure and recreation. Deduct all that we have
learnt about men in times of recreation, in clubs and smoking-rooms, on
the hunting-field, on the cricket-ground, on the deck of the yacht, on
the box of the drag or the dog-cart, would the residue be worth very
much? would it not be a mere heap of dry bones without any warm flesh to
cover them? Even the education of most of us, such as it is, has been in
a great measure acquired out of school, as it were; I mean outside of
the acknowledged duties of our more serious existence. Few Englishmen
past forty have studied English literature either as a college exercise
or a professional preparation; they have read it privately, as an
amusement. Few Englishmen past forty have studied modern languages, or
science, or the fine arts, from any obedience to duty, but merely from
taste and inclination. And even if we studied these things formally, as
young men often do at the present day, it is not from the formal study
that we should get the _perfume_ of the language or the art, but from
idle hours in foreign lands and galleries. It is superfluous to
recommend idleness to the unintellectual, but the intellectual too often
undervalue it. The laborious intellect contracts a habit of
strenuousness which is some times a hindrance to its best activity.

"I have arrived," said Sainte-Beuve, "perhaps by way of secretly
excusing my own idleness, perhaps by a deeper feeling of the principle
that all comes to the same, at the conclusion that whatever I do or do
not, working in the study at continuous labor, scattering myself in
articles, spreading myself about in society, giving my time away to
troublesome callers, to poor people, to _rendez-vous_, in the street, no
matter to whom and to what, I cease not to do one and the same thing, to
read one and the same book, the infinite book of the world and of life,
that no one ever finishes, in which the wisest read farthest; I read it
then at all the pages which present themselves, in broken fragments,
backwards, what matters it? I never cease going on. The greater the
medley, the more frequent the interruption, the more I get on with this
book in which one is never beyond the middle; but the profit is to have
had it open before one at all sorts of different pages."

A distinguished author wrote to another author less distinguished: "You
have gone through a good deal of really vigorous study, but have not
_been in harness_ yet." By harness he meant discipline settled
beforehand like military drill. Now, the advantages of drill are evident
and very generally recognized, but the advantages of intellectual
_flânerie_ are not so generally recognized. For the work of the
intellect to be clear and healthy, a great deal of free play of the mind
is absolutely necessary. Harness is good for an hour or two at a time,
but the finest intellects have never _lived_ in harness. In reading any
book that has much vitality you are sure to meet with many allusions and
illustrations which the author hit upon, not when he was in harness, but
out at grass. Harness trains us to the systematic performance of our
work, and increases our practical strength by regulated exercise, but it
does not supply everything that is necessary to the perfect development
of the mind. The truth is, that we need both the discipline of harness
and the abundant nourishment of the free pasture. Yet may not our
freedom be the profitless, choiceless, freedom of a grain of
desert-sand, carried hither and thither by the wind, gaining nothing and
improving nothing, so that it does not signify where it was carried
yesterday or where it may fall to-morrow, but rather the liberty of the
wild bee, whose coming and going are ordered by no master, nor fixed by
any premeditated regulation, yet which misses no opportunity of
increase, and comes home laden in the twilight. Who knows where he has
wandered; who can tell over what banks and streams the hum of his wings
has sounded? Is anything in nature freer than he is; can anything
account better for a rational use of freedom? Would he do his work
better if tiny harness were ingeniously contrived for him? Where then
would be the golden honey, and where the waxen cells?


LETTER VIII.

TO A FRIEND (HIGHLY CULTIVATED) WHO CONGRATULATED HIMSELF ON HAVING
ENTIRELY ABANDONED THE HABIT OF READING NEWSPAPERS.

  Advantages in economy of time--Much of what we read in newspapers is
  useless to our culture--The too great importance which they attach to
  novelty--Distortion by party spirit--An instance of false
  presentation--Gains to serenity by abstinence from
  newspapers--Newspapers keep up our daily interest in each other--The
  French peasantry--The newspaper-reading Americans--An instance of
  total abstinence from newspapers--Auguste Comte--A suggestion of
  Emerson's--The work of newspaper correspondents--War
  correspondents--Mr. Stanley--M. Erdan, of the _Temps_.

Your abstinence from newspaper reading is not anew experiment in itself,
though it is new in reference to your particular case, and I await its
effects with interest. I shall be curious to observe the consequences,
to an intellect constituted as yours is, of that total cutting off from
the public interests of your own century which an abstinence from
newspapers implies. It is clear that, whatever the loss may be, you
have a definite gain to set against it. The time which you have hitherto
given to newspapers, and which may be roughly estimated at about five
hundred hours a year, is henceforth a valuable time-income to be applied
to whatever purposes your best wisdom may select. When an intellectual
person has contrived by the force of one simple resolution to effect so
fine an economy as this, it is natural that he should congratulate
himself. Your feelings must be like those of an able finance minister
who has found means of closing a great leak in the treasury--if any
economy possible in the finances of a State could ever relatively equal
that splendid stroke of time-thrift which your force of will has enabled
you to effect. In those five hundred hours, which are now your own, you
may acquire a science or obtain a more perfect command over one of the
languages which you have studied. Some department of your intellectual
labors which has hitherto been unsatisfactory to you, because it was too
imperfectly cultivated, may henceforth be as orderly and as fruitful as
a well-kept garden. You may become thoroughly conversant with the works
of more than one great author whom you have neglected, not from lack of
interest, but from want of time. You may open some old chamber of the
memory that has been dark and disused for many a year; you may clear the
cobwebs away, and let the fresh light in, and make it habitable once
again.

Against these gains, of which some to a man of your industry are
certain, and may be counted upon, what must be our estimate of the
amount of sacrifice or loss? It is clear to both of us that much of what
we read in the newspapers is useless to our culture. A large proportion
of newspaper-writing is occupied with speculation on what is likely to
happen in the course of a few months; therefore, by waiting until the
time is past, we know the event without having wasted time in
speculations which could not effect it. Another rather considerable
fraction of newspaper matter consists of small events which have
interest for the day, owing to their novelty, but which will not have
the slightest permanent importance. The whole press of a
newspaper-reading country, like England or America, may be actively
engaged during the space of a week or a fortnight in discussing some
incident which everybody will have forgotten in six months; and besides
these sensational incidents, there are hundreds of less notorious ones,
often fictitious, inserted simply for the temporary amusement of the
reader. The greatest evil of newspapers, in their effect on the
intellectual life, is the enormous importance which they are obliged to
attach to mere novelty. From the intellectual point of view, it is of no
consequence whether a thought occurred twenty-two centuries ago to
Aristotle or yesterday evening to Mr. Charles Darwin, and it is one of
the distinctive marks of the truly intellectual to be able to take a
hearty interest in all truth, independently of the date of its
discovery. The emphasis given by newspapers to novelty exhibits things
in wrong relations, as the lantern shows you what is nearest at the cost
of making the general landscape appear darker by the contrast. Besides
this exhibition of things in wrong relations, there is a positive
distortion arising from the unscrupulousness of party, a distortion
which extends far beyond the limits of the empire.

An essay might be written on the distortion of English affairs in the
French press, or of French affairs in the English press, by writers who
are as strongly partisan in another country as in their own. "It is such
a grand thing," wrote an English Paris correspondent in 1870, "for
Adolphus Thiers, son of a poor laborer of Aix, and in early life a
simple journalist, to be at the head of the Government of France." This
is a fair specimen of the kind of false presentation which is so common
in party journalism. The newspaper from which I have quoted it was
strongly opposed to Thiers, being in fact one of the principal organs of
the English Bonapartists. It is not true that Thiers was the son of a
poor laborer of Aix. His father was a workman of Marseilles, his mother
belonging to a family in which neither wealth nor culture had been rare,
and his mother's relatives had him educated at the Lycée. The art of the
journalist in bringing together the two extremes of a career remarkable
for its steady ascent had for its object to produce the idea of
incongruity, of sudden and unsuitable elevation. Not only M. Thiers,
however, but every human being starts from a very small beginning, since
every man begins life as a baby. It is a great rise for one baby to the
Presidency of the French Republic; it was also a great rise for other
babies who have attained the premiership of England. The question is,
not what Thiers may have been seventy years ago, but what he was
immediately before his acceptance of the highest office of the State. He
was the most trusted and the most experienced citizen, so that the last
step in his career was as natural as the elevation of Reynolds to the
presidency of the Academy.

It is difficult for any one who cares for justice to read party journals
without frequent irritation, and it does not signify which side the
newspaper takes. Men are so unfair in controversy that we best preserve
the serenity of the intellect by studiously avoiding all literature that
has a controversial tone. By your new rule of abstinence from newspapers
you will no doubt gain almost as much in serenity as in time. To the
ordinary newspaper reader there is little loss of serenity, because he
reads only the newspaper that he agrees with, and however unfair it is,
he is pleased by its unfairness. But the highest and best culture makes
us disapprove of unfairness on our own side of the question also. We are
pained by it; we feel humiliated by it; we lament its persistence and
its perversity.

I have said nearly all that has to be said in favor of your rule of
abstinence. I have granted that the newspapers cost us much time, which,
if employed for great intellectual purposes, would carry us very far;
that they give disproportionate views of things by the emphasis they
give to novelty, and false views by the unfairness which belongs to
party. I might have added that newspaper writers give such a
preponderance to politics--not political philosophy, but to the everyday
work of politicians--that intellectual culture is thrown into the
background, and the election of a single member of Parliament is made to
seem of greater national importance than the birth of a powerful idea.
And yet, notwithstanding all these considerations, which are serious
indeed for the intellectual, I believe that your resolution is unwise,
and that you will find it to be untenable. One momentous reason more
than counterbalances all these considerations put together. Newspapers
are to the whole civilized world what the daily house-talk is to the
members of a household; they keep up our daily interest in each other,
they save us from the evils of isolation. To live as a member of the
great white race of men, the race that has filled Europe and America,
and colonized or conquered whatever other territories it has been
pleased to occupy, to share from day to day its cares, its thoughts, its
aspirations, it is necessary that every man should read his daily
newspaper. Why are the French peasants so bewildered and at sea, so out
of place in the modern world? It is because they never read a newspaper.
And why are the inhabitants of the United States, though scattered over
a territory fourteen times the area of France, so much more capable of
concerted political action, so much more _alive_ and modern, so much
more interested in new discoveries of all kinds and capable of selecting
and utilizing the best of them? It is because the newspaper penetrates
everywhere; and even the lonely dweller on the prairie or in the forest
is not intellectually isolated from the great currents of public life
which flow through the telegraph and the press.

The experiment of doing without newspapers has been tried by a whole
class, the French peasantry, with the consequences that we know, and it
has also from time to time been tried by single individuals belonging to
more enlightened sections of society. Let us take one instance, and let
us note what appear to have been the effects of this abstinence. Auguste
Comte abstained from newspapers as a teetotaller abstains from
spirituous liquors. Now, Auguste Comte possessed a gift of nature which,
though common in minor degrees, is in the degree in which he possessed
it rarer than enormous diamonds. That gift was the power of dealing with
abstract intellectual conceptions, and living amidst them always, as the
practical mind lives in and deals with material things. And it happened
in Comte's case, as it usually does happen in cases of very peculiar
endowment, that the gift was accompanied by the instincts necessary to
its perfect development and to its preservation. Comte instinctively
avoided the conversation of ordinary people, because he felt it to be
injurious to the perfect exercise of his faculty, and for the same
reason he would not read newspapers. In imposing upon himself these
privations he acted like a very eminent living etcher, who, having the
gift of an extraordinary delicacy of hand, preserves it by abstinence
from everything that may effect the steadiness of the nerves. There is a
certain difference, however, between the two cases which I am anxious to
accentuate. The etcher runs no risk of any kind by his rule of
abstinence. He refrains from several common indulgences, but he denies
himself nothing that is necessary to health. I may even go farther, and
say that the rules which he observes for the sake of perfection in his
art, might be observed with advantage by many who are not artists, for
the sake of their own tranquillity, without the loss of anything but
pleasure. The rules which Comte made for himself involved, on the other
hand, a great peril. In detaching himself so completely from the
interests and ways of thinking of ordinary men, he elaborated, indeed,
the conceptions of the positive philosophy, but arrived afterwards at a
peculiar kind of intellectual decadence from which it is
possible--probable even--that the rough common sense of the newspapers
might have preserved him. They would have saved him, I seriously
believe, from that mysticism which led to the invention of a religion
far surpassing in unreasonableness the least rational of the creeds of
tradition. It is scarcely imaginable, except on the supposition of
actual insanity, that any regular reader of the _Times_, the _Temps_,
the _Daily News_, and the _Saturday Review_, should believe the human
race to be capable of receiving as the religion of its maturity the
Comtist Trinity and the Comtist Virgin Mother. A Trinity consisting of
the Great Being (or humanity), the Great Fetish (or the earth), and the
Great Midst (or space); a hope for the human race (how unphysiological!)
that women might ultimately arrive at maternity independently of virile
help,--these are conceptions so remote, not only from the habits of
modern thought, but (what is more important) from its tendencies, that
they could not occur to a mind in regular communication with its
contemporaries.

"If you should transfer the amount of your reading day by day from the
newspaper to the standard authors?" To this suggestion of Emerson's it
may be answered that the loss would be greater than the gain. The
writers of Queen Anne's time could educate an Englishman of Queen Anne's
time, but they can only partially educate an Englishman of Queen
Victoria's time. The mind is like a merchant's ledger, it requires to be
continually posted up to the latest date. Even the last telegram may
have upset some venerable theory that has been received as infallible
for ages.

In times when great historical events are passing before our eyes, the
journalist is to future historians what the African traveller is to the
map-makers. His work is neither complete nor orderly, but it is the
fresh record of an eye-witness, and enables us to become ourselves
spectators of the mighty drama of the world. Never was this service so
well rendered as it is now, by correspondents who achieve heroic feats
of bodily and mental prowess, exposing themselves to the greatest
dangers, and writing much and well in circumstances the most unfavorable
to literary composition. How vividly the English war correspondents
brought before us the reality of the great conflict between Germany and
France! What a romantic achievement, worthy to be sung in heroic verse,
was the finding of Livingstone by Stanley! Not less interesting have
been the admirable series of letters by M. Erdan in the _Temps_, in
which, with the firmness of a master-hand, he has painted from the life,
week after week, year after year, the decline and fall of the temporal
power of the Papacy. I cannot think that any page of Roman history is
better worth reading than his letters, more interesting, instructive,
lively, or authentic. Yet with your contempt for newspapers you would
lose all this profitable entertainment, and seek instead of it the
accounts of former epochs not half so interesting as this fall of the
temporal power, accounts written in most cases by men in libraries who
had not seen the sovereigns they wrote about, nor talked with the people
whose condition they attempted to describe. You have a respect for these
accounts because they are printed in books, and bound in leather, and
entitled "history," whilst you despise the direct observation of a man
like Erdan, because he is only a journalist, and his letters are
published in a newspaper. Is there not some touch of prejudice in this,
some mistake, some narrowness of intellectual aristocracy?


