LETTER V.

TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO KEPT ENTIRELY OUT OF COMPANY.

  That Society which is frivolous in the mass contains individuals who
  are not frivolous--A piece of the author's early experience--Those who
  keep out of Society miss opportunities--People talk about what they
  have in common--That we ought to be tolerant of dulness--The loss to
  Society if superior men all held aloof--Utility of the gifted in
  general society--They ought not to submit to expulsion.

I willingly concede all that you say against fashionable society as a
whole. It is, as you say, frivolous, bent on amusement, incapable of
attention sufficiently prolonged to grasp any serious subject, and
liable both to confusion and inaccuracy in the ideas which it hastily
forms or easily receives. You do right, assuredly, not to let it waste
your most valuable hours, but I believe also that you do wrong in
keeping out of it altogether.

The society which seems so frivolous in masses contains individual
members who, if you knew them better, would be able and willing to
render you the most efficient intellectual help, and you miss this help
by restricting yourself exclusively to books. Nothing can replace the
conversation of living men and women; not even the richest literature
can replace it.

Many years ago I was thrown by accident amongst a certain society of
Englishmen who, when they were all together, never talked about anything
worth talking about. Their general conversations were absolutely empty
and null, and I concluded, as young men so easily conclude, that those
twenty or thirty gentlemen had not half a dozen ideas amongst them. A
little reflection might have reminded me that my own talk was no better
than theirs, and consequently that there might be others in the company
who also knew more and thought more than they expressed. I found out, by
accident, after awhile, that some of these men had more than common
culture in various directions; one or two had travelled far, and brought
home the results of much observation; one or two had read largely, and
with profit; more than one had studied a science; five or six had seen a
great deal of the world. It was a youthful mistake to conclude that,
because their general conversation was very dull, the men were dull
individually. The general conversations of English society _are_ dull;
it is a national characteristic. But the men themselves are individually
often very well informed, and quite capable of imparting their
information to a single interested listener. The art is to be that
listener. Englishmen have the greatest dread of producing themselves in
the semi-publicity of a general conversation, because they fear that
their special topics may not be cared for by some of the persons
present; but if you can get one of them into a quiet corner by himself,
and humor his shyness with sufficient delicacy and tact, he will
disburden his mind at last, and experience a relief in so doing.

By keeping out of society altogether you miss these precious
opportunities. The wise course is to mix as much with the world as may
be possible without withdrawing too much time from your serious studies,
but not to expect anything valuable from the general talk, which is
nothing but a neutral medium in which intelligences float and move as
yachts do in sea-water, and for which they ought not to be held
individually responsible. The talk of Society answers its purpose if it
simply permits many different people to come together without clashing,
and the purpose of its conventions is the avoidance of collision. In
England the small talk is heavy, like water; in France it is light as
air; in both countries it is a medium and no more.

Society talks, by preference, about amusements; it does so because when
people meet for recreation they wish to relieve their minds from serious
cares, and also for the practical reason that Society must talk about
what its members have in common, and their amusements are more in common
than their work. As M. Thiers recommended the republican form of
government in France on the ground that it was the form which divided
his countrymen least, so a polite and highly civilized society chooses
for the subject of general conversation the topic which is least likely
to separate the different people who are present. It almost always
happens that the best topic having this recommendation is some species
of amusement; since amusements are easily learnt outside the business of
life, and we are all initiated into them in youth.

For these reasons I think that we ought to be extremely tolerant of the
dulness or frivolity which may seem to prevail in any numerous company,
and not to conclude too hastily that the members of it are in any degree
more dull or frivolous than ourselves. It is unfortunate, certainly,
that the art of general conversation is not so successfully cultivated
as it might be, and there are reasons for believing that our posterity
will surpass us in this respect, because as culture increases the spirit
of toleration increases with it, so that the great questions of
politics and religion, in which all are interested, may be discussed
more safely than they could be at the present day, by persons of
different ways of thinking. But even the sort of general conversation we
have now, poor as it may seem, still sufficiently serves as a medium for
human intercourse, and permits us to meet on a common ground where we
may select at leisure the agreeable or instructive friends that our
higher intellect needs, and without whom the intellectual life is one of
the ghastliest of solitudes.

And now permit me to add a few observations on another aspect of this
subject, which is not without its importance.

Let us suppose that every one of rather more than ordinary capacity and
culture were to act as you yourself are acting, and withdraw entirely
from general society. Let us leave out of consideration for the present
the loss to their private culture which would be the consequence of
missing every opportunity for forming new intellectual friendships. Let
us consider, this time, what would be the consequence to Society itself.

If all the cultivated men were withdrawn from it, the general tone of
Society would inevitably descend much lower even than it is at present;
it would sink so low that the whole national intellect would undergo a
sure and inevitable deterioration. It is plainly the duty of men
situated as you are, who have been endowed by nature with superior
faculties, and who have enlarged them by the acquisition of knowledge,
to preserve Society by their presence from an evil so surely prolific of
bad consequences. If Society is less narrow, and selfish, and
intolerant, and apathetic than it used to be, it is because they who are
the salt of the earth have not disdained to mix with its grosser and
earthier elements. All the improvement in public sentiment, and the
advancement in general knowledge which have marked the course of recent
generations, are to be attributed to the wholesome influence of men who
could think and feel, and who steadily exercised, often quite obscurely,
yet not the less usefully in their time and place, the subtle but
powerful attraction of the greater mind over the less. Instead of
complaining that people are ignorant and frivolous, we ought to go
amongst them and lead them to the higher life. "I know not how it is,"
said one in a dull circle to a more gifted friend who entered it
occasionally, "when we are left to ourselves we are all lamentably
stupid, but whenever you are kind enough to come amongst us we all talk
very much better, and of things that are well worth talking about." The
gifted man is always welcome, if only he will stoop to conquer, and
forget himself to give light and heat to others. The low Philistinism of
many a provincial town is due mainly to the shy reserve of the one or
two superior men who fancy that they cannot amalgamate with the common
intellect of the place.

Not only would I advocate a little patient condescension, but even
something of the sturdier temper which will not be driven out. Are the
Philistines to have all the talk to themselves forever; are they to
rehearse their stupid old platitudes without the least fear of
contradiction? How long, O Lord? how long? Let us resolve that even in
general society they shall not eternally have things their own way.
Somebody ought to have the courage to enlighten them even at their own
tables, and in the protecting presence of their admiring wives and
daughters.


