LETTER V.

TO A STUDENT WHO FELT HURRIED AND DRIVEN.

  Some intellectual products possible only in excitement--Byron's
  authority on the subject--Can inventive minds work regularly?--Sir
  Walter Scott's opinion--Napoleon on the winning of victories--The
  prosaic business of men of genius--"Waiting for
  inspiration"--Rembrandt's advice to a young painter--Culture necessary
  to inspiration itself--Byron, Keats, Morris--Men of genius may be
  regular as students.

In my last letter to you on quiet regularity of work, I did not give
much consideration to another matter which, in certain kinds of work,
has to be taken into account, for I preferred to make that the subject
of a separate letter. There are certain intellectual products which are
only possible in hours or minutes of great cerebral excitement. Byron
said that when people were surprised to find poets very much like others
in the ordinary intercourse of life, their surprise was due to ignorance
of this. If people knew, Byron said, that poetical production came from
an excitement which from its intensity could only be temporary, they
would not expect poets to be very different from other people when not
under the influence of this excitement. Now, we may take the word
"poet," in this connection, in the very largest sense. All men who have
the gift of invention are poets. The inventive ideas come to them at
unforeseen moments, and have to be seized when they come, so that the
true inventor works sometimes with vertiginous rapidity, and afterwards
remains for days or weeks without exercising the inventive faculty at
all. The question is, can you make an inventive mind work on the
principle of measured and regular advance. Is such counsel as that in my
former letter applicable to inventors?

Scott said, that although he had known many men of ordinary abilities
who were capable of perfect regularity in their habits, he had never
known a man of genius who was so. The popular impression concerning men
of genius is very strong in the same sense, but it is well not to attach
too much importance to popular impressions concerning men of genius, for
the obvious reason that such men come very little under popular
observation. When they work it is usually in the most perfect solitude,
and even people who live in the same house know very little, really, of
their intellectual habits.

The truth seems to be, first, that the moments of high excitement, of
noblest invention, are rare, and not to be commanded by the will; but,
on the other hand, that in order to make the gift of invention produce
its full effect in any department of human effort, vast labors of
preparation are necessary, and these labors may be pursued as steadily
as you like Napoleon I. used to say that battles were won by the sudden
flashing of an idea through the brain of the commander at a certain
critical instant. The capacity for generating this sudden electric spark
was military genius. The spark flashed independently of the will; the
General could not win that vivid illumination by labor or by prayer; it
came only in the brain of genius from the intense anxiety and excitement
of the actual conflict. Napoleon seems always to have counted upon it,
always to have believed that when the critical instant arrived the wild
confusion of the battle-field would be illuminated for him by that burst
of sudden flame. But if Napoleon had been ignorant of the prosaic
business of his profession, to which he attended more closely than any
other commander, what would these moments of supreme clearness have
availed him, or would they ever have come to him at all? If they had
come to him, they would have revealed only the extent of his own
negligence. Instead of showing him _what to do_, they would have made
painfully evident what _ought to have been done_. But it is more
probable that these clear moments would never have occurred to a mind
unprepared by study. Clear military inspirations never occur to
shopkeepers and farmers, as bright ideas about checkmates occur only to
persons who have studied chess. The prosaic business, then, of the man
of genius is to accumulate that preparatory knowledge without which his
genius can never be available, and he can do work of this kind as
regularly as he likes.

The one fatal mistake which is committed habitually by people who have
the scarcely desirable gift of half-genius is "waiting for inspiration."
They pass week after week in a state of indolence, unprofitable alike to
the mind and the purse, under pretext of waiting for intellectual
flashes like those which came to Napoleon on his battle-fields. They
ought to remember the advice given by one of the greatest artists of the
seventeenth century to a young painter of his acquaintance. "Practise
assiduously what you already know, and in course of time other things
will become clear to you." The inspirations come only to the
disciplined; the indolent wait for them in vain.

If you have genius, therefore, or believe you have, it is admitted that
you cannot be perpetually in a state of intense excitement. If you were
in that state without ceasing, you would go mad. You cannot be expected
to write poetry in the plodding ox-pace manner advocated for
intellectual work generally in my last letter. As for that good old
comparison between the hare and the tortoise, it may be answered for
you, simply, that you are not a tortoise, and that what is a most wise
procedure for tortoises may be impracticable for you. The actual
composition of poetry, especially poetry of a fiery kind, like--

  "The isles of Greece, the isles of Greece,"

of Byron, is to be done not when the poet will, but when he can, or
rather, when he _must_.

But if you are a wise genius you will feel how necessary is culture even
for work of that kind. Byron would not have felt any enthusiasm for the
isles of Greece if he had not known something of their history. The
verses are an inspiration, but they could never have occurred to a quite
uncultivated person, however bright his inspirations. Even more
obviously was the genius of Keats dependent upon his culture. He did not
read Greek, but from translations of Greek literature and from the
direct study of Greek art he got the sort of material that he needed.
And in our own day Morris has been evidently a very diligent student of
many literatures. What I insist upon is, that we could not have had the
real Keats, the real Morris, unless they had prepared themselves by
culture. We see immediately that the work they have done is _their_
work, specially, that they were specially adapted for it--inspired for
it, if you will. But how evident it is that the inspiration could never
have produced the work, or anything like it, without labor in the
accumulation of material!

Now, although men of genius cannot be regularly progressive in actual
production, cannot write so many verses a day, regularly, as you may
spin yarn, they can be very regular as students, and some of the best of
them have been quite remarkable for unflinching steadiness of
application in that way. The great principle recommended by Mr. Galton,
of not looking forward eagerly to the end of your journey, but
interesting yourself chiefly in the progress of it, is as applicable to
the studies of men of genius as to those of more ordinary persons.


