LETTER IV.

TO AN ENERGETIC AND SUCCESSFUL COTTON MANUFACTURER.

  Two classes in their lower grades inevitably hostile--The spiritual
  and temporal powers--The functions of both not easily exercised by the
  same person--Humboldt, Faraday, Livingstone--The difficulty about
  time--Limits to the energy of the individual--Jealousy between the
  classes--That this jealousy ought not to exist--Some of the sciences
  based upon an industrial development--The work of the intellectual
  class absolutely necessary in a highly civilized community--That it
  grows in numbers and influence side by side with the industrial class.

Our last conversation together, in the privacy of your splendid new
drawing-room after the guests had gone away and the music had ceased for
the night, left me under the impression that we had not arrived at a
perfect understanding of each other. This was due in a great measure to
my unfortunate incapacity for expressing anything exactly by spoken
words. The constant habit of writing, which permits a leisurely
selection from one's ideas, is often very unfavorable to readiness in
conversation. Will you permit me, then, to go over the ground we
traversed, this time in my own way, pen in hand?

We represent, you and I, two classes which in their lower grades are
inevitably hostile; but the superior members of these classes ought not
to feel any hostility, since both are equally necessary to the world. We
are, in truth, the spiritual and the temporal powers in their most
modern form. The chief of industry and the man of letters stand to-day
in the same relation to each other and to mankind as the baron and
bishop of the Middle Ages. We are not recognized, either of us, by
formally conferred titles, we are both held to be somewhat intrusive by
the representatives of a former order of things, and there is, or was
until very lately, a certain disposition to deny what we consider our
natural rights; but we know that our powers are not to be resisted, and
we have the inward assurance that the forces of nature are with us.

This, with reference to the outer world. But there is a want of
clearness in the relation between ourselves. You understand your great
temporal function, which is the wise direction of the industry of
masses, the accumulation and distribution of wealth; but you do not so
clearly understand the spiritual function of the intellectual class, and
you do not think of it quite justly. This want of understanding is
called by some of us your Philistinism. Will you permit me to explain
what the intellectual class thinks of you, and what is its opinion about
itself?

Pray excuse any appearance of presumption on my part if I say we of the
intellectual class and you of the industrial. My position is something
like that of the clergyman who reads, "Let him come to me or to some
other learned and discreet minister of God's word," thereby calling
himself learned and discreet. It is a simple matter of fact that I
belong to the intellectual class, since I lead its life, just as it is
a fact that you have a quarter of a million of money.

First, I want to show that the existence of my class is necessary.

Although men in various occupations often acquire a considerable degree
of culture outside their trade, the highest results of culture can
scarcely ever be attained by men whose time is taken up in earning a
fortune. Every man has but a limited flow of mental energy per day; and
if this is used up in an industrial leadership, he cannot do much more
in the intellectual sphere than simply ascertain what has been done by
others. Now, although we have a certain respect, and the respect is
just, for those who know what others have accomplished, it is clear that
if no one did more than this, if no one made any fresh discoveries, the
world would make no progress whatever; and in fact, if nobody ever had
been dedicated to intellectual pursuits in preceding ages, the men who
only learn what others have done, would in these days have had nothing
to learn. Past history proves the immensity of the debt which the world
owes to men who gave their whole time and attention to intellectual
pursuits; and if the existences of these men could be eliminated from
the past of the human race, its present would be very different from
what it is. A list has been published of men who have done much good
work in the intervals of business, but still the fact remains that the
great intellectual pioneers were absorbed and devoted men, scorning
wealth so far as it affected themselves, and ready to endure everything
for knowledge beyond the knowledge of their times. Instances of such
enthusiasm abound, an enthusiasm fully justified by the value of the
results which it has achieved. When Alexander Humboldt sold his
inheritance to have the means for his great journey in South America,
and calmly dedicated the whole of a long life, and the strength of a
robust constitution, to the advancement of natural knowledge, he acted
foolishly indeed, if years, and strength, and fortune are given to us
only to be well invested in view of money returns; but the world has
profited by his decision. Faraday gave up the whole of his time to
discovery when he might have earned a large fortune by the judicious
investment of his extraordinary skill in chemistry. Livingstone has
sacrificed everything to the pursuit of his great work in Africa. Lives
such as these--and many resemble them in useful devotion of which we
hear much less--are clearly not compatible with much money-getting. A
decent existence, free from debt, is all that such men ought to be held
answerable for.

I have taken two or three leading instances, but there is quite a large
class of intellectual people who cannot in the nature of things serve
society effectively in their own way without being quite outside of the
industrial life. There is a real incompatibility between some pursuits
and others. I suspect that you would have been a good general, for you
are a born leader and commander of men; but it would have been difficult
to unite a regular military career with strict personal attention to
your factories. We often find the same difficulty in our intellectual
pursuits. We are not always quite so unpractical as you think we are;
but the difficulty is how to find the time, and how to arrange it so as
not to miss two or three distinct classes of opportunities. We are not
all of us exactly imbeciles in money matters, though the pecuniary
results of our labors seem no doubt pitiful enough. There is a tradition
that a Greek philosopher, who was suspected by the practical men of his
day of incapacity for affairs, devoted a year to prove the contrary, and
traded so judiciously that he amassed thereby great riches. It may be
doubtful whether he could do it in one year, but many a fine
intellectual capacity has overshadowed a fine practical capacity in the
same head by the withdrawal of time and effort.

It is because the energies of one man are so limited, and there is so
little time in a single human life, that the intellectual and industrial
functions must, _in their highest development_, be separated. No one man
could unite in his own person your life and Humboldt's, though it is
possible that he might have the natural capacity for both. Grant us,
then, the liberty _not_ to earn very much money, and this being once
granted, try to look upon our intellectual superiority as a simple
natural fact, just as we look upon your pecuniary superiority.

In saying in this plain way that we are intellectually superior to you
and your class, I am guilty of no more pride and vanity than you when
you affirm or display your wealth. The fact is there, in its simplicity.
We have culture because we have paid the twenty or thirty years of labor
which are the price of culture, just as you have great factories and
estates which are the reward of your life's patient and intelligent
endeavor.

Why should there be any narrow jealousy between us; why any contempt on
the one side or the other? Each has done his appointed work, each has
caused to fructify the talent which the Master gave.

Yet a certain jealousy _does_ exist, if not between you and me
personally, at least between our classes. The men who have culture
without wealth are jealous of the power and privileges of those who
possess money without culture; and on the other hand, the men whose time
has been too entirely absorbed by commercial pursuits to leave them any
margin sufficient to do justice to their intellectual powers, are often
painfully sensitive to the contempt of the cultivated, and strongly
disposed, from jealousy, to undervalue culture itself. Both are wrong so
far as they indulge any unworthy and unreasonable feeling of this kind.
The existence of the two classes is necessary to an advanced
civilization. The science of accumulating and administrating material
wealth, of which you yourself are a great practical master, is the
foundation of the material prosperity of nations, and it is only when
this prosperity is fully assured to great numbers that the arts and
sciences can develop themselves in perfect liberty and with the tranquil
assurance of their own permanence. The advancement of material
well-being in modern states tends so directly to the advancement of
intellectual pursuits, even when the makers of fortunes are themselves
indifferent to this result, that it ought always to be a matter of
congratulation for the intellectual class itself, which needs the
support of a great public with leisure to read and think. It is easy to
show how those arts and sciences which our class delights to cultivate
are built upon those developments of industry which have been brought
about by the energy of yours. Suppose the case of a scientific chemist:
the materials for his experiments are provided ready to his hand by the
industrial class; the record of them is preserved on paper manufactured
by the same industrial class; and the public which encourages him by its
attention is usually found in great cities which are maintained by the
labors of the same useful servants of humanity. It is possible, no
doubt, in these modern times, that some purely pastoral or agricultural
community might produce a great chemist, because a man of inborn
scientific genius who came into the world in an agricultural country
might in these days get his books and materials from industrial centres
at a distance, but his work would still be based on the industrial life
of others. No pastoral or agricultural community which was really
isolated from industrial communities ever produced a chemist. And now
consider how enormously important this one science of chemistry has
proved itself even to our intellectual life! Several other sciences have
been either greatly strengthened or else altogether renewed by it, and
the wonderful photographic processes have been for nature and the fine
arts what printing was for literature, placing reliable and authentic
materials for study within the reach of every one. Literature itself has
profited by the industrial progress of the present age, in the increased
cheapness of everything that is material in books. I please myself with
the reflection that even you make paper cheaper by manufacturing so much
cotton.

All these are reasons why we ought not to be jealous of you; and now
permit me to indicate a few other reasons why it is unreasonable on your
part to feel any jealousy of us.

Suppose we were to cease working to-morrow--cease working, I mean, in
our peculiar ways--and all of us become colliers and factory operatives
instead, with nobody to supply our places. Or, since you may possibly be
of opinion that there is enough literature and science in the world at
the present day, suppose rather that at some preceding date the whole
literary and scientific and artistic labor of the human race; had come
suddenly to a standstill. Mind, I do not say of Englishmen merely, but
of the whole race, for if any intellectual work had been done in France
or Germany, or even in Japan, you would have imported it like cotton and
foreign cereals. Well, I have no hesitation in telling you that although
there was a good deal of literature and science in England before the
1st of January, 1800, the present condition of the nation would have
been a very chaotic condition if the intellectual class had ceased on
that day to think and observe and to place on record its thoughts and
observations. The life of a progressive nation cannot long go forward
exclusively on the thinking of the past: its thoughtful men must not be
all dead men, but living men who accompany it on its course. It is they
who make clear the lessons of experience; it is they who discover the
reliable general laws upon which all safe action must be founded in the
future; it is they who give decision to human action in every direction
by constantly registering, in language of comprehensive accuracy, both
its successes and its failures. It is their great and arduous labor
which makes knowledge accessible to men of action at the cost of little
effort and the smallest possible expenditure of time. The intellectual
class grows in numbers and in influence along with the numbers and
influence of the materially productive population of the State. And not
only are the natural philosophers, the writers of contemporary and past
history, the discoverers in science, _necessary_ in the strictest sense
to the life of such a community as the modern English community, but
even the poets, the novelists, the artists are necessary to the
perfection of its life. Without them and their work the national mind
would be as incomplete as would be the natural universe without beauty.
But this, perhaps, you will perceive less clearly, or be less willing to
admit.


