LETTER II.

TO A FRIEND WHO MAINTAINED THAT SURROUNDINGS WERE A MATTER OF
INDIFFERENCE TO A THOROUGHLY OCCUPIED MIND.

  Archimedes at the siege of Syracuse--Geoffroy St. Hilaire in the
  besieged city of Alexandria--Goethe at the bombardment of
  Verdun--Lullo, the Oriental missionary--Giordano Bruno--Unacknowledged
  effect of surroundings--Effect of Frankfort on Goethe--Great
  capitals--Goethe--His garden-house--What he said about Béranger and
  Paris--Fortunate surroundings of Titian.

There are so many well-known instances of men who have been able to
continue their intellectual labors under the most unfavorable
conditions, that your argument might be powerfully supported by an
appeal to actual experience. There is Archimedes, of course, to begin
with, who certainly seems to have abstracted himself sufficiently from
the tumult of a great siege to forget it altogether when occupied with
his mathematical problems. The prevalent stories of his death, though
not identical, point evidently to a habit of abstraction which had been
remarked as a peculiarity by those about him, and it is probable enough
that a great inventor in engineering would follow his usual speculations
under circumstances which, though dangerous, had lasted long enough to
become habitual. Even modern warfare, which from the use of gunpowder is
so much noisier than that which raged at Syracuse, does not hinder men
from thinking and writing when they are used to it. Geoffrey St. Hilaire
never worked more steadily and regularly in his whole life than he did
in the midst of the besieged city of Alexandria. "Knowledge is so
sweet," he said long afterwards, in speaking of this experience, "that
it never entered my thoughts how a bombshell might in an instant have
cast into the abyss both me and my documents." By good luck two electric
fish had been caught and given to him just then, so he immediately began
to make experiments, as if he had been in his own cabinet in Paris, and
for three weeks he thought of nothing else, utterly forgetting the
fierce warfare that filled the air with thunder and flame, and the
streets with victims. He had sixty-four hypotheses to amuse him, and it
was necessary to review his whole scientific acquirement with reference
to each of these as he considered them one by one. It may be doubted,
however, whether he was more in danger from the bombardment or from the
intensity of his own mental concentration. He grew thin and haggard,
slept one hour in the twenty-four, and lived in a perilous condition of
nervous strain and excitement. Goethe at the bombardment of Verdun,
letting his mind take its own course, found that it did not occupy
itself with tragedies, or with anything suggested by what was passing
in the conflict around him, but by scientific considerations about the
phenomena of colors. He noticed, in a passing observation, the bad
effect of war upon the mind, how it makes people destructive one day and
creative the next, how it accustoms them to phases intended to excite
hope in desperate circumstances, thus producing a peculiar sort of
hypocrisy different from the priestly and courtly kind. This is the
extent of his interest in the war; but when he finds some soldiers
fishing he is attracted to the spot and profoundly occupied--not with
the soldiers, but with the optical phenomena on the water. He was never
very much moved by external events, nor did he take that intense
interest in the politics of the day which we often find in people less
studious of literature and science. Raimond Lullo, the Oriental
missionary, continued to write many volumes in the midst of the most
continual difficulties and dangers, preserving as much mental energy and
clearness as if he had been safe and tranquil in a library. Giordano
Bruno worked constantly also in the midst of political troubles and
religious persecutions, and his biographer tells us that "il desiderio
vivissimo della scienza aveva ben più efficacia sull' animo del Bruno,
che non gli avvenimenti esterni."

These examples which have just occurred to me, and many others that it
would be easy to collect, may be taken to prove at least so much as
this, that it is possible to be absorbed in private studies when
surrounded by the most disturbing influences; but even in these cases it
would be a mistake to conclude that the surroundings had no effect
whatever. There can be no doubt that Geoffroy St. Hilaire was intensely
excited by the siege of Alexandria, though he may not have attributed
his excitement to that cause. His mind was occupied with the electrical
fishes, but his nervous system was wrought upon by the siege, and kept
in that state of tension which at the same time enabled him to get
through a gigantic piece of intellectual labor and made him incapable of
rest. Had this condition been prolonged it must have terminated either
in exhaustion or in madness. Men have often engaged in literature or
science to escape the pressure of anxiety, which strenuous mental labor
permits us, at least temporarily, to forget; but the circumstances which
surround us have invariably an influence of some kind upon our thinking,
though the connection may not be obvious. Even in the case of Goethe,
who could study optics on a battle-field, his English biographer
recognizes the effect of the Frankfort life which surrounded the great
author in his childhood. "The old Frankfort city, with its busy crowds,
its fairs, its mixed population, and its many sources of excitement,
offered great temptations and great pasture to so desultory a genius.
This is perhaps a case wherein circumstances may be seen influencing the
direction of character.... A large continuity of thought and effort was
perhaps radically uncongenial to such a temperament; yet one cannot help
speculating whether under other circumstances he might not have achieved
it. Had he been reared in a quiet little old German town, where he would
have daily seen the same faces in the silent streets, and come in
contact with the same characters, his culture might have been less
various, but it might perhaps have been deeper. Had he been reared in
the country, with only the changing seasons and the sweet serenities of
nature to occupy his attention when released from study, he would
certainly have been a different poet. The long summer afternoons spent
in lonely rambles, the deepening twilights filled with shadowy visions,
the slow uniformity of his external life necessarily throwing him more
and more upon the subtler diversities of inward experience, would
inevitably have influenced his genius in quite different directions,
would have animated his works with a very different spirit."

We are sometimes told that life in a great capital is essential to the
development of genius, but Frankfort was the largest town Goethe ever
lived in, and he never visited either Paris or London. Much of the
sanity of his genius may have been due to his residence in so tranquil a
place as Weimar, where he could shut himself up in his "garden-house"
and lock all the gates of the bridge over the Ilm. "The solitude," says
Mr. Lewes, "is absolute, broken only by the occasional sound of the
church clock, the music from the barracks, and the screaming of the
peacocks spreading their superb beauty in the park." Few men of genius
have been happier in their surroundings than Goethe. He had
tranquillity, and yet was not deprived of intellectual intercourse; the
scenery within excursion-distance from his home was interesting and even
inspiring, yet not so splendid as to be overwhelming. We know from his
conversations that he was quite aware of the value of those little
centres of culture to Germany, and yet in one place he speaks of
Béranger in the tone which seems to imply an appreciation of the larger
life of Paris. "Fancy," he says, "this same Béranger away from Paris,
and the influence and opportunities of a world-city, born as the son of
a poor tailor, at Jena or Weimar; let him run his wretched career in
either of the two small cities, and see what fruit would have grown on
such a soil and in such an atmosphere."

We cannot too frequently be reminded that we are nothing of ourselves,
and by ourselves, and are only something by the place we hold in the
intellectual chain of humanity by which electricity is conveyed to us
and through us--to be increased in the transmission if we have great
natural power and are favorably situated, but not otherwise. A child is
born to the Vecelli family at Cadore, and when it is nine years old is
taken to Venice and placed under the tuition of Sebastian Zuccato.
Afterwards he goes to Bellini's school, and there gets acquainted with
another student, one year his junior, whose name is Barbarelli. They
live together and work together in Venice; then young Barbarelli (known
to posterity as Giorgione), after putting on certain spaces of wall and
squares of canvas such color as the world had never before seen, dies in
his early manhood and leaves Vecellio, whom we call Titian, to work on
there in Venice till the plague stays his hand in his hundredth year.
The genius came into the world, but all the possibilities of his
development depended upon the place and the time. He came exactly in the
right place and precisely at the right time. To be born not far from
Venice in the days of Bellini, to be taken there at nine years old, to
have Giorgione for one's comrade, all this was as fortunate for an
artistic career as the circumstances of Alexander of Macedon were for a
career of conquest.


