LETTER VI.

TO AN ARDENT FRIEND WHO TOOK NO REST.

  On some verses of Goethe--Man not constituted like a planet--Matthew
  Arnold's poem, "Self-dependence"--Poetry and prose--The wind more
  imitable than the stars--The stone in Glen Croe--Rest and be thankful.

"Rambling over the wild moors, with thoughts oftentimes as wild and
dreary as those moors, the young Carlyle, who had been cheered through
his struggling sadness, and strengthened for the part he was to play in
life, by the beauty and the wisdom which Goethe had revealed to him,
suddenly conceived the idea that it would be a pleasant and a fitting
thing if some of the few admirers in England forwarded to Weimar a
trifling token of their admiration. On reaching home Mr. Carlyle at once
sketched the design of a seal to be engraved, the serpent of eternity
encircling a star, with the words _ohne Hast, ohne Rast_ (unhasting,
unresting), in allusion to the well-known verses--

  'Wie das Gestirn,
   Ohne Hast
   Aber ohne Rast
   Drehe sich jeder
   Um die eigne Last.'

(Like a star, unhasting, unresting, be each one fulfilling his God-given
'hest.')"[10]

This is said so beautifully, and seems so wise, that it may easily
settle down into the mind as a maxim and rule of life. Had we been told
in plain prose to take no rest, without the beautiful simile of the
star, and without the wise restriction about haste, our common sense
would have rebelled at once; but as both beauty and wisdom exist
together in the gem-like stanza, our judgment remains silent in charmed
acquiescence.

Let us ask ourselves, however, about this stella example, whether man is
naturally so constituted as to be able to imitate it. A planet moves
without haste, because it is incapable of excitement; and without rest,
because it is incapable of fatigue. A planet makes no effort, and
encounters no friction or resistance of any kind. Man is so constituted
as to feel frequently the stimulus of excitement, which immediately
translates itself either into actual acceleration or into the desire for
acceleration--a desire which cannot be restrained without an effort; and
whatever man undertakes to do he encounters friction and resistance,
which, for him, always sooner or later inevitably induce fatigue. Man is
neither constituted like a star nor situated like a star, and therefore
it is not possible for him to exist as stars exist.

You will object to this criticism that it handles a delicate little poem
very roughly, and you may tell me that I am unfit to receive the wisdom
of the poets, which is always uttered with a touch of Oriental
exaggeration. Certainly Goethe could never mean that a man should kill
himself by labors literally incessant. Goethe's own life is the best
elucidation of his true meaning. The example of the star was held up to
us to be followed only within the limits of our human nature, as a
Christian points to the example of Christ. In the same spirit Matthew
Arnold wrote his noble poem "Self-dependence," in which he tells us to
live like the stars and the sea:--

  "Ah, once more," I cried, "ye stars, ye waters,
     On my heart your mighty charm renew;
   Still, still let me, as I gaze upon you,
     Feel my soul becoming vast like you."

   From the intense, clear, star-sown vault of heaven,
     Over the lit sea's unquiet way,
   In the rustling night-air came the answer:
     "Wouldst thou _be_ as these are? _Live_ as they.

  "Unaffrighted by the silence round them,
     Undistracted by the sights they see,
   These demand not that the things without them
     Yield them love, amusement, sympathy."

The true intention of poetical teachings like these is in the influence
they have over the feelings. If a star makes me steadier in my labor,
less of a victim to vain agitation, in consequence of Goethe's verses;
if the stars and the sea together renew more fully their mighty charm
upon my heart because those stanzas of Arnold have fixed themselves in
my memory, the poets have done their work. But the more positive
_prosateur_ has his work to do also, and you, as it seems to me, need
this positive help of prose.

You are living a great deal too much like a star, and not enough like a
human being. You do not hasten often, but you _never_ rest, except when
Nature mercifully prostrates you in irresistible sleep. Like the stars
and the sea in Arnold's poem, you do not ask surrounding things to yield
you love, amusement, sympathy. The stars and the sea can do without
these refreshments of the brain and heart, but you cannot. Rest is
necessary to recruit your intellectual forces; sympathy is necessary to
prevent your whole nature from stiffening like a rotifer without
moisture; love is necessary to make life beautiful for you, as the
plumage of certain birds becomes splendid when they pair; and without
amusement you will lose the gayety which wise men try to keep as the
best legacy of youth.

Let your rest be perfect in its season, like the rest of waters that are
still. If you will have a model for your living, take neither the stars,
for they fly without ceasing, nor the ocean that ebbs and flows, nor the
river that cannot stay, but rather let your life be like that of the
summer air, which has times of noble energy and times of perfect peace.
It fills the sails of ships upon the sea, and the miller thanks it on
the breezy uplands; it works generously for the health and wealth of all
men, yet it claims its hours of rest. "I have pushed the fleet, I have
turned the mill, I have refreshed the city, and now, though the captain
may walk impatiently on the quarter-deck, and the miller swear, and the
city stink, I will stir no more until it pleases me."

You have learned many things, my friend, but one thing you have _not_
learned--the art of resting. That stone in Glen Croe ought to have
impressed its lesson on the mind of many a traveller, long before Earl
Russell gave it a newspaper celebrity. Have we not rested there
together, you and I, a little in advance of the coach, which the weary
horses were still slowly dragging up the tedious hill? And as we sat on
the turf, and looked down the misty glen, did we not read the lesson
there engraven? How good and _human_ the idea was, the idea of setting
up that graven stone in the wilderness; how full of sympathy is that
inscription for all the weakness and weariness of humanity! Once, in the
ardor of youth, there shone before me a golden star in heaven, and on
the deep azure around it "_Ohne Hast, ohne Rast_," in letters of steady
flame; but now I see more frequently a plain little stone set up in the
earth, with the inscription, "Rest, and be thankful!"

Is not the stone just a little like a grave-stone, my friend? Perhaps it
is. But if we take rest when we require it during life, we shall not
need the grave's rest quite so soon.


