PART IX.

_SOCIETY AND SOLITUDE._


LETTER I.

TO A LADY WHO DOUBTED THE REALITY OF INTELLECTUAL FRIENDSHIPS.

  That intellectual friendships are in their nature temporary, when
  there is no basis of feeling to support them--Their freshness soon
  disappears--Danger of satiety--Temporary acquaintances--Succession in
  friendships--Free communication of intellectual results--Friendships
  between ripe and immature men--Rembrandt and Hoogstraten--Tradition
  transmitted through these friendships.

I heartily agree with you so far as this, that intellectual relations
will not sustain friendship for very long, unless there is also some
basis of feeling to sustain it. And still there is a certain reality in
the friendships of the intellect whilst they last, and they are
remembered gratefully for their profit when in the course of nature they
have ceased. We may wisely contract them, and blamelessly dissolve them
when the occasion that created them has gone by. They are like business
partnerships, contracted from motives of interest, and requiring
integrity above all things, with mutual respect and consideration, yet
not necessarily either affection or the semblance of it. Since the
motive of the intellectual existence is the desire to ascertain and
communicate truth, a sort of positive and negative electricity
immediately establishes itself between those who want to know and those
who desire to communicate their knowledge; and the connection is
mutually agreeable until these two desires are satisfied. When this
happens, the connection naturally ceases; but the memory of it usually
leaves a permanent feeling of good-will, and a permanent disposition to
render services of the same order. This, in brief, is the whole
philosophy of the subject; but it may be observed farther, that the
purely intellectual intercourse which often goes by the name of
friendship affords excellent opportunities for the formation of real
friendship, since it cannot be long continued without revealing much of
the whole nature of the associates.

We do not easily exhaust the mind of another, but we easily exhaust what
is accessible to us in his mind; and when we have done this, the first
benefit of intercourse is at an end. Then comes a feeling of dulness and
disappointment, which is full of the bitterest discouragement to the
inexperienced. In maturer life we are so well prepared for this that it
discourages us no longer. We know beforehand that the freshness of the
mind that was new to us will rapidly wear away, that we shall soon
assimilate the fragment of it which is all that ever can be made our
own, so we enjoy the freshness whilst it lasts, and are even careful of
it as a fruiterer is of the bloom upon his grapes and plums. It may seem
a hard and worldly thing to say, but it appears to me that a wise man
might limit his intercourse with others before there was any danger of
satiety, as it is wisdom in eating to rise from table with an appetite.
Certainly, if the friends of our intellect live near enough for us to
anticipate no permanent separation by mere distance, if we may expect to
meet them frequently, to have many opportunities for a more thorough and
searching exploration of their minds, it is a wise policy not to exhaust
them all at once. With the chance acquaintances we make in travelling,
the case is altogether different; and this is, no doubt, the reason why
men are so astonishingly communicative when they never expect to see
each other any more. You feel an intense curiosity about some temporary
companion; you make many guesses about him; and to induce him to tell
you as much as possible in the short time you are likely to be together,
you win his confidence by a frankness that would perhaps considerably
surprise your nearest neighbors and relations. This is due to the
shortness of the opportunity; but with people who live in the same
place, you will proceed much more deliberately.

Whoever would remain regularly provided with intellectual friends, ought
to arrange a succession of friendships, as gardeners do with peas and
strawberries, so that, whilst some are fully ripe, others should be
ripening to replace them. This doctrine sounds like blasphemy against
friendship; but it is not intended to apply to the sacred friendship of
the heart, which ought to be permanent like marriage, only to the
friendship of the head, which is of the utmost utility to culture, yet
in its nature temporary. I know a distinguished Englishman who is quite
remarkable for the talent with which he arranges his intellectual
friendships, so as never to be dependent on any one, but always sure of
the intercourse he needs, both now and in the future. He will never be
isolated, never without some fresh and living interest in humanity. It
may seem to you that there is a lamentable want of faith in this; and I
grant at once that a system of this kind does presuppose the extinction
of the boyish belief in the permanence of human relations; still, it
indicates a large-minded confidence in the value of human intercourse,
an enjoyment of the present, a hope for the future, and a right
appreciation of the past.

Nothing is more beautiful in the intellectual life than the willingness
of all cultivated people--unless they happen to be accidentally soured
by circumstances that have made them wretched--to communicate to others
the results of all their toil. It is true that they apparently lose
nothing by the process, and that a rich man who gives some portion of
his material wealth exercises a greater self-denial; still, when you
consider that men of culture, in teaching others, abandon something of
their relative superiority, and often voluntarily incur the sacrifice
of what is most precious to them, namely, their time, I think you will
admit that their readiness in this kind of generosity is one of the
finest characteristics of highly-developed humanity. Of all intellectual
friendships, none are so beautiful as those which subsist between old
and ripe men and their younger brethren in science, or literature, or
art. It is by these private friendships, even more than by public
performance, that the tradition of sound thinking and great doing is
perpetuated from age to age. Hoogstraten, who was a pupil of Rembrandt,
asked him many questions, which the great master answered thus:--"Try to
put well in practice what you already know; in so doing you will, in
good time, discover the hidden things which you now inquire about." That
answer of Rembrandt's is typical of the maturest teaching. How truly
friendly it is; how full of encouragement; how kind in its admission
that the younger artist _did_ already know something worth putting into
practice; and yet, at the same time, how judicious in its reserve! Few
of us have been so exceptionally unfortunate as not to find, in our own
age, some experienced friend who has helped us by precious counsel,
never to be forgotten. We cannot render it in kind; but perhaps in the
fulness of time it may become our noblest duty to aid another as we have
ourselves been aided, and to transmit to him an invaluable treasure, the
tradition of the intellectual life.


