PART V.

_THE INFLUENCES OF MONEY._


LETTER I.

TO A VERY RICH STUDENT.

  The author of "Vathek"--The double temptation of wealth--Rich men
  tempted to follow occupations in which their wealth is
  useful--Pressure of social duties on the rich--The Duchess of
  Orleans--The rich man's time not his own--The rich may help the
  general intellectual advancement by the exercise of patronage--Dr.
  Carpenter--Franz Woepke.

It has always seemed to me a very remarkable and noteworthy circumstance
that although Mr. Beckford, the author of "Vathek," produced in his
youth a story which bears all the signs of true inventive genius, he
never produced anything in after-life which posterity cares to preserve.
I read "Vathek" again quite recently, to see how far my early enthusiasm
for it might have been due to that passion for orientalism which reigned
amongst us many years ago, but this fresh perusal left an impression
which only genius leaves. Beckford really had invention, and an
extraordinary narrative power. That such faculties, after having once
revealed themselves, should contentedly have remained dormant ever
afterwards, is one of the most curious facts in the history of the
human mind, and it is the more curious that Beckford lived to a very
advanced age.

Beckford's case appears to have been one of those in which great wealth
diminishes or wholly paralyzes the highest energy of the intellect,
leaving the lower energies free to exert less noble kinds of activity. A
refined self-indulgence became the habit of his life, and he developed
simply into a dilettant. Even his love for the fine arts did not rise
above the indulgence of an elegant and cultivated taste. Although he
lived at the very time most favorable to the appearance of a great
critic in architecture and painting, the time of a great architectural
revival and of the growth of a vigorous and independent school of
contemporary art, he exercised no influence beyond that of a wealthy
virtuoso. His love of the beautiful began and ended in simple personal
gratification; it led to no noble labor, to no elevating severity of
discipline. Englishman though he was, he filled his Oriental tower with
masterpieces from Italy and Holland, only to add form and color to the
luxuries of his reverie, behind his gilded lattices.

And when he raised that other tower at Fonthill, and the slaves of the
lamp toiled at it by torchlight to gratify his Oriental impatience, he
exercised no influence upon the confusion of his epoch more durable than
that hundred yards of masonry which sank into a shapeless heap whilst as
yet Azrael spared its author. He to whom Nature and Fortune had been so
prodigal of their gifts, he whom Reynolds painted and Mozart instructed,
who knew the poets of seven literatures, culling their jewels like
flowers in seven enchanted gardens--he to whom the palaces of knowledge
all opened their golden gates even in his earliest youth, to whom were
also given riches and length of days, for whom a thousand craftsmen
toiled in Europe and a thousand slaves beyond the sea,[4]--what has this
gifted mortal left as the testimony of his power, as the trace of his
fourscore years upon the earth? Only the reminiscence of a vague
splendor, like the fast-fading recollection of a cloud that burned at
sunset, and one small gem of intellectual creation that lives like a
tiny star.

If wealth had only pleasure to offer as a temptation from intellectual
labor, its influence would be easier to resist. Men of the English race
are often grandly strong in resistance to every form of voluptuousness;
the race is fond of comfort and convenience, but it does not sacrifice
its energy to enervating self-indulgence. There is, however, another
order of temptations in great wealth, to which Englishmen not only
yield, but yield with a satisfied conscience, even with a sense of
obedience to duty. Wealth carries pleasure in her left hand, but in her
right she bears honor and power. The rich man feels that he can do so
much by the mere exercise of his command over the labor of others, and
so little by any unaided labor of his own, that he is always strongly
tempted to become, not only physically but intellectually, a director of
work rather that a workman. Even his modesty, when he is modest, tends
to foster his reliance on others rather than himself. All that he tries
to do is done so much better by those who make it their profession, that
he is always tempted to fall back upon his paying power as his most
satisfactory and effective force. There are cases in which this
temptation is gloriously overcome, where men of great wealth compel
every one to acknowledge that their money is nothing more than a help to
their higher life, like the charger that bore Wellington at Waterloo,
serving him indeed usefully, but not detracting from the honor which is
his due. But in these cases the life is usually active or administrative
rather than intellectual. The rich man does not generally feel tempted
to enter upon careers in which his command over labor is not an evident
advantage, and this because men naturally seek those fields in which
_all_ their superiorities tell. Even the well known instance of Lord
Rosse can scarcely be considered an exception to this rule, for although
he was eminent in a science which has been followed by poor men with
great distinction, his wealth was of use in the construction of his
colossal telescope, which gave him a clear advantage over merely
professional contemporaries.

Besides this natural desire to pursue careers in which their money may
lessen the number of competitors, the rich are often diverted from
purely intellectual pursuits by the social duties of their station,
duties which it is impossible to avoid and difficult to keep within
limits. The Duchess of Orleans (mother of the present Count of Paris)
arranged her time with the greatest care so as to reserve a little of it
for her own culture in uninterrupted solitude. By an exact system, and
the exercise of the rarest firmness, she contrived to steal half an hour
here and an hour there--enough no doubt, when employed as she employed
them, to maintain her character as a very distinguished lady, yet still
far from sufficient for the satisfactory pursuit of any great art or
science. If it be difficult for the rich man to enter into the kingdom
of heaven, it is also difficult for him to secure that freedom from
interruption which is necessary to fit him for his entrance into the
Intellectual Kingdom. He can scarcely allow himself to be absorbed in
any great study, when he reflects on all the powerful means of social
influence which he is suffering to lie idle. He is sure to possess by
inheritance, or to have acquired in obedience to custom, a complicated
and expensive machinery for the pleasures and purposes of society. There
is game to be shot; there are hunters to be exercised; great houses to
be filled with guests. So much is expected of the rich man, both in
business and in pleasure, that his time is not his own, and he could not
quit his station if he would. And yet the Intellectual Life, in its
fruitful perfection, requires, I do not say the complete abandonment of
the world, but it assuredly requires free and frequent spaces of labor
in tranquil solitude, "retreats" like those commanded by the Church of
Rome, but with more of study and less of contemplation.

It would be useless to ask you to abdicate your power, and retreat into
some hermitage with a library and a laboratory, without a thought of
returning to your pleasant hall in Yorkshire and your house in Mayfair.
You will not sell all and follow the Light, but there is a life which
you may powerfully encourage, yet only partially share. Notwithstanding
the increased facilities for earning a living which this age offers to
the intellectual, the time that they are often compelled to give to the
satisfaction of common material necessities is so much time withdrawn
from the work which they alone can do. It is a lamentable waste of the
highest and rarest kind of energy to compel minds that are capable of
original investigation, of discovery, to occupy themselves in that mere
vulgarization of knowledge, in popular lecturing and literature, which
could be done just as efficiently by minds of a common order. It is an
error of the present age to believe that the time for what is called
patronage is altogether passed away. Let me mention two instances to
the contrary: one in which kindly help would have saved fifteen years of
a noble life; another in which that kindly help did actually permit a
man of exceptional endowment and equally exceptional industry to pursue
investigations for which no other human being was so well qualified, and
which were entirely incompatible with the earning of the daily bread.
Dr. Carpenter has lately told us that, finding it impossible to unite
the work of a general practitioner with the scientific researches upon
which his heart was set, he gave up nine-tenths of his time for twenty
years to popular lecturing and writing, in order that he might exist and
devote the other tenth to science. "Just as he was breaking down from
the excessive strain upon mind and body which this life involved, an
appointment was offered to Dr. Carpenter which gave him competence and
sufficient leisure for the investigations which he has conducted to such
important issues." Suppose that during those twenty years of struggle he
_had_ broken down like many another only a little less robust--what
then? A mind lost to his country and the world. And would it not have
been happier for him and for us if some of those men (of whom there are
more in England than in any other land), who are so wealthy that their
gold is positively a burden and an encumbrance, like too many coats in
summer, had helped Dr. Carpenter at least a few years earlier, in some
form that a man of high feeling might honorably accept? The other
example that I shall mention is that of Franz Woepke, the
mathematician and orientalist. A modest pension, supplied by an Italian
prince who was interested in the history of mathematics, gave Woepke
that peace which is incompatible with poverty, and enabled him to live
grandly in his narrow lodging the noble intellectual life. Was not this
rightly and well done, and probably a much more effectual employment of
the power of gold than if that Italian prince had added some rare
manuscripts to his own library without having time or knowledge to
decipher them? I cannot but think that the rich may serve the cause of
culture best by a judicious exercise of patronage--unless, indeed, they
have within themselves the sense of that irresistible vocation which
made Humboldt use his fortune as the servant of his high ambition. The
Humboldts never are too rich; they possess their gold and are not
possessed by it, and they are exempt from the duty of aiding others
because they themselves have a use for all their powers.


