PART XI.

_TRADES AND PROFESSIONS._


LETTER I.

TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN OF ABILITY AND CULTURE WHO HAD NOT DECIDED ABOUT
HIS PROFESSION.

  The Church--Felicities and advantages of the clerical profession--Its
  elevated ideal--That it is favorable to noble studies--French priests
  and English Clergymen--The professional point of view--Difficulty of
  disinterested thinking--Colored light--Want of strict
  accuracy--Quotation from a sermon--The drawback to the clerical
  life--Provisional nature of intellectual conclusions--The legal
  profession--That it affords gratification to the intellectual
  powers--Want of intellectual disinterestedness in lawyers--Their
  absorption in professional life--Anecdote of a London
  lawyer--Superiority of lawyers in their sense of
  affairs--Medicine--The study of it a fine preparation for the
  intellectual life--Social rise of medical men coincident with the
  mental progress of communities--Their probable future influence on
  education--The heroic side of their profession--The military and naval
  professions--Bad effect of the privation of
  solitude--Interruption--Anecdote of Cuvier--The fine arts--In what way
  they are favorable to thought--Intellectual leisure of
  artists--Reasoning artists--Sciences included in the fine arts.

It may be taken for granted that to a mind constituted as yours is, no
profession will be satisfactory which does not afford free play to the
intellectual powers. You might no doubt exercise resolution enough to
bind yourself down to uncongenial work for a term of years, but it would
be with the intention of retiring as soon as you had realized a
competency. The happiest life is that which constantly exercises and
educates what is best in us.

You had thoughts, at one time, of the Church, and the Church would have
suited you in many respects very happily, yet not, I think, in all
respects. The clerical profession has many great felicities and
advantages: it educates and develops, by its mild but regular
discipline, much of our higher nature; it sets before us an elevated
ideal, worth striving for at the cost of every sacrifice but one, of
which I intend to say something farther on; and it offers just that
mixture of public and private life which best affords the alternation of
activity and rest. It is an existence in many respects most favorable to
the noblest studies. It offers the happiest combination of duties that
satisfy the conscience with leisure for the cultivation of the mind; it
gives the easiest access to all classes of society, providing for the
parson himself a neutral and independent position, so safe that he need
only conduct himself properly to preserve it. How superior, from the
intellectual point of view, is this liberal existence to the narrower
one of a French _curé de campagne_! I certainly think that if a good
_curé_ has an exceptional genius for sanctity, his chances of becoming a
perfect saint are better than those of a comfortable English incumbent,
who is at the same time a gentleman and man of the world, but he is not
nearly so well situated for leading the intellectual life. Our own
clergy have a sort of middle position between the _curé_ and the layman,
which without at all interfering with their spiritual vocation, makes
them better judges of the character of laymen and more completely in
sympathy with it.

And yet, although the life of a clergyman is favorable to culture in
many ways, it is not wholly favorable to it. There exists, in clerical
thinking generally, just one restriction or impediment, which is the
overwhelming importance of the professional point of view. Of all the
professions the ecclesiastical one is that which most decidedly and most
constantly affects the judgment of persons and opinions. It is
peculiarly difficult for a clergyman to attain disinterestedness in his
thinking, to accept truth just as it may happen to present itself,
without passionately desiring that one doctrine may turn out to be
strong in evidence and another unsupported. And so we find the clergy,
as a class, anxious rather to discover aids to faith, than the simple
scientific truth; and the more the special priestly character develops
itself, the more we find them disposed to use their intellects for the
triumph of principles that are decided upon beforehand. Sometimes this
disposition leads them to see the acts of laymen in a colored light and
to speak of them without strict accuracy. Here is an example of what I
mean. A Jesuit priest preached a sermon in London very recently, in
which he said that "in Germany, France, Italy, and England, gigantic
efforts were being made to rob Christian children of the blessing of a
Christian education." "Herod, though dead," the preacher continued, "has
left his mantle behind him; and I wish that the soldiers of Herod in
those countries would plunge their swords into the breasts of little
children while they were innocent, rather than have their souls
destroyed by means of an unchristian and uncatholic education." No doubt
this is very earnest and sincere, but it is not accurate and just
thinking. The laity in the countries the preacher mentioned have
certainly a strong tendency to exclude theology from State schools,
because it is so difficult for a modern State to impose any kind of
theological teaching without injustice to minorities; but the laity do
not desire to deprive children of whatever instruction may be given to
them by the clergy of their respective communions. May I add, that to
the mind of a layman it seems a sanguinary desire that all little
children should have swords plunged into their breasts rather than be
taught in schools not clerically directed? The exact truth is, that the
powerful lay element is certainly separating itself from the
ecclesiastical element all over Europe, because it is found by
experience that the two have a great and increasing difficulty in
working harmoniously together, but the ecclesiastical element is
detached and not destroyed. The quotation I have just made is in itself
a sufficient illustration of that very peculiarity in the more exalted
ecclesiastical temperament, which often makes it so difficult for
priests and governments, in these times, to get on comfortably together.
Here is first a very inaccurate statement, and then an outburst of most
passionate feeling, whereas the intellect desires the strictest truth
and the most complete disinterestedness. As the temper of the laity
becomes more and more intellectual (and that is the direction of its
movement), the sacerdotal habit will become more and more remote from
it.

The clerical life has many strong attractions for the intellectual, and
just one drawback to counterbalance them. It offers tranquillity,
shelter from the interruptions and anxieties of the more active
professions, and powerful means of influence ready to hand; but it is
compatible with intellectual freedom and with the satisfaction of the
conscience, only just so long as the priest really remains a believer in
the details of his religion. Now, although we may reasonably hope to
retain the chief elements of our belief, although what a man believes at
twenty-five is always what he will most probably believe at fifty,
still, in an age when free inquiry is the common habit of cultivated
people of our sex, we may well hesitate before taking upon ourselves any
formal engagement for the future, especially in matters of detail. The
intellectual spirit does not regard its conclusions as being at any time
final, but always provisional; we hold what we believe to be the truth
until we can replace it by some more perfect truth, but cannot tell how
much of to-day's beliefs to-morrow will retain or reject. It may be
observed, however, that the regular performance of priestly functions is
in itself a great help to permanence in belief by connecting it closely
with practical habit, so that the clergy do really and honestly often
retain through life their hold on early beliefs which as laymen they
might have lost.

The profession of the law provides ample opportunities for a critical
intellect with a strong love of accuracy and a robust capacity for hard
work, besides which it is the best of worldly educations. Some lawyers
love their work as passionately as artists do theirs, others dislike it
very heartily, most of them seem to take it as a simple business to be
done for daily bread. Lawyers whose heart is in their work are
invariably men of superior ability, which proves that there is something
in it that affords gratification to the intellectual powers. However, in
speaking of lawyers, I feel ignorant and on the outside, because their
profession is one of which the interior feelings can be known to no one
who has not practised. One thing seems clear, they get the habit of
employing the whole strength and energy of their minds for especial and
temporary ends, the purpose being the service of the client, certainly
not the revelation of pure truth. Hence, although they become very
acute, and keen judges of that side of human nature which they
habitually see (not the best side), they are not more disinterested than
clergymen.[12] Sometimes they take up some study outside of their
profession and follow it disinterestedly, but this is rare. A busy
lawyer is much more likely than a clergyman to become entirely absorbed
in his professional life, because it requires so much more intellectual
exertion. I remember asking a very clever lawyer who lived in London,
whether he ever visited an exhibition of pictures, and he answered me by
the counter-inquiry whether I had read Chitty on Contracts, Collier on
Partnerships, Taylor on Evidence, Cruse's Digest, or Smith's Mercantile
Law? This seemed to me at the time a good instance of the way a
professional habit may narrow one's views of things, for these law-books
were written for lawyers alone, whilst the picture exhibitions were
intended for the public generally. My friend's answer would have been
more to the point if I had inquired whether he had read Linton on
Colors, and Burnet on Chiaroscuro.

There is just one situation in which we all may feel for a short time as
lawyers feel habitually. Suppose that two inexperienced players sit down
to a game of chess, and that each is backed by a clever person who is
constantly giving him hints. The two backers represent the lawyers, and
the players represent their clients. There is not much disinterested
thought in a situation of this kind, but there is a strong stimulus to
acuteness.

I think that lawyers are often superior to philosophers in their sense
of what is relatively important in human affairs with reference to
limited spaces of time, such as half a century. They especially know the
enormous importance of custom, which the speculative mind very readily
forgets, and they have in the highest degree that peculiar sense which
fits men for dealing with others in the affairs of ordinary life. In
this respect they are remarkably superior to clergymen, and superior
also to artists and men of science.

The profession of medicine is, of all fairly lucrative professions, the
one best suited to the development of the intellectual life. Having to
deal continually with science, being constantly engaged in following and
observing the operation of natural laws, it produces a sense of the
working of those laws which prepares the mind for bold and original
speculation, and a reliance upon their unfailing regularity, which gives
it great firmness and assurance. A medical education is the best
possible preparation for philosophical pursuits, because it gives them a
solid basis in the ascertainable. The estimation in which these studies
are held is an accurate meter of the intellectual advancement of a
community. When the priest is reverenced as a being above ordinary
humanity, and the physician slightly esteemed, the condition of society
is sure to be that of comparative ignorance and barbarism; and it is one
of several signs which indicate barbarian feeling in our own
aristocracy, that it has a contempt for the study of medicine. The
progress of society towards enlightenment is marked by the steady social
rise of the surgeon and the physician, a rise which still continues,
even in Western Europe. It is probable that before very long the medical
profession will exercise a powerful influence upon general education,
and take an active share in it. There are very strong reasons for the
opinion that schoolmasters educated in medicine would be peculiarly well
qualified to train both body and mind for a vigorous and active manhood.
An immense advantage, even from the intellectual point of view, in the
pursuit of medicine and surgery, is that they supply a discipline in
mental heroism. Other professions do this also, but not to the same
degree. The combination of an accurate training in positive science with
the habitual contempt of danger and contemplation of suffering and
death, is the finest possible preparation for noble studies and arduous
discoveries. I ought to add, however, that medical men in the provinces,
when they have not any special enthusiasm for their work, seem
peculiarly liable to the deadening influences of routine, and easily
fall behind their age. The medical periodicals provide the best remedy
for this.

The military and naval professions are too active, and too much bound to
obedience in their activity, for the highest intellectual pursuits; but
their greatest evil in this respect is the continual privation of
solitude, and the frequency of interruption. A soldier's life in the
higher ranks, when there is great responsibility and the necessity for
personal decision, undoubtedly leads to the most brilliant employment of
the mental powers, and develops a manliness of character which is often
of the greatest use in intellectual work; so that a man of science may
find his force augmented, and better under control, for having passed
through a military experience; but the life of barracks and camps is
destructive to continuity of thinking. The incompatibility becomes
strikingly manifest when we reflect how impossible it would have been
for Ney or Massena to do the work of Cuvier or Comte. Cuvier even
declined to accompany the expedition to Egypt, notwithstanding the
prospects of advantage that it offered. The reason he gave for this
refusal was, that he could do more for science in the tranquillity of
the Jardin des Plantes. He was a strict economist of time, and dreaded
the loss of it involved in following an army, even though his mission
would have been purely scientific. How much more would Cuvier have
dreaded the interruptions of a really military existence! It is these
interruptions, and not any want of natural ability, that are the true
explanation of the intellectual poverty which characterizes the military
profession. Of all the liberal professions it is the least studious.

Let me say a word in conclusion about the practical pursuit of the fine
arts. Painters are often remarkable for pleasant conversational power,
and a degree of intelligence strikingly superior to their literary
culture. This is because the processes of their art can be followed, at
least under certain circumstances, by the exercise of hand and eye,
directed merely by artistic taste and experience, whilst the intellect
is left free either for reflection or conversation. Rubens liked to be
read to when he painted; many artists like to hear people talk, and to
take a share occasionally in the conversation. The truth is that
artists, even when they work very assiduously, do in fact enjoy great
spaces of intellectual leisure, and often profit by them. Painting
itself is also a fine discipline for some of the best faculties of the
mind, though it is well known that the most gifted artists think least
about their art. Still there is a large class of painters, including
many eminent ones, who _proceed intellectually_ in the execution of
their works, who reason them out philosophically step by step, and
exercise a continual criticism upon their manual labor as it goes
forward. I find, as I know art and artists better, that this class is
more numerous than is commonly suspected, and that the charming effects
which we believe to be the result of pure inspiration have often been
elaborately reasoned out like a problem in mathematics. We are very apt
to forget that art includes a great science, the science of natural
appearances, and that the technical work of painters and engravers
cannot go forward safely without the profoundest knowledge of certain
delicate materials, this being also a science, and a difficult one. The
common tendency is to underrate (from ignorance) what is intellectual in
the practice of the fine arts; and yet the artists of past times have
left evidence enough that they thought about art, and thought deeply.
Artists are often illiterate; but it is possible to be at the same time
illiterate and intellectual; as we see frequent examples of
book-learning in people who have scarcely a single idea of their own.


