PART IX.

SOCIETY AND SOLITUDE.

    I. To a lady who doubted the reality of intellectual
       friendships                                                   374

   II. To a young gentleman who lived much in fashionable society    379

  III. To the same                                                   384

   IV. To the same                                                   391

    V. To a young gentleman who kept entirely out of company         397

   VI. To a friend who kindly warned the author  of the bad effects
        of solitude                                                  402

PART X.

INTELLECTUAL HYGIENICS.

    I. To a young author whilst he was writing his first book        415

   II. To a student in the first ardor of intellectual ambition      422

  III. To an intellectual man who desired an  outlet for his
         energies                                                    431

   IV. To the friend of a man of high culture  who produced nothing  441

    V. To a student who felt hurried and driven                      446

   VI. To an ardent friend who took no rest                          451

  VII. To the same                                                   456

 VIII. To a friend (highly cultivated) who congratulated  himself
          on having entirely  abandoned the habit of reading
          newspapers                                                 466

   IX. To an author who appreciated contemporary literature          470

    X. To an author who kept very irregular hours                    476


PART XI.

TRADES AND PROFESSIONS.

    I. To a young gentleman of ability and culture who had not
         decided about his profession                                488

   II. To a young gentleman who had literary and artistic tastes,
         but no profession                                           499

  III. To a young gentleman who wished to devote himself to
         literature as a profession                                  504

   IV. To an energetic and successful cotton manufacturer            513

    V. To a young Etonian who thought of becoming a cotton-spinner   522


PART XII.

SURROUNDINGS.

    I. To a friend who often changed his place of residence          530

   II. To a friend who maintained that surroundings  were a matter
         of indifference to a thoroughly occupied mind               539

  III. To an artist who was fitting up a magnificent new studio      546




THE INTELLECTUAL LIFE.




PART I.

_THE PHYSICAL BASIS._


LETTER I.

TO A YOUNG MAN OF LETTERS WHO WORKED EXCESSIVELY.

  Mental labor believed to be innocuous to healthy persons--Difficulty
  of testing this--Case of the poet Wordsworth--Case of an eminent
  living author--Case of a literary clergyman--Case of an energetic
  tradesman--Instances of two Londoners who wrote
  professionally--Scott's paralysis--Byron's death--All intellectual
  labor proceeds on a physical basis.

So little is really known about the action of the nervous system, that
to go into the subject from the physiological point of view would be to
undertake a most difficult investigation, entirely beyond the competence
of an unscientific person like your present correspondent. You will,
therefore, permit me, in reference to this, to leave you to the teaching
of the most advanced physiologists of the time; but I may be able to
offer a few practical suggestions, based on the experience of
intellectual workers, which may be of use to a man whose career is
likely to be one of severe and almost uninterrupted intellectual labor.

A paper was read several years ago before the members of a society in
London, in which the author maintained that mental labor was never
injurious to a perfectly healthy human organization, and that the
numerous cases of break-down, which are commonly attributed to excessive
brain-work, are due, in reality, to the previous operation of disease.

This is one of those assertions which cannot be answered in a sentence.
Concentrated within the briefest expression it comes to this, that
mental labor cannot produce disease, but may aggravate the consequences
of disease which already exists.

The difficulty of testing this is obvious; for so long as health remains
quite perfect, it remains perfect, of course, whether the brain is used
or not; and when failure of health becomes manifest, it is not always
easy to decide in what degree mental labor may have been the cause of
it. Again, the accuracy of so general a statement cannot be proved by
any number of instances in its favor, since it is universally admitted
that brain-work is not the only cause of disease, and no one affirms
that it is more than one amongst many causes which may impede the bodily
functions.

When the poet Wordsworth was engaged in composing the "White Doe of
Rylstone," he received a wound in his foot, and he observed that the
continuation of the literary labor increased the irritation of the
wound; whereas by suspending his work he could diminish it, and absolute
mental rest produced a perfect cure. In connection with this incident he
remarked that poetic excitement, accompanied by protracted labor in
composition, always brought on more or less of bodily derangement. He
preserved himself from permanently injurious consequences by his
excellent habits of life.

A very eminent living author, whose name I do not feel at liberty to
mention, is always prostrated by severe illness at the conclusion of
each of his works; another is unwell every Sunday, because he does not
write on that day, and the recoil after the mental stretch of the week
is too much for him.

In the case of Wordsworth, the physical constitution is believed to have
been sound. His health at seventy-two was excellent; the two other
instances are more doubtful in this respect, yet both these writers
enjoy very fair health, after the pressure of brain-work has been
removed for any considerable time. A clergyman of robust organization,
who does a good deal of literary work at intervals, told me that,
whenever he had attempted to make it regular, the consequence had always
been distressing nervous sensations, from which at other times he was
perfectly free. A tradesman, whose business affords an excellent outlet
for energetic bodily activity, told me that having attempted, in
addition to his ordinary work, to acquire a foreign language which
seemed likely to be useful to him, he had been obliged to abandon it on
account of alarming cerebral symptoms. This man has immense vigor and
energy, but the digestive functions, in this instance, are sluggish.
However, when he abandoned study, the cerebral inconveniences
disappeared, and have never returned since.

Two Londoners who followed literature as a profession, and who both
worked to excess, had cerebral attacks of a still more decided kind. One
of them, after his recovery, resolved to regulate his work in future, so
that it might never pass the limits of moderation. He is now living, and
in possession of a remarkably clear and richly furnished intellect. The
other, who returned to his old habits, died in two years from softening
of the brain. I am not aware that in these cases there was any other
disease than that produced by an immoderate use of the mental powers.

The health of Sir Walter Scott--we have this on his own testimony--was
uncommonly robust, and there is every reason to believe that his
paralysis was brought on by the excessive labor which resulted from his
pecuniary embarrassments, and that without such excessive mental labor
and anxiety he would have preserved his health much longer. The death of
Byron was due, no doubt, quite as much to habits of dissipation as to
poetical excitement; still it is probable that he would have borne
either of these evil influences if it had not been accompanied by the
other; and that to a man whose way of life was so exhausting as Byron's
was, the addition of constant poetical excitement and hard work in
production, may be said without exaggeration to have killed him. We know
that Scott, with all his facility, had a dread of that kind of
excitement, and withdrew from the poetical arena to avoid it. We know,
too, that the brain of Southey proved ultimately unable to endure the
burden of the tasks he laid upon it.

Difficult as it may be in some instances to ascertain quite accurately
whether an overworked man had perfectly sound bodily health to begin
with, obvious as it may be that in many breakdowns the final failure has
been accelerated by diseases independent of mental work, the facts
remain, that the excessive exercise of the mental powers is injurious to
bodily health and that all intellectual labor proceeds upon a physical
basis. No man can safely forget this, and act as if he were a pure
spirit, superior to physical considerations. Let me then, in other
letters on this subject, direct your attention to the close connection
which exists between intellectual production and the state of the body
and the brain; not with the authority of a physician, but with the
sympathy of a fellow-laborer, who has learned something from his own
experience, and still more from the more varied experience of his
friends.


