LETTER IX.

TO AN AUTHOR WHO APPRECIATED CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE.

  Miss Mitford on the selfishness of authors--A suggestion of
  Emerson's--A laconic rule of his--Traces of jealousy--And of a more
  subtle feeling--A contradiction--Necessary to resist the invasion of
  the present--A certain equilibrium--The opposite of a pedant--The best
  classics not pedants, but artists.

Reading the other day a letter by Miss Mitford, I was reminded of you as
the eye is reminded of green when it sees scarlet. You, whose interest
in literature has ever kept pace with the time, to whom no new thing is
unwelcome if only it is good, are safe from her accusations; but how
many authors have deserved them! Miss Mitford is speaking of a certain
writer who is at the same time a clergyman, and whom it is not
difficult to recognize.

"I never," she says, "saw him interested in the slightest degree by the
work of any other author, except, indeed, one of his own followers or of
his own clique, and then only as admiring or helping him. He has great
kindness and great sympathy with working people, or with a dying friend,
but I profess to you I am amazed at the utter selfishness of authors. I
do not know one single poet who cares for any man's poetry but his own.
In general they read no books except such as may be necessary to their
own writings--that is to the work they happen to be about, and even then
I suspect that they only read the bits that they may immediately want.
You know the absolute ignorance in which Wordsworth lived of all modern
works; and if, out of compliment to a visitor, he thought it needful to
seem to read or listen to two or three stanzas, he gave unhesitating
praise to the writer himself, but took especial care not to repeat the
praise where it might have done him good--utterly fair and false."

There are touches of this spirit of indifference to contemporary
literature in several writers and scholars whom we know. There are
distinct traces of it even in published writings, though it is much more
evident in private life and habit. Emerson seriously suggests that "the
human mind would perhaps be a gainer if all the secondary writers were
lost--say, in England, all but Shakespeare, Milton, and Bacon, through
the profounder study so drawn to those wonderful minds." In the same
spirit we have Emerson's laconic rule, "Never read any but famed books,"
which suggests the remark that if men had obeyed this rule from the
beginning, no book could ever have acquired reputation, and nobody would
ever have read anything. The idea of limiting English literature to a
holy trinity of Shakespeare, Milton, and Bacon, and voluntarily losing
all other authors, seems to me the most intense expression of the spirit
of aristocracy in reading. It is as if a man were to decide in his own
mind that society would be the better if all persons except the three
Emperors were excluded from it. There is a want of reliance upon one's
own judgment, and an excess of faith in the estimates of others, when we
resolve to read only those books which come to us in the splendor of a
recognized intellectual royalty. We read either to gain information, to
have good thinking suggested to us, or to have our imagination
stimulated. In the way of knowledge the best authors are always the most
recent, so that Bacon could not suffice. In the way of thinking, our
methods have gained in precision since Milton's time, and we are helped
by a larger experience than his. The one thing which Shakespeare and
Milton can do for us quite perfectly still, is to fill our imagination
richly, and give it a fine stimulus. But modern writers can render us
the same service.

Is there not a little jealousy of contemporaries in the persistence with
which some authors avoid them, and even engage others to avoid them? May
not there be a shade of another feeling than jealousy, a feeling more
subtle in operation, the undefined apprehension that we may find, even
amongst our more obscure contemporaries, merit equal to our own? So long
as we restrict our reading to old books of great fame we are safe from
this apprehension, for if we find admirable qualities, we know
beforehand that the world has handsomely acknowledged them, and we
indulge in the hope that our own admirable qualities will be recognized
by posterity with equal liberality. But it creates an unpleasant feeling
of uneasiness to see quantities of obscure contemporary work, done in a
plain way to earn a living by men of third or fourth-rate reputation, or
of no reputation at all, which in many respects would fairly sustain a
comparison with our own. It is clear that an author ought to be the last
person to advise the public not to read contemporary literature, since
he is himself a maker of contemporary literature; and there is a direct
contradiction between the invitation to read his book, which he
circulates by the act of publishing, and the advice which the book
contains. Emerson is more safe from this obvious rejoinder when he
suggests to us to transfer our reading day by day from the newspaper to
the standard authors. But are these suggestions anything more than the
reaction of an intellectual man against the too prevalent customs of
the world? The reading practised by most people, by all who do not set
before themselves intellectual culture as one of the definite aims of
life, is remarkable for the regularity with which it neglects all the
great authors of the past. The books provided by the circulating
library, the reviews and magazines, the daily newspapers, are read
whilst they are novelties, but the standard authors are left on their
shelves unopened. We require a firm resolution to resist this invasion
of what is new, because it flows like an unceasing river, and unless we
protect our time against it by some solid embankment of unshakable rule
and resolution, every nook and cranny of it will be filled and flooded.
An Englishman whose life was devoted to culture, but who lived in an
out-of-the-way place on the Continent, told me that he considered it a
decided advantage to his mind to live quite outside of the English
library system, because if he wanted to read a new book he had to buy it
and pay heavily for carriage besides, which made him very careful in his
choice. For the same reason he rejoiced that the nearest English
news-room was two hundred miles from his residence.

But, on the other hand, what would be the condition of a man's mind who
never read anything but the classic authors? He would live in an
intellectual monastery, and would not even understand the classic
authors themselves, for we understand the past only by referring it to
what we know in the present.

It is best to preserve our minds in a state of equilibrium, and not to
allow our repugnance to what we see as an evil to drive us into an evil
of an opposite kind. We are too often like those little toy-fish with a
bit of steel in their mouths, which children attract with a magnet. If
you present the positive pole of the magnet, the fish rushes at it at
once, but if you offer the negative end it retreats continually.
Everything relatively to our character has this positive or negative
end, and we either rush to things or rush away from them. Some persons
are actually driven away from the most entertaining writers because they
happen to be what are called classics, because pedants boast of having
read them. I know a man who is exactly the opposite of a pedant, who has
a horror of the charlatanism which claims social and intellectual
position as the reward for having laboriously waded through those
authors who are conventionally termed "classical," and this opposition
to pedantry has given him an aversion to the classics themselves, which
he never opens. The shallow pretence to admiration of famous writers
which is current in the world is so distasteful to the love of honesty
and reality which is the basis of his character, that by an unhappy
association of ideas he has acquired a repugnance to the writers
themselves. But such men as Horace, Terence, Shakespeare, Molière,
though they have had the misfortune to be praised and commentated upon
by pedants, were in their lives the precise opposite of pedants; they
were _artists_ whose study was human nature, and who lived without
pretension in the common world of men. The pedants have a habit of
considering these genial old artists as in some mysterious way their own
private property, for do not the pedants live by expounding them? And
some of us are frightened away from the fairest realms of poetry by the
fences of these grim guardians.


