LETTER IV.

TO THE FRIEND OF A MAN OF HIGH CULTURE WHO PRODUCED NOTHING.

  Joubert--"Not yet time," or else "The time is past"--His weakness for
  production--Three classes of minds--A more perfect intellectual life
  attainable by the silent student than by authors--He may follow his
  own genius--Saving of time effected by abstinence from writing--The
  unproductive may be more influential than the prolific.

When I met B. at your house last week, you whispered to me in the
drawing-room that he was a man of the most remarkable attainments, who,
to the great regret of all his friends, had never employed his abilities
to any visible purpose. We had not time for a conversation on this
subject, because B. himself immediately joined us. His talk reminded me
very much of Joubert--not that I ever knew Joubert personally, though I
have lived very near to Villeneuve-sur-Yonne, where Joubert lived; but
he is one of those characters whom it is possible to know without having
seen them in the flesh. His friends used to urge him to write something,
and then he said, "_Pas encore._" "Not yet; I need a long peace."
Tranquillity came, and then he said that God had only given force to his
mind for a limited time, and that the time was past. Therefore, as
Sainte-Beuve observed, for Joubert there was no medium; either it was
not yet time, or else the time was past.

Nothing is more common than for _other_ people to say this of us. They
often say "He is too young," as Napoleon said of Ingres, or else "He is
too old," as Napoleon said of Greuze. It is more rare for a man himself
to shrink from every enterprise, first under the persuasion that he is
unprepared, and afterwards because the time is no longer opportune. Yet
there does exist a certain very peculiar class of highly-gifted,
diffident, delicate, unproductive minds, which impress those around them
with an almost superstitious belief in their possibilities, yet never do
anything to justify that belief.

But may it not be doubted whether these minds _have_ productive power of
any kind? I believe that the full extent of Joubert's productive power
is displayed in those sentences of his which have been preserved, and
which reveal a genius of the rarest delicacy, but at the same time
singularly incapable of sustained intellectual effort. He said that he
could only compose slowly, and with an extreme fatigue. He believed,
however, that the weakness lay in the instrument alone, in the composing
faculties, and not in the faculties of thought, for he said that behind
his weakness there was strength, as behind the strength of some others
there was weakness.

In saying this, it is probable that Joubert did not overestimate
himself. He _had_ strength of a certain kind, or rather he had quality;
he had distinction, which is a sort of strength in society and in
literature. But he had no productive force, and I do not believe that
his unproductiveness was a productiveness checked by a fastidious taste;
I believe that it was real, that he was not organized for production.

Sainte-Beuve said that a modern philosopher was accustomed to
distinguish three classes of minds--

1. Those who are at once powerful and delicate, who excel as they
propose, execute what they conceive, and reach the great and true
beautiful--a rare _élite_ amongst mortals.

2. A class of minds especially characterized by their delicacy, who feel
that their idea is superior to their execution, their intelligence
greater than their talent, even when the talent is very real; they are
easily dissatisfied with themselves, disdain easily won praises, and
would rather judge, taste, and abstain from producing, than remain below
their conception and themselves. Or if they write it is by fragments,
for themselves only, at long intervals and at rare moments. Their
fecundity is internal, and known to few.

3. Lastly, there is a third class of minds more powerful and less
delicate or difficult to please, who go on producing and publishing
themselves without being too much dissatisfied with their work.

The majority of our active painters and writers, who fill modern
exhibitions, and produce the current literature of the day, belong to
the last class, to which we are all greatly indebted for the daily bread
of literature and art.

But Sainte-Beuve believed that Joubert belonged to the second class, and
I suspect that both Sainte-Beuve and many others have credited that
class with a potential productiveness beyond its real endowments. Minds
of the Joubert class are admirable and valuable in their way, but they
are really, and not apparently, sterile.

And why would we have it otherwise? When we lament that a man of culture
has "done nothing," as we say, we mean that he has not written books. Is
it necessary, is it desirable, that every cultivated person should write
books?

On the contrary, it seems that a more perfect intellectual life may be
attained by the silent student than by authors. The writer for the
public is often so far its slave that he is compelled by necessity or
induced by the desire for success (since it is humiliating to write
unsaleable books as well as unprofitable) to deviate from his true path,
to leave the subjects that most interest him for other subjects which
interest him less, and therefore to acquire knowledge rather as a matter
of business than as a labor of love. But the student who never
publishes, and does not intend to publish, may follow his own genius and
take the knowledge which belongs to him by natural affinity. Add to this
the immense saving of time effected by abstinence from writing. Whilst
the writer is polishing his periods, and giving hours to the artistic
exigencies of mere form, the reader is adding to his knowledge.
Thackeray said that writers were not great readers, because they had not
the time.

The most studious Frenchman I ever met with used to say that he so hated
the pen as scarcely to resolve to write a letter. He reminded me of
Joubert in this; he often said, "J'ai horreur de la plume." Since he had
no profession his leisure was unlimited, and he employed it in educating
himself without any other purpose than this, the highest purpose of all,
to become a cultivated man. The very prevalent idea that lives of this
kind are failures unless they leave some visible achievement as a
testimony and justification of their labors, is based upon a narrow
conception both of duty and of utility. Men of this unproductive class
are sure to influence their immediate neighborhood by the example of
their life. Isolated as they are too frequently in the provinces, in the
midst of populations destitute of the higher culture, they often
establish the notion of it notwithstanding the contemptuous estimates of
the practical people around them. A single intellectual life, thus
modestly lived through in the obscurity of a country-town, may leave a
tradition and become an enduring influence. In this, as in all things,
let us trust the arrangements of Nature. If men are at the same time
constitutionally studious and constitutionally unproductive, in must be
that production is not the only use of study. Joubert was right in
keeping silence when he felt no impulses to speak, right also in saying
the little that he did say without a superfluous word. His mind is more
fully known, and more influential, than many which are abundantly
productive.


