LETTER III.

TO A STUDENT IN UNCERTAIN HEALTH.

  Habits of Kant, the philosopher--Objection to an over-minute
  regularity of habit--Value of independence of character--Case of an
  English author--Case of an English resident in Paris--Scott an
  abundant eater and drinker--Goethe also--An eminent French
  publisher--Turgot--Importance of good cookery--Wine drinking--Ale--The
  aid of stimulants treacherous--The various effects of tobacco--Tea and
  coffee--Case of an English clergyman--Balzac--The Arabia custom of
  coffee-drinking--Wisdom of occasionally using stimulants.

IMMANUEL KANT, who was a master in the art of taking care of himself,
had by practice acquired a dexterous mode of folding himself up in the
bed-clothes, by passing them over and under his shoulders, so that, when
the operation was complete, he was shut up like the silkworm in his
cocoon. "When I am thus snugly folded up in my bed," he would say to his
friends, "I say to myself, can any man be in better health than I am?"

There is nothing in the lives of philosophers more satisfactory than
this little passage. If Kant had said to himself, "Can anybody be wiser,
more learned, more justly deserving of immortal fame than I am?" we
should have felt, that however agreeable this opinion might have been to
the philosopher who held it, his private satisfaction stood in need of
confirmation from without; and even if he had really been all this, we
might have reflected that wisdom and learning still leave their
possessor exposed to the acutest kinds of suffering. But when a
philosopher rolls himself up at night, and congratulates himself on the
possession of perfect health, we only think what a happy man he was to
possess that first of blessings, and what a sensible man to know the
value of it! And Kant had a deeper happiness in this reflection than any
which could spring from the mere consciousness of possessing one of the
unearned gifts of nature. The excellence of his health was due in part
to a sufficiently good constitution, but it was due also to his own
extreme carefulness about his habits. By an unceasing observation of his
own bodily life, as far as possible removed from the anxiety of
hypochondriacs, he managed to keep the physical machine in such regular
order, that for more than thirty years he always rose precisely at the
same minute. If his object had been health for health's sake, the result
would still have been well worth any sacrifices of momentary inclination
that it cost him; but Kant had a higher purpose. He well knew that the
regularity of the intellectual life depended entirely on the regularity
of the bodily functions, and, unlike the foolish men alluded to by
Goethe who pass the day in complaining of headache, and the night in
drinking the wine that produces it, Kant not only knew that regular
health was necessary to his work as a philosopher, but did everything in
his power to preserve it. Few intellectual laborers have in this respect
given evidence of such persistent strength of will.

In his manner of living he did not consult custom, but the needs of his
individual nature. It is not always easy for great brain-workers to
follow with perfect fidelity the customs of the people about them. These
usages have been gradually formed by the majority to suit the needs of
the majority; but there are cases where a close adherence to them would
be a serious hindrance to the highest and best activity. A good example
of this is Kant's intense antipathy to beer. It did not suit him, and he
was right in his non-conformity to German usage on this point, but he
was mistaken in believing beer to be universally injurious. There is a
very general belief in England that what is called a good breakfast is
the foundation of the labor of the day. Kant's breakfast, which he took
at five in the morning at all seasons of the year, consisted of a cup of
tea and a pipe of tobacco. On this he worked eight hours, either in
lecturing or writing--a long stretch of uninterrupted labor. He dined at
one, and this was his only meal, for he had no supper. The single repast
was a deviation from ordinary usage, but Kant found that it suited him,
probably because he read in the evening from six till a quarter to ten,
and a second meal might have interfered with this by diminishing his
power of attention. There exists a strong medical objection to this
habit of taking only one meal in twenty-four hours, which indeed is
almost unknown in England, though not extremely rare on the Continent. I
know an old gentleman who for forty years has lived as Kant did, and
enjoys excellent health and uncommon mental clearness.

A detail which illustrates Kant's attention to whatever could affect his
physical life, is his rule to withdraw his mind from everything
requiring effort fifteen minutes before he went to bed. His theory,
which is fully confirmed by the experience of others, was, that there
was a risk of missing sleep if the brain was not tranquillized before
bed-time. He knew that the intellectual life of the day depended on the
night's rest, and he took this precaution to secure it. The regularity
of his daily walk, taken during the afternoon in all weathers, and the
strict limitation of the hours of rest, also helped the soundness of his
sleep.

He would not walk out in company, for the whimsical reason that if he
opened his mouth a colder air would reach his lungs than that which
passed through the nostrils; and he would not eat alone, but always had
guests to dinner. There are good physiological reasons in favor of
pleasant society at table, and, besides these, there are good
intellectual reasons also.

By attention to these rules of his, Kant managed to keep both body and
mind in a working order, more uninterrupted than is usual with men who
go through much intellectual labor. The solitary objection to his system
is the excessive regularity of habit to which it bound him by chains of
his own forging. He found a quiet happiness in this regularity; indeed,
happiness is said to be more commonly found in habit that in anything
else, so deeply does it satisfy a great permanent instinct of our
nature. But a _minute_ regularity of habit is objectionable, because it
can only be practicable at home, and is compatible only with an
existence of the most absolute tranquillity. Kant did not travel, and
never could have travelled. He was a bachelor, and could not have ceased
to be a bachelor, without a disturbance that would have been intolerable
to him. He enjoyed the full benefits of his system without experiencing
its disadvantages, but any considerable change of situation would have
made the disadvantages apparent. Few lives can be so minutely regulated
without risk of future inconvenience.

Kant's example is a good one so far as this, that it proved a sort of
independence of character which would be valuable to every student. All
who need to keep their minds in the best possible condition ought to
have resolution enough to regulate their living in a manner which
experience, in their case, proves to be most favorable. Whatever may be
the authority of custom, a wise man makes himself independent of usages
which are impediments to his best activity. I know an author who was
always unwell about eleven o'clock in the morning--so unwell that he
could do nothing but lament his miserable fate. Knowing by experience
the powerful effect of regimen, I inquired whether he enjoyed his
breakfast. "No, he did not." "Then why did he attempt to eat any
breakfast?" It turned out that this foolish man swallowed every morning
two cups of bad coffee and a quantity of greasy food, from a patriotic
deference to the customs of his country. He was persuaded to abandon
this unsuitable habit and to eat nothing till half-past ten, when his
adviser prescribed a well-cooked little _déjeuner à la fourchette_,
accompanied by half a bottle of sound Bordeaux. The effect was magical.
My friend felt light and cheerful before _déjeuner_, and worked quite
happily and well, whilst after _déjeuner_ he felt like a horse that has
eaten his corn. Nor was the good effect a transitory one; the bad
symptoms never returned and he still adheres to his new arrangement.
This little reform made a wretched existence happy, and has had for its
result an increase in production with a diminution of fatigue. The
explanation is that the stomach did not ask for the early breakfast, and
had a hard fight to overcome it, after which came exhaustion and a
distaste both for food and work. There are cases where an opposite rule
is the right one. An Englishman living in Paris found the French
_déjeuner_ unsuitable for him, and discovered that he worked best on a
substantial English breakfast, with strong tea, at eight in the morning,
after which he went on working all day without any further nourishment
till dinner at six in the evening. A friend of Sir Walter Scott's, who
had stayed with him at Abbotsford, told me that Sir Walter ate and drank
like everybody else as to times and seasons, but much more abundantly
than people of less vigorous organization. Goethe used to work till
eleven without taking anything, then he drank a cup of chocolate and
worked till one. "At two he dined. This meal was the important meal of
the day. His appetite was immense. Even on the days when he complained
of not being hungry he ate much more than most men. Puddings, sweets,
and cakes were always welcome. He sat a long while over his wine. He was
fond of wine, and drank daily his two or three bottles." An eminent
French publisher, one of the most clear-headed and hard-working men of
his generation, never touched food or drink till six in the evening,
when he ate an excellent dinner with his guests. He found this system
favorable to his work, but a man of less robust constitution would have
felt exhausted in the course of the day.

Turgot could not work well till after he had dined copiously, but many
men cannot think after a substantial meal; and here, in spite of the
example set by Scott and Goethe, let me observe that nothing interferes
so much with brainwork as over-eating. The intellectual workman requires
nourishment of the best possible quality, but the quantity ought always
to be well within the capacity of his digestive powers. The truth
appears to be, that whilst the intellectual life makes very large
demands upon nutrition--for cerebral activity cannot go forward without
constant supplies of force, which must come ultimately from what we have
eaten--this kind of life, being sedentary, is unfavorable to the work of
digestion. Brain-workers cannot eat like sportsmen and farmers without
losing many hours in torpor, and yet they need nutrition as much as if
they led active lives. The only way out of this difficulty is to take
care that the food is good enough for a moderate quantity of it to
maintain the physical and mental powers. The importance of scientific
cookery can hardly be exaggerated. Intellectual labor is, in its
origin, as dependent upon the art of cookery as the dissemination of its
results is dependent upon paper-making and printing. This is one of
those matters which people cannot be brought to consider seriously; but
cookery in its perfection--the great science of preparing food in the
way best suited to our use--is really the most important of all
sciences, and the mother of the arts. The wonderful theory that the most
ignorant cookery is the most favorable to health is only fit for the
dark ages. It is grossly and stupidly untrue. A scientific cook will
keep you in regular health, when an ignorant one will offer you the
daily alternative of starving or indigestion.

The great question of drinks is scarcely less important. Sound natural
wines, not strengthened by any addition of alcohol, are known to supply
both stimulus and nourishment to the brain. Goethe's practice was not
irrational, though he drank fifty thousand bottles in his lifetime.
Still it is not necessary to imitate him to this extent. The
wine-drinking populations have keener and livelier wits than those who
use other beverages. It is proved by long experience that the pure juice
of the grape sustains the force and activity of the brain. The poets who
from age to age have sung the praise of wine were not wholly either
deceivers or deceived. In the lands of the vine, where the plant is
looked upon as a nursing mother, men do not injure their health by
drinking; but in the colder North, where the grape can never ripen, the
deaths from intemperance are frequent. Bread and wine are almost pure
gifts of nature, though both are prepared by man after the old
traditional ways. These are not poisons, but gin and absinthe are
poisons, madness poured out from a bottle! Kant and Goethe loved the
pure Rhine wine, and their brains were clear and vigorous to the utmost
span of life. It was not wine that ruined Burns and Byron, or
Baudelaire, or Alfred de Musset.

Notwithstanding Kant's horror of beer, that honest northern drink
deserves our friendly recognition. It has quite a peculiar effect upon
the nervous system, giving a rest and calm which no other drink can
procure for it so safely. It is said that beer drinkers are slow, and a
little stupid; that they have an ox-like placidity not quite favorable
to any brilliant intellectual display. But there are times when this
placidity is what the laboring brain most needs. After the agitations of
too active thinking there is safety in a tankard of ale. The wine
drinkers are agile, but they are excitable; the beer drinkers are heavy,
but in their heaviness there is peace. In that clear golden drink which
England has brewed for more than a thousand Octobers, and will brew for
a thousand more, we may find perhaps some explanation of that absence of
irritability which is the safe-guard of the national character, which
makes it faithful in its affections, easy to govern, not easy to excite
to violence.

If I have spoken favorably of beer and wine as having certain
intellectual uses, please remember that I recommend only the habitual
use of them, not mad rites of Bacchus, and even the habitual use only
just so far as it may suit the individual constitution. The liberal
regimen of Scott and Goethe would not answer in every case, and there
are organizations, often very robust, in which intoxicating drinks of
all kinds, even in the most moderate quantity, impede the brain's action
instead of aiding it. Two of the most able men I have ever known could
not drink pure wine of any kind because it sent the blood to the head,
with consequent cerebral oppression. And whilst on this subject I ought
to observe, that the aid which these stimulants afford, even when the
body gratefully accepts them, is often treacherous from its very
acceptability. Men who are over-driven--and the number of such men is
unhappily very great in these days--say that without stimulants they
could not get through their labor; but the stimulants often delude us as
to the limits of our natural powers and encourage us to attempt too
much. The help they give us is not altogether illusory; under certain
limitations it is real, but many have gone farther than the reality of
the assistance warranted. The ally brings to us an increase of forces,
but he comes with appearances of power surpassing the reality, and we
undertake tasks beyond our strength. In drinking, as in eating, the best
rule for the intellectual is moderation in quantity with good quality,
a sound wine, and not enough of it to foster self-delusion.

The use of tobacco has so much extended itself in the present generation
that we are all obliged to make a decision for ourselves on the ancient
controversy between its friends and enemies. We cannot form a reasonable
opinion about tobacco without bearing in mind that it produces,
according to circumstances, one of two entirely distinct and even
opposite classes of effects. In certain states of the body it acts as a
stimulant, in other states as a narcotic. People who have a dislike to
smoking affirm that it stupefies; but this assertion, at least so far as
the temporary consequences are concerned, is not supported by
experience. Most of the really brilliant conversations that I have
listened to have been accompanied by clouds of tobacco-smoke; and a
great deal of the best literary composition that is produced by
contemporary authors is wrought by men who are actually smoking whilst
they work. My own experience is that very moderate smoking acts as a
pleasant stimulus upon the brain, whilst it produces a temporary
lassitude of the muscular system, not perceptible in times of rest, but
an appreciable hindrance in times of muscular exertion. It is better
therefore for men who feel these effects from tobacco to avoid it when
they are in exercise, and to use it only when the body rests and the
mind labors. Pray remember, however, that this is the experience of an
exceedingly moderate smoker, who has not yet got himself into the
general condition of body which is brought on by a larger indulgence in
tobacco. On the other hand, it is evident that men engaged in physical
labor find a muscular stimulus in occasional smoking, and not a
temporary lassitude. It is probable that the effect varies with
individual cases, and is never precisely what our own experience would
lead us to imagine. For excessive smokers, it appears to be little more
than the tranquillizing of a sort of uneasiness, the continual
satisfaction of a continual craving. I have never been able to ascertain
that moderate smoking diminished intellectual force; but I have observed
in excessive smokers a decided weakening of the will, and a preference
for talking about work to the effort of actual labor. The opinions of
medical men on this subject are so much at variance that their science
only adds to our uncertainty. One doctor tells me that the most moderate
smoking is unquestionably injurious, whilst others affirm that it is
innocent. Speaking simply from self-observation, I find that in my own
case tea and coffee are far more perilous than tobacco.

Almost all English people are habitual tea-drinkers, and as the tea they
drink is very strong, they may be said to use it in excess. The
unpleasant symptoms which tea-poisoning produces in a patient not inured
by habit, disappear in the seasoned tea-drinker, leaving only a certain
exhilaration, which appears to be perfectly innocuous. If tea is a safe
stimulant, it is certainly an agreeable one, and there seems to be no
valid reason why brain-workers should refuse themselves that solace. I
knew a worthy clergyman many years ago who from the most conscientious
motives denied himself ale and wine, but found a fountain of consolation
in the tea-pot. His usual allowance was sixteen cups, all of heroic
strength, and the effect upon his brain seems to have been altogether
favorable, for his sermons were both long and eloquent, and to this day
he is preaching still, without any diminution of his powers. French
people find in coffee the most efficacious remedy for the temporary
torpor of the mind which results from the processes of digestion. Balzac
drank great quantities of coffee whilst he wrote; and this, it is
believed, brought on the terrible nervous disease that accelerated his
end. The best proof that tea and coffee are favorable to intellectual
expression is that all nations use one or the other as aids to
conversation. In Mr. Palgrave's Travels in Arabia there is never any
talk without the inevitable coffee, that fragrant Arabian berry prepared
with such delicate cunning that it yields the perfect aroma.

The wisdom of occasionally using these various stimulants for
intellectual purposes is proved by a single consideration. Each of us
has a little cleverness and a great deal of sluggish stupidity. There
are certain occasions when we absolutely need the little cleverness
that we possess. The orator needs it when he speaks, the poet when he
versifies, but neither cares how stupid he may become when the oration
is delivered and the lyric set down on paper. The stimulant serves to
bring out the talent when it is wanted, like the wind in the pipes of an
organ. "What will it matter if I am even a little duller afterwards?"
says the genius; "I can afford to be dull when I have done." But the
truth still remains that there are stimulants and stimulants. Not the
nectar of the gods themselves were worth the dash of a wave upon the
beach, and the pure cool air of the morning.

  NOTE.--What is said in the above letter about the employment of
  stimulants is intended to apply only to cases in which there is no
  organic disease. The harm which diseased persons do to themselves by
  conforming to customs which are innocent for others is as lamentable
  as it is easily avoidable. Two bottles of any natural wine grown above
  the latitude of Lyons are a permissible daily allowance to a man whose
  organs are all sound; but the doctors in the wine districts
  unanimously forbid pure wine when there is a chronic inflammatory
  tendency. In these cases even the most honest Bordeaux ought to be
  diluted with twice its volume of water. There are many chronic
  diseases which tobacco irritates and accelerates. Both wine and
  tobacco are injurious to weak eyes.


