LETTER III.

TO A STUDENT IN GREAT POVERTY.

  Poverty really a great obstacle--Difference between a thousand rich
  men and a thousand poor men taken from persons of average natural
  gifts--The Houses of Parliament--The English recognize the natural
  connection between wealth and culture--Connection between ignorance
  and parsimony in expenditure--What may be honestly said for the
  encouragement of a very poor student.

As it seems to me that to make light of the difficulties which lie in
the path of another is not to show true sympathy for him, even though it
is done sometimes out of a sort of awkward kindness and for his
encouragement, I will not begin by pretending that poverty is not a
great obstacle to the perfection of the intellectual life. It _is_ a
great obstacle; it is one of the very greatest of all obstacles. Only
observe how riches and poverty operate upon mankind in the mass. Here
and there no doubt a very poor man attains intellectual distinction when
he has exceptional strength of will, and health enough to bear a great
strain of extra labor that he imposes upon himself, and natural gifts so
brilliant that he can learn in an hour what common men learn in a day.
But consider mankind in the mass. Look, for instance, at our two Houses
of Parliament. They are composed of men taken from the average run of
Englishmen with very little reference to ability, but almost all of them
are rich men; not one of them is poor, as you are poor; not one of them
has to contend against the stern realities of poverty. Then consider the
very high general level of intellectual attainment which distinguishes
those two assemblies, and ask yourself candidly whether a thousand men
taken from the beggars in the streets, or even from the far superior
class of our manufacturing operatives, would be likely to understand, as
the two Houses of Parliament understand, the many complicated questions
of legislation and of policy which are continually brought before them.
We all know that the poor are too limited in knowledge and experience,
from the want of the necessary opportunities, and too little accustomed
to exercise their minds in the tranquil investigations of great
questions, to be competent for the work of Parliament. It is scarcely
necessary to insist upon this fact to an Englishman, because the English
have always recognized the natural connection between wealth and
culture, and have preferred to be governed by the rich from the belief
that they are likely to be better informed, and better situated for
intellectual activity of a disinterested kind, than those members of the
community whose time and thoughts are almost entirely occupied in
winning their daily bread by the incessant labor of their hands. And if
you go out into the world, if you mix with men of very different
classes, you will find that in a broad average way (I am not speaking
just now of the exceptions) the richer classes are much more capable of
entering into the sort of thinking which may be called intellectual
than those whose money is less plentiful, and whose opportunities have
therefore been less abundant. Indeed it may be asserted, roughly and
generally, that the narrowness of men's ideas is in direct proportion to
their parsimony in expenditure. I do not mean to affirm that all who
spend largely attain large intellectual results, for of course we know
that a man may spend vast sums on pursuits which do not educate him in
anything worth knowing, but the advantage is that with habits of free
expenditure the germs of thought are well tilled and watered, whereas
parsimony denies them every external help. The most spending class in
Europe is the English gentry, it is also the class most strikingly
characterized by a high general average of information;[5] the most
parsimonious class in Europe is the French peasantry; it is also the
class most strikingly characterized by ignorance and intellectual
apathy. The English gentleman has cultivated himself by various reading
and extensive travel, but the French peasant will not go anywhere except
to the market-town, and could not pardon the extravagance of buying a
book, or a candle to read it by in the evening. Between these extremes
we have various grades of the middle classes in which culture usually
increases very much in proportion to the expenditure. The rule is not
without its exceptions; there are rich vulgar people who spend a great
deal without improving themselves at all--who only, by unlimited
self-indulgence, succeed in making themselves so uncomfortably sensitive
to every bodily inconvenience that they have no leisure, even in the
midst of an unoccupied life, to think of anything but their own bellies
and their own skins--people whose power of attention is so feeble that
the smallest external incident distracts it, and who remember nothing of
their travels but a catalogue of trivial annoyances. But people of this
kind do not generally belong to families on whom wealth has had time to
produce its best effects. What I mean is, that a family which has been
for generations in the habit of spending four thousand a year will
usually be found to have a more cultivated one than one that has only
spent four hundred.

I have come to the recognition of this truth very reluctantly indeed,
not because I dislike rich people, but merely because they are
necessarily a very small minority, and I should like every human being
to have the best benefits of culture if it were only possible. The plain
living and high thinking that Wordsworth so much valued is a cheering
ideal, for most men have to live plainly, and if they could only think
with a certain elevation we might hope to solve the great problem of
human life, the reconciliation of poverty and the soul. There certainly
is a slow movement in that direction, and the shortening of the hours of
labor may afford some margin of leisure; but we who work for culture
every day and all day long, and still feel that we know very little, and
have hardly skill enough to make any effective use of the little that we
know, can scarcely indulge in very enthusiastic anticipations of the
future culture of the poor.

Still, there are some things that may be rationally and truly said to a
poor man who desires culture, and which are not without a sort of
Spartan encouragement. You are restricted by your poverty, but it is not
always a bad thing to be restricted, even from the intellectual point of
view. The intellectual powers of well-to-do people are very commonly
made ineffective by the enormous multiplicity of objects that are
presented to their attention, and which claim from them a sort of polite
notice like the greeting of a great lady to each of her thousand guests.
It requires the very rarest strength of mind, in a rich man, to
concentrate his attention on anything there are so many things that he
is expected to make a pretence of knowing; but nobody expects _you_ to
know anything, and this is an incalculable advantage. I think that all
poor men who have risen to subsequent distinction have been greatly
indebted to this independence of public opinion as to what they ought to
know. In trying to satisfy that public opinion by getting up a pretence
of various sorts of knowledge, which is only a sham, we sacrifice not
only much precious time, but we blunt our natural interest in things.
That interest you preserve in all its virgin force, and this force
carries a man far. Then, again, although the opportunities of rich
people are very superior to yours, they are not altogether so superior
as they seem. There exists a great equalizing power, the limitation of
human energy. A rich man may sit down to an enormous banquet, but he can
only make a good use of the little that he is able to digest. So it is
with the splendid intellectual banquet that is spread before the rich
man's eyes. He can only possess what he has energy to master, and too
frequently the manifest impossibility of mastering everything produces a
feeling of discouragement that ends in his mastering nothing. A poor
student, especially if he lives in an out-of-the-way place where there
are no big libraries to bewilder him, may apply his energy with effect
in the study of a few authors.

I used to believe a great deal more in opportunities and less in
application than I do now. Time and health are needed, but with these
there are always opportunities. Rich people have a fancy for spending
money very uselessly on their culture because it seems to them more
valuable when it has been costly; but the truth is, that by the blessing
of good and cheap literature, intellectual light has become almost as
accessible as daylight. I have a rich friend who travels more, and buys
more costly things, than I do, but he does not really learn more or
advance farther in the twelvemonth. If my days are fully occupied, what
has he to set against them? only other well-occupied days, no more. If
he is getting benefit at St. Petersburg he is missing the benefit I am
getting round my house, and in it. The sum of the year's benefit seems
to be surprisingly alike in both cases. So if you are reading a piece of
thoroughly good literature, Baron Rothschild may possibly be as well
occupied as you--he is certainly not better occupied. When I open a
noble volume I say to myself, "Now the only Croesus that I envy is he
who is reading a better book than this."


FOOTNOTES:

  [4] This sounds like a poetical exaggeration, but it is less than the
    bare truth. There were fifteen hundred slaves on two West Indian
    estates that Beckford lost in a lawsuit. It is quite certain,
    considering his lavish expenditure, that fully a thousand men must
    have worked for the maintenance of his luxury in Europe. So much for
    his command of labor.

  [5] The reader will please to bear in mind that I am speaking here of
    broad effects on great numbers. I do not think that aristocracy, in
    its spirit, is quite favorable to the exceptionally highest
    intellectual life.




