LETTER II.

TO A STUDENT IN THE FIRST ARDOR OF INTELLECTUAL AMBITION.

  The first freshness--Why should it not be preserved?--The dulness of
  the intellectual--Fictions and false promises--Ennui in work
  itself--Dürer's engraving of Melancholy--Scott about Dryden--Byron,
  Shelley, Wordsworth--Humboldt, Cuvier, Goethe--Tennyson's
  "Maud"--Preventives of _ennui_--Hard study for limited times--The
  _ennui_ of jaded faculties.

I have been thinking about you frequently of late, and the burden or
refrain of my thoughts has been "What a blessing he has in that first
freshness, if only he could keep it!" But now I am beginning more
hopefully to ask myself, "Why should he not keep it?"

It would be an experiment worth trying, so to order your intellectual
life, that however stony and thorny your path might be, however
difficult and arduous, it should at all events never be dull; or, to
express what I mean more accurately, that you yourself should never
feel the depressing influences of dulness during the years when they are
most to be dreaded. I want you to live steadily and happily in your
intellectual labors, even to the natural close of existence, and my best
wish for you is that you may escape a long and miserable malady which
brain-workers very commonly suffer from when the first dreams of youth
have been disappointed--a malady in which the intellectual desires are
feeble, the intellectual hopes are few; whose victim, if he has still
resolution enough to learn anything, acquires without satisfaction, and,
if he has courage to create, has neither pride nor pleasure in his
creations.

If I were to sing the praises of knowledge as they have been so often
sung by louder harps than mine, I might avoid so dreary a theme. It is
easy to pretend to believe that the intellectual life is always sure to
be interesting and delightful, but the truth is that, either from an
unwise arrangement of their work, or from mental or physical causes
which we will investigate to some extent before we have done with the
subject, many men whose occupations are reputed to be amongst the most
interesting have suffered terribly from _ennui_, and that not during a
week or two at a time, but for consecutive years and years.

There is a class of books written with the praiseworthy intention of
stimulating young men to intellectual labor, in which this danger of the
intellectual life is systematically ignored. It is assumed in these
books that the satisfactions of intellectual labor are certain; that
although it may not always, or often, result in outward and material
prosperity, its inward joys will never fail. Promises of this kind
cannot safely be made to any one. The satisfactions of intellectual
riches are not more sure than the satisfactions of material riches; the
feeling of dull indifference which often so mysteriously clouds the life
of the rich man in the midst of the most elaborate contrivances for his
pleasure and amusement, has its exact counterpart in the lives of men
who are rich in the best treasures of the mind, and who have infinite
intellectual resources. However brilliant your ability, however brave
and persistent your industry, however vast your knowledge, there is
always this dreadful possibility of _ennui_. People tell you that work
is a specific against it, but many a man has worked steadily and
earnestly, and suffered terribly from _ennui_ all the time that he was
working, although the labor was of his own choice, the labor that he
loved best, and for which Nature evidently intended him. The poets, from
Solomon downwards, have all of them, so far as I know, given utterance
in one page or another of their writings to this feeling of dreary
dissatisfaction, and Albert Dürer, in his "Melencolia," illustrated it.
It is plain that the robust female figure which has exercised the
ingenuity of so many commentators is not melancholy either from weakness
of the body or vacancy of the mind. She is strong and she is learned;
yet, though the plumes of her wings are mighty, she sits heavily and
listlessly, brooding amidst the implements of suspended labor, on the
shore of a waveless sea. The truth is that Dürer engraved the melancholy
that he himself only too intimately knew. This is not the dulness of the
ignorant and incapable, whose minds are a blank because they have no
ideas, whose hands are listless for want of an occupation; it is the
sadness of the most learned, the most intelligent, the most industrious;
the weary misery of those who are rich in the attainments of culture,
who have the keys of the chambers of knowledge, and wings to bear them
to the heaven of the ideal. If you counsel this "Melencolia" to work
that she may be merry, she will answer that she knows the uses of labor
and its vanity, and the precise amount of profit that a man hath of all
his labor which he taketh under the sun. All things are full of labor,
she will tell you; and in much wisdom is much grief, and he that
increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.

Can we escape this brooding melancholy of the great workers--has any
truly intellectual person escaped it ever? The question can never be
answered with perfect certainty, because we can never quite accurately
know the whole truth about the life of another. I have known several men
of action, almost entirely devoid of intellectual culture, who enjoyed
an unbroken flow of animal energy and were clearly free from the
melancholy of Dürer; but I never intimately knew a really cultivated
person who had not suffered from it more or less, and the greatest
sufferers were the most conscientious thinkers and students. Amongst the
illustrious dead, it may be very safely answered that any poet who has
described it has written from his own experience--a transient experience
it may be, yet his own. When Walter Scott, _à-propos_ of Dryden, spoke
of "the apparently causeless fluctuation of spirits incident to one
doomed to labor incessantly in the feverish exercise of the
imagination," and of that "sinking of spirit which follows violent
mental exertion," is it not evident that his kindly understanding of
Dryden's case came from the sympathy of a fellow-laborer who knew by his
own experience the gloomier and more depressing passages of the
imaginative life? It would be prudent perhaps to omit the mention of
Byron, because some may attribute his sadness to his immorality; and if
I spoke of Shelley, they might answer that he was "sad because he was
impious;" but the truth is, that quite independently of conduct, and
even of belief, it was scarcely possible for natures so highly
imaginative as these two, and so ethereally intellectual as one of the
two, to escape those clouds of gloom which darken the intellectual life.
Wordsworth was not immoral, Wordsworth was not unorthodox, yet he could
be as sad in his own sober way as Byron in the bitterness of his
desolation, or Shelley in his tenderest wailing. The three men who seem
to have been the least subject to the sadness of intellectual workers
were Alexander Humboldt, Cuvier, and Goethe. Alexander Humboldt, so far
as is known to us, lived always in a clear and cheerful daylight; his
appetite for learning was both strong and regular; he embraced the
intellectual life in his earliest manhood, and lived in it with an
unhesitating singleness of purpose, to the limits of extreme old age.
Cuvier was to the last a model student, of a temper at once most
unflinching and most kind, happy in all his studies, happier still in
his unequalled facility of mental self-direction. Goethe, as all know,
lived a life of unflagging interest in each of the three great branches
of intellectual labor. During the whole of his long life he was
interested in literature, in which he was a master; he was interested in
science, in which he was a discoverer, and in art, of which he was an
ardent though not practically successful student. His intellectual
activity ceased only on rare occasions of painful illness or
overwhelming affliction; he does not seem to have asked himself ever
whether knowledge was worth its cost; he was always ready to pay the
appointed price of toil. He had no infirmity of intellectual doubt; the
powerful impulses from within assured him that knowledge was good for
him, and he went to it urged by an unerring instinct, as a young salmon
bred in the slime of a river seeks strength in the infinite sea. And
yet, being a poet and a man of strong passions, Goethe did not
altogether escape the green-sickness which afflicts the imaginative
temperament, or he could never have written "Werther;" but he cured
himself very soon, and the author of "Werther" had no indulgence for
Wertherism--indeed we are told that he grew ashamed of having written
the book which inoculated the younger minds of Europe with that
miserable disease. In our own time an illustrious poet has given in
"Maud" a very perfect study of a young mind in a morbid condition, a
mind having indeed the student-temper, but of a bad kind, that which
comes not from the genuine love of study, but from sulky rage against
the world.

  "Thanks, for the fiend best knows whether woman or man be the worse.
   _I will bury myself in my books_, and the Devil may pipe to his own."

This kind of self-burial in one's library does not come from the love of
literature. The recluse will not speak to his neighbor, yet needs human
intercourse of some kind, and seeks it in reading, urged by an inward
necessity. He feels no gratitude towards the winners of knowledge; his
morbid ill-nature depreciates the intellectual laborers:--

  "The man of science himself is fonder of glory and vain;
   An eye well-practised in nature, a spirit bounded and poor."

What is the life such a spirit will choose for itself? Despising alike
the ignorant and the learned, the acuteness of the cultivated and the
simplicity of the poor, in what form of activity or inaction will he
seek what all men need, the harmony of a life well tuned?

  "Be mine a philosopher's life in the quiet woodland ways:
   Where, if I cannot be gay, let a passionless peace be my lot."

There are many different morbid states of the mind, and this of the hero
of "Maud" is only one of them, but it is the commonest amongst
intellectual or semi-intellectual young men. See how he has a little fit
of momentary enthusiasm (all he is capable of) about a shell that
suddenly and accidentally attracts his attention. How true to the morbid
nature is that incident! Unable to pursue any large and systematic
observation, the diseased mind is attracted to things suddenly and
accidentally, sees them out of all proportion, and then falls into the
inevitable fit of scornful peevishness.

  "What is it? A learned man
   Could give it a clumsy name:
   Let him name it who can."

The question which concerns the world is, how this condition of the mind
may be avoided. The cure Mr. Tennyson suggested was war; but wars,
though more frequent than is desirable, are not to be had always. And in
your case, my friend, it is happily not a cure but a preventive that is
needed. Let me recommend certain precautions which taken together are
likely to keep you safe. Care for the physical health in the first
place, for if there is a morbid mind the bodily organs are not doing
their work as they ought to do. Next, for the mind itself, I would
heartily recommend hard study, really hard study, taken very regularly
but in very moderate quantity. The effect of it on the mind is as
bracing as that of cold water on the body, but as you ought not to
remain too long in the cold bath, so it is dangerous to study _hard_
more than a short time every day. Do some work that is very difficult
(such as reading some language that you have to puzzle out _à coups de
dictionnaire_) two hours a day regularly, to brace the fighting power of
the intellect, but let the rest of the day's work be easier. Acquire
especially, if you possibly can, the enviable faculty of getting
entirely rid of your work in the intervals of it, and of taking a hearty
interest in common things, in a garden, or stable, or dog-kennel, or
farm. If the work pursues you--if what is called unconscious
cerebration, which ought to go forward without your knowing it, becomes
conscious cerebration, and bothers you, then you have been working
beyond your cerebral strength, and you are not safe.

An organization which was intended by Nature for the intellectual life
cannot be healthy and happy without a certain degree of intellectual
activity. Natures like those of Humboldt and Goethe need immense labors
for their own felicity, smaller powers need less extensive labor. To all
of us who have intellectual needs there is a certain supply of work
necessary to perfect health. If we do less, we are in danger of that
ennui which comes from want of intellectual exercise; if we do more, we
may suffer from that other ennui which is due to the weariness of the
jaded faculties, and this is the more terrible of the two.


