LETTER IV.

TO A STUDENT WHO FELT HURRIED AND DRIVEN.

  People who like to be hurried--Sluggish temperaments gain vivacity
  under pressure--Routine work may be done at increased speed--The
  higher intellectual work cannot be done hurriedly--The art of avoiding
  hurry consists in Selection--How it was practised by a good landscape
  painter--Selection in reading and writing--Some studies allow the play
  of selection more than others do--Languages permit it less than
  natural sciences--Difficulty of using selection in the fulfilment of
  literary engagements.

So you have got yourself into that pleasant condition which is about as
agreeable, and as favorable to fruitful study and observation, as the
condition of an over-driven cab-horse!

Very indolent men, who will not work at all unless under the pressure of
immediate urgency, sometimes tell us that they actually like to be
hurried; but although certain kinds of practical work which have become
perfectly easy from habit may be got through at a great pace when the
workman feels that there is an immediate necessity for effort, it is
certainly not true that hurry is favorable to sound study of any kind.
Work which merely runs in a fixed groove may be urged on occasionally at
express speed without any perceptible injury to the quality of it. A
clever violinist can play a passage _prestissimo_ as correctly as if he
played it _adagio_; a banker's clerk can count money very rapidly with
positively less risk of error than if he counted it as you and I do. A
person of sluggish temperament really gains in vivacity when he is
pressed for time, and becomes during those moments of excited energy a
clearer-headed and more able person than he is under ordinary
circumstances. It is therefore not surprising that he should find
himself able to accomplish more under the great stimulus of an immediate
necessity than he is able to do in the dulness of his every-day
existence. Great prodigies of labor have been performed in this way to
avert impending calamity, especially by military officers in critical
times like those of the Sepoy rebellion; and in the obscurer lives of
tradesmen, immense exertions are often made to avert the danger of
bankruptcy, when without the excitement of a serious anxiety of that
kind the tradesman would not feel capable of more than a moderate and
reasonable degree of attention to his affairs. But notwithstanding the
many instances of this kind which might be cited, and the many more
which might easily be collected, the truth remains that the highest
kinds of intellectual labor can hardly ever be properly performed when
the degree of pressure is in the least excessive. You may, for example,
if you have the kind of ability which makes a good journalist, write an
effective leader with your watch lying on the table, and finish it
exactly when the time is up; but if you had the kind of ability which
makes a good poet, you could not write anything like highly-finished
poetry against time. It is equally clear that scientific discovery,
which, though it may flash suddenly upon the mind of the discoverer, is
always the result of long brooding over the most patient observations,
must come at its own moments, and cannot be commanded. The activity of
poets and discoverers would be paralyzed by exigencies which stimulate
the activity of soldiers and men of business. The truth is, that
intelligence and energy are beneficially stimulated by pressure from
without, whereas the working of the higher intellect is impeded by it,
and that to such a degree that in times of the greatest pressure the
high intellectual life is altogether suspended, to leave free play to
the lower but more immediately serviceable intelligence.

This being so, it becomes a necessary part of the art of intellectual
living so to order our work as to shield ourselves if possible, at least
during a certain portion of our time, from the evil consequences of
hurry. The whole secret lies in a single word--Selection.

An excellent landscape painter told me that whatever he had to do, he
always took the greatest pains to arrange his work so as never to have
his tranquillity disturbed by haste. His system, which is quite
applicable to many other things than landscape painting, was based on
the principle of selection. He always took care to determine beforehand
how much time he could devote to each sketch or study, and then, from
the mass of natural facts before him, selected the most valuable facts
which could be recorded in the time at his disposal. But however short
that time might be, he was always perfectly cool and deliberate in the
employment of it. Indeed this coolness and his skill in selection helped
each other mutually, for he chose wisely because he was cool, and he had
time to be cool by reason of the wisdom of his selection. In his little
memoranda, done in five minutes, the lines were laid just as
deliberately as the tints on an elaborate picture; the difference being
in choice only, not in speed.

Now if we apply this art of selection to all our labors it will give us
much of that landscape painter's enviable coolness, and enable us to
work more satisfactorily. Suppose that instead of painting and sketching
we have to do a great deal of reading and writing: the art is to select
the reading which will be most useful to our purpose, and, in writing,
to select the words which will express our meaning with the greatest
clearness in a little space. The art of reading is to skip judiciously.
Whole libraries may be skipped in these days, when we have the results
of them in our modern culture without going over the ground again. And
even of the books we decide to read, there are almost always large
portions which do not concern us, and which we are sure to forget the
day after we have read them. The art is to skip all that does not
concern us, whilst missing nothing that we really need. No external
guidance can teach us this; for nobody but ourselves can guess what the
needs of our intellect may be. But let us select with decisive firmness,
independently of other people's advice, independently of the authority
of custom. In every newspaper that comes to hand there is a little bit
that we ought to read; the art is to find that little bit, and waste no
time over the rest.

Some studies permit the exercise of selection better than others do. A
language, once undertaken, permits very little selection indeed, since
you must know the whole vocabulary, or nearly so, to be able to read and
speak. On the other hand, the natural sciences permit the most prudent
exercise of selection. For example, in botany you may study as few
plants as you choose.

In writing, the art of selection consists in giving the utmost effect to
expression in the fewest words; but of this art I say little, for who
can contend against an inevitable trade-necessity? Almost every author
of ordinary skill could, when pressed for time, find a briefer
expression for his thoughts, but the real difficulty in fulfilling
literary engagements does not lie in the expression of the thought, it
lies in the sufficiently rapid production of a certain quantity of copy.
For this purpose I fear that selection would be of very little use--of
no more use, in fact, than in any other branch of manufacture where (if
a certain standard is kept up to) quantity in sale is more important
than quality of material.


