LETTER II.

TO A YOUNG MAN OF GREAT TALENT AND ENERGY WHO HAD MAGNIFICENT PLANS FOR
THE FUTURE.

  Mistaken estimates about time and occasion--The Unknown
  Element--Procrastination often time's best preserver--Napoleon's
  advice to do nothing at all--Use of deliberation and of intervals of
  leisure--Artistic advantages of calculating time--Prevalent
  childishness about time--Illusions about reading--Bad economy of
  reading in languages we have not mastered--That we ought to be thrifty
  of time, but not avaricious--Time necessary in production--Men who
  work best under the sense of pressure--Rossini--That these cases prove
  nothing against time-thrift--The waste of tune from
  miscalculation--People calculate accurately for short spaces, but do
  not calculate so well for long ones--Reason for this--Stupidity of
  the Philistines about wasted time--Töpffer and Claude
  Tillier--Retrospective miscalculations, and the regrets that result
  from them.

Have you ever observed that we pay much more attention to a wise passage
when it is quoted, than when we read it in the original author? On the
same principle, people will give a higher price to a picture-dealer than
they would have given to the painter himself. The picture that has been
once bought has a recommendation, and the quoted passage is both
recommended and isolated from the context.

Trusting to this well-known principle, although I am aware that you have
read everything that Sir Arthur Helps has published, I proceed to make
the following quotation from one of his wisest books.

"Time and occasion are the two important circumstances in human life, as
regards which the most mistaken estimates are made. And the error is
universal. It besets even the most studious and philosophic men. This
may notably be seen in the present day, when many most distinguished men
have laid down projects for literature and philosophy, to be
accomplished by them in their own lifetime, which would require several
men and many lifetimes to complete; and, generally speaking, if any
person, who has passed the meridian of life, looks back upon his career,
he will probably own that his greatest errors have arisen from his not
having made sufficient allowance for the length of time which his
various schemes required for their fulfilment."

There are many traditional maxims about time which insist upon its
brevity, upon the necessity of using it whilst it is there, upon the
impossibility of recovering what is lost; but the practical effect of
these maxims upon conduct can scarcely be said to answer to their
undeniable importance. The truth is, that although they tell us to
economize our time, they cannot, in the nature of things, instruct us as
to the methods by which it is to be economized. Human life is so
extremely various and complicated, whilst it tends every day to still
greater variety and complication, that all maxims of a general nature
require a far higher degree of intelligence in their application to
individual cases than it ever cost originally to invent them. Any person
gifted with ordinary common sense can perceive that life is short, that
time flies, that we ought to make good use of the present; but it needs
the union of much experience, with the most consummate wisdom, to know
exactly what ought to be done and what ought to be left undone--the
latter being frequently by far the more important of the two.

Amongst the favorable influences of my early life was the kindness of a
venerable country gentleman, who had seen a great deal of the world and
passed many years, before he inherited his estates, in the practice of
a laborious profession. I remember a theory of his, that experience was
much less valuable than is generally supposed, because, except in
matters of simple routine, the problems that present themselves to us
for solution are nearly always dangerous from the presence of some
unknown element. The unknown element he regarded as a hidden pitfall,
and he warned me that in my progress through life I might always expect
to tumble into it. This saying of his has been so often confirmed since
then, that I now count upon the pitfall quite as a matter of certainty.
Very frequently I have escaped it, but more by good luck than good
management. Sometimes I have tumbled into it, and when this misfortune
occurred it has not unfrequently been in consequence of having acted
upon the advice of some very knowing and experienced person indeed. We
have all read, when we were boys, Captain Marryat's "Midshipman Easy."
There is a passage in that story which may serve as an illustration of
what is constantly happening in actual life. The boats of the _Harpy_
were ordered to board one of the enemy's vessels; young Easy was in
command of one of these boats, and as they had to wait he began to fish.
After they had received the order to advance, he delayed a little to
catch his fish, and this delay not only saved him from being sunk by the
enemy's broadside, but enabled him to board the Frenchman. Here the
pitfall was avoided by idling away a minute of time on an occasion when
minutes were like hours; yet it was mere luck, not wisdom, which led to
the good result. There was a sad railway accident on one of the
continental lines last autumn; a notable personage would have been in
the train if he had arrived in time for it, but his miscalculation saved
him. In matters where there is no risk of the loss of life, but only of
the waste of a portion of it in unprofitable employment, it frequently
happens that procrastination, which is reputed to be the thief of time,
becomes its best preserver. Suppose that you undertake an enterprise,
but defer the execution of it from day to day: it is quite possible that
in the interval some fact may accidentally come to your knowledge which
would cause a great modification of your plan, or even its complete
abandonment. Every thinking person is well aware that the enormous loss
of time caused by the friction of our legislative machinery has
preserved the country from a great deal of crude and ill-digested
legislation. Even Napoleon the Great who had a rapidity of conception
and of action so far surpassing that of other kings and commanders that
it seems to us almost supernatural, said that when you did not quite
know what ought to be done it was best to do nothing at all. One of the
most distinguished of living painters said exactly the same thing with
reference to the practice of his art, and added that very little time
would be needed for the actual execution of a picture if only the artist
knew beforehand how and where to lay the color. It so often happens
that mere activity is a waste of time, that people who have a morbid
habit of being busy are often terrible time-wasters, whilst, on the
contrary, those who are judiciously deliberate, and allow themselves
intervals of leisure, see the way before them in those intervals, and
save time by the accuracy of their calculations.

A largely intelligent thrift of time is necessary to all great
works--and many works are very great indeed relatively to the energies
of a single individual, which pass unperceived in the tumult of the
world. The advantages of calculating time are artistic as well as
economical. I think that, in this respect, magnificent as are the
cathedrals which the Gothic builders have left us, they committed an
artistic error in the very immensity of their plans. They do not appear
to have reflected that from the continual changes of fashion in
architecture, incongruous work would be sure to intrude itself before
their gigantic projects could be realized by the generations that were
to succeed them. For a work of that kind to possess artistic unity, it
ought to be completely realized within the space of forty years. How
great is the charm of those perfect edifices which, like the Sainte
Chapelle, are the realization of one sublime idea? And those changes in
national thought which have made the old cathedrals a jumble of
incongruous styles, have their parallel in the life of every individual
workman. We change from year to year, and any work which occupies us
for very long will be wanting in unity of manner.

Men are apt enough of themselves to fall into the most astonishing
delusions about the opportunities which time affords, but they are even
more deluded by the talk of the people about them. When children hear
that a new carriage has been ordered of the builder, they expect to see
it driven up to the door in a fortnight, with the paint quite dry on the
panels. All people are children in this respect, except the workman, who
knows the endless details of production; and the workman himself,
notwithstanding the lessons of experience, makes light of the future
task. What gigantic plans we scheme, and how little we advance in the
labor of a day! Three pages of the book (to be half erased to-morrow), a
bit of drapery in the picture that will probably have to be done over
again, the imperceptible removal of an ounce of marble-dust from the
statue that seems as if it never would be finished; so much from dawn to
twilight has been the accomplishment of the golden hours. If there is
one lesson which experience teaches, surely it is this, to make plans
that are strictly limited, and to arrange our work in a practicable way
within the limits that we must accept. Others expect so much from us
that it seems as if we had accomplished nothing. "What! have you done
only that?" they say, or we know by their looks that they are thinking
it.

The most illusory of all the work that we propose to ourselves is
reading. It seems so easy to read, that we intend, in the indefinite
future, to master the vastest literatures. We cannot bring ourselves to
admit that the library we have collected is in great part closed to us
simply by want of time. A dear friend of mine, who was a solicitor with
a large practice, indulged in wonderful illusions about reading, and
collected several thousand volumes, all fine editions, but he died
without having cut their leaves. I like the university habit of making
reading a business, and estimating the mastery of a few authors as a
just title to consideration for scholarship. I should like very well to
be shut up in a garden for a whole summer with no literature but the
"Faëry Queene," and one year I very nearly realized that project, but
publishers and the postman interfered with it. After all, this business
of reading ought to be less illusory than most others, for printers
divide books into pages, which they number, so that, with a moderate
skill in arithmetic, one ought to be able to foresee the limits of his
possibilities. There is another observation which may be suggested, and
that is to take note of the time required for reading different
languages. We read very slowly when the language is imperfectly
mastered, and we need the dictionary, whereas in the native tongue we
see the whole page almost at a glance, as if it were a picture. People
whose time for reading is limited ought not to waste it in grammars and
dictionaries, but to confine themselves resolutely to a couple of
languages, or three at the very utmost, notwithstanding the contempt of
polyglots, who estimate your learning by the variety of your tongues. It
is a fearful throwing away of time, from the literary point of view, to
begin more languages than you can master or retain, and to be always
puzzling yourself about irregular verbs.

All plans for sparing time in intellectual matters ought, however, to
proceed upon the principle of thrift, and not upon the principle of
avarice. The object of the thrifty man in money matters is so to lay out
his money as to get the best possible result from his expenditure; the
object of the avaricious man is to spend no more money than he can help.
An artist who taught me painting often repeated a piece of advice which
is valuable in other things than art, and which I try to remember
whenever patience fails. He used to say to me, "_Give it time._" The
mere length of time that we bestow upon our work is in itself a most
important element of success, and if I object to the use of languages
that we only half know, it is not because it takes us a long time to get
through a chapter, but because we are compelled to think about syntax
and conjugations which did not in the least occupy the mind of the
author, when we ought rather to be thinking about those things which
_did_ occupy his mind, about the events which he narrated, or the
characters that he imagined or described. There are, in truth, only two
ways of impressing anything on the memory, either intensity or duration.
If you saw a man struck down by an assassin, you would remember the
occurrence all your life; but to remember with equal vividness a picture
of the assassination, you would probably be obliged to spend a month or
two in copying it. The subjects of our studies rarely produce an
intensity of emotion sufficient to ensure perfect recollection without
the expenditure of time. And when your object is not to learn, but to
produce, it is well to bear in mind that everything requires a certain
definite time-outlay, which _cannot_ be reduced without an inevitable
injury to quality. A most experienced artist, a man of the very rarest
executive ability, wrote to me the other day about a set of designs I
had suggested. "If I could but get the TIME,"--the large capitals are
his own,--"for, somehow or other, let a design be never so studiously
simple in the masses, it _will_ fill itself as it goes on, like the
weasel in the fable who got into the meal-tub; and when the pleasure
begins in attempting tone and mystery and intricacy, _away go the hours
at a gallop_." A well-known and very successful English dramatist wrote
to me: "When I am hurried, and have undertaken more work than I can
execute in the time at my disposal, I am always perfectly paralyzed."

There is another side to this subject which deserves attention. Some men
work best under the sense of pressure. Simple compression evolves heat
from iron, so that there is a flash of fire when a ball hits the side
of an ironclad. The same law seems to hold good in the intellectual life
of man, whenever he needs the stimulus of extraordinary excitement.
Rossini positively advised a young composer never to write his overture
until the evening before the first performance. "Nothing," he said,
"excites inspiration like necessity; the presence of a copyist waiting
for your work, and the view of a manager in despair tearing out his hair
by handfuls. In Italy in my time all the managers were bald at thirty. I
composed the overture to 'Othello' in a small room in the Barbaja
Palace, where the baldest and most ferocious of managers had shut me up
by force with nothing but a dish of maccaroni, and the threat that I
should not leave the place alive until I had written the last note. I
wrote the overture to the 'Gazza Ladra' on the day of the first
performance, in the upper loft of the La Scala, where I had been
confined by the manager, under the guard of four scene-shifters who had
orders to throw my text out of the window bit by bit to copyists, who
were waiting below to transcribe it. In default of music I was to be
thrown out myself."

I have quoted the best instance known to me of this voluntary seeking
after pressure, but striking as it is, even this instance does not
weaken what I said before. For observe, that although Rossini deferred
the composition of his overture till the evening before the first
performance, he knew very well that he could do it thoroughly in the
time. He was like a clever schoolboy who knows that he can learn his
lesson in the quarter of an hour before the class begins; or he was like
an orator who knows that he can deliver a passage and compose at the
same time the one which is to follow, so that he prefers to arrange his
speech in the presence of his audience. Since Rossini always allowed
himself all the time that was necessary for what he had to do, it is
clear that he did not sin against the great time-necessity. The express
which can travel from London to Edinburgh in a night may leave the
English metropolis on Saturday evening although it is due in Scotland on
Sunday, and still act with the strictest consideration about time. The
blameable error lies in miscalculation, and not in rapidity of
performance.

Nothing _wastes_ time like miscalculation. It negatives all results. It
is the parent of incompleteness, the great author of the Unfinished and
the Unserviceable. Almost every intellectual man has laid out great
masses of time on five or six different branches of knowledge which are
not of the least use to him, simply because he has not carried them far
enough, and could not carry them far enough in the time he had to give.
Yet this might have been ascertained at the beginning by the simplest
arithmetical calculation. The experience of students in all departments
of knowledge has quite definitely ascertained the amount of time that is
necessary for success in them, and the successful student can at once
inform the aspirant how far he is likely to travel along the road. What
is the use, to anybody, of having just enough skill to feel vexed with
himself that he has no more, and yet angry at other people for not
admiring the little that he possesses?

I wish to direct your attention to a cause which more than any other
produces disappointment in ordinary intellectual pursuits. It is this.
People can often calculate with the utmost accuracy what they can
accomplish in ten minutes or even in ten hours, and yet the very same
persons will make the most absurd miscalculations about what they can
accomplish in ten years. There is of course a reason for this: if there
were not, so many sensible people would not suffer from the delusion.
The reason is, that owing to the habits of human life there is a certain
elasticity in large spaces of time that include nights, and mealtimes,
and holidays. We fancy that we shall be able, by working harder than we
have been accustomed to work, and by stealing hours from all the
different kinds of rest and amusement, to accomplish far more in the ten
years that are to come than we have ever actually accomplished in the
same space. And to a certain extent this may be very true. No doubt a
man whose mind has become seriously aware of the vast importance of
economizing his time will economize it better than he did in the days
before the new conviction came to him. No doubt, after skill in our work
has been confirmed, we shall perform it with increased speed. But the
elasticity of time is rather that of leather than that of india-rubber.
There is certainly a degree of elasticity, but the degree is strictly
limited. The true master of time-thrift would be no more liable to
illusion about years than about hours, and would act as prudently when
working for remote results as for near ones.

Not that we ought to work as if we were always under severe pressure.
Little books are occasionally published in which we are told that it is
a sin to lose a minute. From the intellectual point of view this
doctrine is simply stupid. What the Philistines call wasted time is
often rich in the most varied experience to the intelligent. If all that
we have learned in idle moments could be suddenly expelled from our
minds by some chemical process, it is probable that they would be worth
very little afterwards. What, after such a process, would have remained
to Shakespeare, Scott, Cervantes, Thackeray, Dickens, Hogarth,
Goldsmith, Molière? When these great students of human nature were
learning most, the sort of people who write the foolish little books
just alluded to would have wanted to send them home to the dictionary or
the desk. Töpffer and Claude Tillier, both men of delicate and observant
genius, attached the greatest importance to hours of idleness. Töpffer
said that a year of downright loitering was a desirable element in a
liberal education; whilst Claude Tillier went even farther, and boldly
affirmed that "le temps le mieux employé est celui que l'on perd."

Let us not think too contemptuously of the miscalculators of time, since
not one of us is exempt from their folly. We have all made
miscalculations, or more frequently have simply omitted calculation
altogether, preferring childish illusion to a manly examination of
realities; and afterwards as life advances another illusion steals over
us not less vain than the early one, but bitter as that was sweet. We
now begin to reproach ourselves with all the opportunities that have
been neglected, and now our folly is to imagine that we might have done
impossible wonders if we had only exercised a little resolution. We
might have been thorough classical scholars, and spoken all the great
modern languages, and written immortal books, and made a colossal
fortune. Miscalculations again, and these the most imbecile of all; for
the youth who forgets to reason in the glow of happiness and hope, is
wiser than the man who overestimates what was once possible that he may
embitter the days which remain to him.


