LETTER V.

TO A FRIEND WHO, THOUGH HE HAD NO PROFESSION, COULD NOT FIND TIME FOR
HIS VARIOUS INTELLECTUAL PURSUITS.

  Compensations resulting from the necessity for time--Opportunity only
  exists for us so far as we have time to make use of it--This _or_
  that, not this _and_ that--Danger of apparently unlimited
  opportunities--The intellectual training of our ancestors--Montaigne
  the Essayist--Reliance upon the compensations.

It has always seemed to me that the great and beautiful principle of
compensation is more clearly seen in the distribution and effects of
time than in anything else within the scope of our experience. The good
use of one opportunity very frequently compensates us for the absence of
another, and it does so because opportunity is itself so dependent upon
time that, although the best opportunities may apparently be presented
to us, we can make no use of them unless we are able to give them the
time that they require. You, who have the best possible opportunities
for culture, find a certain sadness and disappointment because you
cannot avail yourself of all of them; but the truth is, that opportunity
only exists for us just so far as we are able to make use of it, and our
power to do so is often nothing but a question of time. If our days are
well employed we are sure to have done some good thing which we should
have been compelled to neglect if we had been occupied about anything
else. Hence every genuine worker has rich compensations which ought to
console him amply for his shortcomings, and to enable him to meet
comparisons without fear.

Those who aspire to the intellectual life, but have no experience of its
difficulties, very frequently envy men so favorably situated as you are.
It seems to them that all the world's knowledge is accessible to you,
and that you have simply to cull its fruits as we gather grapes in a
vineyard. They forget the power of Time, and the restrictions which Time
imposes. "This _or_ that, not this _and_ that," is the rule to which all
of us have to submit, and it strangely equalizes the destinies of men.
The time given to the study of one thing is withdrawn from the study of
another, and the hours of the day are limited alike for all of us. How
difficult it is to reconcile the interests of our different pursuits!
Indeed it seems like a sort of polygamy to _have_ different pursuits.
It is natural to think of them as jealous wives tormenting some Mormon
prophet.

There is great danger in apparently unlimited opportunities, and a
splendid compensation for those who are confined by circumstances to a
narrow but fruitful field. The Englishman gets more civilization out of
a farm and a garden than the Red Indian out of the space encircled by
his horizon. Our culture gains in thoroughness what it loses in extent.

This consideration goes far to explain the fact that although our
ancestors were so much less favorably situated than we are, they often
got as good an intellectual training from the literature that was
accessible to them, as we from our vaster stores. We live in an age of
essayists, and yet what modern essayist writes better than old
Montaigne? All that a thoughtful and witty writer needs for the
sharpening of his intellect, Montaigne found in the ancient literature
that was accessible to him, and in the life of the age he lived in. Born
in our own century, he would have learned many other things, no doubt,
and read many other books, but these would have absorbed the hours that
he employed not less fruitfully with the authors that he loved in the
little library up in the third story of his tower, as he tells us, where
he could see all his books at once, set upon five rows of shelves round
about him. In earlier life he bought "this sort of furniture" for
"ornament and outward show," but afterwards quite abandoned that, and
procured such volumes only "as supplied his own need."

To supply our own need, within the narrow limits of the few and
transient hours that we can call our own, is enough for the wise
everywhere, as it was for Montaigne in his tower. Let us resolve to do
as much as that, not more, and then rely upon the golden compensations.

  NOTE.--"Supposing that the executive and critical powers always exist
  in some correspondent degree in the same person, still they cannot be
  cultivated to the same extent. The attention required for the
  development of a theory is necessarily withdrawn from the design of a
  drawing, and the time devoted to the realization of a form is lost to
  the solution of a problem."--MR. RUSKIN, _in the preface to the third
  volume of_ "_Modern Painters_."

  In the case of Mr. Ruskin, in that of Mr. Dante Rossetti, and in all
  cases where the literary and artistic gifts are naturally pretty
  evenly balanced, the preponderance of an hour a day given to one or
  the other class of studies may have settled the question whether the
  student was to be chiefly artist or chiefly author. The enormous
  importance of the distribution of time is never more clearly
  manifested than in cases of this kind. Mr. Ruskin might certainly have
  attained rank as a painter, Rossetti might have been as prolific in
  poetry as he is excellent. What these gifted men are now is not so
  much a question of talent as of time. In like manner the question
  whether Ingres was to be known as a painter or as a violinist was
  settled by the employment of hours rather than by any preponderance of
  faculty.


FOOTNOTES:

  [2] "Being astonished at the prodigious variety and at the extent of
    knowledge possessed by the Germans, I begged one of my friends, Saxon
    by birth, and one of the foremost geologists in Europe, to tell me
    how his countrymen managed to know so many things. Here is his
    answer, nearly in his own words:--'A German (except myself, who am
    the idlest of men) gets up early, summer and winter, at about five
    o'clock. He works four hours before breakfast, sometimes smoking all
    the time, which does not interfere with his application. His
    breakfast lasts half an hour, and he remains, afterwards, another
    half-hour talking with his wife and playing with his children. He
    returns to his work for six hours, dines without hurrying himself,
    smokes an hour after dinner, playing again with his children, and
    before he goes to bed he works four hours more. He begins again every
    day, and never goes out. This is how it comes to pass that Oersted,
    the greatest natural philosopher in Germany, is at the same time the
    greatest physician; this is how Kant the metaphysician was one of the
    most learned astronomers in Europe, and how Goethe, who is at present
    the first and most fertile author in Germany in almost all kinds of
    literature, is an excellent botanist, mineralogist, and natural
    philosopher.'"

  [3] The man, then, judges me worthy of death. Be it so.




