LETTER III.

TO A MAN OF BUSINESS WHO DESIRED TO MAKE HIMSELF BETTER ACQUAINTED WITH
LITERATURE, BUT WHOSE TIME FOR READING WAS LIMITED.

  Victor Jacquemont on the intellectual labors of the Germans--Business
  may be set off as the equivalent to one of their pursuits--Necessity
  for regularity in the economy of time--What may be done in two hours a
  day--Evils of interruption--Florence Nightingale--Real nature of
  interruption--Instance from the Apology of Socrates.

In the charming and precious letters of Victor Jacquemont, a man whose
life was dedicated to culture, and who not only lived for it, but died
for it, there is a passage about the intellectual labors of Germans,
which takes due account of the expenditure of time. "Comme j'étais
étonné," he says, "de la prodigieuse variété et de l'étendue de
connaissances des Allemands, je demandai un jour à l'un de mes amis,
Saxon de naissance et l'un des premiers géologues de l'Europe, comment
ses compatriotes s'y prenaient pour savoir tant de choses. Voici sa
réponse, à peu près: 'Un Allemand (moi excepté qui suis le plus
paresseux des hommes) se lève de bonne heure, été et hiver, à cinq
heures environ. Il travaille quatre heures avant le déjeuner, fumant
quelquefois pendant tout ce temps, sans que cela nuise à son
application. Son déjeuner dure une demi-heure, et il reste, après, une
autre demi-heure à causer avec sa femme et à faire jouer ses enfants.
Il retourne au travail pour six heures; dîne sans se presser; fume une
heure après le dîner, jouant encore avec ses enfants; et avant de se
coucher il travaille encore quatre heures. Il recommence tous les jours,
ne sortant jamais.--Voilà,' me dit mon ami, 'comment Oersted, le plus
grand physicien de l'Allemagne, en est aussi le plus grand médecin;
voilà comment Kant le métaphysicien était un des plus savants astronomes
de l'Europe, et comment Goethe, qui en est actuellement le premier
littérateur, dans presque tous les genres, et le plus fécond, est
excellent botaniste, minéralogiste, physicien.'"[2]

Here is something to encourage, and something to discourage you at the
same time. The number of hours which these men have given in order to
become what they were, is so great as to be past all possibility of
imitation by a man occupied in business. It is clear that, with your
counting-house to occupy you during the best hours of every day, you can
never labor for your intellectual culture with that unremitting
application which these men have given for theirs. But, on the other
hand, you will perceive that these extraordinary workers have hardly
ever been wholly dedicated to one pursuit, and the reason for this in
most cases is clear. Men who go through a prodigious amount of work feel
the necessity for varying it. The greatest intellectual workers I have
known personally have varied their studies as Kant and Goethe did, often
taking up subjects of the most opposite kinds, as for instance
imaginative literature and the higher mathematics, the critical and
practical study of fine art and the natural sciences, music, and
political economy. The class of intellects which arrogate to themselves
the epithet "practical," but which we call _Philistine_, always oppose
this love of variety, and have an unaffected contempt for it, but these
are matters beyond their power of judgment. They cannot know the needs
of the intellectual life, because they have never lived it. The practice
of all the greatest intellects has been to cultivate themselves
variously, and if they have always done so, it must be because they have
felt the need of it.

The encouraging inference which you may draw from this in reference to
your own case is that, since all intellectual men have had more than one
pursuit, you may set off your business against the most absorbing of
their pursuits, and for the rest be still almost as rich in time as they
have been. You may study literature as some painters have studied it, or
science as some literary men have studied it.

The first step is to establish a regulated economy of your time, so
that, without interfering with a due attention to business and to
health, you may get two clear hours every day for reading of the best
kind. It is not much, some men would tell you that it is not enough, but
I purposely fix the expenditure of time at a low figure because I want
it to be always practicable consistently with all the duties and
necessary pleasures of your life. If I told you to read four hours every
day, I know beforehand what would be the consequence. You would keep the
rule for three days, by an effort, then some engagement would occur to
break it, and you would have no rule at all. And please observe that the
two hours are to be given quite regularly, because, when the time given
is not much, regularity is quite essential. Two hours a day, regularly,
make more than seven hundred hours in a year, and in seven hundred
hours, wisely and uninterruptedly occupied, much may be done in
anything.

Permit me to insist upon that word _uninterruptedly_. Few people realize
the full evil of an interruption, few people know all that is implied
by it. After warning nurses against the evils of interruption, Florence
Nightingale says:--

"These things are not fancy. If we consider that, with sick as with
well, every thought decomposes some nervous matter--that decomposition
as well as re-composition of nervous matter is always going on, and more
quickly with the sick than with the well,--that to obtrude another
thought upon the brain whilst it is in the act of destroying nervous
matter by thinking, is calling upon it to make a new exertion--if we
consider these things, which are facts, not fancies, we shall remember
that we are doing positive injury by interrupting, by startling a
'fanciful' person, as it is called. Alas, it is no fancy.

"If the invalid is forced by his avocations to continue occupations
requiring much thinking, the injury is doubly great. In feeding a
patient suffering under delirium or stupor you may suffocate him by
giving him his food suddenly, but if you rub his lips gently with a
spoon and thus attract his attention, he will swallow the food
unconsciously, but with perfect safety. Thus it is with the brain. If
you offer it a thought, especially one requiring a decision, abruptly,
you do it a real, not fanciful, injury. Never speak to a sick person
suddenly; but, at the same time, do not keep his expectation on the
tiptoe."

To this you will already have answered, mentally, that you are not a
patient suffering under either delirium or stupor, and that nobody
needs to rub your lips gently with a spoon. But Miss Nightingale does
not consider interruption baneful to sick persons only.

"This rule indeed," she continues, "applies to the well quite as much as
to the sick. _I have never known persons who exposed themselves for
years to constant interruption who did not muddle away their intellects
by it at last._ The process, with them, may be accomplished without
pain. With the sick, pain gives warning of the injury."

Interruption is an evil to the reader which must be estimated very
differently from ordinary business interruptions. The great question
about interruption is not whether it compels you to divert your
attention to other facts, but whether it compels you to tune your whole
mind to another diapason. Shopkeepers are incessantly compelled to
change the subject; a stationer is asked for notepaper one minute, for
sealing-wax the next, and immediately afterwards for a particular sort
of steel pen. The subjects of his thoughts are changed very rapidly, but
the general state of his mind is not changed; he is always strictly in
his shop, as much mentally as physically. When an attorney is
interrupted in the study of a case by the arrival of a client who asks
him questions about another case, the change is more difficult to bear;
yet even here the general state of mind, the legal state of mind, is not
interfered with. But now suppose a reader perfectly absorbed in his
author, an author belonging very likely to another age and another
civilization entirely different from ours. Suppose that you are reading
the Defence of Socrates in Plato, and have the whole scene before you as
in a picture: the tribunal of the Five Hundred, the pure Greek
architecture, the interested Athenian public, the odious Melitus, the
envious enemies, the beloved and grieving friends whose names are dear
to us, and immortal; and in the centre you see one figure draped like a
poor man, in cheap and common cloth, that he wears winter and summer,
with a face plain to downright ugliness, but an air of such genuine
courage and self-possession that no acting could imitate it; and you
hear the firm voice saying--

  [Greek: Timatai d' oun moi hanêr thanatou
  Eien.][3]

You are just beginning the splendid paragraph where Socrates condemns
himself to maintenance in the Prytaneum, and if you can only be safe
from interruption till it is finished, you will have one of those
minutes of noble pleasure which are the rewards of intellectual toil.
But if you are reading in the daytime in a house where there are women
and children, or where people can fasten upon you for pottering details
of business, you may be sure that you will _not_ be able to get to the
end of the passage without in some way or other being rudely awakened
from your dream, and suddenly brought back into the common world. The
loss intellectually is greater than any one who had not suffered from it
could imagine. People think that an interruption is merely the unhooking
of an electric chain, and that the current will flow, when the chain is
hooked on again, just as it did before. To the intellectual and
imaginative student an interruption is not that; it is the destruction
of a picture.


