LETTER V.

TO A YOUNG ETONIAN WHO THOUGHT OF BECOMING A COTTON-SPINNER.

  Absurd old prejudices against commerce--Stigma attached to the great
  majority of occupations--Traditions of feudalism--Distinctions between
  one trade and another--A real instance of an Etonian who had gone into
  the cotton-trade--Observations on this case--The trade a fine field
  for energy--A poor one for intellectual culture--It develops practical
  ability--Culture not possible without leisure--The founders of
  commercial fortunes.

It is agreeable to see various indications that the absurd old
prejudices against commerce are certainly declining. There still remains
quite enough contempt for trade in the professional classes and the
aristocracy, to give us frequent opportunities for studying it as a
relic of former superstition, unhappily not yet rare enough to be quite
a curiosity; but as time passes and people become more rational, it
will retreat to out-of-the-way corners of old country mansions and rural
parsonages, at a safe distance from the light-giving centres of
industry. It is a surprising fact, and one which proves the almost
pathetic spirit of deference and submission to superiors which
characterizes the English people, that out of the hundreds of
occupations which are followed by the busy classes of this country, only
three are entirely free from some degrading stigma, so that they may be
followed by a high-born youth without any sacrifice of caste. The wonder
is that the great active majority of the nation, the men who by their
industry and intelligence have made England what she is, should ever
have been willing to submit to so insolent a rule as this rule of caste,
which, instead of honoring industry, honored idleness, and attached a
stigma to the most useful and important trades. The landowner, the
soldier, the priest, these three were pure from every stain of
degradation, and only these three were quite absolutely and ethereally
pure. Next to them came the lawyer and the physician, on whom there
rested some traces of the lower earth; so that although the youthful
baron would fight or preach, he would neither plead nor heal. And after
these came the lower professions and the innumerable trades, all marked
with stigmas of deeper and deeper degradation.

From the intellectual point of view these prejudices indicate a state of
society in which public opinion has not emerged from barbarism. It
understands the strength of the feudal chief having land, with serfs or
voters on the land; it knows the uses of the sword, and it dreads the
menaces of the priesthood. Beyond this it knows little, and despises
what it does not understand. It is ignorant of science, and industry,
and art; it despises them as servile occupations beneath its conception
of the gentleman. This is the tradition of countries which retain the
impressions of feudalism; but notwithstanding all our philosophy, it is
difficult for us to avoid some feeling of astonishment when we reflect
that the public opinion of England--a country that owes so much of her
greatness and nearly all her wealth to commercial enterprise--should be
contemptuous towards commerce.

I may notice, in passing, a very curious form of this narrowness. Trade
is despised, but distinctions are established between one trade and
another. A man who sells wine is considered more of a gentleman than a
man who sells figs and raisins; and I believe you will find, if you
observe people carefully, that a woollen manufacturer is thought to be a
shade less vulgar than a cotton manufacturer. These distinctions are
seldom based on reason, for the work of commerce is generally very much
the same sort of work, mentally, whatever may be the materials it deals
in. You may be heartily congratulated on the strength of mind, firmness
of resolution, and superiority to prejudice, which have led you to
choose the business of a cotton-spinner. It is an excellent business,
and, in itself, every whit as honorable as dealing in corn and cattle,
which our nobles do habitually without reproach. But now that I have
disclaimed any participation in the stupid narrowness which despises
trade in general, and the cotton-trade in particular, let me add a few
words upon the effects of the cotton business on the mind.

There appeared in one of the newspapers a little time since a most
interesting and evidently genuine letter from an Etonian, who had
actually entered business in a cotton factory, and devoted himself to it
so as to earn the confidence of his employers and a salary of 400_l_. a
year as manager. He had waited some time uselessly for a diplomatic
appointment which did not arrive, and so, rather than lose the best
years of early manhood, as a more indolent fellow would have done very
willingly, in pure idleness, he took the resolution of entering
business, and carried out his determination with admirable persistence.
At first nobody would believe that the "swell" could be serious; people
thought that his idea of manufacturing was a mere freak, and expected
him to abandon it when he had to face the tedium of the daily work; but
the swell _was_ serious--went to the mill at six in the morning and
stayed there till six at night, from Monday till Saturday inclusive.
After a year of this, his new companions believed in him.

Now, all this is very admirable indeed as a manifestation of energy, and
that truest independence which looks to fortune as the reward of its own
manly effort, but it may be permitted to me to make a few observations
on this young gentleman's resolve. What he did seems to me rather the
act of an energetic nature seeking an outlet for energy, than of an
intellectual nature seeking pasture and exercise for the intellect. I am
far indeed from desiring, by this comparison, to cast any disparaging
light on the young gentleman's natural endowments, which appear to have
been valuable in their order and robust in their degree, nor do I
question the wisdom of his choice; all I mean to imply is, that although
he had chosen a fine large field for simple energy, it was a poor and
barren field for the intellect to pasture in. Consider for one moment
the difference in this respect between the career which he had abandoned
and the trade he had embraced. As an _attaché_ he would have lived in
capital cities, have had the best opportunities for perfecting himself
in modern languages, and for meeting the most varied and the most
interesting society. In every day there would have been precious hours
of leisure, to be employed in the increase of his culture. If an
intellectual man, having to choose between diplomacy and
cotton-spinning, preferred cotton-spinning it would be from the desire
for wealth, or from the love of an English home. The life of a cotton
manufacturer, who personally attends to his business with that close
supervision which has generally conducted to success, leaves scarcely
any margin for intellectual pleasure or spare energy for intellectual
work. After ten hours in the mill, it is difficult to sit down and
study; and even if there were energy enough, the mind would not readily
cast off the burden of great practical anxieties and responsibilities so
as to attune itself to disinterested thinking. The leaders of industry
often display mental power of as high an order as that which is employed
in the government of great empires; they show the highest administrative
ability, they have to deal continually with financial questions which on
their smaller scale require as much forethought and acumen as those that
concern the exchequer; but the ability they need is always strictly
practical, and there is the widest difference between the practical and
the intellectual minds. A constant and close pressure of practical
considerations develops the sort of power which deals effectually with
the present and its needs but atrophies the higher mind. The two minds
which we call intelligence and intellect resemble the feet and wings of
birds. Eagles and swallows walk badly or not at all, but they have a
marvellous strength of flight; ostriches are great pedestrians, but they
know nothing of the regions of the air. The best that can be hoped for
men immersed in the details of business is that they may be able, like
partridges and pheasants, to take a short flight on an emergency, and
rise, if only for a few minutes, above the level of the stubble and the
copse.

Without, therefore, desiring to imply any prejudiced contempt for trade,
I do desire to urge the consideration of its inevitable effects upon the
mind. For men of great practical intelligence and abundant energy, trade
is all-sufficing, but it could never entirely satisfy an intellectual
nature. And although there is drudgery in every pursuit, for even
literature and painting are full of it, still there are certain kinds of
drudgery which intellectual natures find to be harder to endure than
others. The drudgery which they bear least easily is an incessant
attention to duties which have no intellectual interest, and yet which
cannot be properly performed mechanically so as to leave the mind at
liberty for its own speculations. Deep thinkers are notoriously absent,
for thought requires abstraction from what surrounds us, and it is hard
for them to be denied the liberty of dreaming. An intellectual person
might be happy as a stone-breaker on the roadside, because the work
would leave his mind at liberty; but he would certainly be miserable as
an engine-driver at a coal-pit shaft, where the abstraction of an
instant would imperil the lives of others.

In a recent address delivered by Mr. Gladstone at Liverpool, he
acknowledged the neglect of culture which is one of the shortcomings of
our trading community, and held out the hope (perhaps in some degree
illusory) that the same persons might become eminent in commerce and in
learning. No doubt there have been instances of this; and when a
"concern" has been firmly established by the energy of a predecessor,
the heir to it may be satisfied with a royal sort of supervision,
leaving the drudgery of detail to his managers, and so secure for
himself that sufficient leisure without which high culture is not
possible. But the _founders_ of great commercial fortunes have, I
believe, in every instance thrown their _whole_ energy into their trade,
making wealth their aim, and leaving culture to be added in another
generation. The founders of commercial families are in this country
usually men of great mother-wit and plenty of determination--but
illiterate.


FOOTNOTES:

  [12] The word "disinterested" is used here in the sense explained in
    Part II. Letter III.

  [13] "This work has at any rate the character of having come into the
    world like every really living creation. It has been produced by the
    heat of a gentle incubation."




