LETTER II.

TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO LIVED MUCH IN FASHIONABLE SOCIETY.

  Certain dangers to the intellectual life--Difficult to resist the
  influences of society--Gilding--Fashionable education--Affectations of
  knowledge--Not easy to ascertain what people really know--Value of
  real knowledge diminished--Some good effects of affectations--Their
  bad effect on workers--Skill in amusements.

The kind of life which you have been leading for the last three or four
years will always be valuable to you as a past experience, but if the
intellectual ambition you confess to me is quite serious, I would
venture to suggest that there are certain dangers in the continuation of
your present existence if altogether uninterrupted. Pray do not suspect
me of any narrow prejudice against human intercourse, or of any wish to
make a hermit of you before your time, but believe that the few
observations I have to make are grounded simply on the desire that your
career should be entirely satisfactory to your own maturer judgment,
when you will look back upon it after many years.

An intellectual man may go into general society quite safely if only he
can resist its influence upon his serious work; but such resistance is
difficult in maturity and impossible in youth.

The sort of influence most to be dreaded is this. Society is, and must
be, based upon appearances, and not upon the deepest realities. It
requires some degree of reality to produce the appearance, but not a
substantial reality. Gilding is the perfect type of what Society
requires. A certain quantity of gold is necessary for the work of the
gilder, but a very small quantity, and skill in applying the metal so as
to cover a large surface, is of greater consequence than the weight of
the metal itself. The mind of a fashionable person is a carefully gilded
mind.

Consider fashionable education. Society imperatively requires an outside
knowledge of many things; not permitting the frank confession of
ignorance, whilst it is yet satisfied with a degree of knowledge
differing only from avowed ignorance in permitting you to be less
sincere. All young ladies, whether gifted by nature with any musical
talent or not, are compelled to say that they have learned to play upon
the piano; all young gentlemen are compelled to affect to know Latin. In
the same way the public opinion of Society compels its members to
pretend to know and appreciate the masterpieces of literature and art.
There is, in truth, so much compulsion of this kind that it is not easy
to ascertain what people do really know and care about until they admit
you into their confidence.

The inevitable effect of these affectations is to diminish the value, in
Society, of genuine knowledge and accomplishment of all kinds. I know a
man who is a Latin scholar; he is one of the few moderns who have really
learned Latin; but in fashionable society this brings him no
distinction, because we are all supposed to know Latin, and the true
scholar, when he appears, cannot be distinguished from the multitude of
fashionable pretenders. I know another man who can draw; there are not
many men, even amongst artists, who can draw soundly; yet in fashionable
society he does not get the serious sort of respect which he deserves,
because fashionable people believe that drawing is an accomplishment
generally attainable by young ladies and communicable by governesses. I
have no wish to insinuate that Society is wrong, in requiring a certain
pretence to education in various subjects, and a certain affectation of
interest in masterpieces, for these pretences and affectations do serve
to deliver it from the darkness of a quite absolute ignorance. A society
of fashionable people who think it necessary to be able to talk
superficially about the labors of men really belonging to the
intellectual class, is always sure to be much better informed than a
Society such as that of the French peasantry, for example, where nobody
is expected to know anything. It is well for Society itself that it
should profess a deep respect for classical learning, for the great
modern poets and painters, for scientific discoverers, even though the
majority of its members do not seriously care about them. The pretension
itself requires a certain degree of knowledge, as gilding requires a
certain quantity of gold.

The evil effects of these affectations may be summed up in a sentence.
They diminish the apparent value of the realities which they imitate,
and they tend to weaken our enthusiasm for those great realities, and
our ardor in the pursuit of them. The impression which fashionable
society produces upon a student who has strength enough to resist it, is
a painful sense of isolation in his earnest work. If he goes back to the
work with courage undiminished, he still clearly realizes--what it would
be better for him not to realize quite so clearly--the uselessness of
going beyond fashionable standards, if he aims at social success. And
there is still another thing to be said which concerns you just now very
particularly. Whoever leads the intellectual life in earnest is sure on
some points to fail in strict obedience to the exigencies of fashionable
life, so that, if fashionable successes are still dear to him, he will
be constantly tempted to make some such reflections as the
following:--"Here am I, giving years and years of labor to a pursuit
which brings no external reward, when half as much work would keep me
abreast of the society I live with, in everything it really cares about.
I know quite well all that my learning is costing me. Other men outshine
me easily in social pleasures and accomplishments. My skill at billiards
and on the moors is evidently declining, and I cannot ride or drive so
well as fellows who do very little else. In fact I am becoming an old
muff, and all I have to show on the other side is a degree of
scholarship which only six men in Europe can appreciate, and a
speciality in natural science in which my little discoveries are sure to
be either anticipated or left behind."

The truth is, that to succeed well in fashionable society the higher
intellectual attainments are not so useful as distinguished skill in
those amusements which are the real business of the fashionable world.
The three things which tell best in your favor amongst young gentlemen
are to be an excellent shot, to ride well to hounds, and to play
billiards with great skill. I wish to say nothing against any of these
accomplishments, having an especially hearty admiration and respect for
all good horsemen, and considering the game of billiards the most
perfectly beautiful of games; still, the fact remains that to do these
things as well as some young gentlemen do them, we must devote the time
which they devote, and if we regularly give nine hours a day to graver
occupations, pray, how and where are we to find it?


