PART VI.

CUSTOM AND TRADITION.


LETTER I.

TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO HAD FIRMLY RESOLVED NEVER TO WEAR ANYTHING BUT
A GRAY COAT.[6]

  Secret enjoyment of rebellion against custom, and of the disabilities
  resulting from it--Penalties imposed by Society and by Nature out of
  proportion to the offence--Instances--What we consider penalties not
  really penalties, but only consequences--Society likes harmony, and is
  offended by dissonance--Utility of rebels against custom--That they
  ought to reserve their power of rebellion for great occasions--Uses of
  custom--Duty of the intellectual class--Best way to procure the
  abolition of a custom we disapprove--Bad customs--Eccentricity
  sometimes a duty.

When I had the pleasure of staying at your father's house, you told me,
rather to my surprise, that it was impossible for you to go to balls and
dinner-parties because you did not possess such a thing as a dress-coat.
The reason struck me as being scarcely a valid one, considering the
rather high scale of expenditure adopted in the paternal mansion. It
seemed clear that the eldest son of a family which lived after the
liberal fashion of Yorkshire country gentlemen could afford himself a
dress-coat if he liked. Then I wondered whether you disliked dress-coats
from a belief that they were unbecoming to your person; but a very
little observation of your character convinced me that, whatever might
be your weaknesses (for everybody has some weaknesses), anxiety about
personal appearance was not one of them.

The truth is, that you secretly enjoy this little piece of disobedience
to custom, and all the disabilities which result from it. This little
rebellion is connected with a larger rebellion, and it is agreeable to
you to demonstrate the unreasonableness of society by incurring a very
severe penalty for a very trifling offence. You are always dressed
decently, you offend against no moral rule, you have cultivated your
mind by study and reflection, and it rather pleases you to think that a
young gentleman so well qualified for society in everything of real
importance should be excluded from it because he has not purchased a
permission from his tailor.

The penalties imposed by society for the infraction of very trifling
details of custom are often, as it seems, out of all proportion to the
offence; but so are the penalties of nature. Only three days before the
date of this letter, an intimate friend of mine was coming home from a
day's shooting. His nephew, a fine young man in the full enjoyment of
existence, was walking ten paces in advance. A covey of partridges
suddenly cross the road: my friend in shouldering his gun touches the
trigger just a second too soon, and kills his nephew. Now, think of the
long years of mental misery that will be the punishment of that very
trifling piece of carelessness! My poor friend has passed, in the space
of a single instant, from a joyous life to a life that is permanently
and irremediably saddened. It is as if he had left the summer sunshine
to enter a gloomy dungeon and begin a perpetual imprisonment. And for
what? For having touched a trigger, without evil intention, a little too
precipitately. It seems harder still for the victim, who is sent out of
the world in the bloom of perfect manhood because his uncle was not
quite so cool as he ought to have been. Again, not far from where I
live, thirty-five men were killed last week in a coal-pit from an
explosion of fire-damp. One of their number had struck a lucifer to
light his pipe: for doing this in a place where he ought not to have
done it, the man suffers the penalty of death, and thirty-four others
with him. The fact is simply that Nature _will_ be obeyed, and makes no
attempt to proportion punishments to offences: indeed, what in our human
way we call punishments are not punishments, but simple consequences. So
it is with the great social penalties. Society _will be obeyed_: if you
refuse obedience, you must take the consequences. Society has only one
law, and that is custom. Even religion itself is socially powerful only
just so far as it has custom on its side.

Nature does not desire that thirty-five men should be destroyed because
one could not resist the temptation of a pipe; but fire-damp is highly
inflammable, and the explosion is a simple consequence. Society does not
desire to exclude you because you will not wear evening dress; but the
dress is customary, and your exclusion is merely a consequence of your
nonconformity. The view of society goes no farther in this than the
artistic conception (not very delicately artistic, perhaps) that it is
prettier to see men in black coats regularly placed between ladies round
a dinner-table than men in gray coats or brown coats. The uniformity of
costume appears to represent uniformity of sentiment and to ensure a
sort of harmony amongst the _convives_. What society really cares for is
harmony; what it dislikes is dissent and nonconformity. It wants peace
in the dining-room, peace in the drawing-room, peace everywhere in its
realm of tranquil pleasure. You come in your shooting-coat, which was in
tune upon the moors, but is a dissonance amongst ladies in full dress.
Do you not perceive that fustian and velveteen, which were natural
amongst gamekeepers, are not so natural on gilded chairs covered with
silk, with lace and diamonds at a distance of three feet? You don't
perceive it? Very well: society does not argue the point with you, but
only excludes you.

It has been said that in the life of every intellectual man there comes
a time when he questions custom at all points. This seems to be a
provision of nature for the reform and progress of custom itself, which
without such questioning would remain absolutely stationary and
irresistibly despotic. You rebels against the established custom have
your place in the great work of progressive civilization. Without you,
Western Europe would have been a second China. It is to the continual
rebellion of such persons as yourself that we owe whatever progress has
been accomplished since the times of our remotest forefathers. There
have been rebels always, and the rebels have not been, generally
speaking, the most stupid part of the nation.

But what is the use of wasting this beneficial power of rebellion on
matters too trivial to be worth attention? Does it hurt your conscience
to appear in a dress-coat? Certainly not, and you would be as
good-looking in it as you are in your velveteen shooting-jacket with the
pointers on the bronze buttons. Let us conform in these trivial matters,
which nobody except a tailor ought to consider worth a moment's
attention, in order to reserve our strength for the protection of
intellectual liberty. Let society arrange your dress for you (it will
save you infinite trouble), but never permit it to stifle the expression
of your thought. You find it convenient, because you are timid, to
exclude yourself from the world by refusing to wear its costume; but a
bolder man would let the tailor do his worst, and then go into the world
and courageously defend there the persons and causes that are
misunderstood and slanderously misrepresented. The fables of Spenser
are fables only in form, and a noble knight may at any time go forth,
armed in the panoply of a tail-coat, a dress waistcoat, and a manly
moral courage, to do battle across the dinner-table and in the
drawing-room for those who have none to defend them.

It is unphilosophical to set ourselves obstinately against custom in the
mass, for it multiplies the power of men by settling useless discussion
and clearing the ground for our best and most prolific activity. The
business of the world could not be carried forward one day without a
most complex code of customs; and law itself is little more than custom
slightly improved upon by men reflecting together at their leisure, and
reduced to codes and systems. We ought to think of custom as a most
precious legacy of the past, saving us infinite perplexity, yet not as
an infallible rule. The most intelligent community would be conservative
in its habits, yet not obstinately conservative, but willing to hear and
adopt the suggestions of advancing reason. The great duty of the
intellectual class, and its especial function, is to confirm what is
reasonable in the customs that have been handed down to us, and so
maintain their authority, yet at the same time to show that custom is
not final, but merely a form suited to the world's convenience. And
whenever you are convinced that a custom is no longer serviceable, the
way to procure the abolition of it is to lead men very gradually away
from it, by offering a substitute at first very slightly different from
what they have been long used to. If the English had been in the habit
of tattooing, the best way to procure its abolition would have been to
admit that it was quite necessary to cover the face with elaborate
patterns, yet gently to suggest that these patterns would be still more
elegant if delicately painted in water-colors. Then you might have gone
on arguing--still admitting, of course, the absolute necessity for
ornament of some kind--that good taste demanded only a moderate amount
of it; and so you would have brought people gradually to a little
flourish on the nose or forehead, when the most advanced reformers might
have set the example of dispensing with ornament altogether. Many of our
contemporaries have abandoned shaving in this gradual way, allowing the
whiskers to encroach imperceptibly, till at last the razor lay in the
dressing-case unused. The abominable black cylinders that covered our
heads a few years ago were vainly resisted by radicals in custom, but
the moderate reformers gradually reduced their elevation, and now they
are things of the past.

Though I think we ought to submit to custom in matters of indifference,
and to reform it gradually, whilst affecting submission in matters
altogether indifferent, still there are other matters on which the only
attitude worthy of a man is the most bold and open resistance to its
dictates. Custom may have a right to authority over your wardrobe, but
it cannot have any right to ruin your self-respect. Not only the virtues
most advantageous to well-being, but also the most contemptible and
degrading vices, have at various periods of the world's history been
sustained by the full authority of custom. There are places where forty
years ago drunkenness was conformity to custom, and sobriety an
eccentricity. There are societies, even at the present day, where
licentiousness is the rule of custom, and chastity the sign of weakness
or want of spirit. There are communities (it cannot be necessary to name
them) in which successful fraud, especially on a large scale, is
respected as the proof of smartness, whilst a man who remains poor
because he is honest is despised for slowness and incapacity. There are
whole nations in which religious hypocrisy is strongly approved by
custom, and honesty severely condemned. The Wahabee Arabs may be
mentioned as an instance of this, but the Wahabee Arabs are not the only
people, nor is Nejed the only place, where it is held to be more
virtuous to lie on the side of custom than to be an honorable man in
independence of it. In all communities where vice and hypocrisy are
sustained by the authority of custom, eccentricity is a moral duty. In
all communities where a low standard of thinking is received as
infallible common sense, eccentricity becomes an intellectual duty.
There are hundreds of places in the provinces where it is impossible for
any man to lead the intellectual life without being condemned as an
eccentric. It is the duty of intellectual men who are thus isolated to
set the example of that which their neighbors call eccentricity, but
which may be more accurately described as superiority.


