LETTER III.

TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO LIVED MUCH IN FASHIONABLE SOCIETY.

  Some exceptional men may live alternately in different
  worlds--Instances--Differences between the fashionable and the
  intellectual spirit--Men sometimes made unfashionable by special
  natural gifts--Sometimes by trifling external circumstances--Anecdote
  of Ampère--He did not shine in society--His wife's anxieties about his
  material wants--Apparent contrast between Ampère and Oliver Goldsmith.

You ask me why there should be any fundamental incompatibility between
the fashionable and the intellectual lives. It seems to you that the two
might possibly be reconciled, and you mention instances of men who
attained intellectual distinction without deserting the fashionable
world.

Yes, there _have_ been a few examples of men endowed with that overflow
of energy which permits the most opposite pursuits, and enables its
possessors to live, apparently, in two worlds between which there is not
any natural affinity. A famous French novelist once took the trouble to
elaborate the portrait of a lady who passed one half of her time in
virtue and churches, whilst she employed the other half in the wildest
adventures. In real life I may allude to a distinguished English
engraver, who spent a fortnight over his plate and a fortnight in some
fashionable watering-place, alternately, and who found this distribution
of his time not unfavorable to the elasticity of his mind. Many
hard-working Londoners, who fairly deserve to be considered intellectual
men, pass their days in professional labor and their evenings in
fashionable society. But in all instances of this kind the professional
work is serious enough, and regular enough, to give a very substantial
basis to the life, so that the times of recreation are kept daily
subordinate by the very necessity of circumstances. If you had a
profession, and were obliged to follow it in earnest six or eight hours
a day, the more Society amused you the better. The danger in your case
is that your whole existence may take a fashionable tone.

The _esprit_ or tone of fashion differs from the intellectual tone in
ways which I will attempt to define. Fashion is nothing more than the
temporary custom of rich and idle people who make it their principal
business to study the external elegance of life. This custom incessantly
changes. If your habits of mind and life change with it you are a
fashionable person, but if your habits of mind and life either remain
permanently fixed or follow some law of your own individual nature, then
you are outside of fashion. The intellectual spirit is remarkable for
its independence of custom, and therefore on many occasions it will
clash with the fashionable spirit. It does so most frequently in the
choice of pursuits, and in the proportionate importance which the
individual student will (in his own case) assign to his pursuits. The
regulations of fashionable life have fixed, at the least temporarily,
the degree of time and attention which a fashionable person may devote
to this thing or that. The intellectual spirit ignores these
regulations, and devotes its possessor, or more accurately its
_possessed_, to the intellectual speciality for which he has most
aptitude, often leaving him ignorant of what fashion has decided to be
essential. After living the intellectual life for several years he will
know too much of one thing and too little of some other things to be in
conformity with the fashionable ideal. For example, the fashionable
ideal of a gentleman requires classical scholarship, but it is so
difficult for artists and men of science to be classical scholars also
that in this respect they are likely to fall short. I knew a man who
became unfashionable because he had a genius for mechanics. He was
always about steam-engines, and, though a gentleman by birth, associated
from choice with men who understood the science that chiefly interested
him, of which all fashionable people were so profoundly ignorant that he
habitually kept out of their way. He, on his part, neglected scholarship
and literature and all that "artistry of life," as Mr. Robert Lytton
calls it, in which fashionable society excels. Men are frequently driven
into unfashionable existence by the very force and vigor of their own
intellectual gifts, and sometimes by external circumstances, apparently
most trifling, yet of infinite influence on human destiny. There is a
good instance of this in a letter from Ampère to his young wife, that
"Julie" who was lost to him so soon. "I went to dine yesterday at Madame
Beauregard's with hands blackened by a harmless drug which stains the
skin for three or four days. She declared that it looked like manure,
and left the table, saying that she would dine when I was at a distance.
I promised not to return there before my hands were white. Of course I
shall never enter the house again."

Here we have an instance of a man of science who has temporarily
disqualified himself for polite society by an experiment in the pursuit
of knowledge. What do you think of the vulgarity of Madame Beauregard?
To me it appears the perfect type of that preoccupation about
appearances which blinds the genteel vulgar to the true nobility of
life. Were not Ampère's stained hands nobler than many white ones? It is
not necessary for every intellectual worker to blacken his fingers with
chemicals, but a kind of rust very frequently comes over him which ought
to be as readily forgiven, yet rarely is forgiven. "In his relations
with the world," writes the biographer of Ampère, "the authority of
superiority disappeared. To this the course of years brought no
alternative. Ampère become celebrated, laden with honorable
distinctions, the great Ampère! outside the speculations of the
intellect, was hesitating and timid again, disquieted and troubled, and
more disposed to accord his confidence to others than to himself."

Intellectual pursuits did not qualify Ampère, they do not qualify any
one, for success in fashionable society. To succeed in the world you
ought to be _of_ the world, so as to share the things which interest it
without too wide a deviation from the prevalent current of your
thoughts. Its passing interests, its temporary customs, its transient
phases of sentiment and opinion, ought to be for the moment your own
interests, your own feelings and opinions. A mind absorbed as Ampère's
was in the contemplation and elucidation of the unchangeable laws of
nature, is too much fixed upon the permanent to adapt itself naturally
to these ever-varying estimates. He did not easily speak the world's
lighter language, he could not move with its mobility. Such men forget
even what they eat and what they put on; Ampère's young wife was in
constant anxiety, whilst the pair were separated by the severity of
their fate, as to the sufficiency of his diet and the decency of his
appearance. One day she writes to him to mind not to go out in his
shabby old coat, and in the same letter she entreats him to purchase a
bottle of wine, so that when he took no milk or broth he would find it,
and when it was all drunk she tells him to buy another bottle.
Afterwards she asks him whether he makes a good fire, and if he has any
chairs in his room. In another letter she inquires if his bed is
comfortable, and in another she tells him to mind about his acids, for
he has burnt holes in his blue stockings. Again, she begs him to try to
have a passably decent appearance, because that will give pleasure to
his poor wife. He answers, to tranquillize her, that he does not burn
his things now, and that he makes chemical experiments only in his old
breeches with his gray coat and his waistcoat of greenish velvet. But
one day he is forced to confess that she must send him new trousers if
he is to appear before MM. Delambre and Villars. He "does not know what
to do," his best breeches still smell of turpentine, and, having wished
to put on trousers to go to the Society of Emulation, he saw the hole
which Barrat fancied he had mended become bigger than ever, so that it
showed the piece of different cloth which he had sown under it. He adds
that his wife will be afraid that he will spoil his "_beau pantalon_,"
but he promises to send it back to her as clean as when he received it.
How different is all this from that watchful care about externals which
marks the man of fashion! Ampère was quite a young man then, still
almost a bridegroom, yet he is already so absorbed in the intellectual
life as to forget appearances utterly, except when Julie, with feminine
watchfulness, writes to recall them to his mind. I am not defending or
advocating this carelessness. It is better to be neat and tidy than to
go in holes and patches; but I desire to insist upon the radical
difference between the fashionable spirit and the intellectual spirit.
And this difference, which shows itself in these external things, is
not less evident in the clothing or preparation of the mind. Ampère's
intellect, great and noble as it was, could scarcely be considered more
suitable for _le grand monde_ than the breeches that smelt of
turpentine, or the trousers made ragged by aquafortis.

A splendid contrast, as to tailoring, was our own dear Oliver Goldsmith,
who displayed himself in those wonderful velvet coats and satin
small-clothes from Mr. Filby's, which are more famous than the finest
garments ever worn by prince or peer. Who does not remember that
bloom-colored coat which the ablest painters have studiously
immortalized, made by John Filby, at the Harrow, in Water Lane (best
advertised of tailors!), and that charming blue velvet suit, which Mr.
Filby was never paid for? Surely a poet so splendid was fit for the
career of fashion! No, Oliver Goldsmith's velvet and lace were the
expression of a deep and painful sense of personal unfitness. They were
the fine frame which is intended to pass off an awkward and imperfect
picture. There was a quieter dignity in Johnson's threadbare sleeves.
Johnson, the most influential though not the most elegant intellect of
his time, is grander in his neglect of fashion than Goldsmith in his
ruinous subservience. And if it were permitted to me to speak of two or
three great geniuses who adorn the age in which we ourselves are living,
I might add that they seem to follow the example of the author of
"Rasselas" rather than that of Mr. Filby's illustrious customer. They
remind me of a good old squire who, from a fine sentiment of duty,
permitted the village artist to do his worst upon him, and incurred
thereby this withering observation from his metropolitan tailor: "You
are _covered_, sir, but you are _not_ dressed!"


