PART X.

_INTELLECTUAL HYGIENICS._


LETTER I.

TO A YOUNG AUTHOR WHILST HE WAS WRITING HIS FIRST BOOK.

  Mr. Galton's advice to young travellers--That we ought to interest
  ourselves in the _progress_ of a journey--The same rule applicable in
  intellectual things--Women in the cabin of a canal boat--Working
  hastily for temporary purposes--Fevered eagerness to get work
  done--Beginners have rarely acquired firm intellectual habits--Knowing
  the range of our own powers--The coolness of accomplished
  artists--Advice given by Ingres--Balzac's method of work--Scott,
  Horace Vernet, John Phillip--Decided workers are deliberate workers.

I read the other day, in Galton's "Art of Travel," a little bit which
concerns you and all of us, but I made the extract in my
commonplace-book for your benefit rather than my own, because the truth
it contains has been "borne in upon me" by my own experience, so that
what Mr. Galton says did not give me a new conviction, but only
confirmed me in an old one. He is speaking to explorers who have not
done so much in that way as he has himself, and though the subject of
his advice is the conduct of an exploring party (in the wilds of
Australia, for example) the advice itself is equally useful if taken
metaphorically, and applied to the conduct of intellectual labors and
explorations of all kinds.

"Interest yourself," says Mr. Galton, "chiefly in the progress of your
journey, and do not look forward to its end with eagerness. It is better
to think of a return to civilization, not as an end to hardship and a
haven from ill, but as a thing to be regretted, and as a close to an
adventurous and pleasant life. In this way, risking less, you will
insensibly creep on, making connections, and learning the capabilities
of the country as you advance, which will be found invaluable in the
case of a hurried or a disastrous return. And thus, when some months
have passed by, you will look back with surprise on the great distance
travelled over; for if you average only three miles a day, at the end of
the year you will have advanced 1000, which is a very considerable
exploration. The fable of the hare and the tortoise seems expressly
intended for travellers over wide and unknown tracts."

Yes, we ought to interest ourselves chiefly in the progress of our work,
and not to look forward to its end with eagerness. That eagerness of
which Mr. Galton speaks has spoiled many a piece of work besides a
geographical exploration, and it not only spoils work, but it does
worse, it spoils life also. How am I to enjoy this year as I ought, if I
am continually wishing it were over? A truly intellectual philosophy
must begin by recognizing the fact that the intellectual paths are
infinitely long, that there will always be new horizons behind the
horizon that is before us, and that we must accept a gradual advance as
the law of our intellectual life. It is our business to move forwards,
but we ought to do so without any greater feeling of hurry than that
which affects the most stationary of minds. Not a bad example for us is
a bargeman's wife in a canal-boat. She moves; movement is the law of her
life; yet she is as tranquil in her little cabin as any goodwife on
shore, brewing her tea and preparing her buttered toast without ever
thinking about getting to the end of her journey. For if that voyage
were ended, another would always succeed to it, and another! In striking
contrast to the unhurried bargeman's wife in her cabin is an irritable
Frenchman in the corner of a diligence, looking at his watch every
half-hour, and wishing that the dust and rattle were over, and he were
in his own easy-chair at home. Those who really lead the intellectual
life, and have embraced it for better and for worse, are like the
bargeman's wife; but those who live the life from time to time only, for
some special purpose, wishing to be rid of it as soon as that purpose is
accomplished, are like the sufferer in the purgatory of the diligence.
Is there indeed really any true intellectual life at all when every hour
of labor is spoiled by a feverish eagerness to be at the end of the
projected task? You cannot take a bit out of another man's life and live
it, without having lived the previous years that led up to it, without
having also the assured hopes for the years that lie beyond. The attempt
is constantly made by amateurs of all kinds, and by men of temporary
purposes, and it always fails. The amateur says when he awakes on some
fine summer morning, and draws up his blind, and looks out on the dewy
fields: "Ah, the world of nature is beautiful to-day: what if I were to
lead the life of an artist?" And after breakfast he seeks up his old box
of watercolor and his blockbook, and stool, and white umbrella, and what
not, and sallies forth, and fixes himself on the edge of the forest or
the banks of the amber stream. The day that he passes there looks like
an artist's day, yet it is not. It has not been preceded by the three or
four thousand days which ought to have led up to it; it is not strong in
the assured sense of present skill, in the calm knowledge that the hours
will bear good fruit. So the chances are that there will be some hurry,
and fretfulness, and impatience, under the shadow of that white parasol,
and also that when the day is over there will be a disappointment. You
cannot put an artist's day into the life of any one but an artist.

Our impatiences come mainly, I think, from an amateurish doubt about our
own capacity, which is accompanied by a fevered eagerness to see the
work done, because we are tormented both by hopes and fears so long as
it is in progress. We have fears that it may not turn out as it ought to
do, and we have at the same time hopes for its success. Both these
causes produce eagerness, and deprive us of the tranquillity which
distinguishes the thorough workman, and which is necessary to
thoroughness in the work itself. Now please observe that I am not
advising you to set aside these hopes and fears by an effort of the
will; when you have them they are the inevitable result of your state of
culture, and the will can no more get rid of them than it can get rid of
an organic disease. When you have a limited amount of power and of
culture, and are not quite clear in your own mind as to where the limits
lie, it is natural on the one hand that you should fear the
insufficiency of what you possess, and on the other that in more
sanguine moments you should indulge in hopes which are only extravagant
because your powers have not yet been accurately measured. You will
alternate between fear and hope, according to the temporary predominance
of saddening or cheerful ideas, but both these feelings will urge you to
complete the work in hand, that you may see your own powers reflected in
it, and measure them more exactly. This is the main cause of the
eagerness of young authors, and the reason why they often launch work
upon the sea of publicity which is sure to go immediately to the bottom,
from the unworkmanlike haste with which it has been put together. But
beyond this there is another cause, which is, that beginners in
literature have rarely acquired firm intellectual habits, that they do
not yet lead the tranquil intellectual life, so that such a piece of
work as the composition of a book keeps them in an unwholesome state of
excitement. When you feel this coming upon you, pray remember Mr.
Galton's wise traveller in unknown tracts, or the bargeman's wife in the
canal-boat.

Amongst the many advantages of experience, one of the most valuable is
that we come to know the range of our own powers, and if we are wise we
keep contentedly within them. This relieves us from the malady of
eagerness; we know pretty accurately beforehand what our work will be
when it is done, and therefore we are not in a hurry to see it
accomplished. The coolness of old hands in all departments of labor is
due in part to the cooling of the temperament by age, but it is due even
more to the fulness of acquired experience, for we do not find
middle-aged men so cool in situations where they feel themselves
incompetent. The conduct of the most experienced painters in the
management of their work is a good example of this masterly coolness,
because we can see them painting in their studios whereas we cannot so
easily see or so justly estimate the coolness of scientific or literary
workmen. A painter of great experience will have, usually, several
pictures at a time upon his easels, and pass an hour upon one, or an
hour upon the other, simple as the state of the pigment invites him
without ever being tempted to risk anything by hurrying a process. The
ugly preparatory daubing which irritates the impatience of the beginner
does not disturb _his_ equanimity; he has laid it with a view to the
long-foreseen result, and it satisfies him temporarily as the right
thing for the time being. If you know what is the right thing for the
time being, and always do it, you are sure of the calm of the thorough
workman. All his touches, except the very last touch on each work, are
touches of preparation, leading gradually up to his result. Ingres used
to counsel his pupils to sketch always, to sketch upon and within the
first sketch till the picture came right in the end; and this was
strictly Balzac's method in literature. The literary and artistic labors
of these two men did not proceed so much upon the principle of
travelling as upon that of cultivation. They took an idea in the rough,
as a settler takes a tract from wild nature, and then they went over it
repeatedly, each time pushing the cultivation of it a little farther.
Scott, Horace Vernet, John Phillip, and many others, have worked rather
on the principle of travelling, passing over the ground once, and
leaving it, never coming back again to correct the mistakes of
yesterday. Both methods of work require deliberation, but the latter
needs it in the supreme degree. All very decided workers, men who did
not correct, have been at the same time very deliberate workers--rapid,
in the sense of accomplishing much in the course of the year, or the
life, but cautious and slow and observant whilst they actually labored,
thinking out very carefully every sentence before they wrote it, every
touch of paint before they laid it.


