LETTER IV.

TO THE SON OF THE LADY TO WHOM THE PRECEDING LETTER WAS ADDRESSED.

  Difficulty of detaching intellectual from religious questions--The
  sacerdotal system--Necessary to ascertain what religion
  is--Intellectual religion really nothing but philosophy--The popular
  instinct--The test of belief--Public worship--The intellect moral, but
  not religious--Intellectual activity sometimes in contradiction to
  dogma--Differences between the intellectual and religious lives.

Your request is not so simple as it appears. You ask me for a frank
opinion as to the course your mind is taking in reference to very
important subjects; but you desire only intellectual, and not religious
guidance. The difficulty is to effect any clear demarcation between the
two. Certainly I should never take upon myself to offer religious advice
to any one; it is difficult for those who have not qualified themselves
for the priestly office to do that with force and effect. The manner in
which a priest leads and manages a mind that has from the first been
moulded in the beliefs and observances of his Church, cannot be imitated
by a layman. A priest starts always from authority; his method, which
has been in use from the earliest ages, consists first in claiming your
unquestioning assent to certain doctrines, from which he immediately
proceeds to deduce the inferences that may affect your conduct or
regulate your thoughts. It is a method perfectly adapted to its own
ends. It can deal with all humanity, and produce the most immediate
practical results. So long as the assent to the doctrines is sincere,
the sacerdotal system may contend successfully against some of the
strongest forms of evil; but when the assent to the doctrines has ceased
to be complete, when some of them are half-believed and others not
believed at all, the system loses much of its primitive efficiency. It
seems likely that your difficulty, the difficulty of so many
intellectual men in these days, is to know where the intellectual
questions end and the purely religious ones can be considered to begin.
If you could once ascertain that, in a manner definitely satisfactory,
you would take your religious questions to a clergyman and your
intellectual ones to a man of science, and so get each solved
independently.

Without presuming to offer a solution of so complex a difficulty as
this, I may suggest to you that it is of some importance to your
intellectual life to ascertain what religion is. A book was published
many years ago by a very learned author, in which he endeavored to show
that what is vulgarly called scepticism may be intellectual religion.
Now, although nothing can be more distasteful to persons of culture
than the bigotry which refuses the name of religion to other people's
opinions, merely because they are other people's opinions, I suspect
that the popular instinct is right in denying the name of religion to
the inferences of the intellect. The description which the author just
alluded to gave of what he called intellectual religion was in fact
simply a description of philosophy, and of that discipline which the
best philosophy imposes upon the heart and the passions. On the other
hand, Dr. Arnold, when he says that by religion he always understands
Christianity, narrows the word as much as he would have narrowed the
word "patriotism" had he defined it to mean a devotion to the interests
of England. I think the popular instinct, though of course quite unable
to construct a definition of religion, is in its vague way very well
aware of the peculiar nature of religious thought and feeling. The
popular instinct would certainly never confound religion with philosophy
on the one hand, nor, on the other, unless excited to opposition, would
it be likely to refuse the name of religion to another worship, such as
Mahometanism, for instance.

According to the popular instinct, then, which on a subject of this kind
appears the safest of all guides, a religion involves first a belief and
next a public practice. The nature of the belief is in these days wholly
peculiar to religion; in other times it was not so, because then people
believed other things much in the same way. But in these days the test
of religious belief is that it should make men accept as certain truth
what they would disbelieve on any other authority. For example, a true
Roman Catholic believes that the consecrated host is the body of Christ,
and so long as he lives in the purely religious spirit he continues to
believe this; but so soon as the power of his religious sentiment
declines he ceases to believe it, and the wafer appears to him a wafer,
and no more. And so amongst Protestants the truly religious believe many
things which no person not being under the authority of religion could
by any effort bring himself to believe. It is easy, for example, to
believe that Joshua arrested the sun's apparent motion, so long as the
religious authority of the Bible remains perfectly intact; but no sooner
does the reader become critical than the miracle is disbelieved. In all
ages, and in all countries, religions have narrated marvellous things,
and the people have always affirmed that not to believe these narratives
constituted the absence of religion, or what they called atheism. They
have equally, in all ages and countries, held the public act of
participation in religious worship to be an essential part of what they
called religion. They do not admit the sufficiency of secret prayer.

Can these popular instincts help us to a definition? They may help us at
least to mark the dividing line between religion and morality, between
religion and philosophy. No one has ever desired, more earnestly and
eagerly than I, to discover the foundations of the intellectual
religion; no one has ever felt more chilling disappointment in the
perception of the plain bare fact that the intellect gives morality,
philosophy, precious things indeed, but not religion. It is like seeking
art by science. Thousands of artists, whole schools from generation to
generation, have sought fine art through anatomy and perspective; and
although these sciences did not hinder the born artists from coming to
art at last, they did not ensure their safe arrival in the art-paradise;
in many instances they even led men away from art. So it is with the
great modern search for the intellectual religion; the idea of it is
scientific in its source, and the result of it, the last definite
attainment, is simply intellectual morality, not religion in the sense
which all humanity has attached to religion during all the ages that
have preceded ours. We may say that philosophy is the religion of the
intellectual; and if we go scrupulously to Latin derivations, it is so.
But taking frankly the received meaning of the word as it is used by
mankind everywhere, we must admit that, although high intellect would
lead us inevitably to high and pure morality, and to most scrupulously
beautiful conduct in everything, towards men, towards women, towards
even the lower and lowest animals, still it does not lead us to that
belief in the otherwise unbelievable, or to that detailed _cultus_
which is meant by religion in the universally accepted sense. It is
disingenuous to take a word popularly respected and attribute to it
another sense. Such a course is not strictly honest, and therefore not
purely intellectual; for the foundation of the intellectual life is
honesty.

The difficulty of the intellectual life is, that whilst it can never
assume a position of hostility to religion, which it must always
recognize as the greatest natural force for the amelioration of mankind,
it is nevertheless compelled to enunciate truths which may happen to be
in contradiction with dogmas received at this or that particular time.
That you may not suspect me of a disposition to dwell continually on
safe generalities and to avoid details out of timidity, let me mention
two cases on which the intellectual and scientific find themselves at
variance with the clergy. The clergy tell us that mankind descend from a
single pair, and that in the earlier ages the human race attained a
longevity counted not by decades but by centuries. Alexander Humboldt
disbelieves the first of these propositions, Professor Owen disbelieves
the second. Men of science generally are of the same opinion. Few men of
science accept Adam and Eve, few accept Methuselah. Professor Owen
argues that, since the oldest skeletons known have the same system of
teething that we have, man can never have lived long enough to require
nine sets of teeth. In regard to these, and a hundred other points on
which science advances new views, the question which concerns us is how
we are to maintain the integrity of the intellectual life. The danger is
the loss of inward ingenuousness, the attempt to persuade ourselves that
we believe opposite statements. If once we admit disingenuousness into
the mind, the intellectual life is no longer serene and pure. The plain
course for the preservation of our honesty, which is the basis of truly
intellectual thinking, is to receive the truth, whether agreeable or the
contrary, with all its train of consequences, however repulsive or
discouraging. In attempting to reconcile scientific truth with the
oldest traditions of humanity, there is but one serious danger, the loss
of intellectual integrity. Of that possession modern society has little
left to lose.

But let us understand that the intellectual life and the religious life
are as distinct as the scientific and the artistic lives. They may be
led by the same person, but by the same person in different moods. They
coincide on some points, accidentally. Certainly, the basis of high
thinking is perfect honesty, and honesty is a recognized religious
virtue. Where the two minds differ is on the importance of authority.
The religious life is based upon authority, the intellectual life is
based upon personal investigation. From the intellectual point of view I
cannot advise you to restrain the spirit of investigation, which is the
scientific spirit. It may lead you very far, yet always to truth,
ultimately,--you, or those after you, whose path you may be destined to
prepare. Science requires a certain inward heat and heroism in her
votaries, notwithstanding the apparent coldness of her statements.
Especially does she require that intellectual fearlessness which accepts
a proved fact without reference to its personal or its social
consequences.


