LETTER III.

TO AN INTELLECTUAL MAN WHO DESIRED AN OUTLET FOR HIS ENERGIES.

  Dissatisfaction of the intellectual when they have not an extensive
  influence--A consideration suggested to the author by Mr. Matthew
  Arnold--Each individual mind a portion of the national mind, which
  must rise or decline with the minds of which it is composed--Influence
  of a townsman in his town--Household influence--Charities and
  condescendences of the highly cultivated--A suggestion of M.
  Taine--Conversation with inferiors--How to make it interesting--That
  we ought to be satisfied with humble results and small successes.

There is a very marked tendency amongst persons of culture to feel
dissatisfied with themselves and their success in life when they do not
exercise some direct and visible influence over a considerable portion
of the public. To put the case in a more concrete form, it may be
affirmed that if an intellectual young man does not exercise influence
by literature, or by oratory, or by one of the most elevated forms of
art, he is apt to think that his culture and intelligence are lost upon
the world, and either to blame himself for being what he considers a
failure, or else (and this is more common) to find fault with the world
in general for not giving him a proper chance of making his abilities
tell. The facilities for obtaining culture are now so many and great,
and within the reach of so many well-to-do people, that hundreds of
persons become really very clever in various ways who would have
remained utterly uncultivated had they lived in any previous century. A
few of these distinguish themselves in literature and other pursuits
which bring notoriety to the successful, but by far the greater number
have to remain in positions of obscurity, often being clearly conscious
that they have abilities and knowledge not much, if at all, inferior to
the abilities and knowledge of some who have achieved distinction. The
position of a clever man who remains obscure is, if he has ambition,
rather trying to the moral fibre, but there are certain considerations
which might help to give a direction to his energy and so procure him a
sure relief, which reputation too frequently fails to provide.

The first consideration is one which was offered to me many years ago by
Mr. Matthew Arnold, and which I can give, though from memory, very
nearly in his own words. The multiplicity of things which make claim to
the attention of the public is in these days such that it requires
either uncommon strength of will or else the force of peculiar
circumstances to make men follow any serious study to good result, and
the great majority content themselves with the general enlightenment of
the epoch, which they get from newspapers and reviews. Hence the efforts
of the intellectual produce little effect, and it requires either
extraordinary talent or extraordinary fanaticism to awaken the serious
interest of any considerable number of readers. Yet, in spite of these
discouragements, we ought to remember that our labors, if not applauded
by others, may be of infinite value to ourselves, and also that beyond
this gain to the individual, his culture is a gain to the nation,
whether the nation formally recognizes it or not. For the intellectual
life of a nation is the sum of the lives of all intellectual people
belonging to it, and in this sense your culture is a gain to England,
whether England counts you amongst her eminent sons, or leaves you
forever obscure. Is it not a noble spectacle, a spectacle well worthy of
a highly civilized country, when a private citizen, with an admirable
combination of patriotism and self-respect, says to himself as he
labors, "I know that in a country so great as England, where there are
so many able men, all that I do can count for very little in public
estimation, yet I will endeavor to store my mind with knowledge and make
my judgment sure, in order that the national mind of England, of which
my mind is a minute fraction, may be enlightened by so much, be it never
so little"? I think the same noble feeling might animate a citizen with
reference to his native town; I think a good townsman might say to
himself, "Our folks are not much given to the cultivation of their
minds, and they need a few to set them an example. I will be one of
those few. I will work and think, in order that our town may not get
into a state of perfect intellectual stagnation." But if the nation or
the city were too vast to call forth any noble feeling of this kind,
surely the family is little enough and near enough. Might not a man say,
"I will go through a good deal of intellectual drudgery in order that my
wife and children may unconsciously get the benefit of it; I will learn
facts for them that they may be accurate, and get ideas for them that
they may share with me a more elevated mental state; I will do something
towards raising the tone of the whole household"?

The practical difficulty in all projects of this kind is that the
household does not care to be intellectually elevated, and opposes the
resistance of gravitation. The household has its natural intellectual
level, and finds it as inevitably as water that is free. Cultivated men
are surrounded in their homes by a group of persons, wife, children,
servants, who, in their intercourse with one another, create the
household tone. What is a single individual with his books against these
combined and active influences? Is he to go and preach the gospel of the
intellect in the kitchen? Will he venture to present intellectual
conclusions in the drawing-room? The kitchen has a tone of its own
which all our efforts cannot elevate, and the drawing-room has its own
atmosphere, an atmosphere unfavorable to severe and manly thinking. You
cannot make cooks intellectual, and you must not be didactic with
ladies. Intellectual men always feel this difficulty, and most commonly
keep their intellect very much to themselves, when they are at home. If
they have not an outlet elsewhere, either in society or in literature,
they grow morbid.

Yet, although it is useless to attempt to elevate any human being above
his own intellectual level unless he gradually climbs himself as a man
ascends a mountain, there are nevertheless certain charities or
condescendences of the highly cultivated which may be good for the lower
intelligences that surround them, as the streams from the Alpine snows
are good for the irrigation of the valleys, though the meadows which
they water must forever remain eight or ten thousand feet below them.
And I believe that it would greatly add to the happiness of the
intellectual portion of mankind if they could more systematically
exercise these charities. It is quite clear that we can never effect by
chance conversation that total change in the mental state which is
gradually brought about by the slow processes of education; we cannot
give to an intellect that has never been developed, and which has fixed
itself in the undeveloped state, that power and activity which come only
after years of labor; but we may be able on many occasions to offer the
sort of help which a gentleman offers to an old woman when he invites
her to get up into the rumble behind his carriage. I knew an
intellectual lady who lived habitually in the country, and I may say
without fanciful exaggeration that the farmers' wives round about her
were considerably superior to what in all probability they would have
been without the advantage of her kindly and instructive conversation.
She possessed the happy art of conveying the sort of knowledge which
could be readily received by her hearers, and in a manner which made it
agreeable to them, so that they drew ideas from her quite naturally, and
her mind irrigated their minds, which would have remained permanently
barren without that help and refreshment. It would be foolish to
exaggerate the benefits of such intellectual charity as this, but it is
well, on the other hand, not to undervalue it. Such an influence can
never convey much solid instruction, but it may convey some of its
results. It may produce a more thoughtful and reasonable condition of
mind, it may preserve the ignorant from some of those preposterous
theories and beliefs which so easily gain currency amongst them.
Indirectly, it may have rather an important political influence, by
disposing people to vote for the better sort of candidate. And the
influence of such intellectual charity on the material well being of the
humbler classes, on their health and wealth, may be quite as
considerable as that of the other and more common sort of charity which
passes silver from hand to hand.

Shortly after the termination of the great Franco-German conflict, M.
Taine suggested in the _Temps_ that subscribers to the better sort of
journals might do a good deal for the enlightenment of the humbler
classes by merely lending their newspapers in their neighborhood. This
was a good suggestion: the best newspapers are an important intellectual
propaganda; they awaken an interest in the most various subjects, and
supply not only information but a stimulus. The danger to persons of
higher culture that the newspaper may absorb time which would else be
devoted to more systematic study, does not exist in the classes for
whose benefit M. Taine made his recommendation. The newspaper is their
only secular reading, and without it they have no modern literature of
any kind. In addition to the praiseworthy habit of lending good
newspapers, an intellectual man who lives in the country might adopt the
practice of conversing with his neighbors about everything in which they
could be induced to take an interest, giving them some notion of what
goes on in the classes which are intellectually active, some idea of
such discoveries and projects as an untutored mind may partially
understand. For example, there is the great tunnel under the Mont Cenis,
and there is the projected tunnel beneath the Channel, and there is the
cutting of the Isthmus of Suez. A peasant can comprehend the greatness
of these remarkable conceptions when they are properly explained to
him, and he will often feel a lively gratitude for information of that
kind. We ought to remember what a slow and painful operation reading is
to the uneducated. Merely to read the native tongue is to them a labor
so irksome that they are apt to lose the sense of a paragraph in seeking
for that of a sentence or an expression. As they would rather speak than
have to write, so they prefer hearing to reading, and they get much more
good from it, because they can ask a question when the matter has not
been made clear to them.

One of the best ways of interesting and instructing your intellectual
inferiors is to give them an account of your travels. All people like to
hear a traveller tell his own tale, and whilst he is telling it he may
slip in a good deal of information about many things, and much sound
doctrine. Accounts of foreign countries, even when you have not seen
them personally, nearly always awaken a lively interest, especially if
you are able to give your hearers detailed descriptions of the life led
by foreigners who occupy positions corresponding to their own. Peasants
can be made to take an interest in astronomy even, though you cannot
tell them anything about the peasants in Jupiter and Mars, and there is
always, at starting, the great difficulty of persuading them to trust
science about the motion and rotundity of the earth.

A very direct form of intellectual charity is that of gratuitous
teaching, both in classes and by public lectures, open to all comers. A
great deal of light has in this way been spread abroad in cities, but in
country villages there is little encouragement to enterprises of this
kind, the intelligence of farm laborers being less awakened than that of
the corresponding urban population. Let us remember, however, that one
of the very highest and last achievements of the cultivated intellect is
the art of conveying to the uncultivated, the untaught, the unprepared,
the best and noblest knowledge which they are capable of assimilating.
No one who, like the writer of these pages, has lived much in the
country, and much amongst a densely ignorant peasantry, will be likely
in any plans of enlightenment to err far on the side of enthusiastic
hopefulness. The mind of a farm laborer, or that of a small farmer, is
almost always sure to be a remarkably stiff soil, in which few
intellectual conceptions can take root; yet these few may make the
difference between an existence worthy of a man, and one that differs
from the existence of a brute in little beyond the possession of
articulate language. We to whom the rich inheritance of intellectual
humanity is so familiar as to have lost much of its freshness, are
liable to underrate the value of thoughts and discoveries which to us
have for years seemed commonplace. It is with our intellectual as with
our material wealth; we do not realize how precious some fragments of it
might be to our poorer neighbors. The old clothes that we wear no
longer may give comfort and confidence to a man in naked destitution;
the truths which are so familiar to us that we never think about them,
may raise the utterly ignorant to a sense of their human brotherhood.

Above all, in the exercise of our intellectual charities, let us
accustom ourselves to feel satisfied with humble results and small
successes; and here let me make a confession which may be of some
possible use to others. When a young man, I taught a drawing-class
gratuitously, beginning with thirty-six pupils, who dwindled gradually
to eleven. Soon afterwards I gave up the work from dissatisfaction, on
account of the meagre attendance. This was very wrong--the eleven were
worth the thirty-six; and so long as one of the eleven remained I ought
to have contentedly taught him. The success of a teacher is not to be
measured by the numbers whom he immediately influences. It is enough, it
has been proved to be enough in more than one remarkable instance, that
a single living soul should be in unison with the soul of a master, and
receive his thought by sympathy. The one disciple teaches in his turn,
and the idea is propagated.


