LETTER IV.

TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN WHO LIVED MUCH IN FASHIONABLE SOCIETY.

  Test of professions--Mobility of fashionable taste--Practical service
  of an external deference to culture--Incompatibility between
  fashionable and intellectual lives--What each has to offer.

Your polite, almost diplomatic answer to my letter about fashionable
society may be not unfairly concentrated into some such paragraph as the
following:--

"What grounds have I for concluding that the professed tastes and
opinions of Society are in any degree insincere? May not society be
quite sincere in the preferences which it professes, and are not the
preferences themselves almost always creditable to the good taste and
really advanced culture of the Society which I suspect of a certain
degree of affectation?"

This is the sense of your letter, and in reply to it I give you a simple
but sure test. Is the professed opinion carried out in practice, when
there are fair opportunities for practice?

Let us go so far as to examine a particular instance. Your friends
profess to appreciate classical literature. Do they read it? Or, on the
other hand, do they confine themselves to believing that it is a good
thing for other people to read it?

When I was a schoolboy, people told me that the classical authors of
antiquity were eminently useful, and indeed absolutely necessary to the
culture of the human mind, but I perceived that they did not read them.
So I have heard many people express great respect for art and science,
only they did not go so far as to master any department of art or
science.

If you will apply this test to the professions of what is especially
called fashionable society it is probable that you will arrive at the
conclusions of the minority, which I have endeavored to express. You
will find that the fashionable world remains very contentedly outside
the true working intellectual life, and does not really share either its
labors or its aspirations.

Another kind of evidence, which tells in the same direction, is the
mobility of fashionable taste. At one time some studies are fashionable,
at another time these are neglected and others have taken their place.
You will not find this fickleness in the true intellectual world, which
steadily pursues all its various studies, and keeps them well abreast,
century after century.

If I insist upon this distinction with reference to you, do not accuse
me of hostility even to fashion itself. Fashion is one of the great
Divine institutions of human society, and the best philosophy rebels
against none of the authorities that be, but studies and endeavors to
explain them. The external deference which Society yields to culture is
practically of great service, although (I repeat the epithet) it is
_external_. The sort of good effect is in the intellectual sphere what
the good effect of a general religious profession is in the moral
sphere. All fashionable society goes to church. Fashionable religion
differs from the religion of Peter and Paul as fashionable science
differs from that of Humboldt and Arago, yet, notwithstanding this
difference, the profession of religion is useful to Society as some
restraint, at least during one day out of seven, upon its inveterate
tendency to live exclusively for its amusement. And if any soul happens
to come into existence in the fashionable world which has the genuine
religious nature, that nature has a chance of developing itself, and of
finding ready to hand certain customs which are favorable to its
well-being. So it is, though in quite a different direction, with the
esteem which Society professes for intellectual pursuits. It is an
esteem in great part merely nominal, as fashionable Christianity is
nominal, and still it helps and favors the early development of the
genuine faculty where it exists. It is certainly a great help to us
that fashionable society, which has such a tremendous, such an almost
irresistible power for good or evil, does not openly discourage our
pursuits, but on the contrary regards them with great external deference
and respect. The recognition which Society has given to artists has been
wanting in frankness and in promptitude, though even in this case much
may be said to excuse a sort of hesitation rather than refusal which was
attributable to the strangeness and novelty of the artistic caste in
England; but Society has far more than a generation professed a respect
for literature and erudition which has helped those two branches of
culture more effectually than great subsidies of money. The exact truth
seems to be that Society is sincere in approving our devotion to these
pursuits, but is not yet sufficiently interested in them to appreciate
them otherwise than from the outside, just as a father and mother
applaud their boys for reading Thucydides, yet do not read him
themselves, either in the original or in a translation.

All that I care to insist upon is that there is a degree of
incompatibility between the fashionable and the intellectual lives which
makes it necessary, at a certain time, to choose one or the other as our
own. There is no hostility, there need not be any uncharitable feeling
on one side or the other, but there must be a resolute choice between
the two. If you decide for the intellectual life, you will incur a
definite loss to set against your gain. Your existence may have calmer
and profounder satisfactions, but it will be less amusing, and even in
an appreciable degree less _human_; less in harmony, I mean, with the
common instincts and feelings of humanity. For the fashionable world,
although decorated by habits of expense, has enjoyment for its object,
and arrives at enjoyment by those methods which the experience of
generations has proved to be most efficacious. Variety of amusement,
frequent change of scenery and society, healthy exercise, pleasant
occupation of the mind without fatigue--these things do indeed make
existence agreeable to human nature, and the science of living agreeably
is better understood in the fashionable society of England than by
laborious students and _savans_. The life led by that society is the
true heaven of the natural man, who likes to have frequent feasts and a
hearty appetite, who enjoys the varying spectacle of wealth, and
splendor, and pleasure, who loves to watch, from the Olympus of his
personal ease, the curious results of labor in which he takes no part,
the interesting ingenuity of the toiling world below. In exchange for
these varied pleasures of the spectator the intellectual life can offer
you but one satisfaction, for all its promises are reducible simply to
this, that you shall come at last, after infinite labor, into contact
with some great _reality_--that you shall know, and do, in such sort
that you will feel yourself on firm ground and be recognized--probably
not much applauded, but yet recognized--as a fellow-laborer by other
knowers and doers. Before you come to this, most of your present
accomplishments will be abandoned by yourself as unsatisfactory and
insufficient, but one or two of them will be turned to better account,
and will give you after many years a tranquil self-respect, and, what is
still rarer and better, a very deep and earnest reverence for the
greatness which is above you. Severed from the vanities of the Illusory,
you will live with the realities of knowledge, as one who has quitted
the painted scenery of the theatre to listen by the eternal ocean or
gaze at the granite hills.


