LETTER II

TO A GENIUS CARELESS IN MONEY MATTERS.

  Danger of carelessness--Inconveniences of poverty unfavorable to the
  Intellectual Life--Necessity advances men in industrial occupations,
  but disturbs and interrupts the higher intellectual life--Instances in
  science, literature, and art--Careers aided by wealth--Mr. Ruskin--De
  Saussure--Work spoiled by poverty in the doing--The central passion of
  men of ability is to do their work well--The want of money the most
  common hindrance to excellence of work--De Sénancour--Bossuet--
  Sainte-Beuve--Shelley-- Wordsworth--Scott--Kepler--Tycho
  Brahe--Schiller--Goethe--Case of an eminent English philosopher, and of
  a French writer of school-primers--Loss of time in making experiments
  on public taste--_Surtout ne pas trop écrire_--Auguste Comte--The
  reaction of the intellectual against money-making--Money the protector
  of the intellectual life.

I have been anxious for you lately, and venture to write to you about
the reasons for this anxiety.

You are neither extravagant nor self-indulgent, yet it seems to me that
your entire absorption in the higher intellectual pursuits has produced
in you, as it frequently does, a carelessness about material interests
of all kinds which is by far the most dangerous of all tempers to the
pecuniary well-being of a man. Sydney Smith declared that no fortune
could stand that temper long, and that we are on the high road to ruin
the moment we think ourselves rich enough to be careless.

Let me observe, to begin with, that although the pursuit of wealth is
not favorable to the intellectual life, the inconveniences of poverty
are even less favorable to it. We are sometimes lectured on the great
benefits of necessity as a stimulant to exertion, and it is implied that
comfortable people would go much farther on the road to distinction if
they were made uncomfortable by having to think perpetually about money.
Those who say this confound together the industry of the industrial and
professional classes, and the labors of the more purely intellectual. It
is clear that when the labor a man does is of such a nature that he will
be paid for it in strict proportion to the time and effort he bestows,
the need of money will be a direct stimulus to the best exertion he may
be capable of. In all simple industrial occupations the need of money
_does_ drive a man forwards, and is often, when he feels it in early
life, the very origin and foundation of his fortune. There exists, in
such occupations, a perfect harmony between the present necessity and
the ultimate purpose of the life. Wealth is the object of industry, and
the first steps towards the possession of it are steps on the chosen
path. The future captain of industry, who will employ thousands of
workpeople and accumulate millions of money, is going straight to his
splendid future when he gets up at five in the morning to work in
another person's factory. To learn to be a builder of steam-vessels, it
is necessary, even when you begin with capital, to pass through the
manual trades, and you will only learn them the better if the wages are
necessary to your existence. Poverty in these cases only makes an
intelligent man ground himself all the better in that stern practical
training which is the basis of his future career. Well, therefore, may
those who have reached distinguished success in fields of practical
activity extol the teachings of adversity. If it is a necessary part of
your education that you should hammer rivets inside a steam-boiler, it
is as well that your early habits should not be over-dainty. So it is
observed that horny hands, in the colonies, get gold into them sooner
than white ones.

Even in the liberal professions young men get on all the better for not
being too comfortably off. If you have a comfortable private income to
begin with, the meagre early rewards of professional life will seem too
paltry to be worth hard striving, and so you will very likely miss the
more ample rewards of maturity, since the common road to success is
nothing but a gradual increase. And you miss education at the same time,
for practice is the best of professional educators, and many successful
lawyers and artists have had scarcely any other training. The daily
habit of affairs trains men for the active business of the world, and if
the purpose of their lives is merely to do what they are doing or to
command others to do the same things, the more closely circumstances tie
them down to their work, the better.

But in the higher intellectual pursuits the necessity for immediate
earning has an entirely different result. It comes, not as an educator,
but as an interruption or suspension of education. All intellectual
lives, however much they may differ in the variety of their purposes,
have at least this purpose in common, that they are mainly devoted to
self-education of one kind or another. An intellectual man who is forty
years old is as much at school as an Etonian of fourteen, and if you set
him to earn more money than that which comes to him without especial
care about it, you interrupt his schooling, exactly as selfish parents
used to do when they sent their young children to the factory and
prevented them from learning to read. The idea of the intellectual life
is an existence passed almost entirely in study, yet preserving the
results of its investigations. A day's writing will usually suffice to
record the outcome of a month's research.

Necessity, instead of advancing your studies, stops them. Whenever her
harsh voice speaks it becomes your duty to shut your books, put aside
your instruments, and do something that will fetch a price in the
market. The man of science has to abandon the pursuit of a discovery to
go and deliver a popular lecture a hundred miles off, for which he gets
five pounds and his railway fare. The student of ancient literature has
to read some feeble novel, and give three days of a valuable life to
write an anonymous review which will bring him two pounds ten. The
artist has to leave his serious picture to manufacture "pot-boilers,"
which will teach him nothing, but only spoil his hands and vitiate the
public taste. The poet suspends his poem (which is promised to a
publisher for Christmas, and will be spoiled in consequence by hurry at
the last) in order to write newspaper articles on subjects of which he
has little knowledge and in which he takes no interest. And yet these
are instances of those comparatively happy and fortunate needy who are
only compelled to suspend their intellectual life, and who can cheer
themselves in their enforced labor with the hope of shortly renewing it.
What of those others who are pushed out of their path forever by the
buffets of unkindly fortune? Many a fine intellect has been driven into
the deep quagmire, and has struggled in it vainly till death came, which
but for that grim necessity might have scaled the immortal mountains.

This metaphor of the mountains has led me, by a natural association of
ideas, to think of a writer who has added to our enjoyment of their
beauty, and I think of him the more readily that his career will serve
as an illustration--far better than any imaginary career--of the very
subject which just now occupies my mind. Mr. Ruskin is not only one of
the best instances, but he is positively the very best instance except
the two Humboldts, of an intellectual career which has been greatly
aided by material prosperity, and which would not have been possible
without it. This does not in the least detract from the merit of the
author of "Modern Painters," for it needed a rare force of resolution,
or a powerful instinct of genius, to lead the life of a severe student
under every temptation to indolence. Still it is true that Mr. Ruskin's
career would have been impossible for a poor man, however gifted. A poor
man would not have had access to Mr. Ruskin's materials, and one of his
chief superiorities has always been an abundant wealth of material. And
if we go so far as to suppose that the poor man might have found other
materials perhaps equivalent to these, we know that he could not have
turned them to that noble use. The poor critic would be immediately
absorbed in the ocean of anonymous periodical literature; he could not
find time for the incubation of great works. "Modern Painters," the
result of seventeen years of study, is not simply a work of genius but
of genius seconded by wealth. Close to it on my shelves stand four
volumes which are the monument of another intellectual life devoted to
the investigation of nature. De Saussure, whom Mr. Ruskin reverences as
one of his ablest teachers, and whom all sincere students of nature
regard as a model observer, pursued for many laborious years a kind of
life which was not, and could not be, self-supporting in the pecuniary
sense. Many other patient laborers, who have not the celebrity of these,
work steadily in the same way, and are enabled to do so by the
possession of independent fortune. I know one such who gives a whole
summer to the examination of three or four acres of mountain-ground,
the tangible result being comprised in a few memoranda, which,
considered as literary material, might (in the hands of a skilled
professional writer) just possibly be worth five pounds.

Not only do narrow pecuniary means often render high intellectual
enterprises absolutely impossible, but they do what is frequently even
more trying to the health and character, they permit you to undertake
work that would be worthy of you if you might only have time and
materials for the execution of it, and then spoil it in the doing. An
intellectual laborer will bear anything except that. You may take away
the very table he is writing upon, if you let him have a deal board for
his books and papers; you may take away all his fine editions, if you
leave him common copies that are legible; you may remove his very
candlestick, if you leave him a bottle-neck to stick his candle in, and
he will go on working cheerfully still. But the moment you do anything
to spoil the quality of the work itself, you make him irritable and
miserable. "You think," says Sir Arthur Helps, "to gain a good man to
manage your affairs because he happens to have a small share in your
undertaking. It is a great error. You want him to do something well
which you are going to tell him to do. If he has been wisely chosen, and
is an able man, his pecuniary interest in the matter will be mere dust
in the balance, when compared with the desire which belongs to all such
men to do their work well." Yes, this is the central passion of all men
of true ability, _to do their work well_; their happiness lies in that,
and not in the amount of their profits, or even in their reputation. But
then, on the other hand, they suffer indescribable mental misery when
circumstances compel them to do their work less well than they know
that, under more favorable circumstances, they would be capable of doing
it. The want of money is, in the higher intellectual pursuits, the most
common hindrance to thoroughness and excellence of work. De Sénancour,
who, in consequence of a strange concatenation of misfortunes, was all
his life struggling in shallows, suffered not from the privations
themselves, but from the vague feeling that they stunted his
intellectual growth; and any experienced student of human nature must be
aware that De Sénancour was right. With larger means he would have seen
more of the world, and known it better, and written of it with riper
wisdom. He said that the man "who only saw in poverty the direct effect
of the money-privation, and only compared, for instance, an eight-penny
dinner to one that cost ten shillings, would have no conception of the
true nature of misfortune, for not to spend money is the least of the
evils of poverty." Bossuet said that he "had no attachment to riches,
and still if he had only what is barely necessary, if he felt himself
narrowed, he would lose more than half his talents." Sainte-Beuve said,
"Only think a little what a difference there is in the starting point
and in the employment of the faculties between a Duc de Luynes and a
Sénancour." How many of the most distinguished authors have been
dependent upon private means, not simply for physical sustenance, but
for the opportunities which they afforded of gaining that experience of
life which was absolutely essential to the full growth of their mental
faculties. Shelley's writings brought him no profit whatever, and
without a private income he could not have produced them, for he had not
a hundred buyers. Yet his _whole time_ was employed in study or in
travel, which for him was study of another kind, or else in the actual
labor of composition. Wordsworth tried to become a London journalist and
failed. A young man called Raisley Calvert died and left him 900_l._;
this saved the poet in Wordsworth, as it kept him till the publication
of the "Lyrical Ballads," and afterwards other pieces of good luck
happened to him, so that he could think and compose at leisure. Scott
would not venture to devote himself to literature until he had first
secured a comfortable income outside of it. Poor Kepler struggled with
constant anxieties, and told fortunes by astrology for a livelihood,
saying that astrology as the daughter of astronomy ought to keep her
mother; but fancy a man of science wasting precious time over
horoscopes! "I supplicate you," he writes to Moestlin, "if there is a
situation vacant at Tübingen, do what you can to obtain it for me, and
let me know the prices of bread and wine and other necessaries of life,
for my wife is not accustomed to live on beans." He had to accept all
sorts of jobs; he made almanacs, and served any one who would pay him.
His only tranquil time for study was when he lived in Styria, on his
wife's income, a tranquillity that did not last for long, and never
returned. How different is this from the princely ease of Tycho Brahe,
who labored for science alone, with all the help that the ingenuity of
his age could furnish! There is the same contrast, in a later
generation, between Schiller and Goethe. Poor Schiller "wasting so much
of his precious life in literary hack-work, translating French books for
a miserable pittance;" Goethe, fortunate in his pecuniary independence
as in all the other great circumstances of his life, and this at a time
when the pay of authors was so miserable that they could hardly exist by
the pen. Schiller got a shilling a page for his translations. Merck the
publisher offered three pounds sterling for a drama of Goethe. "If
Europe praised me," Goethe said, "what has Europe done for me? Nothing.
_Even my works have been an expense to me._"

The pecuniary rewards which men receive for their labor are so absurdly
(yet inevitably) disproportionate to the intellectual power that is
needed for the task, and also to the toil involved, that no one can
safely rely upon the higher intellectual pursuits as a protection from
money-anxieties. I will give you two instances of this disproportion,
real instances, of men who are known to me personally. One of them is an
eminent Englishman of most remarkable intellectual force, who for many
years past has occupied his leisure in the composition of works that are
valued by the thinking public to a degree which it would be difficult to
exaggerate. But this thinking public is not numerous, and so in the year
1866 this eminent philosopher, "unable to continue losing money in
endeavoring to enlighten his contemporaries, was compelled to announce
the termination of his series." On the other hand, a Frenchman, also
known to me personally, one day conceived the fortunate idea that a new
primer might possibly be a saleable commodity. So he composed a little
primer, beginning with the alphabet, advancing to a, b, _ab_; b, a,
_ba_; and even going so far in history as to affirm that Adam was the
first man and Abraham the father of the faithful. He had the wisdom to
keep the copyright of this little publication, which employed (in the
easiest of all imaginable literary labor) the evenings of a single week.
It has brought him in, ever since, a regular income of 120_l._ a year,
which, so far from showing any signs of diminution, is positively
improving. This success encouraged the same intelligent gentleman to
compose more literature of the same order, and he is now the enviable
owner of several other such copyrights, all of them very valuable; in
fact as good properties as house-leases in London. Here is an author
who, from the pecuniary point of view, was incomparably more successful
than Milton, or Shelley, or Goethe. If every intellectual man could
shield his higher life by writing primers for children which should be
as good as house-leases, if the proverb _Qui peut le plus peut le moins_
were a true proverb, which it is not, then of course all men of culture
would be perfectly safe, since they all certainly know the contents of a
primer. But you may be able to write the most learned philosophical
treatise and still not be able to earn your daily bread.

Consider, too, the lamentable loss of time which people of high culture
incur in making experiments on public taste, when money becomes one of
their main objects. Whilst they are writing stories for children, or
elementary educational books which people of far inferior attainment
could probably do much better, their own self-improvement comes to a
standstill. If it could only be ascertained without delay what sort of
work would bring in the money they require, then there would be some
chance of apportioning time so as to make reserves for self-improvement;
but when they have to write a score of volumes merely to ascertain the
humor of the public, there is little chance of leisure. The life of the
professional author who has no reputation is much less favorable to high
culture than the life of a tradesman in moderately easy circumstances
who can reserve an hour or two every day for some beloved intellectual
pursuit.

Sainte-Beuve tells us that during certain years of his life he had
endeavored, and had been able, so to arrange his existence that it
should have both sweetness and dignity, writing from time to time what
was agreeable, reading what was both agreeable and serious, cultivating
friendships, throwing much of his mind into the intimate relations of
every day, giving more to his friends than to the public, reserving what
was most tender and delicate for the inner life, enjoying with
moderation; such for him was the dream of an intellectual existence in
which things truly precious were valued according to their worth. And
"_above all_," he said, above all his desire was not to write too much,
"_surtout ne pas trop écrire_." And then comes the regret for this wise,
well-ordered life enjoyed by him only for a time. "La nécessité depuis
m'a saisi et m'a contraint de renoncer à ce que je considérais comme le
seul bonheur ou la consolation exquise du mélancolique et du sage."

Auguste Comte lamented in like manner the evil intellectual consequences
of anxieties about material needs. "There is nothing," he said, "more
mortal to my mind than the necessity, pushed to a certain degree, to
have to think each day about a provision for the next. Happily I think
little and rarely about all that; but whenever this happens to me I pass
through moments of discouragement and positive despair, which if the
influence of them became habitual _would make me renounce all my
labors, all my philosophical projects, to end my days like an ass_."

There are a hundred rules for getting rich, but the instinct of
accumulation is worth all such rules put together. This instinct is
rarely found in combination with high intellectual gifts, and the reason
is evident. To advance from a hundred pounds to a thousand is not an
intellectual advance, and there is no intellectual interest in the
addition of a cipher at the bankers'. Simply to accumulate money that
you are never to use is, from the intellectual point of view, as stupid
an operation as can be imagined. We observe, too, that the great
accumulators, the men who are gifted by nature with the true instinct,
are not usually such persons as we feel any ambition to become. Their
faculties are concentrated on one point, and that point, as it seems to
us, of infinitely little importance. We cannot see that it signifies
much to the intellectual well-being of humanity that John Smith should
be worth his million when he dies, since we know quite well that John
Smith's mind will be just as ill-furnished then as it is now. In places
where much money is made we easily acquire a positive disgust for it,
and the curate seems the most distinguished gentleman in the community,
with his old black coat and his seventy pounds a year. We come to hate
money-matters when we find that they exclude all thoughtful and
disinterested conversation, and we fly to the society of people with
fixed incomes, not large enough for much saving, to escape the perpetual
talk about investments. Our happiest hours have been spent with poor
scholars, and artists, and men of science, whose words remain in the
memory and make us rich indeed. Then we dislike money because it rules
and restrains us, and because it is unintelligent and seems hostile, so
far as that which is unintelligent can be hostile. And yet the real
truth is that money is the strong protector of the intellectual life.
The student sits and studies, too often despising the power that
shelters him from the wintry night, that gives him roof and walls, and
lamp, and books, and fire. For money is simply the accumulated labor of
the past, guarding our peace as fleets and armies guard the industry of
England, or like some mighty fortress-wall within which men follow the
most peaceful avocations. The art is to use money so that it shall be
the protector and not the scatterer of our time, the body-guard of the
sovereign Intellect and Will.


