LETTER II.

TO AN ENGLISH DEMOCRAT.

  The liberal and illiberal spirit of aristocracy--The desire to draw a
  line--Substitution of external limitations for realities--The high
  life of nature--Value of gentlemen in a State--Odiousness of the
  narrow class-spirit--Julian Fane--Perfect knighthood--Democracies
  intolerant of dignity--Tendency of democracies to fix one uniform type
  of manners--That type not a high one--A descriptive
  anecdote--Knowledge and taste reveal themselves in manners--Dr. Arnold
  on the absence of gentlemen in France and Italy--Absence of a class
  with traditional good manners--Language defiled by the vulgarity of
  popular taste--Influence of aristocratic opinion limited, that of
  democratic opinion universal--Want of elevation in the French
  _bourgeoisie_--Spirit of the provincial democracy--Spirit of the
  Parisian democracy--Sentiments and acts of the Communards--Romantic
  feeling towards the past--Hopes for liberal culture in the democratic
  idea--Aristocracies think too much of persons and positions--That we
  ought to forget persons and apply our minds to things, and phenomena,
  and ideas.

All you say against the narrowness of the aristocratic spirit is true
and to the point; but I think that you and your party are apt to
confound together two states of feeling which are essentially distinct
from each other. There is an illiberal spirit of aristocracy, and there
is also a liberal one. The illiberal spirit does not desire to improve
itself, having a full and firm belief in its own absolute perfection;
its sole anxiety is to exclude others, to draw a circular line, the
smaller the better, provided always that it gets inside and can keep the
millions out. We see this spirit, not only in reference to birth, but in
even fuller activity with regard to education and employment--in the
preference for certain schools and colleges, for class reasons, without
regard to the quality of the teaching--in the contempt for all
professions but two or three, without regard to the inherent baseness or
nobility of the work that has to be done in them: so that the question
asked by persons of this temper is not whether a man has been well
trained in his youth, but if he has been to Eton and Oxford; not whether
he is honorably laborious in his manhood, but whether he belongs to the
Bar, or the Army, or the Church. This spirit is evil in its influence,
because it substitutes external limitations for the realities of the
intellect and the soul, and makes those realities themselves of no
account wherever its traditions prevail. This spirit cares nothing for
culture, nothing for excellence, nothing for the superiorities that make
men truly great; all it cares for is to have reserved seats in the great
assemblage of the world. Whatever you do, in fairness and honesty,
against this evil and inhuman spirit of aristocracy, the best minds of
this age approve; but there is another spirit of aristocracy which does
not always receive the fairest treatment at your hands, and which ought
to be resolutely defended against you.

There is really, in nature, such a thing as high life. There is really,
in nature, a difference between the life of a gentleman who has culture,
and fine bodily health, and independence, and the life of a Sheffield
dry-grinder who cannot have any one of these three things. It is a good
and not a bad sign of the state of popular intelligence when the people
does not wilfully shut its eyes to the differences of condition amongst
men, and when those who have the opportunity of leading what is truly
the high life accept its discipline joyfully and have a just pride in
keeping themselves up to their ideal. A life of health, of sound
morality, of disinterested intellectual activity, of freedom from petty
cares, _is_ higher than a life of disease, and vice, and stupidity, and
sordid anxiety. I maintain that it is right and wise in a nation to set
before itself the highest attainable ideal of human life as the
existence of the complete gentleman, and that an envious democracy,
instead of rendering a service to itself, does exactly the contrary when
it cannot endure and will not tolerate the presence of high-spirited
gentlemen in the State. There are things in this world that it is right
to hate, that we are the better for hating with all our hearts; and one
of the things that I hate most, and with most reason, is the narrow
class-spirit when it sets itself against the great interests of mankind.
It is odious in the narrow-minded, pompous, selfish, pitiless aristocrat
who thinks that the sons of the people were made by Almighty God to be
his lackeys and their daughters to be his mistresses; it is odious also,
to the full as odious, in the narrow-minded, envious democrat who cannot
bear to see any elegance of living, or grace of manner, or culture of
mind above the range of his own capacity or his own purse.

Let me recommend to your consideration the following words, written by
one young nobleman about another young nobleman, and reminding us, as we
much need to be reminded, that life may be not only honest and vigorous,
but also noble and beautiful. Robert Lytton says of Julian Fane--

"He was, I think, the most graceful and accomplished gentleman of the
generation he adorned, and by this generation, at least, appropriate
place should be reserved for the memory of a man in whose character the
most universal sympathy with all the intellectual culture of his age was
united to a refinement of social form, and a perfection of personal
grace, which, in spite of all its intellectual culture, the age is sadly
in want of. There is an artistry of life as well as of literature, and
the perfect knighthood of Sidney is no less precious to the world than
the genius of Spenser."

It is just this "perfect knighthood" that an envious democracy sneers at
and puts down. I do not say that all democracies are necessarily
envious, but they often are so, especially when they first assert
themselves, and whilst in that temper they are very willing to ostracize
gentlemen, or compel them to adopt bad manners. I have some hopes that
the democracies of the future may be taught by authors and artists to
appreciate natural gentlemanhood; but so far as we know them hitherto
they seem intolerant of dignity, and disposed to attribute it (very
unjustly) to individual self-conceit. The personages most popular in
democratic countries are often remarkably deficient in dignity, and
liked the better for the want of it, whilst if on the positive side they
can display occasional coarseness they become more popular still. Then I
should say, that although democratic feeling raises the lower classes
and increases their self-respect, which is indeed one of the greatest
imaginable benefits to a nation, it has a tendency to fix one uniform
type of behavior and of thought as the sole type in conformity with what
is accepted for "common sense," and that type can scarcely, in the
nature of things, be a very elevated one. I have been much struck, in
France, by the prevalence of what may be not inaccurately defined as the
commercial traveller type, even in classes where you would scarcely
expect to meet with it. One little descriptive anecdote will illustrate
what I mean. Having been invited to a stag-hunt in the Côte d'Or, I sat
down to _déjeuner_ with the sportsmen in a good country-house or château
(it was an old place with four towers), and in the midst of the meal in
came a man smoking a cigar. After a bow to the ladies he declined to eat
anything, and took a chair a little apart, but just opposite me. He
resumed his hat and went on smoking with a _sans-gêne_ that rather
surprised me under the circumstances. He put one arm on the side-board:
the hand hung down, and I perceived that it was dirty (so was the
shirt), and that the nails had edges of ebony. On his chin there was a
black stubble of two days' growth. He talked very loudly, and his dress
and manners were exactly those of a bagman just arrived at his inn. Who
and what could the man be? I learned afterwards that he had begun life
as a distinguished pupil of the _Ecole Polytechnique_, that since then
he had distinguished himself as an officer of artillery and had won the
Legion of Honor on the field of battle, that he belonged to one of the
principal families in the neighborhood, and had nearly 2000_l._ a year
from landed property.

Now, it may be a good thing for the roughs at the bottom of the social
scale to level up to the bagman-ideal, but it does seem rather a pity
(does it not?) that a born gentleman of more than common bravery and
ability should level _down_ to it. And it is here that lies the
principle objection to democracy from the point of view of culture, that
its notion of life and manners is a uniform notion, not admitting much
variety of classes, and not allowing the high development of graceful
and accomplished humanity in any class which an aristocracy does at
least encourage in one class, though it may be numerically a small
class. I have not forgotten what Saint-Simon and La Bruyère have
testified about the ignorance of the old noblesse. Saint-Simon said that
they were fit for nothing but fighting, and only qualified for promotion
even in the army by seniority; that the rest of their time was passed
in "the most deadly uselessness, the consequence of their indolence and
distaste for all instruction." I am sure that my modern artillery
captain, notwithstanding his bad manners, _knew_ more than any of his
forefathers; but where was his "perfect knighthood?" And we easily
forget "how much talent runs into manners," as Emerson says. From the
artistic and poetical point of view, behavior is an expression of
knowledge and taste and feeling in combination, as clear and legible as
literature or painting, so that when the behavior is coarse and
unbecoming we know that the perceptions cannot be delicate, whatever may
have been learned at school. When Dr. Arnold travelled on the Continent,
nothing struck him more than the absence of gentlemen. "We see no
gentlemen anywhere," he writes from Italy. From France he writes: "Again
I have been struck with the total absence of all gentlemen, and of all
persons of the education and feelings of gentlemen." Now, although Dr.
Arnold spoke merely from the experience of a tourist, and was perhaps
not quite competent to judge of Frenchmen and Italians otherwise than
from externals, still there was much truth in his observation. It was
not quite absolutely true. I have known two or three Italian officers,
and one Savoyard nobleman, and a Frenchman here and there, who were as
perfect gentlemen as any to be found in England, but they were isolated
like poets, and were in fact poets in behavior and self discipline. The
plain truth is, that there is no distinct class in France maintaining
good manners as a tradition common to all its members; and this seems to
be the inevitable defect of a democracy. It may be observed, further,
that language itself is defiled by the vulgarity of the popular taste;
that expressions are used continually, even by the upper middle class,
which it is impossible to print, and which are too grossly indecent to
find a place even in the dictionaries; that respectable men, having
become insensible to the meaning of these expressions from hearing them
used without intention, employ them constantly from habit, as they
decorate their speech with oaths, whilst only purists refrain from them
altogether.

An aristocracy may be very narrow and intolerant, but it can only
exclude from its own pale, whereas when a democracy is intolerant it
excludes from all human intercourse. Our own aristocracy, as a class,
rejects Dissenters, and artists, and men of science, but they flourish
quite happily outside of it. Now try to picture to yourself a great
democracy having the same prejudices, who could get out of the
democracy? All aristocracies are intolerant with reference, I will not
say to religion, but, more accurately, with reference to the outward
forms of religion, and yet this aristocratic intolerance has not
prevented the development of religious liberty, because the lower
classes were not strictly bound by the customs of the nobility and
gentry. The unwritten law appears to be that members of an aristocracy
shall conform either to what is actually the State Church or to what has
been the State Church at some former period of the national history.
Although England is a Protestant country, an English gentleman does not
lose caste when he joins the Roman Catholic communion; but he loses
caste when he becomes a Dissenter. The influence of this caste-law in
keeping the upper classes within the Churches of England and of Rome has
no doubt been very considerable, but its influence on the nation
generally has been incomparably less considerable than that of some
equally decided social rule in the entire mind of a democracy. Had this
rule of conformity to the religion of the State been that of the English
democracy, religious liberty would have been extinguished throughout the
length and breadth of England. I say that the customs and convictions of
a democracy are more dangerous to intellectual liberty than those of an
aristocracy, because, in matters of custom, the gentry rule only within
their own park-palings, whereas the people, when power resides with
them, rule wherever the breezes blow. A democracy that dislikes
refinement and good manners can drive men of culture into solitude, and
make morbid hermits of the very persons who ought to be the lights and
leaders of humanity. It can cut short the traditions of good-breeding,
the traditions of polite learning, the traditions of thoughtful
leisure, and reduce the various national types of character to one
type, that of the _commis-voyageur_. All men of refined sentiment in
modern France lament the want of elevation in the _bourgeoisie_. They
read nothing, they learn nothing, they think of nothing but money and
the satisfaction of their appetites. There are exceptions, of course,
but the tone of the class is mean and low, and devoid of natural dignity
or noble aspiration. Their ignorance passes belief, and is accompanied
by an absolute self-satisfaction. "La fin de la bourgeoisie," says an
eminent French author, "commence parcequ'elle a les sentiments de la
populace. Je ne vois pas qu'elle lise d'autres journaux, qu'elle se
régale d'une musique différente, qu'elle ait des plaisirs plus élevés.
Chez l'une comme chez l'autre, c'est le même amour de l'argent, le même
respect du fait accompli, le même besoin d'idoles pour les détruire, la
même haine de toute supériorité, le même esprit de dénigrement, la même
crasse ignorance!" M. Renan also complains that during the Second Empire
the country sank deeper and deeper into vulgarity, forgetting its past
history and its noble enthusiasms. "Talk to the peasant, to the
socialist of the International, of France, of her past history, of her
genius, he will not understand you. Military honor seems madness to him;
the taste for great things, the glory of the mind, are vain dreams;
money spent for art and science is money thrown away foolishly. Such is
the provincial spirit." And if this is the provincial spirit, what is
the spirit of the metropolitan democracy? Is it not clearly known to us
by its acts? It had the opportunity, under the Commune, of showing the
world how tenderly it cared for the monuments of national history, how
anxious it was for the preservation of noble architecture, of great
libraries, of pictures that can never be replaced. Whatever may have
been our illusions about the character of the Parisian democracy, we
know it very accurately now. To say that it is brutal would be an
inadequate use of language, for the brutes are only indifferent to
history and civilization, not hostile to them. So far as it is possible
for us to understand the temper of that democracy, it appears to cherish
an active and intense hatred for every conceivable kind of superiority,
and an instinctive eagerness to abolish the past; or, as that is not
possible, since the past will always _have been_ in spite of it, then at
least to efface all visible memorials and destroy the bequests of all
preceding generations. If any one had affirmed, before the fall of Louis
Napoleon, that the democratic spirit was capable of setting fire to the
Louvre and the national archives and libraries, of deliberately planning
the destruction of all those magnificent edifices, ecclesiastical and
civil, which were the glory of France and the delight of Europe, we
should have attributed such an assertion to the exaggerations of
reactionary fears. But since the year 1870 we do not speculate about
the democratic temper in its intensest expression; we have seen it at
work, and we know it. We know that every beautiful building, every
precious manuscript and picture, has to be protected against the noxious
swarm of Communards as a sea-jetty against the Pholas and the Teredo.

Compare this temper with that of a Marquis of Hertford, a Duke of
Devonshire, a Duc de Luynes! True guardians of the means of culture,
these men have given splendid hospitality to the great authors and
artists of past times, by keeping their works for the future with tender
and reverent care. Nor has this function of high stewardship ever been
more nobly exercised than it is to-day by that true knight and
gentleman, Sir Richard Wallace. Think of the difference between this
great-hearted guardian of priceless treasures, keeping them for the
people, for civilization, and a base-spirited Communard setting fire to
the library of the Louvre.

The ultra-democratic spirit is hostile to culture, from its hatred of
all delicate and romantic sentiment, from its scorn of the tenderer and
finer feelings of our nature, and especially from its brutish incapacity
to comprehend the needs of the higher life. If it had its way we should
be compelled by public opinion to cast all the records of our ancestors,
and the shields they wore in battle, into the foul waters of an eternal
Lethe. The intolerance of the sentiment of birth, that noble sentiment
which has animated so many hearts with heroism, and urged them to deeds
of honor, associated as it is with a cynical disbelief in the existence
of female virtue,[9] is one of the commonest signs of this evil spirit
of detraction. It is closely connected with an ungrateful indifference
towards all that our forefathers have done to make civilization possible
for us. Now, although the intellectual spirit studies the past
critically, and does not accept history as a legend is accepted by the
credulous, still the intellectual spirit has a deep respect for all that
is noble in the past, and would preserve the record of it forever. Can
you not imagine, have you not actually seen, the heir of some ancient
house who shares to the full the culture and aspirations of the age in
which we live, and who nevertheless preserves, with pious reverence, the
towers his forefathers built on the ancestral earth, and the oaks they
planted, and the shields that were carved on the tombs where the knights
and their ladies rest? Be sure that a right understanding of the present
is compatible with a right and reverent understanding of the past, and
that, although we may closely question history and tradition, no longer
with childlike faith, still the spirit of true culture would never
efface their vestiges. It was not Michelet, not Renan, not Hugo, who set
fire to the Palace of Justice and imperilled the Sainte-Chapelle.

And yet, notwithstanding all these vices and excesses of the democratic
spirit, notwithstanding the meanness of the middle classes and the
violence of the mob, there is one all-powerful reason why our best hopes
for the liberal culture of the intellect are centred in the democratic
idea. The reason is, that aristocracies think too much of persons and
positions to weigh facts and opinions justly. In an aristocratic society
it is thought unbecoming to state your views in their full force in the
presence of any social superior. If you state them at all you must
soften them to suit the occasion, or you will be a sinner against
good-breeding. Observe how timid and acquiescent the ordinary Englishman
becomes in the presence of a lord. No right-minded person likes to be
thought impudent, and where the tone of society refers everything to
position, you are considered impudent when you forget your station. But
what has my station to do with the truths the intellect perceives, that
lie entirely outside of me? From the intellectual point of view, it is a
necessary virtue to forget your station, to forget yourself entirely,
and to think of the subject only, in a manner perfectly disinterested.
Anonymous journalism was a device to escape from that continual
reference to the rank and fortune of the speaker which is an inveterate
habit in all aristocratic communities. A young man without title or
estate knows that he would not be listened to in the presence of his
social superiors, so he holds his tongue in society and relieves
himself by an article in the _Times_. The anonymous newspapers and
reviews are a necessity in an aristocratic community, for they are the
only means of attracting attention to facts and opinions without
attracting it to yourself, the only way of escaping the personal
question, "Who and what are you, that you venture to speak so plainly,
and where is your stake in the country?"

The democratic idea, by its theoretic equality amongst men, affords an
almost complete relief from this impediment to intellectual
conversation. The theory of equality is good, because it negatives the
interference of rank and wealth in matters that appertain to the
intellect or to the moral sense. It may even go one step farther with
advantage, and ignore intellectual authority also. The perfection of the
intellectual spirit is the entire forgetfulness of persons, in the
application of the whole power of the mind to things, and phenomena, and
ideas. Not to mind whether the speaker is of noble or humble birth, rich
or poor; this indeed is much, but we ought to attain a like indifference
to the authority of the most splendid reputation. "Every great advance
in natural knowledge," says Professor Huxley, "has involved the absolute
rejection of authority, the cherishing of the keenest scepticism, the
annihilation of the spirit of blind faith; and the most ardent votary of
science holds his firmest convictions, not because the men he most
venerates hold them, not because their verity is testified by portents
and wonders, but because his experience teaches him that whenever he
chooses to bring these convictions into contact with their primary
source, Nature--whenever he thinks fit to test them by appealing to
experiment and to observation--Nature will confirm them."


FOOTNOTES:

  [8] I think it right to inform the reader that there is no fiction in
    this letter.

  [9] The association between the two is this. If you believe that you
    are descended from a distinguished ancestor, you are simple enough to
    believe in his wife's fidelity.




