Chapter XV

Piscator

The GUDGEON is reputed a fish of excellent taste, and to be very
wholesome. He is of a fine shape, of a silver colour, and beautified
with black spots both on his body and tail. He breeds two or three times
in the year; and always in summer. He is commended for a fish of
excellent nourishment. The Germans call him Groundling, by reason of his
feeding on the ground; and he there feasts himself, in sharp streams and
on the gravel. He and the Barbel both feed so: and do not hunt for flies
at any time, as most other fishes do. He is an excellent fish to enter a
young angler, being easy to be taken with a small red worm, on or very
near to the ground. He is one of those leather-mouthed fish that has his
teeth in his throat, and will hardly be lost off from the hook if he be
once strucken.

They be usually scattered up and down every river in the shallows, in
the heat of summer: but in autumn, when the weeds begin to grow sour and
rot, and the weather colder, then they gather together, and get into the
deeper parts of the water; and are to be fished for there, with your
hook always touching the ground, if you fish for him with a float or
with a cork. But many will fish for the Gudgeon by hand, with a running
line upon the ground, without a cork, as a Trout is fished for: and it
is an excellent way, if you have a gentle rod, and as gentle a hand.

There is also another fish called a POPE, and by some a RUFFE; a fish
that is not known to be in some rivers: he is much like the Perch for
his shape, and taken to be better than the Perch, but will not grow to
be bigger than a Gudgeon. He is an excellent fish; no fish that swims is
of a pleasanter taste. And he is also excellent to enter a young angler,
for he is a greedy biter: and they will usually lie, abundance of them
together, in one reserved place, where the water is deep and runs
quietly; and an easy angler, if he has found where they lie, may catch
forty or fifty, or sometimes twice so many, at a standing.

You must fish for him with a small red worm; and if you bait the ground
with earth, it is excellent.

There is also a BLEAK or fresh-water Sprat; a fish that is ever in
motion, and therefore called by some the river-swallow; for just as you
shall observe the swallow to be, most evenings in summer, ever in
motion, making short and quick turns when he flies to catch flies, in
the air, by which he lives; so does the Bleak at the top of the water.
Ausonius would have called him Bleak from his whitish colour: his back
is of a pleasant sad or sea-water-green; his belly, white and shining as
the mountain snow. And doubtless, though we have the fortune, which
virtue has in poor people, to be neglected, yet the Bleak ought to be
much valued, though we want Allamot salt, and the skill that the
Italians have, to turn them into anchovies. This fish may be caught with
a Pater-noster line; that is, six or eight very small hooks tied along
the line, one half a foot above the other: I have seen five caught thus
at one time; and the bait has been gentles, than which none is better.

Or this fish may be caught with a fine small artificial fly, which is to
be of a very sad brown colour, and very small, and the hook answerable.
There is no better sport than whipping for Bleaks in a boat, or on a
bank, in the swift water, in a summer's evening, with a hazel top about
five or six foot long, and a line twice the length of the rod. I have
heard Sir Henry Wotton say, that there be many that in Italy will catch
swallows so, or especially martins; this bird-angler standing on the top
of a steeple to do it, and with the line twice so long as I have spoken
of. And let me tell you, scholar, that both Martins and Bleaks be most
excellent meat.

And let me tell you, that I have known a Heron, that did constantly
frequent one place, caught with a hook baited with a big minnow or a
small gudgeon. The line and hook must be strong: and tied to some loose
staff, so big as she cannot fly away with it: a line not exceeding two
yards.





The fourth day-continued

Is of nothing, or of nothing worth

Chapter XVI

Piscator, Venator, Peter, Coridon

Piscator. My purpose was to give you some directions concerning ROACH
and DACE, and some other inferior fish which make the angler excellent
sport; for you know there is more pleasure in hunting the hare than in
eating her: but I will forbear, at this time, to say any more, because
you see yonder come our brother Peter and honest Coridon. But I will
promise you, that as you and I fish and walk to-morrow towards London,
if I have now forgotten anything that I can then remember, I will not
keep it from you.

Well met, gentlemen; this is lucky that we meet so just together at this
very door, Come, hostess, where are you? is supper ready? Come, first
give us a drink; and be as quick as you can, for I believe we are all
very hungry. Well, brother Peter and Coridon, to you both! Come, drink:
and then tell me what luck of fish: we two have caught but ten bouts, of
which my scholar caught three. Look! here's eight; and a brace we gave
away. We have had a most pleasant day for fishing and talking, and are
returned home both weary and hungry; and now meat and rest will be
pleasant.

Peter. And Coridon and I have not had an unpleasant day: and yet I have
caught but five bouts; for, indeed, we went to a good honest ale-house,
and there we played at shovel-board half the day; all the time that it
rained we were there, and as merry as they that fished. And I am glad we
are now with a dry house over our heads; for, hark! how it rains and
blows. Come, hostess, give us more ale, and our supper with what haste
you may: and when we have supped, let us have your song, Piscator; and
the catch that your scholar promised us; or else, Coridon will be
dogged.

Piscator. Nay, I will not be worse than my word; you shall not want my
song, and I hope I shall be perfect in it.

Venator. And I hope the like for my catch, which I have ready too: and
therefore let's go merrily to supper, and then have a gentle touch at
singing and drinking; but the last with moderation.

Coridon. Come, now for your song; for we have fed heartily. Come,
hostess, lay a few more sticks on the fire. And now, sing when you will.

Piscator. Well then, here s to you, Coridon; and now for my song.

    O the gallant Fisher's life,
      It is the best of any;
    'Tis full of pleasure, void of strife,
      And 'tis beloved of many:
        Other joys
        Are but toys;
        Only this
        Lawful is;
        For our skill
        Breeds no ill,
      But content and pleasure.

    In a morning up we rise
      Ere Aurora's peeping,
    Drink a cup to wash our eyes.
      Leave the sluggard sleeping;
        Then we go
        To and fro,
        With our knacks
        At our backs
        To such streams
        As the Thames
      If we have the leisure.

    When we please to walk abroad
      For our recreation,
    In the fields is our abode,
      Full of delectation:
        Where in a brook
        With a hook
        Or a lake
        Fish we take:
        There we sit
        For a bit,
      Till we fish entangle.

    We have gentles in a horn,
      We have paste and worms too
    We can watch both night and morn,
      Suffer rain and storms too;
        None do here
        Use to swear;
        Oaths do fray
        Fish away;
        We sit still,
        And watch our quill
      Fishers must not wrangle.

    If the sun's excessive heat
      Make our bodies swelter,
    To an osier hedge we get
      For a friendly shelter
        Where, in a dike,
        Perch or Pike
        Roach or Dace
        We do chase Bleak or Gudgeon,
        Without grudging
      We are still contented.

    Or we sometimes pass an hour
      Under a green willow,
    That defends us from a shower,
      Making earth our pillow;
        Where we may
        Think and pray
        Before death
        Stops our breath.
        Other joys
        Are but toys,
      And to be lamented.

    Jo. Chalkhill.

Venator. Well sung, master; this day's fortune and pleasure, and the
night's company and song, do all make me more and more in love with
angling. Gentlemen, my master left me alone for an hour this day; and I
verily believe he retired himself from talking with me that he might be
so perfect in this song; was it not, master?

Piscator. Yes indeed, for it is many years since I learned it; and
having forgotten a part of it, I was forced to patch it up with the help
of mine own invention, who am not excellent at poetry, as my part of the
song may testify; but of that I will say no more, lest you should think
I mean, by discommending it, to beg your commendations of it. And
therefore, without replications, let's hear your catch, scholar; which I
hope will be a good one, for you are both musical and have a good fancy
to boot.

Venator. Marry, and that you shall; and as freely as I would have my
honest master tell me some more secrets of fish and fishing, as we walk
and fish towards London to-morrow. But, master, first let me tell you,
that very hour which you were absent from me, I sat down under a
willow-tree by the water-side, and considered what you had told me of
the owner of that pleasant meadow in which you then left me; that he had
a plentiful estate, and not a heart to think so; that he had at this
time many law-suits depending; and that they both damped his mirth, and
took up so much of his time and thoughts, that he himself had not
leisure to take the sweet content that I, who pretended no title to
them, took in his fields: for I could there sit quietly; and looking on
the water, see some fishes sport themselves in the silver streams,
others leaping at flies of several shapes and colours; looking on the
hills, I could behold them spotted with woods and groves; looking down
the meadows, could see, here a boy gathering lilies and lady-smocks, and
there a girl cropping culverkeys and cowslips, all to make garlands
suitable to this present month of May: these, and many other field
flowers, so perfumed the air, that I thought that very meadow like that
field in Sicily of which Diodorus speaks, where the perfumes arising
from the place make all dogs that hunt in it to fall off, and to lose
their hottest scent I say, as I thus sat, joying in my own happy
condition, and pitying this poor rich man that owned this and many other
pleasant groves and meadows about me, I did thankfully remember what my
Saviour said, that the meek possess the earth; or rather, they enjoy
what the others possess, and enjoy not; for anglers and meek
quiet-spirited men are free from those high, those restless thoughts,
which corrode the sweets of life; and they, and they only, can say, as
the poet has happily express it,

    Hail! blest estate of lowliness;
      Happy enjoyments of such minds
    As, rich in self-contentedness,
      Can, like the reeds, in roughest winds,
    By yielding make that blow but small
    At which proud oaks and cedars fall.

There came also into my mind at that time certain verses in praise of a
mean estate and humble mind: they were written by Phineas Fletcher, an
excellent divine, and an excellent angler; and the author of excellent
Piscatory Eclogues, in which you shall see the picture of this good
man's mind: and I wish mine to be like it.

      No empty hopes, no courtly fears him fright;
      No begging wants his middle fortune bite:
    But sweet content exiles both misery and spite.

      His certain life, that never can deceive him,
        Is full of thousand sweets and rich content
      The smooth-leav'd beeches in the field receive him,
        With coolest shade, till noon-tide's heat be spent.
      His life is neither tost in boisterous, seas,
      Or the vexatious world, or lost in slothful ease;
    Please and full blest he lives when he his God can please.

      His bed, more safe than soft, yields quiet sleeps,
        While by his side his faithful spouse teas place
      His little son into his bosom creeps,
        The lively picture of his father's face.
      His humble house or poor state ne'er torment him
      Less he could like, if less his God had lent him;
    And when he dies, green turfs do for a tomb content him,

Gentlemen, these were a part of the thoughts that then possessed me. And
I there made a conversion of a piece of an old catch, and added more to
it, fitting them to be sung by us anglers. Come, Master, you can sing
well: you must sing a part of it, as it is in this paper.

    Man's life is but vain, for 'tis subject to pain,
      And sorrow, and short as a bubble;
    'Tis a hodge-podge of business, and money, and care,
      And care, and money, and trouble.

    But we'll take no care when the weather proves fair;
      Nor will we vex now though it rain;
    We'll banish all sorrow, and sing till to-morrow,
      And angle, and angle again.

Peter. I marry, Sir, this is musick indeed; this has cheer'd my heart,
and made me remember six verses in praise of musick, which I will speak
to you instantly.

    Musick! miraculous rhetorick, thou speak'st sense
    Without a tongue, excelling eloquence;
    With what ease might thy errors be excus'd,
    Wert thou as truly lov'd as th' art abus'd!
    But though dull souls neglect, and some reprove thee,
    I cannot hate thee, 'cause the Angels love thee.

Venator. And the repetition of these last verses of musick has called to
my memory what Mr. Edmund Waller, a lover of the angle, says of love and
musick.

    Whilst I listen to thy voice,
      Chloris! I feel my heart decay
        That powerful voice
      Calls my fleeting soul away:
    Oh! suppress that magic sound,
    Which destroys without a wound.

    Peace, Chloris! peace, or singing die,
      That together you and I
        To heaven may go;
        For all we know
    Of what the blessed do above
    Is, that they sing, and that they love.

Piscator. Well remembered, brother Peter; these verses came seasonably,
and we thank you heartily. Come, we will all join together, my host and
all, and sing my scholar's catch over again; and then each man drink the
tother cup, and to bed; and thank God we have a dry house over our
heads.

Piscator. Well, now, good-night to everybody. Peter. And so say I.

Venator. And so say I.

Coridon. Good-night to you all; and I thank you.





The FIFTH day.

Piscator. Good-morrow, brother Peter, and the like to you, honest
Coridon.

Come, my hostess says there is seven shillings to pay: let's each man
drink a pot for his morning's draught, and lay down his two shillings,
so that my hostess may not have occasion to repent herself of being so
diligent, and using us so kindly.

Peter. The motion is liked by everybody, and so, hostess, here's your
money: we anglers are all beholden to you; it will not be long ere I'll
see you again; and now, brother Piscator, I wish you, and my brother
your scholar, a fair day and good fortune. Come, Coridon, this is our
way.





The FIFTH day-continued

Of Roack and Dace

