Chapter IV



Piscator, Venator, Milk-woman, Maudlin, Hostess


Piscator. The Trout is a fish highly valued, both in this and foreign
nations. He may be justly said, as the old poet said of wine, and we
English say of venison, to be a generous fish: a fish that is so like
the buck, that he also has his seasons; for it is observed, that he
comes in and goes out of season with the stag and buck. Gesner says, his
name is of a German offspring; and says he is a fish that feeds clean
and purely, in the swiftest streams, and on the hardest gravel; and that
he may justly contend with all fresh water fish, as the Mullet may with
all sea fish, for precedency and daintiness of taste; and that being in
right season, the most dainty palates have allowed precedency to him.

And before I go farther in my discourse, let me tell you, that you are
to observe, that as there be some barren does that are good in summer,
so there be some barren Trouts that are good in winter; but there are
not many that are so; for usually they be in their perfection in the
month of May, and decline with the buck. Now you are to take notice,
that in several countries, as in Germany, and in other parts, compared
to ours, fish do differ much in their bigness, and shape, and other
ways; and so do Trouts. It is well known that in the Lake Leman, the
Lake of Geneva, there are Trouts taken of three cubits long; as is
affirmed by Gesner, a writer of good credit: and Mercator says, the
Trouts that are taken in the Lake of Geneva are a great part of the
merchandize of that famous city. And you are further to know, that there
be certain waters that breed Trouts remarkable, both for their number
and smallness. I know a little brook in Kent, that breeds them to a
number incredible, and you may take them twenty or forty in an hour, but
none greater than about the size of a Gudgeon. There are also, in divers
rivers, especially that relate to, or be near to the sea, as Winchester,
or the Thames about Windsor, a little Trout called a Samlet, or Skegger
Trout, in both which places I have caught twenty or forty at a standing,
that will bite as fast and as freely as Minnows: these be by some taken
to be young Salmons; but in those waters they never grow to be bigger
than a Herring.

There is also in Kent, near to Canterbury, a Trout called there a
Fordidge Trout, a Trout that bears the name of the town where it is
usually caught, that is accounted the rarest of fish; many of them near
the bigness of a Salmon, but known by their different colour; and in
their best season they cut very white: and none of these have been known
to be caught with an angle, unless it were one that was caught by Sir
George Hastings, an excellent angler, and now with God: and he hath told
me, he thought that Trout bit not for hunger but wantonness; and it is
the rather to be believed, because both he, then, and many others before
him, have been curious to search into their bellies, what the food was
by which they lived; and have found out nothing by which they might
satisfy their curiosity.

Concerning which you are to take notice, that it is reported by good
authors, that grasshoppers and some fish have no mouths, but are
nourished and take breath by the porousness of their gills, man knows
not how: and this may be believed, if we consider that when the raven
hath hatched her eggs, she takes no further care, but leaves her young
ones to the care of the God of nature, who is said, in the Psalms, "to
feed the young ravens that call upon him ". And they be kept alive and
fed by a dew; or worms that breed in their nests; or some other ways
that we mortals know not. And this may be believed of the Fordidge
Trout, which, as it is said of the stork, that he knows his season, so
he knows his times, I think almost his day of coming into that river out
of the sea; where he lives, and, it is like, feeds, nine months of the
year, and fasts three in the river of Fordidge. And you are to note,
that those townsmen are very punctual in observing the time of beginning
to fish for them; and boast much, that their river affords a Trout that
exceeds all others. And just so does Sussex boast of several fish; as,
namely, a Shelsey Cockle, a Chichester Lobster, an Arundel Mullet, and
an Amerly Trout.

And, now, for some confirmation of the Fordidge Trout: you are to know
that this Trout is thought to eat nothing in the fresh water; and it may
be the better believed, because it is well known, that swallows, and
bats, and wagtails, which are called half-year birds, and not seen to
fly in England for six months in the year, but about Michaelmas leave us
for a hotter climate, yet some of them that have been left behind their
fellows, have been found, many thousands at a time, in hollow trees, or
clay caves, where they have been observed to live, and sleep out the
whole winter, without meat. And so Albertus observes, that there is one
kind of frog that hath her mouth naturally shut up about the end of
August, and that she lives so all the winter: and though it be strange
to some, yet it is known to too many among us to be doubted.

And so much for these Fordidge Trouts, which never afford an angler
sport, but either live their time of being in the fresh water, by their
meat formerly gotten in the sea, not unlike the swallow or frog, or, by
the virtue of the fresh water only; or, as the birds of Paradise and the
cameleon are said to live, by the sun and the air.

There is also in Northumberland a Trout called a Bull-trout, of a much
greater length and bigness than any in these southern parts; and there
are, in many rivers that relate to the sea, Salmon-trouts, as much
different from others, both in shape and in their spots, as we see sheep
in some countries differ one from another in their shape and bigness,
and in the fineness of the wool: and, certainly, as some pastures breed
larger sheep; so do some rivers, by reason of the ground over which they
run, breed larger Trouts.

Now the next thing that I will commend to your consideration is, that
the Trout is of a more sudden growth than other fish. Concerning which,
you are also to take notice, that he lives not so long as the Pearch,
and divers other fishes do, as Sir Francis Bacon hath observed in his
History of Life and Death.

And next you are to take notice, that he is not like the Crocodile,
which if he lives never so long, yet always thrives till his death: but
'tis not so with the Trout; for after he is come to his full growth, he
declines in his body, and keeps his bigness, or thrives only in his head
till his death. And you are to know, that he will, about, especially
before, the time of his spawning, get, almost miraculously, through
weirs and flood-gates, against the stream; even through such high and
swift places as is almost incredible. Next, that the Trout usually
spawns about October or November, but in some rivers a little sooner or
later; which is the more observable, because most other fish spawn in
the spring or summer, when the sun hath warmed both the earth and water,
and made it fit for generation. And you are to note, that he continues
many months out of season; for it may be observed of the Trout, that he
is like the Buck or the Ox, that will not be fat in many months, though
he go in the very same pastures that horses do, which will be fat in one
month: and so you may observe, That most other fishes recover strength,
and grow sooner fat and in season than the Trout doth.

And next you are to note, That till the sun gets to such a height as to
warm the earth and the water, the Trout is sick, and lean, and lousy,
and unwholesome; for you shall, in winter, find him to have a big head,
and, then, to be lank and thin and lean; at which time many of them have
sticking on them Sugs, or Trout-lice; which is a kind of a worm, in
shape like a clove, or pin with a big head, and sticks close to him, and
sucks his moisture, those, I think, the Trout breeds himself: and never
thrives till he free himself from them, which is when warm weather
comes; and, then, as he grows stronger, he gets from the dead still
water into the sharp streams and the gravel, and, there, rubs off these
worms or lice; and then, as he grows stronger, so he gets him into
swifter and swifter streams, and there lies at the watch for any fly or
minnow that comes near to him; and he especially loves the May-fly,
which is bred of the cod-worm, or cadis; and these make the Trout bold
and lusty, and he is usually fatter and better meat at the end of that
month than at any time of the year.

Now you are to know that it is observed, that usually the best Trouts
are either red or yellow; though some, as the Fordidge Trout, be white
and yet good; but that is not usual: and it is a note observable, that
the female Trout hath usually a less head, and a deeper body than the
male Trout, and is usually the better meat. And note, that a hog back
and a little head, to either Trout, Salmon or any other fish, is a sign
that that fish is in season.

But yet you are to note, that as you see some willows or palm-trees bud
and blossom sooner than others do, so some Trouts be, in rivers, sooner
in season: and as some hollies, or oaks, are longer before they cast
their leaves, so are some Trouts, in rivers, longer before they go out
of season.

And you are to note, that there are several kinds of Trouts: but these
several kinds are not considered but by very few men; for they go under
the general name of Trouts; just as pigeons do, in most places; though
it is certain, there are tame and wild pigeons; and of the tame, there
be hermits and runts, and carriers and cropers, and indeed too many to
name. Nay, the Royal Society have found and published lately, that there
be thirty and three kinds of spiders; and yet all, for aught I know, go
under that one general name of spider. And it is so with many kinds of
fish, and of Trouts especially; which differ in their bigness, and
shape, and spots, and colour. The great Kentish hens may be an instance,
compared to other hens: and, doubtless, there is a kind of small Trout,
which will never thrive to be big; that breeds very many more than
others do, that be of a larger size: which you may rasher believe, if
you consider that the little wren and titmouse will have twenty young
ones at a time, when, usually, the noble hawk, or the musical thrassel
or blackbird, exceed not four or five.

And now you shall see me try my skill to catch a Trout; and at my next
walking, either this evening or to-morrow morning, I will give you
direction how you yourself shall fish for him.

Venator. Trust me, master, I see now it is a harder matter to catch a
Trout than a Chub; for I have put on patience, and followed you these
two hours, and not seen a fish stir, neither at your minnow nor your
worm.

Piscator. Well, scholar, you must endure worse luck sometime, or you
will never make a good angler. But what say you now? there is a Trout
now, and a good one too, if I can but hold him; and two or three turns
more will tire him. Now you see he lies still, and the sleight is to
land him: reach me that landing-net. So, Sir, now he is mine own: what
say you now, is not this worth all my labour and your patience?

Venator. On my word, master, this is a gallant Trout; what shall we do
with him?

Piscator. Marry, e'en eat him to supper: we'll go to my hostess from
whence we came; she told me, as I was going out of door, that my brother
Peter, a good angler and a cheerful companion, had sent word he would
lodge there to-night, and bring a friend with him. My hostess has two
beds, and I know you and I may have the best: we'll rejoice with my
brother Peter and his friend, tell tales, or sing ballads, or make a
catch, or find some harmless sport to content us, and pass away a little
time without offence to God or man.

Venator. A match, good master, let's go to that house, for the linen
looks white, and smells of lavender, and I long to lie in a pair of
sheets that smell so. Let's be going, good master, for I am hungry again
with fishing.

Piscator. Nay, stay a little, good scholar. I caught my last Trout with
a worm; now I will put on a minnow, and try a quarter of an hour about
yonder trees for another; and, so, walk towards our lodging. Look you,
scholar, thereabout we shall have a bite presently, or not at all. Have
with you, Sir: o' my word I have hold of him. Oh! it is a great
logger-headed Chub; come, hang him upon that willow twig, and let's be
going. But turn out of the way a little, good scholar! toward yonder
high honeysuckle hedge; there we'll sit and sing whilst this shower
falls so gently upon the teeming earth, and gives yet a sweeter smell to
the lovely flowers that adorn these verdant meadows.

Look! under that broad beech-tree I sat down, when I was last this way
a-fishing; and the birds in the adjoining grove seemed to have a
friendly contention with an echo, whose dead voice seemed to live in a
hollow tree near to the brow of that primrose-hill. There I sat viewing
the silver streams glide silently towards their centre, the tempestuous
sea; yet sometimes opposed by rugged roots and pebble-stones, which
broke their waves, and turned them into foam; and sometimes I beguiled
time by viewing the harmless lambs; some leaping securely in the cool
shade, whilst others sported themselves in the cheerful sun; and saw
others craving comfort from the swollen udders of their bleating dams.
As I thus sat, these and other sights had so fully possess my soul with
content, that I thought, as the poet has happily express it,

    I was for that time lifted above earth,
    And possest joys not promis'd in my birth.

As I left this place, and entered into the next field, a second pleasure
entertained me; 'twas a handsome milk-maid, that had not yet attained so
much age and wisdom as to load her mind with any fears of many things
that will never be, as too many men too often do; but she cast away all
care, and sung like a nightingale. Her voice was good, and the ditty
fitted for it; it was that smooth song which was made by Kit Marlow, now
at least fifty years ago; and the milk-maid's mother sung an answer to
it, which was made by Sir Walter Raleigh, in his younger days. They were
old-fashioned poetry, but choicely good; I think much better than the
strong lines that are now in fashion in this critical age. Look yonder!
on my word, yonder, they both be a-milking again. I will give her the
Chub, and persuade them to sing those two songs to us.

God speed you, good woman! I have been a-fishing; and am going to Bleak
Hall to my bed; and having caught more fish than will sup myself and my
friend, I will bestow this upon you and your daughter, for I use to sell
none.

Milk-woman. Marry! God requite you, Sir, and we'll eat it cheerfully.
And if you come this way a-fishing two months hence, a grace of God!
I'll give you a syllabub of new verjuice, in a new-made hay-cock, for
it. And my Maudlin shall sing you one of her best ballads; for she and I
both love all anglers, they be such honest, civil, quiet men. In the
meantime will you drink a draught of red cow's milk? you shall have it
freely.

Piscator. No, I thank you; but, I pray, do us a courtesy that shall
stand you and your daughter in nothing, and yet we will think ourselves
still something in your debt: it is but to sing us a song that was sung
by your daughter when I last passed over this meadow, about eight or
nine days since.

Milk-woman. What song was it, I pray? Was it, "Come, Shepherds, deck
your herds "? or, "As at noon Dulcina rested"? or, "Phillida flouts
me"? or, "Chevy Chace"? or, "Johnny Armstrong"? or, "Troy Town"?

Piscator. No, it is none of those; it is a Song that your daughter sung
the first part, and you sung the answer to it.

Milk-woman. O, I know it now. I learned the first part in my golden age,
when I was about the age of my poor daughter; and the latter part, which
indeed fits me best now, but two or three years ago, when the cares of
the world began to take hold of me: but you shall, God willing, hear
them both; and sung as well as we can, for we both love anglers. Come,
Maudlin, sing the first part to the gentlemen, with a merry heart; and
I'll sing the second when you have done.

        The Milk-maid's song.

    Come live with me, and be my love,
    And we will all the pleasures prove,
    That valleys, groves, or hills, or fields,
    Or woods, and steepy mountains yields;

    Where we will sit upon the rocks,
    And see the shepherds feed our flocks,
    By shallow rivers, to whose falls
    Melodious birds sing madrigals.

    And I will make thee beds of roses;
    And, then, a thousand fragrant posies;
    A cap of flowers, and a kirtle,
    Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle;

    A gown made of the finest wool
    Which from our pretty lambs we pull
    Slippers, lin'd choicely for the cold,
    With buckles of the purest gold;

    A belt of straw and ivy-buds,
    With coral clasps, and amber studs.
    And if these pleasures may thee move,
    Come, live with me, and be my love,

    Thy silver dishes, for thy meat
    As precious as the Gods do eat
    Shall, on an ivory table, be
    Prepared each day for thee and me.

    The shepherd swains shall dance and sing
    For thy delight, each May morning.
    If these delights thy mind may move,
    Then live with me, and be my love.

Venator. Trust me, master, it is a choice song, and sweetly sung by
honest Maudlin. I now see it was not without cause that our good queen
Elizabeth did so often wish herself a milk-maid all the month of May,
because they are not troubled with fears and cares, but sing sweetly all
the day, and sleep securely all the night: and without doubt, honest,
innocent, pretty Maudlin does so. I'll bestow Sir Thomas Overbury's
milk-maid's wish upon her, "that she may die in the Spring; and, being
dead, may have good store of flowers stuck round about her
winding-sheet".

        The Milk-maid's mother's answer

    If all the world and love were young
    And truth in every shepherd's tongue,
    These pretty pleasures might me move
    To live with thee, and be thy love.

    But Time drives flocks from field to fold.
    When rivers rage, and rocks grow cold
    Then Philomel becometh dumb
    And age complains of cares to come.

    The flowers do fade, and wanton fields
    To wayward winter reckoning yields.
    A honey tongue, a heart of gall,
    Is fancy's spring but sorrow's fall.

    Thy gowns, thy shoes, thy beds of roses,
    Thy cap, thy kirtle, and thy posies,
    Soon break, soon wither, soon forgotten;
    In folly rise, in reason rotten.

    Thy belt of straw, and ivy buds,
    Thy coral clasps, and amber studs,
    All these in me no means can move
    To come to thee, and be thy love.

    What should we talk of dainties, then,
    Of better meat than's fit for men?
    These are but vain: that's only good
    Which God hath blessed and sent for food.

    But could youth last, and love still breed;
    Had joys no date, nor age no need;
    Then those delights my mind might move
    To live with thee, and be thy love.

Mother. Well! I have done my song. But stay, honest anglers; for I will
make Maudlin sing you one short song more. Maudlin! sing that song that
you sung last night, when young Coridon the shepherd played so purely on
his oaten pipe to you and your cousin Betty.

Maudlin. I will, mother.

    I married a wife of late,
    The more's my unhappy fate:
      I married her for love,
      As my fancy did me move,
    And not for a worldly estate:

    But oh! the green sickness
    Soon changed her likeness;
      And all her beauty did fail.
        But 'tis not so
        With those that go
        Thro'frost and snow
        As all men know,
    And carry the milking-pail.

Piscator. Well sung, good woman; I thank you. I'll give you another dish
of fish one of these days; and then beg another song of you. Come,
scholar! let Maudlin alone: do not you offer to spoil her voice. Look!
yonder comes mine hostess, to call us to supper. How now! is my brother
Peter come?

Hostess. Yes, and a friend with him. They are both glad to hear that you
are in these parts; and long to see you; and long to be at supper, for
they be very hungry.





The third day-continued

On the Trout

