Chapter XIV

Piscator, Venator, Milk-woman

Piscator. The Barbel is so called, says Gesner, by reason of his barb or
wattles at his mouth, which are under his nose or chaps. He is one of
those leather-mouthed fishes that I told you of, that does very seldom
break his hold if he be once hooked: but he is so strong, that he will
often break both rod and line, if he proves to be a big one.

But the Barbel, though he be of a fine shape, and looks big, yet he is
not accounted the best fish to eat, neither for his wholesomeness nor
his taste; but the male is reputed much better than the female, whose
spawn is very hurtful, as I will presently declare to you.

They flock together like sheep, and are at the worst in April, about
which time they spawn; but quickly grow to be in season. He is able to
live in the strongest swifts of the water: and, in summer, they love the
shallowest and sharpest streams: and love to lurk under weeds, and to
feed on gravel, against a rising ground; and will root and dig in the
sands with his nose like a hog, and there nests himself: yet sometimes
he retires to deep and swift bridges, or flood-gates, or weir; where he
will nest himself amongst piles, or in hollow places; and take such hold
of moss or weeds, that be the water never so swift, it is not able to
force him from the place that he contends for. This is his constant
custom in summer, when he and most living creatures sport themselves in
the sun: but at the approach of winter, then he forsakes the swift
streams and shallow waters, and, by degrees, retires to those parts of
the river that are quiet and deeper; in which places, and I think about
that time he spawns; and, as I have formerly told you, with the help of
the melter, hides his spawn or eggs in holes, which they both dig in the
gravel; and then they mutually labour to cover it with the same sand, to
prevent it from being devoured by other fish.

There be such store of this fish in the river Danube, that Rondeletius
says they may, in some places of it, and in some months of the year, be
taken, by those who dwell near to the river, with their hands, eight or
ten load at a time. He says, they begin to be good in May, and that they
cease to be so in August: but it is found to be otherwise in this
nation. But thus far we agree with him, that the spawn of a Barbel, if
it be not poison, as he says, yet that it is dangerous meat, and
especially in the month of May, which is so certain, that Gesner and
Gasius declare it had an ill effect upon them, even to the endangering
of their lives.

The fish is of a fine cast and handsome shape, with small scales, which
are placed after a most exact and curious manner, and, as I told you,
may be rather said not to be ill, than to be good meat, The Chub and he
have, I think, both lost part of their credit by ill cookery; they being
reputed the worst, or coarsest, of fresh-water fish. But the Barbel
affords an angler choice sport, being a lusty and a cunning fish; so
lusty and cunning as to endanger the breaking of the angler's line, by
running his head forcibly towards any covert, or hole, or bank, and then
striking at the line, to break it off, with his tail; as is observed by
Plutarch, in his book De Industria Animalium: and also so cunning, to
nibble and suck off your worm close to the hook, and yet avoid the
letting the hook come into his mouth.

The Barbel is also curious for his baits; that is to say, that they be
clean and sweet; that is to say, to have your worms well scoured, and
not kept in sour and musty moss, for he is a curious feeder: but at a
well-scoured lob-worm he will bite as boldly as at any bait, and
specially if, the night or two before you fish for him, you shall bait
the places where you intend to fish for him, with big worms cut into
pieces. And note, that none did ever over-bait the place, nor fish too
early or too late for a Barbel. And the Barbel will bite also at
generals, which, not being too much scoured, but green, are a choice
bait for him: and so is cheese, which is not to be too hard, but kept a
day or two in a wet linen cloth, to make it tough; with this you may
also bait the water a day or two before you fish for the Barbel, and be
much the likelier to catch store; and if the cheese were laid in
clarified honey a short time before, as namely, an hour or two, you were
still the likelier to catch fish. Some have directed to cut the cheese
into thin pieces, and toast it; and then tie it on the hook with fine
silk. And some advise to fish for the Barbel with sheep's tallow and
soft cheese, beaten or worked into a paste; and that it is choicely good
in August: and I believe it. Rut, doubtless, the lob-worm well scoured,
and the gentle not too much scoured, and cheese ordered as I have
directed, are baits enough, and I think will serve in any month: though
I shall commend any angler that tries conclusions, and is industrious to
improve the art. And now my honest scholar, the long shower and my
tedious discourse are both ended together: and I shall give you but this
observation, that when you fish for a Barbel, your rod and line be both
long and of good strength; for, as I told you, you will find him a heavy
and a dogged fish to be dealt withal; yet he seldom or never breaks his
hold, if he be once strucken. And if you would know more of fishing for
the Umber or Barbel, get into favour with Dr. Sheldon, whose skill is
above others; and of that, the poor that dwell about him have a
comfortable experience.

And now let's go and see what interest the Trouts will pay us, for
letting our angle-rods lie so long and so quietly in the water for their
use. Come, scholar, which will you take up?

Venator. Which you think fit, master.

Piscator. Why, you shall take up that; for I am certain, by viewing the
line, it has a fish at it. Look you, scholar! well done! Come, now take
up the other too: well! now you may tell my brother Peter, at night,
that you have caught a leash of Trouts this day. And now let's move
towards our lodging, and drink a draught of red-cow's milk as we go; and
give pretty Maudlin and her honest mother a brace of Trouts for their
supper.

Venator. Master, I like your motion very well: and I think it is now
about milking-time; and yonder they be at it.

Piscator. God speed you, good woman! I thank you both for our songs last
night: I and my companion have had such fortune a-fishing this day, that
we resolve to give you and Maudlin a brace of Trouts for supper; and we
will now taste a draught of your red-cow's milk.

Milk-woman. Marry, and that you shall with all my heart; and I will be
still your debtor when you come this way. If you will but speak the
word, I will make you a good syllabub of new verjuice; and then you may
sit down in a haycock, and eat it; and Maudlin shall sit by and sing you
the good old song of the "Hunting in Chevy Chace," or some other good
ballad, for she hath store of them: Maudlin, my honest Maudlin, hath a
notable memory, and she thinks nothing too good for you, because you be
such honest men.

Venator. We thank you; and intend, once in a month to call upon you
again, and give you a little warning; and so, good-night Good-night,
Maudlin. And now, good master, let's lose no time: but tell me somewhat
more of fishing; and if you please, first, something of fishing for a
Gudgeon.

Piscator. I will, honest scholar.





The fourth day-continued

Of the Gudgeon, the Ruffe, and the Bleak

