Chapter II

Piscator, Venator, Huntsman, and Hostess

Venator. My friend Piscator, you have kept time with my thoughts; for
the sun is just rising, and I myself just now come to this place, and
the dogs have just now put down an Otter. Look! down at the bottom of
the hill there, in that meadow, chequered with water-lilies and
lady-smocks; there you may see what work they make; look! look! you may
see all busy; men and dogs; dogs and men; all busy.

Piscator. Sir, I am right glad to meet you, and glad to have so fair an
entrance into this day's sport, and glad to see so many dogs, and more
men, all in pursuit of the Otter. Let us compliment no longer, but join
unto them. Come, honest Venator, let us be gone, let us make haste; I
long to be doing; no reasonable hedge or ditch shall hold me.

Venator. Gentleman Huntsman, where found you this Otter?

Huntsman. Marry, Sir, we found her a mile from this place, a-fishing. She
has this morning eaten the greatest part of this Trout; she has only
left thus much of it as you see, and was fishing for more; when we came
we found her just at it: but we were here very early, we were here an
hour before sunrise, and have given her no rest since we came; sure she
will hardly escape all these dogs and men. I am to have the skin if we
kill her.

Venator. Why, Sir, what is the skin worth?

Huntsman. It is worth ten shillings to make gloves; the gloves of an
Otter are the best fortification for your hands that can be thought on
against wet weather.

Piscator. I pray, honest Huntsman, let me ask you a pleasant question:
do you hunt a beast or a fish?

Huntsman. Sir, it is not in my power to resolve you; I leave it to be
resolved by the college of Carthusians, who have made vows never to eat
flesh. But, I have heard, the question hath been debated among many
great clerks, and they seem to differ about it; yet most agree that her
tail is fish: and if her body be fish too, then I may say that a fish
will walk upon land: for an Otter does so sometimes, five or six or ten
miles in a night, to catch for her young ones, or to glut herself with
fish. And I can tell you that Pigeons will fly forty miles for a
breakfast: but, Sir, I am sure the Otter devours much fish, and kills
and spoils much more than he eats. And I can tell you, that this
dog-fisher, for so the Latins call him, can smell a fish in the water a
hundred yards from him: Gesner says much farther: and that his stones
are good against the falling sickness; and that there is an herb,
Benione, which, being hung in a linen cloth near a fish-pond, or any
haunt that he uses, makes him to avoid the place; which proves he smells
both by water and land. And, I can tell you, there is brave hunting this
water-dog in Cornwall; where there have been so many, that our learned
Camden says there is a river called Ottersey, which was so named by
reason of the abundance of Otters that bred and fed in it.

And thus much for my knowledge of the Otter; which you may now see above
water at vent, and the dogs close with him; I now see he will not last
long. Follow, therefore, my masters, follow; for Sweetlips was like to
have him at this last vent.

Venator. Oh me! all the horse are got over the river, what shall we do
now? shall we follow them over the water?

Huntsman. No, Sir, no; be not so eager; stay a little, and follow me;
for both they and the dogs will be suddenly on this side again, I
warrant you, and the Otter too, it may be. Now have at him with Kilbuck,
for he vents again.

Venator. Marry! so he does; for, look! he vents in that corner. Now,
now, Ringwood has him: now, he is gone again, and has bit the poor dog.
Now Sweetlips has her; hold her, Sweetlips! now all the dogs have her;
some above and some under water: but, now, now she is tired, and past
losing. Come bring her to me, Sweetlips. Look! it is a Bitch-otter, and
she has lately whelp'd. Let's go to the place where she was put down;
and, not far from it, you will find all her young ones, I dare warrant
you, and kill them all too.

Huntsman. Come, Gentlemen! come, all! let's go to the place where we put
down the Otter. Look you! hereabout it was that she kennelled; look you!
here it was indeed; for here's her young ones, no less than five: come,
let us kill them all.

Piscator. No: I pray, Sir, save me one, and I'll try if I can make her
tame, as I know an ingenious gentleman in Leicestershire, Mr. Nich.
Segrave, has done; who hath not only made her tame, but to catch fish,
and do many other things of much pleasure.

Huntsman. Take one with all my heart; but let us kill the rest. And now
let's go to an honest ale-house, where we may have a cup of good barley
wine, and sing "Old Rose," and all of us rejoice together.

Venator. Come, my friend Piscator, let me invite you along with us. I'll
bear your charges this night, and you shall bear mine to-morrow; for my
intention is to accompany you a day or two in fishing.

Piscator. Sir, your request is granted; and I shall be right glad both
to exchange such a courtesy, and also to enjoy your company.





The third day



Venator. Well, now let's go to your sport of Angling.

Piscator. Let's be going, with all my heart. God keep you all,
Gentlemen; and send you meet, this day, with another Bitch-otter, and
kill her merrily, and all her young ones too.

Venator. NOW, Piscator, where will you begin to fish?

Piscator. We are not yet come to a likely place; I must walk a mile
further yet before I beam.

Venator. Well then, I pray, as we walk, tell me freely, how do you like
your lodging, and mine host and the company? Is not mine host a witty
man?

Piscator. Sir, I will tell you, presently, what I think of your host:
but, first, I will tell you, I am glad these Otters were killed; and I
am sorry there are no more Otter-killers; for I know that the want of
Otter-killers, and the not keeping the fence-months for the preservation
of fish, will, in time, prove the destruction of all rivers. And those
very few that are left, that make conscience of the laws of the nation,
and of keeping days of abstinence, will be forced to eat flesh, or
suffer more inconveniences than are yet foreseen.

Venator. Why, Sir, what be those that you call the fence-months?

Piscator. Sir, they be principally three, namely, March, April, and May:
for these be the usual months that Salmon come out of the sea to spawn
in most fresh rivers. And their fry would, about a certain time, return
back to the salt water, if they were not hindered by weirs and unlawful
gins, which the greedy fishermen set, and so destroy them by thousands;
as they would, being so taught by nature, change the fresh for salt
water. He that shall view the wise Statutes made in the 13th of Edward
the First, and the like in Richard the Second, may see several
provisions made against the destruction of fish: and though I profess no
knowledge of the law, yet I am sure the regulation of these defects
might be easily mended. But I remember that a wise friend of mine did
usually say, "that which is everybody's business is nobody's business":
if it were otherwise, there could not be so many nets and fish, that are
under the statute size, sold daily amongst us; and of which the
conservators of the waters should be ashamed.

But, above all, the taking fish in spawning-time may be said to be
against nature: it is like taking the dam on the nest when she hatches
her young, a sin so against nature, that Almighty God hath in the
Levitical law made a law against it.

But the poor fish have enemies enough besides such unnatural fishermen;
as namely, the Otters that I spake of, the Cormorant, the Bittern, the
Osprey, the Sea-gull, the Hern, the King-fisher, the Gorara, the Puet,
the Swan, Goose, Duck, and the Craber, which some call the Water-rat:
against all which any honest man may make a just quarrel, but I will
not; I will leave them to be quarrelled with and killed by others, for I
am not of a cruel nature, I love to kill nothing but fish.

And, now, to your question concerning your host. To speak truly, he is
not to me a good companion, for most of his conceits were either
scripture jests, or lascivious jests, for which I count no man witty:
for the devil will help a man, that way inclined, to the first; and his
own corrupt nature, which he always carries with him, to the latter. But
a companion that feasts the company with wit and mirth, and leaves out
the sin which is usually mixed with them, he is the man, and indeed such
a companion should have his charges borne; and to such company I hope to
bring you this night; for at Trout-hall, not far from this place, where
I purpose to lodge to-night, there is usually an Angler that proves good
company. And let me tell you, good company and good discourse are the
very sinews of virtue. But for such discourse as we heard last night, it
infects others: the very boys will learn to talk and swear, as they
heard mine host, and another of the company that shall be nameless. I am
sorry the other is a gentleman, for less religion will not save their
souls than a beggar's: I think more will be required at the last great
day. Well! you know what example is able to do; and I know what the poet
says in the like case, which is worthy to be noted by all parents and
people of civility:

                 ....many a one
    Owes to his country his religion;
    And in another, would as strongly grow,
    Had but his nurse or mother taught him so.

This is reason put into verse, and worthy the consideration of a wise
man. But of this no more; for though I love civility, yet I hate severe
censures. I'll to my own art; and I doubt not but at yonder tree I shall
catch a Chub: and then we'll turn to an honest cleanly hostess, that I
know right well; rest ourselves there; and dress it for our dinner.

Venator. Oh, Sir! a Chub is the worst fish that swims; I hoped for a
Trout to my dinner.

Piscator. Trust me, Sir, there is not a likely place for a Trout
hereabout: and we staid so long to take our leave of your huntsmen this
morning, that the sun is got so high, and shines so clear, that I will
not undertake the catching of a Trout till evening. And though a Chub
be, by you and many others, reckoned the worst of fish, yet you shall
see I'll make it a good fish by dressing it.

Venator. Why, how will you dress him?

Piscator. I'll tell you by-and-by, when I have caught him. Look you
here, Sir, do you see? but you must stand very close, there lie upon the
top of the water, in this very hole, twenty Chubs. I'll catch only one
and that shall be the biggest of them all: and that I will do so, I'll
hold you twenty to one, and you shall see it done.

Venator. Ay, marry! Sir, now you talk like an artist, and I'll say you
are one, when I shall see you perform what you say you can do: but I yet
doubt it.

Piscator. You shall not doubt it long; for you shall see me do it
presently. Look! the biggest of these Chubs has had some bruise upon his
tail, by a Pike or some other accident; and that looks like a white
spot. That very Chub I mean to put into your hands presently; sit you
but down in the shade, and stay but a little while; and I'll warrant
you, I'll bring him to you.

Venator. I'll sit down; and hope well, because you seem to be so
confident.

Piscator. Look you, Sir, there is a trial of my skill; there he is: that
very Chub, that I showed you, with the white spot on his tail. And I'll
be as certain to make him a good dish of meat as I was to catch him:
I'll now lead you to an honest ale-house, where we shall find a cleanly
room, lavender in the windows, and twenty ballads stuck about the wall.
There my hostess, which I may tell you is both cleanly, and handsome,
and civil, hath dressed many a one for me; and shall now dress it after
my fashion, and I warrant it good meat.

Venator. Come, Sir, with all my heart, for I begin to be hungry, and
long to be at it, and indeed to rest myself too; for though I have
walked but four miles this morning, yet I begin to be weary; yesterday's
hunting hangs still upon me.

Piscator. Well, Sir, and you shall quickly be at rest, for yonder is the
house I mean to bring you to.

Come, hostess, how do you? Will you first give us a cup of your best
drink, and then dress this Chub, as you dressed my last, when I and my
friend were here about eight or ten days ago? But you must do me one
courtesy, it must be done instantly.

Hostess. I will do it, Mr. Piscator, and with all the speed I can.

Piscator. NOW, Sir, has not my hostess made haste? and does not the fish
look lovely?

Venator. Both, upon my word, Sir; and therefore let's say grace and fall
to eating of it.

Piscator. Well, Sir, how do you like it?

Venator. Trust me, 'tis as good meat as I ever tasted. Now let me thank
you for it, drink to you and beg a courtesy of you; but it must not be
denied me.

Piscator. What is it, I pray, Sir? You are so modest, that methinks I may
promise to grant it before it is asked.

Venator. Why, Sir, it is, that from henceforth you would allow me to
call you Master, and that really I may be your scholar; for you are such
a companion, and have so quickly caught and so excellently cooked this
fish, as makes me ambitious to be your scholar.

Piscator. Give me your hand; from this time forward I will be your
Master, and teach you as much of this art as I am able; and will, as you
desire me, tell you somewhat of the nature of most of the fish that we
are to angle for, and I am sure I both can and will tell you more than
any common angler yet knows.





The third day-continued


How to fish for, and to dress, the Chavender of Chub


