Chapter XX

Piscator

DOCTOR LEBAULT, the learned Frenchman, in his large discourse of Maison
Rustique, gives this direction for making of fish-ponds. I shall refer
you to him, to read it at large: but I think I shall contract it, and
yet make it as useful.

He adviseth, that when you have drained the ground, and made the earth
firm where the head of the pond must be, that you must then, in that
place, drive in two or three rows of oak or elm piles, which should be
scorched in the fire, or half-burnt, before they be driven into the
earth; for being thus used, it preserves them much longer from rotting.
And having done so, lay faggots or bavins of smaller wood betwixt them:
and then, earth betwixt and above them: and then, having first very well
rammed them and the earth, use another pile in like manner as the first
were: and note, that the second pile is to be of or about the height
that you intend to make your sluice or floodgate, or the vent that you
intend shall convey the overflowings of your pond in any flood that
shall endanger the breaking of your pond-dam.

Then he advises, that you plant willows or owlers, about it, or both:
and then cast in bavins, in some places not far from the side, and in
the most sandy places, for fish both to spawn upon, and to defend them
and the young fry from the many fish, and also from vermin, that lie at
watch to destroy them, especially the spawn of the Carp and Tench, when
'tis left to the mercy of ducks or vermin.

He, and Dubravius, and all others advise, that you make choice of such a
place for your pond, that it may be refreshed with a little rill, or
with rain water, running or falling into it; by which fish are more
inclined both to breed, and are also refreshed and fed the better, and
do prove to be of a much sweeter and more pleasant taste.

To which end it is observed, that such pools as be large and have most
gravel, and shallows where fish may sport themselves, do afford fish of
the purest taste. And note, that in all pools it is best for fish to
have some retiring place; as namely, hollow banks, or shelves, or roots
of trees, to keep them from danger, and, when they think fit, from the
extreme heat of summer; as also from the extremity of cold in winter.
And note, that if many trees be growing about your pond, the leaves
thereof falling into the water, make it nauseous to the fish, and the
fish to be so to the eater of it.

'Tis noted, that the Tench and Eel love mud; and the Carp loves gravelly
ground, and in the hot months to feed on grass. You are to cleanse your
pond, if you intend either profit or pleasure, once every three or four
years, especially some ponds, and then let it dry six or twelve months,
both to kill the water-weeds, as water-lilies, candocks, reate, and
bulrushes, that breed there; and also that as these die for want of
water, so grass may grow in the pond's bottom, which Carps will eat
greedily in all the hot months, if the pond be clean. The letting your
pond dry and sowing oats in the bottom is also good, for the fish feed
the faster; and being sometimes let dry, you may observe what kind of
fish either increases or thrives best in that water; for they differ
much, both in their breeding and feeding.

Lebault also advises, that if your ponds be not very large and roomy,
that you often feed your fish, by throwing into them chippings of bread,
curds, grains, or the entrails of chickens or of any fowl or beast that
you kill to feed yourselves; for these afford fish a great relief. He
says, that frogs and ducks do much harm, and devour both the spawn and
the young fry of all fish, especially of the Carp; and I have, besides
experience, many testimonies of it. But Lebault allows water-frogs to be
good meat, especially in some months, if they be fat: but you are to
note, that he is a Frenchman; and we English will hardly believe him,
though we know frogs are usually eaten in his country: however he
advises to destroy them and king-fishers out of your ponds. And he
advises not to suffer much shooting at wild fowl; for that, he says,
affrightens, and harms, and destroys the fish.

Note, that Carps and Tench thrive and breed best when no other fish is
put with them into the same pond; for all other fish devour their spawn,
or at least the greatest part of it. And note, that clods of grass
thrown into any pond feed any Carps in summer; and that garden-earth and
parsley thrown into a pond recovers and refreshes the sick fish. And
note, that when you store your pond, you are to put into it two or three
melters for one spawner, if you put them into a breeding-pond; but if
into a nurse-pond, or feeding-pond, in which they will not breed, then
no care is to be taken whether there be most male or female Carps.

It is observed that the best ponds to breed Carps are those that be
stony or sandy, and are warm, and free from wind; and that are not deep,
but have willow-trees and grass on their sides, over which the water
does sometimes flow: and note, that Carps do more usually breed in
marle-pits, or pits that have clean clay bottoms; or in new ponds, or
ponds that lie dry a winter season, than in old ponds that be full of
mud and weeds.

Well, Scholar, I have told you the substance of all that either
observation or discourse, or a diligent survey of Dubravius and Lebault
hath told me: not that they, in their long discourses, have not said
more; but the most of the rest are so common observations, as if a man
should tell a good arithmetician that twice two is four. I will
therefore put an end to this discourse; and we will here sit down and
rest us.





The FIFTH day-continued

