Chapter XVIII

Piscator and Venator

Piscator. There be also three or four other little fish that I had
almost forgot; that are all without scales; and may for excellency of
meat, be compared to any fish of greatest value and largest size. They
be usually full of eggs or spawn, all the months of summer; for they
breed often, as 'tis observed mice and many of the smaller four-footed
creatures of the earth do and as those, so these come quickly to their
full growth and perfection. And it is needful that they breed both often
and numerously; for they be, besides other accidents of ruin, both a
prey and baits for other fish. And first I shall tell you of the Minnow
or Penk.

The MINNOW hath, when he is in perfect season, and not sick, which is
only presently after spawning, a kind of dappled or waved colour, like
to a panther, on its sides, inclining to a greenish or sky-colour; his
belly being milk white; and his back almost black or blackish. He is a
sharp biter at a small worm, and in hot weather makes excellent sport
for young anglers, or boys, or women that love that recreation. And in
the spring they make of them excellent Minnow-tansies; for being washed
well in salt, and their heads and tails cut off, and their guts taken
out, and not washed after, they prove excellent for that use; that is,
being fried with yolk of eggs, the flowers of cowslips and of primroses,
and a little tansy; thus used they make a dainty dish of meat.

The LOACH is, as I told you, a most dainty fish: he breeds and feeds in
little and clear swift brooks or rills, and lives there upon the gravel,
and in the sharpest streams: he grows not to be above a finger long, and
no thicker than is suitable to that length. The Loach is not unlike the
shape of the Eel: he has a beard or wattles like a barbel. He has two
fins at his sides, four at his belly, and one at his tail; he is dappled
with many black or brown spots; his mouth is barbel-like under his nose.
This fish is usually full of eggs or spawn; and is by Gesner, and other
learned physicians, commended for great nourishment, and to be very
grateful both to the palate and stomach of sick persons. He is to be
fished for with a very small worm, at the bottom; for he very seldom, or
never, rises above the gravel, on which I told you he usually gets his
living.

The MILLER'S-THUMB, or BULL-HEAD, is a fish of no pleasing shape. He is
by Gesner compared to the Sea-toad-fish, for his similitude and shape.
It has a head big and flat, much greater than suitable to his body; a
mouth very wide, and usually gaping; he is without teeth, but his lips
are very rough, much like to a file. He hath two fins near to his gills,
which be roundish or crested; two fins also under the belly; two on the
back; one below the vent; and the fin of his tail is round. Nature hath
painted the body of this fish with whitish, blackish, brownish spots.
They be usually full of eggs or spawn all the summer, I mean the
females; and those eggs swell their vents almost into the form of a dug.
They begin to spawn about April, and, as I told you, spawn several
months in the summer. And in the winter, the Minnow, and Loach, and
Bull-head dwell in the mud, as the Eel doth; or we know not where, no
more than we know where the cuckoo and swallow, and other half-year
birds, which first appear to us in April, spend their six cold, winter,
melancholy months. This BULL-HEAD does usually dwell, and hide himself,
in holes, or amongst stones in clear water; and in very hot days will
lie a long time very still, and sun himself, and will be easy to be seen
upon any flat stone, or any gravel; at which time he will suffer an
angler to put a hook, baited with a small worm, very near unto his very
mouth: and he never refuses to bite, nor indeed to be caught with the
worst of anglers. Matthiolus commends him much more for his taste and
nourishment, than for his shape or beauty.

There is also a little fish called a STICKLEBAG, a fish without scales,
but hath his body fenced with several prickles. I know not where he
dwells in winter; nor what he is good for in summer, but only to make
sport for boys and women-anglers, and to feed other fish that be fish of
prey, as Trouts in particular, who will bite at him as at a Penk; and
better, if your hook be rightly baited with him, for he may be so baited
as, his tail turning like the sail of a wind-mill, will make him turn
more quick than any Penk or Minnow can. For note, that the nimble
turning of that, or the Minnow is the perfection of Minnow-fishing. To
which end, if you put your hook into his mouth, and out at his tail; and
then, having first tied him with white thread a little above his tail,
and placed him after such a manner on your hook as he is like to turn
then sew up his mouth to your line, and he is like to turn quick, and
tempt any Trout: but if he does not turn quick, then turn his tail, a
little more or less, towards the inner part, or towards the side of the
hook; or put the Minnow or Sticklebag a little more crooked or more
straight on your hook, until it will turn both true and fast; and then
doubt not but to tempt any great Trout that lies in a swift stream. And
the Loach that I told you of will do the like: no bait is more tempting,
provided the Loach be not too big.

And now, scholar, with the help of this fine morning, and your patient
attention, I have said all that my present memory will afford me,
concerning most of the several fish that are usually fished for in fresh
waters.

Venator. But, master, you have by your former civility made me hope that
you will make good your promise, and say something of the several rivers
that be of most note in this nation; and also of fish-ponds, and the
ordering of them: and do it I pray, good master; for I love any
discourse of rivers, and fish and fishing; the time spent in such
discourse passes away very pleasantly.




The FIFTH day-continued

Of Rivers, and some Observations of Fish

