Chapter IX

Piscator

The Carp is the queen of rivers; a stately, a good, and a very subtil
fish; that was not at first bred, nor hath been long in England, but is
now naturalised. It is said, they were brought hither by one Mr. Mascal,
a gentleman that then lived at Plumsted in Sussex, a county that abounds
more with this fish than any in this nation.

You may remember that I told you Gesner says there are no Pikes in
Spain; and doubtless there was a time, about a hundred or a few more
years ago, when there were no Carps in England, as may seem to be
affirmed by Sir Richard Baker, in whose Chronicle you may find these
verses:

    Hops and turkies, carps and beer,
    Came into England all in a year.

And doubtless, as of sea-fish the Herring dies soonest out of the water,
and of fresh-water fish the Trout, so, except the Eel, the Carp endures
most hardness, and lives longest out of its own proper element; and,
therefore, the report of the Carp's being brought out of a foreign
country into this nation is the more probable.

Carps and Loaches are observed to breed several months in one year,
which Pikes and most other fish do not; and this is partly proved by
tame and wild rabbits; as also by some ducks, which will lay eggs nine
of the twelve months; and yet there be other ducks that lay not longer
than about one month. And it is the rather to be believed, because you
shall scarce or never take a male Carp without a melt, or a female
without a roe or spawn, and for the most part very much, and especially
all the summer season; and it is observed, that they breed more
naturally in ponds than in running waters, if they breed there at all;
and that those that live in rivers are taken by men of the best palates
to be much the better meat.

And it is observed that in some ponds Carps will not breed, especially
in cold ponds; but where they will breed, they breed innumerably:
Aristotle and Pliny say six times in a year, if there be no Pikes nor
Perch to devour their spawn, when it is cast upon grass or flags, or
weeds, where it lies ten or twelve days before it be enlivened.

The Carp, if he have water-room and good feed, will grow to a very great
bigness and length; I have heard, to be much above a yard long. It is
said by Jovius, who hath writ of fishes, that in the lake Lurian in
Italy, Carps have thriven to be more than fifty pounds weight: which is
the more probable, for as the bear is conceived and born suddenly, and
being born is but short lived; so, on the contrary, the elephant is said
to be two years in his dam's belly, some think he is ten years in it,
and being born, grows in bigness twenty years; and it is observed too,
that he lives to the age of a hundred years. And 'tis also observed,
that the crocodile is very long-lived; and more than that, that all that
long life he thrives in bigness; and so I think some Carps do,
especially in some places, though I never saw one above twenty-three
inches, which was a great and goodly fish; but have been assured there
are of a far greater size, and in England too.

Now, as the increase of Carps is wonderful for their number, so there is
not a reason found out, I think, by any, why they should breed in some
ponds, and not in others, of the same nature for soil and all other
circumstances. And as their breeding, so are their decays also very
mysterious: I have both read it, and been told by a gentleman of tried
honesty, that he has known sixty or more large Carps put into several
ponds near to a house, where by reason of the stakes in the ponds, and
the owner's constant being near to them, it was impossible they should
be stole away from him; and that when he has, after three or four years,
emptied the pond, and expected an increase from them by breeding young
ones, for that they might do so he had, as the rule is, put in three
melters for one spawner, he has, I say, after three or four years, found
neither a young nor old Carp remaining. And the like I have known of one
that had almost watched the pond, and, at a like distance of time, at
the fishing of a pond, found, of seventy or eighty large Carps, not
above five or six: and that he had forborne longer to fish the said
pond, but that he saw, in a hot day in summer, a large Carp swim near
the top of the water with a frog upon his head; and that he, upon that
occasion, caused his pond to be let dry: and I say, of seventy or eighty
Carps, only found five or six in the said pond, and those very sick and
lean, and with every one a frog sticking so fast on the head of the said
Carps, that the frog would not be got off without extreme force or
killing. And the gentleman that did affirm this to me, told me he saw
it; and did declare his belief to be, and I also believe the same, that
he thought the other Carps, that were so strangely lost, were so killed
by the frogs, and then devoured.

And a person of honour, now living in Worcestershire, assured me he had
seen a necklace, or collar of tadpoles, hang like a chain or necklace of
beads about a Pike's neck, and to kill him: Whether it were for meat or
malice, must be, to me, a question.

But I am fallen into this discourse by accident; of which I might say
more, but it has proved longer than I intended, and possibly may not to
you be considerable: I shall therefore give you three or four more short
observations of the Carp, and then fall upon some directions how you
shall fish for him.

The age of Carps is by Sir Francis Bacon, in his History of Life and
Death, observed to be but ten years; yet others think they live longer.
Gesner says, a Carp has been known to live in the Palatine above a
hundred years. But most conclude, that, contrary to the Pike or Luce, all
Carps are the better for age and bigness. The tongues of Carps are noted
to be choice and costly meat, especially to them that buy them: but
Gesner says, Carps have no tongue like other fish, but a piece of
fleshlike fish in their mouth like to a tongue, and should be called a
palate: but it is certain it is choicely good, and that the Carp is to
be reckoned amongst those leather-mouthed fish which, I told you, have
their teeth in their throat; and for that reason he is very seldom lost
by breaking his hold, if your hook be once stuck into his chaps.

I told you that Sir Francis Bacon thinks that the Carp lives but ten
years: but Janus Dubravius has written a book Of fish and fish-ponds in
which he says, that Carps begin to spawn at the age of three years, and
continue to do so till thirty: he says also, that in the time of their
breeding, which is in summer, when the sun hath warmed both the earth
and water, and so apted them also for generation, that then three or
four male Carps will follow a female; and that then, she putting on a
seeming coyness, they force her through weeds and flags, where she lets
fall her eggs or spawn, which sticks fast to the weeds; and then they
let fall their melt upon it, and so it becomes in a short time to be a
living fish: and, as I told you, it is thought that the Carp does this
several months in the year; and most believe, that most fish breed after
this manner, except the Eel. And it has been observed, that when the
spawner has weakened herself by doing that natural office, that two or
three melters have helped her from off the weeds, by bearing her up on
both sides, and guarding her into the deep. And you may note, that
though this may seem a curiosity not worth observing, yet others have
judged it worth their time and costs to make glass hives, and order them
in such a manner as to see how bees have bred and made their honeycombs,
and how they have obeyed their king, and governed their commonwealth.
But it is thought that all Carps are not bred by generation; but that
some breed other ways, as some Pikes do.

The physicians make the galls and stones in the heads of Carps to be
very medicinable. But it is not to be doubted but that in Italy they
make great profit of the spawn of Carps, by selling it to the Jews, who
make it into red caviare; the Jews not being by their law admitted to
eat of caviare made of the Sturgeon, that being a fish that wants
scales, and, as may appear in Leviticus xi., by them reputed to be
unclean.

Much more might be said out of him, and out of Aristotle, which
Dubravius often quotes in his Discourse of Fishes: but it might rather
perplex than satisfy you; and therefore I shall rather choose to direct
you how to catch, than spend more time in discoursing either of the
nature or the breeding of this Carp, or of any more circumstances
concerning him. But yet I shall remember you of what I told you before,
that he is a very subtil fish, and hard to be caught.

And my first direction is, that if you will fish for a Carp, you must
put on a very large measure of patience, especially to fish for a river
Carp: I have known a very good fisher angle diligently four or six hours
in a day, for three or four days together, for a river Carp, and not
have a bite. And you are to note, that, in some ponds, it is as hard to
catch a Carp as in a river; that is to say, where they have store of
feed, and the water is of a clayish colour. But you are to remember that
I have told you there is no rule without an exception; and therefore
being possess with that hope and patience which I wish to all fishers,
especially to the Carp-angler, I shall tell you with what bait to fish
for him. But first you are to know, that it must be either early, or
late; and let me tell you, that in hot weather, for he will seldom bite
in cold, you cannot be too early, or too late at it. And some have been
so curious as to say, the tenth of April is a fatal day for Carps.

The Carp bites either at worms, or at paste: and of worms I think the
bluish marsh or meadow worm is best; but possibly another worm, not too
big, may do as well, and so may a green gentle: and as for pastes, there
are almost as many sorts as there are medicines for the toothache; but
doubtless sweet pastes are best; I mean, pastes made with honey or with
sugar: which, that you may the better beguile this crafty fish, should
be thrown into the pond or place in which you fish for him, some hours,
or longer, before you undertake your trial of skill with the angle-rod;
and doubtless, if it be thrown into the water a day or two before, at
several times, and in small pellets, you are the likelier, when you fish
for the Carp, to obtain your desired sport. Or, in a large pond, to draw
them to any certain place, that they may the better and with more hope
be fished for, you are to throw into it, in some certain place, either
grains, or blood mixt with cow-dung or with bran; or any garbage, as
chicken's guts or the like; and then, some of your small sweet pellets
with which you propose to angle: and these small pellets being a few of
them also thrown in as you are angling, will be the better.

And your paste must be thus made: take the flesh of a rabbit, or cat,
cut small; and bean-flour; and if that may not be easily got, get other
flour; and then, mix these together, and put to them either sugar, or
honey, which I think better: and then beat these together in a mortar,
or sometimes work them in your hands, your hands being very clean; and
then make it into a ball, or two, or three, as you like best, for your
use: but you must work or pound it so long in the mortar, as to make it
so tough as to hang upon your hook without washing from it, yet not too
hard: or, that you may the better keep it on your hook, you may knead
with your paste a little, and not too much, white or yellowish wool.

And if you would have this paste keep all the year, for any other fish,
then mix with it virgin-wax and clarified honey, and work them together
with your hands, before the fire; then make these into balls, and they
will keep all the year.

And if you fish for a Carp with gentles, then put upon your hook a small
piece of scarlet about this bigness, it being soaked in or anointed with
oil of petre, called by some, oil of the rock: and if your gentles be
put, two or three days before, into a box or horn anointed with honey,
and so put upon your hook as to preserve them to be living, you are as
like to kill this crafty fish this way as any other: but still, as you
are fishing, chew a little white or brown bread in your mouth, and cast
it into the pond about the place where your float swims. Other baits
there be; but these, with diligence and patient watchfulness, will do
better than any that I have ever practiced or heard of. And yet I shall
tell you, that the crumbs of white bread and honey made into a paste is
a good bait for a Carp; and you know, it is more easily made. And having
said thus much of the Carp, my next discourse shall be of the Bream,
which shall not prove so tedious; and therefore I desire the continuance
of your attention.

But, first, I will tell you how to make this Carp, that is so curious to
be caught, so curious a dish of meat as shall make him worth all your
labour and patience. And though it is not without some trouble and
charges, yet it will recompense both.

Take a Carp, alive if possible; scour him, and rub him clean with water
and salt, but scale him not: then open him; and put him, with his blood
and his liver, which you must save when you open him, into a small pot
or kettle: then take sweet marjoram, thyme, and parsley, of each half a
handful; a sprig of rosemary, and another of savoury; bind them into two
or three small bundles, and put them in your Carp, with four or five
whole onions, twenty pickled oysters, and three anchovies. Then pour
upon your Carp as much claret wine as will only cover him; and season
your claret well with salt, cloves, and mace, and the rinds of oranges
and lemons. That done, cover your pot and set it on a quick fire till it
be sufficiently boiled. Then take out the Carp; and lay it, with the
broth, into the dish; and pour upon it a quarter of a pound of the best
fresh butter, melted, and beaten with half a dozen spoonfuls of the
broth, the yolks of two or three eggs, and some of the herbs shred:
garnish your dish with lemons, and so serve it up. And much good do you!
Dr. T.





The fourth day-continued

On the Bream

