The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Compleat Angler
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Compleat Angler

Author: Izaak Walton


        
Release date: October 1, 1996 [eBook #683]
                Most recently updated: October 9, 2017

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/683

Credits: Produced by Tokuya Matsumoto






Produced by Tokuya Matsumoto <toqyam@os.rim.or.jp>







IZAAK WALTON



THE COMPLEAT ANGLER




To the Right worshipful

John Offley

of Madeley Manor, in the County of Stafford

Esquire, My most honoured Friend

Sir,--I have made so ill use of your former favours, as by them to be
encouraged to entreat, that they may be enlarged to the patronage and
protection of this Book: and I have put on a modest confidence, that I
shall not be denied, because it is a discourse of Fish and Fishing,
which you know so well, and both love and practice so much.

You are assured, though there be ignorant men of another belief, that
Angling is an Art: and you know that Art better than others; and that
this is truth is demonstrated by the fruits of that pleasant labour
which you enjoy, when you purpose to give rest to your mind, and divest
yourself of your more serious business, and, which is often, dedicate a
day or two to this recreation.

At which time, if common Anglers should attend you, and be eyewitnesses
of the success, not of your fortune, but your skill, it would doubtless
beget in them an emulation to be like you, and that emulation might
beget an industrious diligence to be so; but I know it is not attainable
by common capacities: and there be now many men of great wisdom,
learning, and experience, which love and practice this Art, that know I
speak the truth.

Sir, this pleasant curiosity of Fish and Fishing, of which you are so
great a master, has been thought worthy the pens and practices of divers
in other nations, that have been reputed men of great learning and
wisdom. And amongst those of this nation, I remember Sir Henry Wotton, a
dear lover of this Art, has told me, that his intentions were to write a
Discourse of the Art, and in praise of Angling; and doubtless he had
done so, if death had not prevented him; the remembrance of which had
often made me sorry, for if he had lived to do it, then the unlearned
Angler had seen some better treatise of this Art, a treatise that might
have proved worthy his perusal, which, though some have undertaken, I
could never yet see in English.

But mine may be thought as weak, and as unworthy of common view; and I
do here freely confess, that I should rather excuse myself, than censure
others, my own discourse being liable to so many exceptions; against
which you, Sir, might make this one, that it can contribute nothing to
YOUR knowledge. And lest a longer epistle may diminish your pleasure, I
shall make this no longer than to add this following truth, that I am
really,

Sir,

your most affectionate Friend,

and most humble Servant,

Iz. Wa.




The epistle to the reader

To all Readers of this discourse, but especially to the honest Angler

I think fit to tell thee these following truths; that I did neither
undertake, nor write, nor publish, and much less own, this Discourse to
please myself: and, having been too easily drawn to do all to please
others, as I propose not the gaining of credit by this undertaking, so I
would not willingly lose any part of that to which I had a just title
before I began it; and do therefore desire and hope, if I deserve not
commendations, yet I may obtain pardon.

And though this Discourse may be liable to some exceptions, yet I cannot
doubt but that most Readers may receive so much pleasure or profit by
it, as may make it worthy the time of their perusal, if they be not too
grave or too busy men. And this is all the confidence that I can put on,
concerning the merit of what is here offered to their consideration and
censure; and if the last prove too severe, as I have a liberty, so I am
resolved to use it, and neglect all sour censures.

And I wish the Reader also to take notice, that in writing of it I have
made myself a recreation of a recreation; and that it might prove so to
him, and not read dull and tediously, I have in several places mixed,
not any scurrility, but some innocent, harmless mirth, of which, if thou
be a severe, sour-complexioned man, then I here disallow thee to be a
competent judge; for divines say, there are offences given, and offences
not given but taken.

And I am the willinger to justify the pleasant part of it, because
though it is known I can be serious at seasonable times, yet the whole
Discourse is, or rather was, a picture of my own disposition, especially
in such days and times as I have laid aside business, and gone a-fishing
with honest Nat. and R. Roe; but they are gone, and with them most of my
pleasant hours, even as a shadow that passeth away and returns not.

And next let me add this, that he that likes not the book, should like
the excellent picture of the Trout, and some of the other fish, which I
may take a liberty to commend, because they concern not myself.

Next, let me tell the Reader, that in that which is the more useful part
of this Discourse, that is to say, the observations of the nature and
breeding, and seasons, and catching of fish, I am not so simple as not
to know, that a captious reader may find exceptions against something
said of some of these; and therefore I must entreat him to consider,
that experience teaches us to know that several countries alter the
time, and I think, almost the manner, of fishes' breeding, but doubtless
of their being in season; as may appear by three rivers in
Monmouthshire, namely, Severn, Wye, and Usk, where Camden observes, that
in the river Wye, Salmon are in season from September to April; and we
are certain, that in Thames and Trent, and in most other rivers, they be
in season the six hotter months.

Now for the Art of catching fish, that is to say, How to make a man that
was none to be an Angler by a book, he that undertakes it shall
undertake a harder task than Mr. Hales, a most valiant and excellent
fencer, who in a printed book called A Private School of Defence
undertook to teach that art or science, and was laughed at for his
labour. Not but that many useful things might be learned by that book,
but he was laughed at because that art was not to be taught by words,
but practice: and so must Angling. And note also, that in this Discourse
I do not undertake to say all that is known, or may be said of it, but I
undertake to acquaint the Reader with many things that are not usually
known to every Angler; and I shall leave gleanings and observations
enough to be made out of the experience of all that love and practice
this recreation, to which I shall encourage them. For Angling may be
said to be so like the Mathematicks, that it can never be fully learnt;
at least not so fully, but that there will still be more new experiments
left for the trial of other men that succeed us.

But I think all that love this game may here learn something that may be
worth their money, if they be not poor and needy men: and in case they
be, I then wish them to forbear to buy it; for I write not to get money,
but for pleasure, and this Discourse boasts of no more, for I hate to
promise much, and deceive the Reader.

And however it proves to him, yet I am sure I have found a high content
in the search and conference of what is here offered to the Reader's
view and censure. I wish him as much in the perusal of it, and so I
might here take my leave; but will stay a little and tell him, that
whereas it is said by many, that in fly-fishing for a Trout, the Angler
must observe his twelve several flies for the twelve months of the year,
I say, he that follows that rule, shall be as sure to catch fish, and be
as wise, as he that makes hay by the fair days in an Almanack, and no
surer; for those very flies that used to appear about, and on, the water
in one month of the year, may the following year come almost a month
sooner or later, as the same year proves colder or hotter: and yet, in
the following Discourse, I have set down the twelve flies that are in
reputation with many anglers; and they may serve to give him some
observations concerning them. And he may note, that there are in Wales,
and other countries, peculiar flies, proper to the particular place or
country; and doubtless, unless a man makes a fly to counterfeit that
very fly in that place, he is like to lose his labour, or much of it;
but for the generality, three or four flies neat and rightly made, and
not too big, serve for a Trout in most rivers, all the summer: and for
winter fly-fishing it is as useful as an Almanack out of date. And of
these, because as no man is born an artist, so no man is born an Angler,
I thought fit to give thee this notice.

When I have told the reader, that in this fifth impression there are
many enlargements, gathered both by my own observation, and the
communication with friends, I shall stay him no longer than to wish him
a rainy evening to read this following Discourse; and that if he be an
honest Angler, the east wind may never blow when he goes a-fishing.

I. W.




The first day

A Conference betwixt an Angler, a Falconer, and a Hunter, each
commending his Recreation

Chapter I

Piscator, Venator, Auceps

Piscator. You are well overtaken, Gentlemen! A good morning to you both!
I have stretched my legs up Tottenham Hill to overtake you, hoping your
business may occasion you towards Ware, whither I am going this fine
fresh May morning.

Venator. Sir, I, for my part, shall almost answer your hopes; for my
purpose is to drink my morning's draught at the Thatched House in
Hoddesden; and I think not to rest till I come thither, where I have
appointed a friend or two to meet me: but for this gentleman that you
see with me, I know not how far he intends his journey; he came so
lately into my company, that I have scarce had time to ask him the
question.

Auceps. Sir, I shall by your favour bear you company as far as
Theobalds, and there leave you; for then I turn up to a friend's house,
who mews a Hawk for me, which I now long to see.

Venator. Sir, we are all so happy as to have a fine, fresh, cool
morning; and I hope we shall each be the happier in the others' company.
And, Gentlemen, that I may not lose yours, I shall either abate or amend
my pace to enjoy it, knowing that, as the Italians say, "Good company in
a journey makes the way to seem the shorter".

Auceps. It may do so, Sir, with the help of good discourse, which,
methinks, we may promise from you, that both look and speak so
cheerfully: and for my part, I promise you, as an invitation to it, that
I will be as free and open hearted as discretion will allow me to be
with strangers.

Venator. And, Sir, I promise the like.

Piscator. I am right glad to hear your answers; and, in confidence you
speak the truth, I shall put on a boldness to ask you, Sir, whether
business or pleasure caused you to be so early up, and walk so fast? for
this other gentleman hath declared he is going to see a hawk, that a
friend mews for him.

Venator. Sir, mine is a mixture of both, a little business and more
pleasure; for I intend this day to do all my business, and then bestow
another day or two in hunting the Otter, which a friend, that I go to
meet, tells me is much pleasanter than any other chase whatsoever:
howsoever, I mean to try it; for to-morrow morning we shall meet a pack
of Otter-dogs of noble Mr. Sadler's, upon Amwell Hill, who will be there
so early, that they intend to prevent the sunrising.

Piscator. Sir, my fortune has answered my desires, and my purpose is to
bestow a day or two in helping to destroy some of those villanous
vermin: for I hate them perfectly, because they love fish so well, or
rather, because they destroy so much; indeed so much, that, in my
judgment all men that keep Otter-dogs ought to have pensions from the
King, to encourage them to destroy the very breed of those base Otters,
they do so much mischief.

Venator. But what say you to the Foxes of the Nation, would not you as
willingly have them destroyed? for doubtless they do as much mischief as
Otters do.

Piscator. Oh, Sir, if they do, it is not so much to me and my
fraternity, as those base vermin the Otters do.

Auceps. Why, Sir, I pray, of what fraternity are you, that you are so
angry with the poor Otters?

Piscator. I am, Sir, a Brother of the Angle, and therefore an enemy to
the Otter: for you are to note, that we Anglers all love one another,
and therefore do I hate the Otter both for my own, and their sakes who
are of my brotherhood.

Venator. And I am a lover of Hounds; I have followed many a pack of dogs
many a mile, and heard many merry Huntsmen make sport and scoff at
Anglers.

Auceps. And I profess myself a Falconer, and have heard many grave,
serious men pity them, it is such a heavy, contemptible, dull
recreation.

Piscator. You know, Gentlemen, it is an easy thing to scoff at any art
or recreation; a little wit mixed with ill nature, confidence, and
malice, will do it; but though they often venture boldly, yet they are
often caught, even in their own trap, according to that of Lucian, the
father of the family of Scoffers:

     "_Lucian, well skilled in scoffing, this hath writ;
     Friend, that's your folly, which you think your wit:
     This, you vent oft, void both of wit and fear,
     Meaning another, when yourself you jeer._"

If to this you add what Solomon says of Scoffers, that "they are an
abomination to mankind," let him that thinks fit scoff on, and be a
Scoffer still; but I account them enemies to me and all that love Virtue
and Angling.

And for you that have heard many grave, serious men pity Anglers; let me
tell you, Sir, there be many men that are by others taken to be serious
and grave men, whom we contemn and pity. Men that are taken to be grave,
because nature hath made them of a sour complexion; money-getting men,
men that spend all their time, first in getting, and next, in anxious
care to keep it; men that are condemned to be rich, and then always busy
or discontented: for these poor rich-men, we Anglers pity them
perfectly, and stand in no need to borrow their thoughts to think
ourselves so happy. No, no, Sir, we enjoy a contentedness above the
reach of such dispositions, and as the learned and ingenuous Montaigne
says, like himself, freely, "When my Cat and I entertain each other with
mutual apish tricks, as playing with a garter, who knows but that I make
my Cat more sport than she makes me? Shall I conclude her to be simple,
that has her time to begin or refuse, to play as freely as I myself
have? Nay, who knows but that it is a defect of my not understanding her
language, for doubtless Cats talk and reason with one another, that we
agree no better: and who knows but that she pities me for being no wiser
than to play with her, and laughs and censures my folly, for making
sport for her, when we two play together?"

Thus freely speaks Montaigne concerning Cats; and I hope I may take as
great a liberty to blame any man, and laugh at him too, let him be never
so grave, that hath not heard what Anglers can say in the justification
of their Art and Recreation; which I may again tell you, is so full of
pleasure, that we need not borrow their thoughts, to think ourselves
happy.

Venator. Sir, you have almost amazed me; for though I am no Scoffer, yet
I have, I pray let me speak it without offence, always looked upon
Anglers, as more patient, and more simple men, than I fear I shall find
you to be.

Piscator. Sir, I hope you will not judge my earnestness to be
impatience: and for my simplicity, if by that you mean a harmlessness,
or that simplicity which was usually found in the primitive Christians,
who were, as most Anglers are, quiet men, and followers of peace; men
that were so simply wise, as not to sell their consciences to buy
riches, and with them vexation and a fear to die; if you mean such
simple men as lived in those times when there were fewer lawyers; when
men might have had a lordship safely conveyed to them in a piece of
parchment no bigger than your hand, though several sheets will not do it
safely in this wiser age; I say, Sir, if you take us Anglers to be such
simple men as I have spoke of, then myself and those of my profession
will be glad to be so understood: But if by simplicity you meant to
express a general defect in those that profess and practice the
excellent Art of Angling, I hope in time to disabuse you, and make the
contrary appear so evidently, that if you will but have patience to hear
me, I shall remove all the anticipations that discourse, or time, or
prejudice, have possessed you with against that laudable and ancient
Art; for I know it is worthy the knowledge and practice of a wise man.

But, Gentlemen, though I be able to do this, I am not so unmannerly as
to engross all the discourse to myself; and, therefore, you two having
declared yourselves, the one to be a lover of Hawks, the other of
Hounds, I shall be most glad to hear what you can say in the
commendation of that recreation which each of you love and practice; and
having heard what you can say, I shall be glad to exercise your
attention with what I can say concerning my own recreation and Art of
Angling, and by this means we shall make the way to seem the shorter:
and if you like my motion, I would have Mr. Falconer to begin.

Auceps. Your motion is consented to with all my heart; and to testify
it, I will begin as you have desired me.

And first, for the Element that I use to trade in, which is the Air, an
element of more worth than weight, an element that doubtless exceeds
both the Earth and Water; for though I sometimes deal in both, yet the
air is most properly mine, I and my Hawks use that most, and it yields
us most recreation. It stops not the high soaring of my noble, generous
Falcon; in it she ascends to such a height as the dull eyes of beasts
and fish are not able to reach to; their bodies are too gross for such
high elevations; in the Air my troops of Hawks soar up on high, and when
they are lost in the sight of men, then they attend upon and converse
with the Gods; therefore I think my Eagle is so justly styled Jove's
servant in ordinary: and that very Falcon, that I am now going to see,
deserves no meaner a title, for she usually in her flight endangers
herself, like the son of Daedalus, to have her wings scorched by the
sun's heat, she flies so near it, but her mettle makes her careless of
danger; for she then heeds nothing, but makes her nimble pinions cut the
fluid air, and so makes her highway over the steepest mountains and
deepest rivers, and in her glorious career looks with contempt upon
those high steeples and magnificent palaces which we adore and wonder
at; from which height, I can make her to descend by a word from my
mouth, which she both knows and obeys, to accept of meat from my hand,
to own me for her Master, to go home with me, and be willing the next
day to afford me the like recreation.

And more; this element of air which I profess to trade in, the worth of
it is such, and it is of such necessity, that no creature whatsoever--not
only those numerous creatures that feed on the face of the earth, but
those various creatures that have their dwelling within the waters,
every creature that hath life in its nostrils, stands in need of my
element. The waters cannot preserve the Fish without air, witness the
not breaking of ice in an extreme frost; the reason is, for that if the
inspiring and expiring organ of any animal be stopped, it suddenly
yields to nature, and dies. Thus necessary is air, to the existence both
of Fish and Beasts, nay, even to Man himself; that air, or breath of
life, with which God at first inspired mankind, he, if he wants it, dies
presently, becomes a sad object to all that loved and beheld him, and in
an instant turns to putrefaction.

Nay more; the very birds of the air, those that be not Hawks, are both
so many and so useful and pleasant to mankind, that I must not let them
pass without some observations. They both feed and refresh him; feed him
with their choice bodies, and refresh him with their heavenly voices. I
will not undertake to mention the several kinds of Fowl by which this is
done: and his curious palate pleased by day, and which with their very
excrements afford him a soft lodging at night. These I will pass by, but
not those little nimble musicians of the air, that warble forth their
curious ditties, with which nature hath furnished them to the shame of
art.

As first the Lark, when she means to rejoice, to cheer herself and those
that hear her; she then quits the earth, and sings as she ascends higher
into the air and having ended her heavenly employment, grows then mute,
and sad, to think she must descend to the dull earth, which she would
not touch, but for necessity.

How do the Blackbird and Thrassel with their melodious voices bid
welcome to the cheerful Spring, and in their fixed months warble forth
such ditties as no art or instrument can reach to!

Nay, the smaller birds also do the like in their particular seasons, as
namely the Laverock, the Tit-lark, the little Linnet, and the honest
Robin that loves mankind both alive and dead.

But the Nightingale, another of my airy creatures, breathes such sweet
loud musick out of her little instrumental throat, that it might make
mankind to think miracles are not ceased. He that at midnight, when the
very labourer sleeps securely, should hear, as I have very often, the
clear airs, the sweet descants, the natural rising and falling, the
doubling and redoubling of her voice, might well be lifted above earth,
and say, "Lord, what musick hast thou provided for the Saints in Heaven,
when thou affordest bad men such musick on Earth!"

And this makes me the less to wonder at the many Aviaries in Italy, or
at the great charge of Varro's Aviary, the ruins of which are yet to be
seen in Rome, and is still so famous there, that it is reckoned for one
of those notables which men of foreign nations either record, or lay up
in their memories when they return from travel.

This for the birds of pleasure, of which very much more might be said.
My next shall be of birds of political use. I think it is not to be
doubted that Swallows have been taught to carry letters between two
armies; but 'tis certain that when the Turks besieged Malta or Rhodes, I
now remember not which it was, Pigeons are then related to carry and
recarry letters: and Mr. G. Sandys, in his Travels, relates it to be
done betwixt Aleppo and Babylon, But if that be disbelieved, it is not
to be doubted that the Dove was sent out of the ark by Noah, to give him
notice of land, when to him all appeared to be sea; and the Dove proved
a faithful and comfortable messenger. And for the sacrifices of the law,
a pair of Turtle-doves, or young Pigeons, were as well accepted as
costly Bulls and Rams; and when God would feed the Prophet Elijah, after
a kind of miraculous manner, he did it by Ravens, who brought him meat
morning and evening. Lastly, the Holy Ghost, when he descended visibly
upon our Saviour, did it by assuming the shape of a Dove. And, to
conclude this part of my discourse, pray remember these wonders were
done by birds of air, the element in which they, and I, take so much
pleasure.

There is also a little contemptible winged creature, an inhabitant of my
aerial element, namely the laborious Bee, of whose prudence, policy, and
regular government of their own commonwealth, I might say much, as also
of their several kinds, and how useful their honey and wax are both for
meat and medicines to mankind; but I will leave them to their sweet
labour, without the least disturbance, believing them to be all very
busy at this very time amongst the herbs and flowers that we see nature
puts forth this May morning.

And now to return to my Hawks, from whom I have made too long a
digression. You are to note, that they are usually distinguished into
two kinds; namely, the long-winged, and the short-winged Hawk: of the
first kind, there be chiefly in use amongst us in this nation,

    The Gerfalcon and Jerkin,
    The Falcon and Tassel-gentle,
    The Laner and Laneret,
    The Bockerel and Bockeret,
    The Saker and Sacaret,
    The Merlin and Jack Merlin,
    The Hobby and Jack:
    There is the Stelletto of Spain,
    The Blood-red Rook from Turkey,
    The Waskite from Virginia:
    And there is of short-winged Hawks,
    The Eagle and Iron
    The Goshawk and Tarcel,
    The Sparhawk and Musket,
    The French Pye of two sorts:

These are reckoned Hawks of note and worth; but we have also of an
inferior rank,

    The Stanyel, the Ringtail,
    The Raven, the Buzzard,
    The Forked Kite, the Bald Buzzard,
    The Hen-driver, and others that I forbear to name.

Gentlemen, if I should enlarge my discourse to the observation of the
Eires, the Brancher, the Ramish Hawk, the Haggard, and the two sorts of
Lentners, and then treat of their several Ayries, their Mewings, rare
order of casting, and the renovation of their feathers: their
reclaiming, dieting, and then come to their rare stories of practice; I
say, if I should enter into these, and many other observations that I
could make, it would be much, very much pleasure to me: but lest I
should break the rules of civility with you, by taking up more than the
proportion of time allotted to me, I will here break off, and entreat
you, Mr. Venator, to say what you are able in the commendation of
Hunting, to which you are so much affected; and if time will serve, I
will beg your favour for a further enlargement of some of those several
heads of which I have spoken. But no more at present.

Venator. Well, Sir, and I will now take my turn, and will first begin
with a commendation of the Earth, as you have done most excellently of
the Air; the Earth being that element upon which I drive my pleasant,
wholesome, hungry trade. The Earth is a solid, settled element; an
element most universally beneficial both to man and beast; to men who
have their several recreations upon it, as horse-races, hunting, sweet
smells, pleasant walks: the earth feeds man, and all those several
beasts that both feed him, and afford him recreation. What pleasure doth
man take in hunting the stately Stag, the generous Buck, the wild Boar,
the cunning Otter, the crafty Fox, and the fearful Hare! And if I may
descend to a lower game, what pleasure is it sometimes with gins to
betray the very vermin of the earth; as namely, the Fichat, the
Fulimart, the Ferret, the Pole-cat, the Mouldwarp, and the like
creatures that live upon the face, and within the bowels of, the Earth.
How doth the Earth bring forth herbs, flowers, and fruits, both for
physick and the pleasure of mankind! and above all, to me at least, the
fruitful vine, of which when I drink moderately, it clears my brain,
cheers my heart, and sharpens my wit. How could Cleopatra have feasted
Mark Antony with eight wild Boars roasted whole at one supper, and other
meat suitable, if the earth had not been a bountiful mother? But to pass
by the mighty Elephant, which the Earth breeds and nourisheth, and
descend to the least of creatures, how doth the earth afford us a
doctrinal example in the little Pismire, who in the summer provides and
lays up her winter provision, and teaches man to do the like! The earth
feeds and carries those horses that carry us. If I would be prodigal of
my time and your patience, what might not I say in commendations of the
earth? That puts limits to the proud and raging sea, and by that means
preserves both man and beast, that it destroys them not, as we see it
daily doth those that venture upon the sea, and are there shipwrecked,
drowned, and left to feed Haddocks; when we that are so wise as to keep
ourselves on earth, walk, and talk, and live, and eat, and drink, and go
a hunting: of which recreation I will say a little, and then leave Mr.
Piscator to the commendation of Angling.

Hunting is a game for princes and noble persons; it hath been highly
prized in all ages; it was one of the qualifications that Xenophon
bestowed on his Cyrus, that he was a hunter of wild beasts. Hunting
trains up the younger nobility to the use of manly exercises in their
riper age. What more manly exercise than hunting the Wild Boar, the
Stag, the Buck, the Fox, or the Hare? How doth it preserve health, and
increase strength and activity!

And for the dogs that we use, who can commend their excellency to that
height which they deserve? How perfect is the hound at smelling, who
never leaves or forsakes his first scent, but follows it through so many
changes and varieties of other scents, even over, and in, the water, and
into the earth! What music doth a pack of dogs then make to any man,
whose heart and ears are so happy as to be set to the tune of such
instruments! How will a right Greyhound fix his eye on the best Buck in
a herd, single him out, and follow him, and him only, through a whole
herd of rascal game, and still know and then kill him! For my hounds, I
know the language of them, and they know the language and meaning of one
another, as perfectly as we know the voices of those with whom we
discourse daily.

I might enlarge myself in the commendation of Hunting, and of the noble
Hound especially, as also of the docibleness of dogs in general; and I
might make many observations of land-creatures, that for composition,
order, figure, and constitution, approach nearest to the completeness
and understanding of man; especially of those creatures, which Moses in
the Law permitted to the Jews, which have cloven hoofs, and chew the
cud; which I shall forbear to name, because I will not be so uncivil to
Mr. Piscator, as not to allow him a time for the commendation of
Angling, which he calls an art; but doubtless it is an easy one: and,
Mr. Auceps, I doubt we shall hear a watery discourse of it, but I hope
it will not be a long one.

Auceps. And I hope so too, though I fear it will.

Piscator. Gentlemen, let not prejudice prepossess you. I confess my
discourse is like to prove suitable to my recreation, calm and quiet; we
seldom take the name of God into our mouths, but it is either to praise
him, or pray to him: if others use it vainly in the midst of their
recreations, so vainly as if they meant to conjure, I must tell you, it
is neither our fault nor our custom; we protest against it. But, pray
remember, I accuse nobody; for as I would not make a "watery discourse,"
so I would not put too much vinegar into it; nor would I raise the
reputation of my own art, by the diminution or ruin of another's. And so
much for the prologue to what I mean to say.

And now for the Water, the element that I trade in. The water is the
eldest daughter of the creation, the element upon which the Spirit of
God did first move, the element which God commanded to bring forth
living creatures abundantly; and without which, those that inhabit the
land, even all creatures that have breath in their nostrils, must
suddenly return to putrefaction. Moses, the great lawgiver and chief
philosopher, skilled in all the learning of the Egyptians, who was
called the friend of God, and knew the mind of the Almighty, names this
element the first in the creation: this is the element upon which the
Spirit of God did first move, and is the chief ingredient in the
creation: many philosophers have made it to comprehend all the other
elements, and most allow it the chiefest in the mixtion of all living
creatures.

There be that profess to believe that all bodies are made of water, and
may be reduced back again to water only; they endeavour to demonstrate
it thus:

Take a willow, or any like speedy growing plant newly rooted in a box or
barrel full of earth, weigh them all together exactly when the tree
begins to grow, and then weigh all together after the tree is increased
from its first rooting, to weigh a hundred pound weight more than when
it was first rooted and weighed; and you shall find this augment of the
tree to be without the diminution of one drachm weight of the earth.
Hence they infer this increase of wood to be from water of rain, or from
dew, and not to be from any other element; and they affirm, they can
reduce this wood back again to water; and they affirm also, the same may
be done in any animal or vegetable. And this I take to be a fair
testimony of the excellency of my element of water.

The water is more productive than the earth. Nay, the earth hath no
fruitfulness without showers or dews; for all the herbs, and flowers,
and fruit, are produced and thrive by the water; and the very minerals
are fed by streams that run under ground, whose natural course carries
them to the tops of many high mountains, as we see by several springs
breaking forth on the tops of the highest hills; and this is also
witnessed by the daily trial and testimony of several miners.

Nay, the increase of those creatures that are bred and fed in the water
are not only more and more miraculous, but more advantageous to man, not
only for the lengthening of his life, but for the preventing of
sickness; for it is observed by the most learned physicians, that the
casting off of Lent, and other fish days, which hath not only given the
lie to so many learned, pious, wise founders of colleges, for which we
should be ashamed, hath doubtless been the chief cause of those many
putrid, shaking intermitting agues, unto which this nation of ours is
now more subject, than those wiser countries that feed on herbs, salads,
and plenty of fish; of which it is observed in story, that the greatest
part of the world now do. And it may be fit to remember that Moses
appointed fish to be the chief diet for the best commonwealth that ever
yet was.

And it is observable, not only that there are fish, as namely the Whale,
three times as big as the mighty Elephant, that is so fierce in battle,
but that the mightiest feasts have been of fish. The Romans, in the
height of their glory, have made fish the mistress of all their
entertainments; they have had musick to usher in their Sturgeons,
Lampreys, and Mullets, which they would purchase at rates rather to be
wondered at than believed. He that shall view the writings of Macrobius,
or Varro, may be confirmed and informed of this, and of the incredible
value of their fish and fish-ponds.

But, Gentlemen, I have almost lost myself, which I confess I may easily
do in this philosophical discourse; I met with most of it very lately,
and, I hope, happily, in a conference with a most learned physician, Dr.
Wharton, a dear friend, that loves both me and my art of Angling. But,
however, I will wade no deeper into these mysterious arguments, but pass
to such observations as I can manage with more pleasure, and less fear
of running into error. But I must not yet forsake the waters, by whose
help we have so many known advantages.

And first, to pass by the miraculous cures of our known baths, how
advantageous is the sea for our daily traffick, without which we could
not now subsist. How does it not only furnish us with food and physick
for the bodies, but with such observations for the mind as ingenious
persons would not want!

How ignorant had we been of the beauty of Florence, of the monuments,
urns, and rarities that yet remain in and near unto old and new Rome, so
many as it is said will take up a year's time to view, and afford to
each of them but a convenient consideration! And therefore it is not to
be wondered at, that so learned and devout a father as St. Jerome, after
his wish to have seen Christ in the flesh, and to have heard St. Paul
preach, makes his third wish, to have seen Rome in her glory; and that
glory is not yet all lost, for what pleasure is it to see the monuments
of Livy, the choicest of the historians; of Tully, the best of orators;
and to see the bay trees that now grow out of the very tomb of Virgil!
These, to any that love learning, must be pleasing. But what pleasure is
it to a devout Christian, to see there the humble house in which St.
Paul was content to dwell, and to view the many rich statues that are
made in honour of his memory! nay, to see the very place in which St.
Peter and he lie buried together! These are in and near to Rome. And how
much more doth it please the pious curiosity of a Christian, to see that
place, on which the blessed Saviour of the world was pleased to humble
himself, and to take our nature upon him, and to converse with men: to
see Mount Sion, Jerusalem, and the very sepulchre of our Lord Jesus! How
may it beget and heighten the zeal of a Christian, to see the devotions
that are daily paid to him at that place! Gentlemen, lest I forget
myself, I will stop here, and remember you, that but for my element of
water, the inhabitants of this poor island must remain ignorant that
such things ever were, or that any of them have yet a being.

Gentlemen, I might both enlarge and lose myself in such like arguments.
I might tell you that Almighty God is said to have spoken to a fish, but
never to a beast; that he hath made a whale a ship, to carry and set his
prophet, Jonah, safe on the appointed shore. Of these I might speak, but
I must in manners break off, for I see Theobald's House. I cry you mercy
for being so long, and thank you for your patience.

Auceps. Sir, my pardon is easily granted you: I except against nothing
that you have said: nevertheless, I must part with you at this
park-wall, for which I am very sorry; but I assure you, Mr. Piscator, I
now part with you full of good thoughts, not only of yourself, but your
recreation. And so, Gentlemen, God keep you both.

Piscator. Well, now, Mr. Venator, you shall neither want time, nor my
attention to hear you enlarge your discourse concerning hunting.

Venator. Not I, Sir: I remember you said that Angling itself was of
great antiquity, and a perfect art, and an art not easily attained to;
and you have so won upon me in your former discourse, that I am very
desirous to hear what you can say further concerning those particulars.

Piscator. Sir, I did say so: and I doubt not but if you and I did
converse together but a few hours, to leave you possessed with the same
high and happy thoughts that now possess me of it; not only of the
antiquity of Angling, but that it deserves commendations; and that it is
an art, and an art worthy the knowledge and practice of a wise man.

Venator. Pray, Sir, speak of them what you think fit, for we have yet
five miles to the Thatched House; during which walk, I dare promise you,
my patience and diligent attention shall not be wanting. And if you
shall make that to appear which you have undertaken, first, that it is
an art, and an art worth the learning, I shall beg that I may attend you
a day or two a-fishing, and that I may become your scholar, and be
instructed in the art itself which you so much magnify.

Piscator. O, Sir, doubt not but that Angling is an art; is it not an art
to deceive a Trout with an artificial Fly? a Trout! that is more
sharp-sighted than any Hawk you have named, and more watchful and
timorous than your high-mettled Merlin is bold? and yet, I doubt not to
catch a brace or two to-morrow, for a friend's breakfast: doubt not
therefore, Sir, but that angling is an art, and an art worth your learning.
The question is rather, whether you be capable of learning it? angling
is somewhat like poetry, men are to be born so: I mean, with
inclinations to it, though both may be heightened by discourse and
practice: but he that hopes to be a good angler, must not only bring an
inquiring, searching, observing wit, but he must bring a large measure
of hope and patience, and a love and propensity to the art itself; but
having once got and practiced it, then doubt not but angling will prove
to be so pleasant, that it will prove to be, like virtue, a reward to
itself.

Venator. Sir, I am now become so full of expectation, that I long much
to have you proceed, and in the order that you propose.

Piscator. Then first, for the antiquity of Angling, of which I shall not
say much, but only this; some say it is as ancient as Deucalion's flood:
others, that Belus, who was the first inventor of godly and virtuous
recreations, was the first inventor of Angling: and some others say, for
former times have had their disquisitions about the antiquity of it,
that Seth, one of the sons of Adam, taught it to his sons, and that by
them it was derived to posterity: others say that he left it engraven on
those pillars which he erected, and trusted to preserve the knowledge of
the mathematicks, musick, and the rest of that precious knowledge, and
those useful arts, which by God's appointment or allowance, and his
noble industry, were thereby preserved from perishing in Noah's flood.

These, Sir, have been the opinions of several men, that have possibly
endeavoured to make angling more ancient than is needful, or may well be
warranted; but for my part, I shall content myself in telling you, that
angling is much more ancient than the incarnation of our Saviour; for in
the Prophet Amos mention is made of fish-hooks; and in the book of Job,
which was long before the days of Amos, for that book is said to have
been written by Moses, mention is made also of fish-hooks, which must
imply anglers in those times.

But, my worthy friend, as I would rather prove myself a gentleman, by
being learned and humble, valiant and inoffensive, virtuous and
communicable, than by any fond ostentation of riches, or, wanting those
virtues myself, boast that these were in my ancestors; and yet I grant,
that where a noble and ancient descent and such merit meet in any man,
it is a double dignification of that person; so if this antiquity of
angling, which for my part I have not forced, shall, like an ancient
family, be either an honour, or an ornament to this virtuous art which I
profess to love and practice, I shall be the gladder that I made an
accidental mention of the antiquity of it, of which I shall say no more,
but proceed to that just commendation which I think it deserves.

And for that, I shall tell you, that in ancient times a debate hath
risen, and it remains yet unresolved, whether the happiness of man in
this world doth consist more in contemplation or action? Concerning
which, some have endeavoured to maintain their opinion of the first; by
saying, that the nearer we mortals come to God by way of imitation, the
more happy we are. And they say, that God enjoys himself only, by a
contemplation of his own infiniteness, eternity, power, and goodness,
and the like. And upon this ground, many cloisteral men of great
learning and devotion, prefer contemplation before action. And many of
the fathers seem to approve this opinion, as may appear in their
commentaries upon the words of our Saviour to Martha.

And on the contrary, there want not men of equal authority and credit,
that prefer action to be the more excellent; as namely, experiments in
physick, and the application of it, both for the ease and prolongation
of man's life; by which each man is enabled to act and do good to
others, either to serve his country, or do good to particular persons:
and they say also, that action is doctrinal, and teaches both art and
virtue, and is a maintainer of human society; and for these, and other
like reasons, to be preferred before contemplation.

Concerning which two opinions I shall forbear to add a third, by
declaring my own; and rest myself contented in telling you, my very
worthy friend, that both these meet together, and do most properly
belong to the most honest, ingenuous, quiet, and harmless art of
angling.

And first, I shall tell you what some have observed, and I have found it
to be a real truth, that the very sitting by the river's side is not
only the quietest and fittest place for contemplation, but will invite
an angler to it: and this seems to be maintained by the learned Peter du
Moulin, who, in his discourse of the fulfilling of Prophecies, observes,
that when God intended to reveal any future events or high notions to
his prophets, he then carried them either to the deserts, or the
sea-shore, that having so separated them from amidst the press of people
and business, and the cares of the world, he might settle their mind in
a quiet repose, and there make them fit for revelation.

And this seems also to be imitated by the children of Israel, who having
in a sad condition banished all mirth and musick from their pensive
hearts, and having hung up their then mute harps upon the willow-trees
growing by the rivers of Babylon, sat down upon those banks, bemoaning
the ruins of Sion, and contemplating their own sad condition.

And an ingenious Spaniard says, that "rivers and the inhabitants of the
watery element were made for wise men to contemplate, and fools to pass
by without consideration ". And though I will not rank myself in the
number of the first, yet give me leave to free myself from the last, by
offering to you a short contemplation, first of rivers, and then of
fish; concerning which I doubt not but to give you many observations
that will appear very considerable: I am sure they have appeared so to
me, and made many an hour pass away more pleasantly, as I have sat
quietly on a flowery bank by a calm river, and contemplated what I shall
now relate to you.

And first concerning rivers; there be so many wonders reported and
written of them, and of the several creatures that be bred and live in
them, and those by authors of so good credit, that we need not to deny
them an historical faith.

As namely of a river in Epirus that puts out any lighted torch, and
kindles any torch that was not lighted. Some waters being drunk, cause
madness, some drunkenness, and some laughter to death. The river Selarus
in a few hours turns a rod or wand to stone: and our Camden mentions the
like in England, and the like in Lochmere in Ireland. There is also a
river in Arabia, of which all the sheep that drink thereof have their
wool turned into a vermilion colour. And one of no less credit than
Aristotle, tells us of a merry river, the river Elusina, that dances at
the noise of musick, for with musick it bubbles, dances, and grows
sandy, and so continues till the musick ceases, but then it presently
returns to its wonted calmness and clearness. And Camden tells us of a
well near to Kirby, in Westmoreland, that ebbs and flows several times
every day: and he tells us of a river in Surrey, it is called Mole, that
after it has run several miles, being opposed by hills, finds or makes
itself a way under ground, and breaks out again so far off, that the
inhabitants thereabout boast, as the Spaniards do of their river Anus,
that they feed divers flocks of sheep upon a bridge. And lastly, for I
would not tire your patience, one of no less authority than Josephus,
that learned Jew, tells us of a river in Judea that runs swiftly all the
six days of the week, and stands still and rests all their sabbath.

But I will lay aside my discourse of rivers, and tell you some things of
the monsters, or fish, call them what you will, that they breed and feed
in them. Pliny the philosopher says, in the third chapter of his ninth
book, that in the Indian Sea, the fish called Balaena or Whirlpool, is
so long and broad, as to take up more in length and breadth than two
acres of ground; and, of other fish, of two hundred cubits long; and
that in the river Ganges, there be Eels of thirty feet long. He says
there, that these monsters appear in that sea, only when the tempestuous
winds oppose the torrents of water falling from the rocks into it, and
so turning what lay at the bottom to be seen on the water's top. And he
says, that the people of Cadara, an island near this place, make the
timber for their houses of those fish bones. He there tells us, that
there are sometimes a thousand of these great Eels found wrapt or
interwoven together He tells us there, that it appears that dolphins
love musick, and will come when called for, by some men or boys that
know, and use to feed them; and that they can swim as swift as an arrow
can be shot out of a bow; and much of this is spoken concerning the
dolphin, and other fish, as may be found also in the learned Dr.
Casaubon's Discourse of Credulity and Incredulity, printed by him about
the year 1670.

I know, we Islanders are averse to the belief of these wonders; but
there be so many strange creatures to be now seen, many collected by
John Tradescant, and others added by my friend Elias Ashmole, Esq., who
now keeps them carefully and methodically at his house near to Lambeth,
near London, as may get some belief of some of the other wonders I
mentioned. I will tell you some of the wonders that you may now see, and
not till then believe, unless you think fit.

You may there see the Hog-fish, the Dog-fish, the Dolphin, the
Cony-fish, the Parrot-fish, the Shark, the Poison-fish, Sword-fish, and
not only other incredible fish, but you may there see the Salamander,
several sorts of Barnacles, of Solan-Geese, the Bird of Paradise, such
sorts of Snakes, and such Birds'-nests, and of so various forms, and so
wonderfully made, as may beget wonder and amusement in any beholder; and
so many hundred of other rarities in that collection, as will make the
other wonders I spake of, the less incredible; for, you may note, that
the waters are Nature's store-house, in which she locks up her wonders.

But, Sir, lest this discourse may seem tedious, I shall give it a sweet
conclusion out of that holy poet, Mr. George Herbert his divine
"Contemplation on God's Providence".

    Lord! who hath praise enough, nay, who hath any?
    None can express thy works, but he that knows them;
    And none can know thy works, they are so many,
    And so complete, but only he that owes them.

    We all acknowledge both thy power and love
    To be exact, transcendant, and divine;
    Who cost so strangely and so sweetly move,
    Whilst all things have their end, yet none but thine.

    Wherefore, most sacred Spirit! I here present,
    For me, and all my fellows, praise to thee;
    And just it is, that I should pay the rent,
    Because the benefit accrues to me.

And as concerning fish, in that psalm, wherein, for height of poetry and
wonders, the prophet David seems even to exceed himself, how doth he
there express himself in choice metaphors, even to the amazement of a
contemplative reader, concerning the sea, the rivers, and the fish
therein contained! And the great naturalist Pliny says, "That nature's
great and wonderful power is more demonstrated in the sea than on the
land ". And this may appear, by the numerous and various creatures
inhabiting both in and about that element; as to the readers of Gesner,
Rondeletius, Pliny, Ausonius, Aristotle, and others, may be
demonstrated. But I will sweeten this discourse also out of a
contemplation in divine Du Bartas, who says:

    God quickened in the sea, and in the rivers,
    So many fishes of so many features,
    That in the waters we may see all creatures,
    Even all that on the earth are to be found,
    As if the world were in deep waters drown'd.
    For seas--as well as skies--have Sun, Moon, Stars
    As well as air--Swallows, Rooks, and Stares;
    As well as earth--Vines, Roses, Nettles, Melons,
    Mushrooms, Pinks, Gilliflowers, and many millions
    Of other plants, more rare, more strange than these,
    As very fishes, living in the seas;
    As also Rams, Calves, Horses, Hares, and Hogs,
    Wolves, Urchins, Lions, Elephants, and Dogs;
    Yea, Men and Maids, and, which I most admire,
    The mitred Bishop and the cowled Friar:
    Of which, examples, but a few years since,
    Were strewn the Norway and Polonian prince.

These seem to be wonders; but have had so many confirmations from men of
learning and credit, that you need not doubt them. Nor are the number,
nor the various shapes, of fishes more strange, or more fit for
contemplation, than their different natures, inclinations, and actions;
concerning which, I shall beg your patient ear a little longer.

The Cuttle-fish will cast a long gut out of her throat, which, like as
an Angler doth his line, she sendeth forth, and pulleth in again at her
pleasure, according as she sees some little fish come near to her; and
the Cuttle-fish, being then hid in the gravel, lets the smaller fish
nibble and bite the end of it; at which time she, by little and little,
draws the smaller fish so near to her, that she may leap upon her, and
then catches and devours her: and for this reason some have called this
fish the Sea-angler.

And there is a fish called a Hermit, that at a certain age gets into a
dead fish's shell, and, like a hermit, dwells there alone, studying the
wind and weather and so turns her shell, that she makes it defend her
from the injuries that they would bring upon her.

There is also a fish called by Ælian the Adonis, or Darling of the Sea;
so called, because it is a loving and innocent fish, a fish that hurts
nothing that hath life, and is at peace with all the numerous
inhabitants of that vast watery element; and truly, I think most Anglers
are so disposed to most of mankind.

And there are, also, lustful and chaste fishes; of which I shall give
you examples.

And first, what Du Bartas says of a fish called the Sargus; which,
because none can express it better than he does, I shall give you in his
own words, supposing it shall not have the less credit for being verse;
for he hath gathered this and other observations out of authors that
have been great and industrious searchers into the secrets of nature.

    The adult'rous Sargus doth not only change
    Wives every day, in the deep streams, but, strange!
    As if the honey of sea-love delight
    Could not suffice his ranging appetite,
    Goes courting she-goats on the grassy shore,
    Horning their husbands that had horns before.

And the same author writes concerning the Cantharus, that which you
shall also hear in his own words:

    But, contrary, the constant Cantharus
    Is ever constant to his faithful spouse
    In nuptial duties, spending his chaste life.
    Never loves any but his own dear wife.

Sir, but a little longer, and I have done.

Venator. Sir, take what liberty you think fit, for your discourse seems
to be musick, and charms me to an attention.

Piscator. Why then, Sir, I will take a little liberty to tell, or rather
to remember you what is said of Turtle-doves; first, that they silently
plight their troth, and marry; and that then the survivor scorns, as the
Thracian women are said to do, to outlive his or her mate, and this is
taken for a truth; and if the survivor shall ever couple with another,
then, not only the living, but the dead, be it either the he or the she,
is denied the name and honour of a true Turtle-dove.

And to parallel this land-rarity, and teach mankind moral faithfulness,
and to condemn those that talk of religion, and yet come short of the
moral faith of fish and fowl, men that violate the law affirmed by St.
Paul to be writ in their hearts, and which, he says, shall at the Last
Day condemn and leave them without excuse--I pray hearken to what Du
Bartas sings, for the hearing of such conjugal faithfulness will be
musick to all chaste ears, and therefore I pray hearken to what Du
Bartas sings of the Mullet.

    But for chaste love the Mullet hath no peer;
    For, if the fisher hath surpris'd her pheer
    As mad with wo, to shore she followeth
    Prest to consort him, both in life and death.

On the contrary, what shall I say of the House-Cock, which treads any
hen; and, then, contrary to the Swan, the Partridge, and Pigeon, takes
no care to hatch, to feed, or cherish his own brood, but is senseless,
though they perish. And it is considerable, that the Hen, which, because
she also takes any Cock, expects it not, who is sure the chickens be her
own, hath by a moral impression her care and affection to her own brood
more than doubled, even to such a height, that our Saviour, in
expressing his love to Jerusalem, quotes her, for an example of tender
affection, as his Father had done Job, for a pattern of patience.

And to parallel this Cock, there be divers fishes that cast their spawn
on flags or stones, and then leave it uncovered, and exposed to become a
prey and be devoured by vermin or other fishes. But other fishes, as
namely the Barbel, take such care for the preservation of their seed,
that, unlike to the Cock, or the Cuckoo, they mutually labour, both the
spawner and the melter, to cover their spawn with sand, or watch it, or
hide it in some secret place unfrequented by vermin or by any fish but
themselves.

Sir, these examples may, to you and others, seem strange; but they are
testified, some by Aristotle, some by Pliny, some by Gesner, and by many
others of credit; and are believed and known by divers, both of wisdom
and experience, to be a truth; and indeed are, as I said at the
beginning, fit for the contemplation of a most serious and a most pious
man. And, doubtless, this made the prophet David say, "They that occupy
themselves in deep waters, see the wonderful works of God": indeed such
wonders and pleasures too, as the land affords not.

And that they be fit for the contemplation of the most prudent, and
pious, and peaceable men, seems to be testified by the practice of so
many devout and contemplative men, as the Patriarchs and Prophets of
old; and of the Apostles of our Saviour in our latter times, of which
twelve, we are sure, he chose four that were simple fishermen, whom he
inspired, and sent to publish his blessed will to the Gentiles; and
inspired them also with a power to speak all languages, and by their
powerful eloquence to beget faith in the unbelieving Jews; and
themselves to suffer for that Saviour, whom their forefathers and they
had crucified; and, in their sufferings, to preach freedom from the
incumbrances of the law, and a new way to everlasting life: this was the
employment of these happy fishermen. Concerning which choice, some have
made these observations:

First, that he never reproved these, for their employment or calling, as
he did the Scribes and the Money-changers. And secondly, he found that
the hearts of such men, by nature, were fitted for contemplation and
quietness; men of mild, and sweet, and peaceable spirits, as indeed most
Anglers are: these men our blessed Saviour, who is observed to love to
plant grace in good natures, though indeed nothing be too hard for him,
yet these men he chose to call from their irreprovable employment of
fishing, and gave them grace to be his disciples, and to follow him, and
do wonders; I say four of twelve.

And it is observable, that it was our Saviour's will that these, our
four fishermen, should have a priority of nomination in the catalogue of
his twelve Apostles, as namely, first St. Peter, St. Andrew, St. James,
and St. John; and, then, the rest in their order.

And it is yet more observable, that when our blessed Saviour went up
into the mount, when he left the rest of his disciples, and chose only
three to bear him company at his Transfiguration, that those three were
all fishermen. And it is to be believed, that all the other Apostles,
after they betook themselves to follow Christ, betook themselves to be
fishermen too; for it is certain, that the greater number of them were
found together, fishing, by Jesus after his resurrection, as it is
recorded in the twenty-first chapter of St. John's gospel.

And since I have your promise to hear me with patience, I will take a
liberty to look back upon an observation that hath been made by an
ingenious and learned man; who observes, that God hath been pleased to
allow those whom he himself hath appointed to write his holy will in
holy writ, yet to express his will in such metaphors as their former
affections or practice had inclined them to. And he brings Solomon for
an example, who, before his conversion, was remarkably carnally amorous;
and after, by God's appointment, wrote that spiritual dialogue, or holy
amorous love-song the Canticles, betwixt God and his church: in which he
says, "his beloved had eyes like the fish-pools of Heshbon".

And if this hold in reason, as I see none to the contrary, then it may
be probably concluded, that Moses, who I told you before writ the book
of Job, and the Prophet Amos, who was a shepherd, were both Anglers; for
you shall, in all the Old Testament, find fish-hooks, I think but twice
mentioned, namely, by meek Moses the friend of God, and by the humble
prophet Amos.

Concerning which last, namely the prophet Amos, I shall make but this
observation, that he that shall read the humble, lowly, plain style of
that prophet, and compare it with the high, glorious, eloquent style of
the prophet Isaiah, though they be both equally true, may easily believe
Amos to be, not only a shepherd, but a good-natured plain fisherman.
Which I do the rather believe, by comparing the affectionate, loving,
lowly, humble Epistles of St. Peter, St. James, and St. John, whom we
know were all fishers, with the glorious language and high metaphors of
St. Paul, who we may believe was not.

And for the lawfulness of fishing: it may very well be maintained by our
Saviour's bidding St. Peter cast his hook into the water and catch a
fish, for money to pay tribute to Caesar. And let me tell you, that
Angling is of high esteem, and of much use in other nations. He that
reads the Voyages of Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, shall find that there he
declares to have found a king and several priests a-fishing. And he that
reads Plutarch, shall find, that Angling was not contemptible in the
days of Mark Antony and Cleopatra, and that they, in the midst of their
wonderful glory, used Angling as a principal recreation. And let me tell
you, that in the Scripture, Angling is always taken in the best sense;
and that though hunting may be sometimes so taken, yet it is but seldom
to be so understood. And let me add this more: he that views the ancient
Ecclesiastical Canons, shall find hunting to be forbidden to Churchmen,
as being a turbulent, toilsome, perplexing recreation; and shall find
Angling allowed to clergymen, as being a harmless recreation, a
recreation that invites them to contemplation and quietness.

I might here enlarge myself, by telling you what commendations our
learned Perkins bestows on Angling: and how dear a lover, and great a
practiser of it, our learned Dr. Whitaker was; as indeed many others of
great learning have been. But I will content myself with two memorable
men, that lived near to our own time, whom I also take to have been
ornaments to the art of Angling.

The first is Dr. Nowel, sometime dean of the cathedral church of St.
Paul, in London, where his monument stands yet undefaced; a man that, in
the reformation of Queen Elizabeth, not that of Henry VIII., was so
noted for his meek spirit, deep learning, prudence, and piety, that the
then Parliament and Convocation, both, chose, enjoined, and trusted him
to be the man to make a Catechism for public use, such a one as should
stand as a rule for faith and manners to their posterity. And the good
old man, though he was very learned, yet knowing that God leads us not
to heaven by many, nor by hard questions, like an honest Angler, made
that good, plain, unperplexed Catechism which is printed with our good
old Service-book. I say, this good man was a dear lover and constant
practiser of Angling, as any age can produce: and his custom was to
spend besides his fixed hours of prayer, those hours which, by command
of the church, were enjoined the clergy, and voluntarily dedicated to
devotion by many primitive Christians, I say, besides those hours, this
good man was observed to spend a tenth part of his time in Angling; and,
also, for I have conversed with those which have conversed with him, to
bestow a tenth part of his revenue, and usually all his fish, amongst
the poor that inhabited near to those rivers in which it was caught;
saying often, "that charity gave life to religion ": and, at his return
to his house, would praise God he had spent that day free from worldly
trouble; both harmlessly, and in a recreation that became a churchman.
And this good man was well content, if not desirous, that posterity
should know he was an Angler; as may appear by his picture, now to be
seen, and carefully kept, in Brazen-nose College, to which he was a
liberal benefactor. In which picture he is drawn leaning on a desk, with
his Bible before him; and on one hand of him, his lines, hooks, and
other tackling, lying in a round; and, on his other hand, are his
Angle-rods of several sorts; and by them this is written, "that he died
13 Feb. 1601, being aged ninety-five years, forty-four of which he had
been Dean of St. Paul's church, and that his age neither impaired his
hearing, nor dimmed his eyes, nor weakened his memory, nor made any of
the faculties of his mind weak or useless". It is said that Angling and
temperance were great causes of these blessings; and I wish the like to
all that imitate him, and love the memory of so good a man.

My next and last example shall be that under-valuer of money, the late
provost of Eton College, Sir Henry Wotton, a man with whom I have often
fished and conversed, a man whose foreign employments in the service of
this nation, and whose experience, learning, wit, and cheerfulness, made
his company to be esteemed one of the delights of mankind. This man,
whose very approbation of Angling were sufficient to convince any modest
censurer of it, this man was also a most dear lover, and a frequent
practiser of the art of Angling; of which he would say, "it was an
employment for his idle time, which was then not idly spent"; for
Angling was, after tedious study, "a rest to his mind, a cheerer of his
spirits, a diverter of sadness, a calmer of unquiet thoughts, a
moderator of passions, a procurer of contentedness; and that it begat
habits of peace and patience in those that professed and practiced it ".
Indeed, my friend, you will find Angling to be like the virtue of
humility, which has a calmness of spirit, and a world of other blessings
attending upon it. Sir, this was the saying of that learned man.

And I do easily believe, that peace, and patience, and a calm content,
did cohabit in the cheerful heart of Sir Henry Wotton, because I know
that when he was beyond seventy years of age, he made this description
of a part of the present pleasure that possessed him, as he sat quietly,
in a summer's evening, on a bank a-fishing. It is a description of the
spring; which, because it glided as soft and sweetly from his pen, as
that river does at this time, by which it was then made, I shall repeat
it unto you:--

    This day dame Nature seem'd in love
    The lusty sap began to move;
    Fresh juice did stir th' embracing vines.
    And birds had drawn their valentines.

    The jealous trout, that low did lie
    Rose at a well-dissembled fly
    There stood my Friend, with patient skill,
    Attending of his trembling quill.

    Already were the eaves possess'd
    With the swift pilgrim's daubed nest;
    The groves already did rejoice
    In Philomel's triumphing voice:

    The showers were short, the weather mild,
    The morning fresh, the evening smil'd.
    Joan takes her neat-rubb'd pail, and now,
    She trips to milk the sand-red cow;

    Where, for some sturdy foot-ball swain,
    Joan strokes a syllabub or twain.
    The fields and gardens were beset
    With tulips, crocus, violet;

    And now, though late, the modest rose
    Did more than half a blush disclose.
    Thus all looks gay, and full of cheer,
    To welcome the new-livery'd year.

These were the thoughts that then possessed the undisturbed mind of Sir
Henry Wotton. Will you hear the wish of another Angler, and the
commendation of his happy life, which he also sings in verse: viz. Jo.
Davors, Esq.

    Let me live harmlessly, and near the brink
    Of Trent or Avon have a dwelling-place
    Where I may see my quill, or cork, down sink
    With eager bite of Perch, or Bleak, or Dace;
    And on the world and my Creator think:
    Whilst some men strive ill-gotten goods t' embrace;
    And others spend their time in base excess
    Of wine, or worse, in war and wantonness.

    Let them that list, these pastimes still pursue,
    And on such pleasing fancies feed their fill;
    So I the fields and meadows green may view,
    And daily by fresh rivers walk at will
    Among the daisies and the violets blue,
    Red hyacinth, and yellow daffodil,
    Purple Narcissus like the morning rays,
    Pale gander-grass, and azure culver-keys.

    I count it higher pleasure to behold
    The stately compass of the lofty sky;
    And in the midst thereof, like burning gold,
    The flaming chariot of the world's great eye:

    The watery clouds that in the air up-roll'd
    With sundry kinds of painted colours fly;
    And fair Aurora, lifting up her head,
    Still blushing, rise from old Tithonus' bed.

    The hills and mountains raised from the plains,
    The plains extended level with the ground
    The grounds divided into sundry veins,
    The veins inclos'd with rivers running round;
    These rivers making way through nature's chains,
    With headlong course, into the sea profound;
    The raging sea, beneath the vallies low,
    Where lakes, and rills, and rivulets do flow:

    The lofty woods, the forests wide and long,
    Adorned with leaves and branches fresh and green,
    In whose cool bowers the birds with many a song,
    Do welcome with their quire the summer's Queen;
    The meadows fair, where Flora's gifts, among
    Are intermix'd with verdant grass between;
    The silver-scaled fish that softly swim
    Within the sweet brook's crystal, watery stream.

    All these, and many more of his creation
    That made the heavens, the Angler oft doth see;
    Taking therein no little delectation,
    To think how strange, how wonderful they be:
    Framing thereof an inward contemplation
    To set his heart from other fancies free;
    And whilst he looks on these with joyful eye,
    His mind is rapt above the starry sky.

Sir, I am glad my memory has not lost these last verses, because they
are somewhat more pleasant and more suitable to May-day than my harsh
discourse. And I am glad your patience hath held out so long as to hear
them and me, for both together have brought us within the sight of the
Thatched House. And I must be your debtor, if you think it worth your
attention, for the rest of my promised discourse, till some other
opportunity, and a like time of leisure.

Venator. Sir, you have angled me on with much pleasure to the Thatched
House; and I now find your words true, "that good company makes the way
seem short"; for trust me, Sir, I thought we had wanted three miles of
this house, till you showed it to me. But now we are at it, we'll turn
into it, and refresh ourselves with a cup of drink, and a little rest.

Piscator. Most gladly, Sir, and we'll drink a civil cup to all the
Otter-hunters that are to meet you to-morrow.

Venator. That we will, Sir, and to all the lovers of Angling too, of
which number I am now willing to be one myself; for, by the help of your
good discourse and company, I have put on new thoughts both of the art
of Angling and of all that profess it; and if you will but meet me
to-morrow at the time and place appointed, and bestow one day with me
and my friends, in hunting the Otter, I will dedicate the next two days
to wait upon you; and we too will, for that time, do nothing but angle,
and talk of fish and fishing.

Piscator. It is a match, Sir, I will not fail you, God willing, to be at
Amwell Hill to-morrow morning before sun-rising.





The second day

On the Otter and the Chub

