Chapter X

Piscator

The Bream, being at a full growth, is a large and stately fish. He will
breed both in rivers and ponds: but loves best to live in ponds, and
where, if he likes the water and air, he will grow not only to be very
large, but as fat as a hog. He is by Gesner taken to be more pleasant,
or sweet, than wholesome. This fish is long in growing; but breeds
exceedingly in a water that pleases him; yea, in many ponds so fast, as
to overstore them, and starve the other fish.

He is very broad, with a forked tail, and his scales set in excellent
order; he hath large eyes, and a narrow sucking mouth; he hath two sets
of teeth, and a lozenge-like bone, a bone to help his grinding. The
melter is observed to have two large melts; and the female, two large
bags of eggs or spawn.

Gesner reports, that in Poland a certain and a great number of large
breams were put into a pond, which in the next following winter were
frozen up into one entire ice, and not one drop of water remaining, nor
one of these fish to be found, though they were diligently searched for;
and yet the next spring, when the ice was thawed, and the weather warm,
and fresh water got into the pond, he affirms they all appeared again.
This Gesner affirms; and I quote my author, because it seems almost as
incredible as the resurrection to an atheist: but it may win something,
in point of believing it, to him that considers the breeding or
renovation of the silk-worm, and of many insects. And that is
considerable, which Sir Francis Bacon observes in his History of Life
and Death, fol. 20, that there be some herbs that die and spring every
year, and some endure longer.

But though some do not, yet the French esteem this fish highly; and to
that end have this proverb "He that hath Breams in his pond, is able to
bid his friend welcome"; and it is noted, that the best part of a Bream
is his belly and head.

Some say, that Breams and Roaches will mix their eggs and melt together;
and so there is in many places a bastard breed of Breams, that never
come to be either large or good, but very numerous.

The baits good to catch this Bream are many. First, paste made of brown
bread and honey; gentles; or the brood of wasps that be young, and then
not unlike gentles, and should be hardened in an oven, or dried on a
tile before the fire to make them tough. Or, there is, at the root of
docks or flags or rushes, in watery places, a worm not unlike a maggot,
at which Tench will bite freely. Or he will bite at a grasshopper with
his legs nipt off, in June and July; or at several flies, under water,
which may be found on flags that grow near to the water-side. I doubt
not but that there be many other baits that are good; but I will turn
them all into this most excellent one, either for a Carp or Bream, in
any river or mere: it was given to me by a most honest and excellent
angler; and hoping you will prove both, I will impart it to you.

1. Let your bait be as big a red worm as you can find, without a knot:
get a pint or quart of them in an evening, in garden-walks, or chalky
commons, after a shower of rain; and put them with clean moss well
washed and picked, and the water squeezed out of the moss as dry as you
can, into an earthen pot or pipkin set dry; and change the moss fresh
every three or four days, for three weeks or a month together; then your
bait will be at the best, for it will be clear and lively.

2. Having thus prepared your baits, get your tackling ready and fitted
for this sport. Take three long angling-rods; and as many and more silk,
or silk and hair, lines; and as many large swan or goose-quill floats.
Then take a piece of lead, and fasten them to the low ends of your
lines: then fasten your link-hook also to the lead; and let there be
about a foot or ten inches between the lead and the hook: but be sure
the lead be heavy enough to sink the float or quill, a little under the
water; and not the quill to bear up the lead, for the lead must lie on
the ground. Note, that your link next the hook may be smaller than the
rest of your line, if you dare adventure, for fear of taking the Pike or
Perch, who will assuredly visit your hooks, till they be taken out, as I
will show you afterwards, before either Carp or Bream will come near to
bite. Note also, that when the worm is well baited, it will crawl up and
down as far as the lead will give leave, which much enticeth the fish to
bite without suspicion.

3. Having thus prepared your baits, and fitted your tackling, repair to
the river, where you have seen them swim in skulls or shoals, in the
summer-time, in a hot afternoon, about three or four of the clock; and
watch their going forth of their deep holes, and returning, which you
may well discern, for they return about four of the clock, most of them
seeking food at the bottom, yet one or two will lie on the top of the
water, rolling and tumbling themselves, whilst the rest are under him at
the bottom; and so you shall perceive him to keep sentinel: then mark
where he plays most and stays longest, which commonly is in the broadest
and deepest place of the river; and there, or near thereabouts, at a
clear bottom and a convenient landing-place, take one of your angles
ready fitted as aforesaid, and sound the bottom, which should be about
eight or ten feet deep; two yards from the bank is best. Then consider
with yourself, whether that water will rise or fall by the next morning,
by reason of any water-mills near; and, according to your discretion,
take the depth of the place, where you mean after to cast your
ground-bait, and to fish, to half an inch; that the lead lying on or
near the ground-bait, the top of the float may only appear upright half
an inch above the water.

Thus you having found and fitted for the place and depth thereof, then
go home and prepare your ground-bait, which is, next to the fruit of
your labours, to be regarded.


The GROUND-BAIT.

You shall take a peck, or a peck and a half, according to the greatness
of the stream and deepness of the water, where you mean to angle, of
sweet gross-ground barley-malt; and boil it in a kettle, one or two
warms is enough: then strain it through a bag into a tub, the liquor
whereof hath often done my horse much good; and when the bag and malt is
near cold, take it down to the water-side, about eight or nine of the
clock in the evening, and not before: cast in two parts of your
ground-bait, squeezed hard between both your hands; it will sink
presently to the bottom; and be sure it may rest in the very place where
you mean to angle: if the stream run hard, or move a little, cast your
malt in handfuls a little the higher, upwards the stream. You may,
between your hands, close the malt so fast in handfuls, that the water
will hardly part it with the fall.

Your ground thus baited, and tackling fitted, leave your bag, with the
rest of your tackling and ground-bait, near the sporting-place all
night; and in the morning, about three or four of the clock, visit the
water-side, but not too near, for they have a cunning watchman, and are
watchful themselves too.

Then, gently take one of your three rods, and bait your hook; casting it
over your ground-bait, and gently and secretly draw it to you till the
lead rests about the middle of the ground-bait.

Then take a second rod, and cast in about a yard above, and your third a
yard below the first rod; and stay the rods in the ground: but go
yourself so far from the water-side, that you perceive nothing but the
top of the floats, which you must watch most diligently. Then when you
have a bite, you shall perceive the top of your float to sink suddenly
into the water: yet, nevertheless, be not too hasty to run to your rods,
until you see that the line goes clear away; then creep to the
water-side, and give as much line as possibly you can: if it be a good
Carp or Bream, they will go to the farther side of the river: then
strike gently, and hold your rod at a bent, a little while; but if you
both pull together, you are sure to lose your game, for either your
line, or hook, or hold, will break: and after you have overcome them,
they will make noble sport, and are very shy to be landed. The Carp is
far stronger and more mettlesome than the Bream.

Much more is to be observed in this kind of fish and fishing, but it is
far fitter for experience and discourse than paper. Only, thus much is
necessary for you to know, and to be mindful and careful of, that if the
Pike or Perch do breed in that river, they will be sure to bite first,
and must first be taken. And for the most part they are very large; and
will repair to your ground-bait, not that they will eat of it, but will
feed and sport themselves among the young fry that gather about and
hover over the bait.

The way to discern the Pike and to take him, it you mistrust your Bream
hook, for I have taken a Pike a yard long several times at my Bream
hooks, and sometimes he hath had the luck to share my line, may be thus:

Take a small Bleak, or Roach, or Gudgeon, and bait it; and set it,
alive, among your rods, two feet deep from the cork, with a little red
worm on the point of the hook: then take a few crumbs of white bread, or
some of the ground-bait, and sprinkle it gently amongst your rods. If
Mr. Pike be there, then the little fish will skip out of the water at
his appearance, but the live-set bait is sure to be taken.

Thus continue your sport from four in the morning till eight, and if it
be a gloomy windy day, they will bite all day long: but this is too long
to stand to your rods, at one place; and it will spoil your evening
sport that day, which is this.

About four of the clock in the afternoon repair to your baited place;
and as soon as you come to the water-side, cast in one-half of the rest
of your ground-bait, and stand off; then whilst the fish are gathering
together, for there they will most certainly come for their supper, you
may take a pipe of tobacco: and then, in with your three rods, as in the
morning. You will find excellent sport that evening, till eight of the
clock: then cast in the residue of your ground-bait, and next morning,
by four of the clock, visit them again for four hours, which is the best
sport of all; and after that, let them rest till you and your friends
have a mind to more sport.

From St. James's-tide until Bartholomew-tide is the best; when they have
had all the summer's food, they are the fattest.

Observe, lastly, that after three or four days' fishing together, your
game will be very shy and wary, and you shall hardly get above a bite or
two at a baiting: then your only way is to desist from your sport, about
two or three days: and in the meantime, on the place you late baited,
and again intend to bait, you shall take a turf of green but short
grass, as big or bigger than a round trencher; to the top of this turf,
on the green side, you shall, with a needle and green thread, fasten one
by one, as many little red worms as will near cover all the turf: then
take a round board or trencher, make a hole in the middle thereof, and
through the turf placed on the board or trencher, with a string or cord
as long as is fitting, tied to a pole, let it down to the bottom of the
water, for the fish to feed upon without disturbance about two or three
days; and after that you have drawn it away, you may fall to, and enjoy
your former recreation.

B. A.





The fourth day-continued

On the Tench

