The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Heroes, by Charles Kingsley


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Heroes
       or Greek Fairy Tales for my Children


Author: Charles Kingsley



Release Date: January 3, 2011  [eBook #677]
This file was first posted on October 4, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEROES***


Transcribed from the 1889 Macmillan and Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                               THE HEROES,
                                    OR
                            GREEK FAIRY TALES


                             FOR MY CHILDREN

                                * * * * *

                                    BY
                             CHARLES KINGSLEY

                                * * * * *

                              _ILLUSTRATED_

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                            MACMILLAN AND CO.
                               AND NEW YORK
                                   1889

                  _The right of translation if reserved_

                                * * * * *

                 _Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, _Edinburgh_.

                                * * * * *

                                    TO
                               MY CHILDREN

                         ROSE, MAURICE, AND MARY

                             A LITTLE PRESENT
                         OF OLD GREEK FAIRY TALES




PREFACE


MY DEAR CHILDREN,

Some of you have heard already of the old Greeks; and all of you, as you
grow up, will hear more and more of them.  Those of you who are boys
will, perhaps, spend a great deal of time in reading Greek books; and the
girls, though they may not learn Greek, will be sure to come across a
great many stories taken from Greek history, and to see, I may say every
day, things which we should not have had if it had not been for these old
Greeks.  You can hardly find a well-written book which has not in it
Greek names, and words, and proverbs; you cannot walk through a great
town without passing Greek buildings; you cannot go into a well-furnished
room without seeing Greek statues and ornaments, even Greek patterns of
furniture and paper; so strangely have these old Greeks left their mark
behind them upon this modern world in which we now live.  And as you grow
up, and read more and more, you will find that we owe to these old Greeks
the beginners of all our mathematics and geometry—that is, the science
and knowledge of numbers, and of the shapes of things, and of the forces
which make things move and stand at rest; and the beginnings of our
geography and astronomy; and of our laws, and freedom, and politics—that
is, the science of how to rule a country, and make it peaceful and
strong.  And we owe to them, too, the beginning of our logic—that is, the
study of words and of reasoning; and of our metaphysics—that is, the
study of our own thoughts and souls.  And last of all, they made their
language so beautiful that foreigners used to take to it instead of their
own; and at last Greek became the common language of educated people all
over the old world, from Persia and Egypt even to Spain and Britain.  And
therefore it was that the New Testament was written in Greek, that it
might be read and understood by all the nations of the Roman empire; so
that, next to the Jews, and the Bible which the Jews handed down to us,
we owe more to these old Greeks than to any people upon earth.

Now you must remember one thing—that ‘Greeks’ was not their real name.
They called themselves always ‘Hellens,’ but the Romans miscalled them
Greeks; and we have taken that wrong name from the Romans—it would take a
long time to tell you why.  They were made up of many tribes and many
small separate states; and when you hear in this book of Minuai, and
Athenians, and other such names, you must remember that they were all
different tribes and peoples of the one great Hellen race, who lived in
what we now call Greece, in the islands of the Archipelago, and along the
coast of Asia Minor (Ionia, as they call it), from the Hellespont to
Rhodes, and had afterwards colonies and cities in Sicily, and South Italy
(which was called Great Greece), and along the shores of the Black Sea at
Sinope, and Kertch, and at Sevastopol.  And after that, again, they
spread under Alexander the Great, and conquered Egypt, and Syria, and
Persia, and the whole East.  But that was many hundred years after my
stories; for then there were no Greeks on the Black Sea shores, nor in
Sicily, or Italy, or anywhere but in Greece and in Ionia.  And if you are
puzzled by the names of places in this book, you must take the maps and
find them out.  It will be a pleasanter way of learning geography than
out of a dull lesson-book.

Now, I love these old Hellens heartily; and I should be very ungrateful
to them if I did not, considering all that they have taught me; and they
seem to me like brothers, though they have all been dead and gone many
hundred years ago.  So as you must learn about them, whether you choose
or not, I wish to be the first to introduce you to them, and to say,
‘Come hither, children, at this blessed Christmas time, when all God’s
creatures should rejoice together, and bless Him who redeemed them all.
Come and see old friends of mine, whom I knew long ere you were born.
They are come to visit us at Christmas, out of the world where all live
to God; and to tell you some of their old fairy tales, which they loved
when they were young like you.’

For nations begin at first by being children like you, though they are
made up of grown men.  They are children at first like you—men and women
with children’s hearts; frank, and affectionate, and full of trust, and
teachable, and loving to see and learn all the wonders round them; and
greedy also, too often, and passionate and silly, as children are.

Thus these old Greeks were teachable, and learnt from all the nations
round.  From the Phoenicians they learnt shipbuilding, and some say
letters beside; and from the Assyrians they learnt painting, and carving,
and building in wood and stone; and from the Egyptians they learnt
astronomy, and many things which you would not understand.  In this they
were like our own forefathers the Northmen, of whom you love to hear,
who, though they were wild and rough themselves, were humble, and glad to
learn from every one.  Therefore God rewarded these Greeks, as He
rewarded our forefathers, and made them wiser than the people who taught
them in everything they learnt; for He loves to see men and children
open-hearted, and willing to be taught; and to him who uses what he has
got, He gives more and more day by day.  So these Greeks grew wise and
powerful, and wrote poems which will live till the world’s end, which you
must read for yourselves some day, in English at least, if not in Greek.
And they learnt to carve statues, and build temples, which are still
among the wonders of the world; and many another wondrous thing God
taught them, for which we are the wiser this day.

For you must not fancy, children, that because these old Greeks were
heathens, therefore God did not care for them, and taught them nothing.

The Bible tells us that it was not so, but that God’s mercy is over all
His works, and that He understands the hearts of all people, and fashions
all their works.  And St. Paul told these old Greeks in after times, when
they had grown wicked and fallen low, that they ought to have known
better, because they were God’s offspring, as their own poets had said;
and that the good God had put them where they were, to seek the Lord, and
feel after Him, and find Him, though He was not far from any one of them.
And Clement of Alexandria, a great Father of the Church, who was as wise
as he was good, said that God had sent down Philosophy to the Greeks from
heaven, as He sent down the Gospel to the Jews.

For Jesus Christ, remember, is the Light who lights every man who comes
into the world.  And no one can think a right thought, or feel a right
feeling, or understand the real truth of anything in earth and heaven,
unless the good Lord Jesus teaches him by His Spirit, which gives man
understanding.

But these Greeks, as St. Paul told them, forgot what God had taught them,
and, though they were God’s offspring, worshipped idols of wood and
stone, and fell at last into sin and shame, and then, of course, into
cowardice and slavery, till they perished out of that beautiful land
which God had given them for so many years.

For, like all nations who have left anything behind them, beside mere
mounds of earth, they believed at first in the One True God who made all
heaven and earth. But after a while, like all other nations, they began
to worship other gods, or rather angels and spirits, who (so they
fancied) lived about their land.  Zeus, the Father of gods and men (who
was some dim remembrance of the blessed true God), and Hera his wife, and
Phoebus Apollo the Sun-god, and Pallas Athené who taught men wisdom and
useful arts, and Aphrodite the Queen of Beauty, and Poseidon the Ruler of
the Sea, and Hephaistos the King of the Fire, who taught men to work in
metals.  And they honoured the Gods of the Rivers, and the Nymph-maids,
who they fancied lived in the caves, and the fountains, and the glens of
the forest, and all beautiful wild places.  And they honoured the
Erinnues, the dreadful sisters, who, they thought, haunted guilty men
until their sins were purged away.  And many other dreams they had, which
parted the One God into many; and they said, too, that these gods did
things which would be a shame and sin for any man to do.  And when their
philosophers arose, and told them that God was One, they would not
listen, but loved their idols, and their wicked idol feasts, till they
all came to ruin.  But we will talk of such sad things no more.

But, at the time of which this little book speaks, they had not fallen as
low as that.  They worshipped no idols, as far as I can find; and they
still believed in the last six of the ten commandments, and knew well
what was right and what was wrong.  And they believed (and that was what
gave them courage) that the gods loved men, and taught them, and that
without the gods men were sure to come to ruin.  And in that they were
right enough, as we know—more right even than they thought; for without
God we can do nothing, and all wisdom comes from Him.

Now, you must not think of them in this book as learned men, living in
great cities, such as they were afterwards, when they wrought all their
beautiful works, but as country people, living in farms and walled
villages, in a simple, hard-working way; so that the greatest kings and
heroes cooked their own meals, and thought it no shame, and made their
own ships and weapons, and fed and harnessed their own horses; and the
queens worked with their maid-servants, and did all the business of the
house, and spun, and wove, and embroidered, and made their husbands’
clothes and their own.  So that a man was honoured among them, not
because he happened to be rich, but according to his skill, and his
strength, and courage, and the number of things which he could do.  For
they were but grown-up children, though they were right noble children
too; and it was with them as it is now at school—the strongest and
cleverest boy, though he be poor, leads all the rest.

Now, while they were young and simple they loved fairy tales, as you do
now.  All nations do so when they are young: our old forefathers did, and
called their stories ‘Sagas.’  I will read you some of them some day—some
of the Eddas, and the Voluspà, and Beowulf, and the noble old Romances.
The old Arabs, again, had their tales, which we now call the ‘Arabian
Nights.’  The old Romans had theirs, and they called them ‘Fabulæ,’ from
which our word ‘fable’ comes; but the old Hellens called theirs ‘Muthoi,’
from which our new word ‘myth’ is taken.  But next to those old Romances,
which were written in the Christian middle age, there are no fairy tales
like these old Greek ones, for beauty, and wisdom, and truth, and for
making children love noble deeds, and trust in God to help them through.

Now, why have I called this book ‘The Heroes’?  Because that was the name
which the Hellens gave to men who were brave and skilful, and dare do
more than other men.  At first, I think, that was all it meant: but after
a time it came to mean something more; it came to mean men who helped
their country; men in those old times, when the country was half-wild,
who killed fierce beasts and evil men, and drained swamps, and founded
towns, and therefore after they were dead, were honoured, because they
had left their country better than they found it.  And we call such a man
a hero in English to this day, and call it a ‘heroic’ thing to suffer
pain and grief, that we may do good to our fellow-men.  We may all do
that, my children, boys and girls alike; and we ought to do it, for it is
easier now than ever, and safer, and the path more clear.  But you shall
hear how the Hellens said their heroes worked, three thousand years ago.
The stories are not all true, of course, nor half of them; you are not
simple enough to fancy that; but the meaning of them is true, and true
for ever, and that is—Do right, and God will help you.’

FARLEY COURT,
   _Advent_, 1855.




CONTENTS

                           STORY I.—PERSEUS
                                                                  PAGE
     PART I.  HOW PERSEUS AND HIS MOTHER CAME TO SERIPHOS            1
         II.  HOW PERSEUS VOWED A RASH VOW                           8
        III.  HOW PERSEUS SLEW THE GORGON                           23
         IV.  HOW PERSEUS CAME TO THE ÆTHIOPS                       36
          V.  HOW PERSEUS CAME HOME AGAIN                           53
                       STORY II.—THE ARGONAUTS
     PART I.  HOW THE CENTAUR TRAINED THE HEROES ON PELION          60
         II.  HOW JASON LOST HIS SANDAL IN ANAUROS                  73
        III.  HOW THEY BUILT THE SHIP ‘ARGO’ IN IOLCOS              87
        III.  HOW THE ARGONAUTS SAILED TO COLCHIS                   93
         IV.  HOW THE ARGONAUTS WERE DRIVEN INTO THE               127
              UNKNOWN SEA
          V.  WHAT WAS THE END OF THE HEROES                       161
                          STORY III.—THESEUS
     PART I.  HOW THESEUS LIFTED THE STONE                         165
         II.  HOW THESEUS SLEW THE DEVOURERS OF MEN                172
        III.  HOW THESEUS SLEW THE MINOTAUR                        206
         IV.  HOW THESEUS FELL BY HIS PRIDE                        214

                                * * * * *

[I owe an apology to the few scholars who may happen to read this hasty
_jeu d’esprit_, for the inconsistent method in which I have spelt Greek
names.  The rule which I have tried to follow has been this: when the
word has been hopelessly Latinised, as ‘Phœbus’ has been, I have left it
as it usually stands; but in other cases I have tried to keep the plain
Greek spelling, except when it would have seemed pedantic, or when, as in
the word ‘Tiphus,’ I should have given an altogether wrong notion of the
sound of the word.  It has been a choice of difficulties, which has been
forced on me by our strange habit of introducing boys to the Greek myths,
not in their original shape, but in a Roman disguise.]




STORY I.—PERSEUS


PART I
HOW PERSEUS AND HIS MOTHER CAME TO SERIPHOS


Once upon a time there were two princes who were twins.  Their names were
Acrisius and Prœtus, and they lived in the pleasant vale of Argos, far
away in Hellas.  They had fruitful meadows and vineyards, sheep and oxen,
great herds of horses feeding down in Lerna Fen, and all that men could
need to make them blest: and yet they were wretched, because they were
jealous of each other.  From the moment they were born they began to
quarrel; and when they grew up each tried to take away the other’s share
of the kingdom, and keep all for himself.  So first Acrisius drove out
Prœtus; and he went across the seas, and brought home a foreign princess
for his wife, and foreign warriors to help him, who were called Cyclopes;
and drove out Acrisius in his turn; and then they fought a long while up
and down the land, till the quarrel was settled, and Acrisius took Argos
and one half the land, and Prœtus took Tiryns and the other half.  And
Prœtus and his Cyclopes built around Tiryns great walls of unhewn stone,
which are standing to this day.

But there came a prophet to that hard-hearted Acrisius and prophesied
against him, and said, ‘Because you have risen up against your own blood,
your own blood shall rise up against you; because you have sinned against
your kindred, by your kindred you shall be punished.  Your daughter Danae
shall bear a son, and by that son’s hands you shall die.  So the Gods
have ordained, and it will surely come to pass.’

And at that Acrisius was very much afraid; but he did not mend his ways.
He had been cruel to his own family, and, instead of repenting and being
kind to them, he went on to be more cruel than ever: for he shut up his
fair daughter Danae in a cavern underground, lined with brass, that no
one might come near her.  So he fancied himself more cunning than the
Gods: but you will see presently whether he was able to escape them.

Now it came to pass that in time Danae bore a son; so beautiful a babe
that any but King Acrisius would have had pity on it.  But he had no
pity; for he took Danae and her babe down to the seashore, and put them
into a great chest and thrust them out to sea, for the winds and the
waves to carry them whithersoever they would.

The north-west wind blew freshly out of the blue mountains, and down the
pleasant vale of Argos, and away and out to sea.  And away and out to sea
before it floated the mother and her babe, while all who watched them
wept, save that cruel father, King Acrisius.

So they floated on and on, and the chest danced up and down upon the
billows, and the baby slept upon its mother’s breast: but the poor mother
could not sleep, but watched and wept, and she sang to her baby as they
floated; and the song which she sang you shall learn yourselves some day.

And now they are past the last blue headland, and in the open sea; and
there is nothing round them but the waves, and the sky, and the wind.
But the waves are gentle, and the sky is clear, and the breeze is tender
and low; for these are the days when Halcyone and Ceyx build their nests,
and no storms ever ruffle the pleasant summer sea.

                      [Picture: Danae and her babe]

And who were Halcyone and Ceyx?  You shall hear while the chest floats
on.  Halcyone was a fairy maiden, the daughter of the beach and of the
wind.  And she loved a sailor-boy, and married him; and none on earth
were so happy as they.  But at last Ceyx was wrecked; and before he could
swim to the shore the billows swallowed him up.  And Halcyone saw him
drowning, and leapt into the sea to him; but in vain.  Then the Immortals
took pity on them both, and changed them into two fair sea-birds; and now
they build a floating nest every year, and sail up and down happily for
ever upon the pleasant seas of Greece.

So a night passed, and a day, and a long day it was for Danae; and
another night and day beside, till Danae was faint with hunger and
weeping, and yet no land appeared.  And all the while the babe slept
quietly; and at last poor Danae drooped her head and fell asleep likewise
with her cheek against the babe’s.

After a while she was awakened suddenly; for the chest was jarring and
grinding, and the air was full of sound.  She looked up, and over her
head were mighty cliffs, all red in the setting sun, and around her rocks
and breakers, and flying flakes of foam.  She clasped her hands together,
and shrieked aloud for help.  And when she cried, help met her: for now
there came over the rocks a tall and stately man, and looked down
wondering upon poor Danae tossing about in the chest among the waves.

He wore a rough cloak of frieze, and on his head a broad hat to shade his
face; in his hand he carried a trident for spearing fish, and over his
shoulder was a casting-net; but Danae could see that he was no common man
by his stature, and his walk, and his flowing golden hair and beard; and
by the two servants who came behind him, carrying baskets for his fish.
But she had hardly time to look at him, before he had laid aside his
trident and leapt down the rocks, and thrown his casting-net so surely
over Danae and the chest, that he drew it, and her, and the baby, safe
upon a ledge of rock.

Then the fisherman took Danae by the hand, and lifted her out of the
chest, and said—

‘O beautiful damsel, what strange chance has brought you to this island
in so flail a ship?  Who are you, and whence?  Surely you are some king’s
daughter; and this boy has somewhat more than mortal.’

And as he spoke he pointed to the babe; for its face shone like the
morning star.

But Danae only held down her head, and sobbed out—

‘Tell me to what land I have come, unhappy that I am; and among what men
I have fallen!’

And he said, ‘This isle is called Seriphos, and I am a Hellen, and dwell
in it.  I am the brother of Polydectes the king; and men call me Dictys
the netter, because I catch the fish of the shore.’

Then Danae fell down at his feet, and embraced his knees, and cried—

‘Oh, sir, have pity upon a stranger, whom a cruel doom has driven to your
land; and let me live in your house as a servant; but treat me
honourably, for I was once a king’s daughter, and this my boy (as you
have truly said) is of no common race.  I will not be a charge to you, or
eat the bread of idleness; for I am more skilful in weaving and
embroidery than all the maidens of my land.’

And she was going on; but Dictys stopped her, and raised her up, and
said—

‘My daughter, I am old, and my hairs are growing gray; while I have no
children to make my home cheerful.  Come with me then, and you shall be a
daughter to me and to my wife, and this babe shall be our grandchild.
For I fear the Gods, and show hospitality to all strangers; knowing that
good deeds, like evil ones, always return to those who do them.’

So Danae was comforted, and went home with Dictys the good fisherman, and
was a daughter to him and to his wife, till fifteen years were past.



