IV

AFFIRMATIVE POWER


Thoroughly to realise the true nature of affirmative power is to possess
the key to the great secret. We feel its presence in all the innumerable
forms of life by which we are surrounded and we feel it as the life in
ourselves; and at last some day the truth bursts upon us like a
revelation that we can wield this power, this life, by the process of
Thought. And as soon as we see this, the importance of regulating our
thinking begins to dawn upon us. We ask ourselves what this thought
process is, and we then find that it is thinking affirmative force into
forms which are the product of our own thought. We mentally conceive the
form and then think life into it.

This must always be the nature of the creative process on whatever
scale, whether on the grand scale of the Universal Cosmic Mind or on the
miniature scale of the individual mind; the difference is only in degree
and not in kind. We may picture the mental machinery by which this is
done in the way that best satisfies our intellect--and the satisfying of
the intellect on this point is a potent factor in giving us that
confidence in our mental action without which we can effect
nothing--but the actual externalisation is the result of something more
powerful than a merely intellectual apprehension. It is the result of
that inner mental state which, for want of a better word, we may call
our emotional conception of ourselves. It is the "self" which we _feel_
ourselves to be which takes forms of our own creating. For this reason
our thought must be so grounded upon knowledge that we shall _feel_
the truth of it, and thus be able to produce in ourselves that mental
attitude of feeling which corresponds to the condition which we desire
to externalise.

We cannot think into manifestation a different sort of life to that
which we realise in ourselves. As Horace says, "_Nemo dat quod non
habet_," we cannot give what we have not got. And, on the other hand, we
can never cease creating forms of some sort by our mental activity,
thinking life into them. This point must be very carefully noted. We
cannot sit still producing nothing: the mental machinery _will_ keep on
turning out work of some sort, and it rests with us to determine of what
sort it shall be. In our entire ignorance or imperfect realisation of
this we create negative forms and think life into them. We create forms
of death, sickness, sorrow, trouble, and limitation of all sorts, and
then think life into these forms; with the result that, however
non-existent in themselves, to us they become realities and throw their
shadow across the path which would otherwise be bright with the
many-coloured beauties of innumerable flowers and the glory of the
sunshine.

This need not be. It is giving to the negative an affirmative force
which does not belong to it. Consider what is meant by the negative. It
is the absence of something. It is not-being, and is the absence of all
that constitutes being. Left to itself, it remains in its own
nothingness, and it only assumes form and activity when we give these to
it by our thought.

Here, then, is the great reason for practising control over our thought.
It is the one and only instrument we have to work with, but it is an
instrument which works with the greatest certainty, for limitation if we
think limitation, for enlargement if we think enlargement. Our thought
as feeling is the magnet which draws to us those conditions which
accurately correspond to itself. This is the meaning of the saying that
"thoughts are things." But, you say, how can I think differently from
the circumstances? Certainly you are not required to say that the
circumstances _at the present moment_ are what they are not; to say so
would be untrue; but what is wanted is not to think from the standpoint
of circumstances at all. Think from that interior standpoint where there
are no circumstances, and from whence you can dictate what circumstances
shall be, and then leave the circumstances to take care of themselves.

Do not think of this, that, or the other particular _circumstances_ of
health, peace, etc., but of health, peace, and prosperity themselves.
Here is an advertisement from _Pearson's Weekly_:--"Think money. Big
moneymakers _think_ money." This is a perfectly sound statement of the
power of thought, although it is only an advertisement; but we may make
an advance beyond thinking "money." We can think "Life" in all its
fulness, together with that perfect harmony of conditions which includes
all that we need of money and a thousand other good things besides, for
some of which money stands as the symbol of exchangeable value, while
others cannot be estimated by so material a standard.

Therefore think Life, illumination, harmony, prosperity,
happiness--think the things rather than this or that condition of them.
And then by the sure operation of the Universal Law these things will
form themselves into the shapes best suited to your particular case, and
will enter your life as active, living forces, which will never depart
from you because you know them to be part and parcel of your own being.




V

SUBMISSION


There are two kinds of submission: submission to superior force and
submission to superior truth. The one is weakness and the other is
strength. It is an exceedingly important part of our training to learn
to distinguish between these two, and the more so because the wrong kind
is extolled by nearly all schools of popular religious teaching at the
present day as constituting the highest degree of human attainment. By
some this is pressed so far as to make it an instrument of actual
oppression, and with all it is a source of weakness and a bar to
progress. We are forbidden to question what are called the wise
dispensations of Providence and are told that pain and sorrow are to be
accepted because they are the will of God; and there is much eloquent
speaking and writing concerning the beauty of quiet resignation, all of
which appeals to a certain class of gentle minds who have not yet learnt
that gentleness does not consist in the absence of power but in the
kindly and beneficent use of it.

Minds cast in this mould are peculiarly apt to be misled. They perceive
a certain beauty in the picture of weakness leaning upon strength, but
they attribute its soothing influence to the wrong element of the
combination. A thoughtful analysis would show them that their feelings
consisted of pity for the weak figure and admiration for the strong one,
and that the suggestiveness of the whole arose from its satisfying the
artistic sense of balance which requires a compensation of this sort.
But which of the two figures in the picture would they themselves prefer
to be? Surely not the weak one needing help, but the strong one giving
it. By itself the weak figure only stirs our pity and not our
admiration. Its form may be beautiful, but its very beauty only serves
to enhance the sense of something wanting--and the something wanting is
strength. The attraction which the doctrine of passive resignation
possesses for certain minds is based upon an appeal to sentiment, which
is accepted without any suspicion that the sentiment appealed to is a
false one.

Now the healthful influence of the movement known as "The Higher
Thought" consists precisely in this--that it sets itself rigorously to
combat this debilitating doctrine of submission. It can see as well as
others the beauty of weakness leaning upon strength; but it sees that
the real source of the beauty lies in the strong element of the
combination. The true beauty consists in the power to confer strength,
and this power is not to be acquired by submission, but by the exactly
opposite method of continually asserting our determination not to
submit.

Of course, if we take it for granted that all the sorrow, sickness,
pain, trouble, and other adversity in the world is the expression of the
will of God, then doubtless we must resign ourselves to the inevitable
with all the submission we can command, and comfort ourselves with the
vague hope that somehow in some far-off future we shall find that

    "Good is the final goal of ill,"

though even _this_ vague hope is a protest against the very submission
we are endeavouring to exercise. But to make the assumption that the
evil of life is the will of God is to assume what a careful and
intelligent study of the laws of the universe, both mental and physical,
will show us is not the truth; and if we turn to that Book which
contains the fullest delineation of these universal laws, we shall find
nothing taught more clearly than that submission to the evils of life is
not submission to the will of God. We are told that Christ was
manifested for this end, that he should destroy him that hath the power
of death--that is, the devil. Now death is the very culmination of the
Negative. It is the entire absence of all that makes Life, and whatever
goes to diminish the living quality of Life reproduces, in its degree,
the distinctive quality of this supreme exhibition of the Negative.
Everything that tends to detract from the fulness of life has in it this
deathful quality.

In that completely renovated life, which is figured under the emblem of
the New Jerusalem, we are told that sorrow and sighing shall flee away,
and that the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick. Nothing that obscures
life, or restricts it, can proceed from the same source as the Power
which gives light to them that sit in darkness, and deliverance to them
that are bound. Negation can never be Affirmation; and the error we have
always to guard against is that of attributing positive power to the
Negative. If we once grasp the truth that God is life, and that life in
every mode of expression can never be anything else than Affirmative,
then it must become clear to us that nothing which is of the opposite
tendency can be according to the will of God. For God (the good) to will
any of the "evil" that is in the world would be for Life to act with the
purpose of diminishing itself, which is a contradiction in terms to the
very idea of Life. God is Life, and Life is, by its very nature,
Affirmative. The submission we have hitherto made has been to our own
weakness, ignorance, and fear, and not to the supreme good.

But is no such thing as submission, then, required of us under any
circumstances? Are we always to have our own way in everything?
Assuredly the whole secret of our progress to liberty is involved in
acquiring the habit of submission; but it is submission to superior
Truth, and not to superior force. It sometimes happens that, when we
attain a higher Truth, we find that its reception requires us to
re-arrange the truths which we possessed before: not, indeed, to lay any
of them aside, for Truth once recognised cannot be again put out of
sight, but to recognise a different relative proportion between them
from that which we had seen previously. Then there comes a submitting of
what has hitherto been our highest truth to one which we recognise as
still higher, a process not always easy of attainment, but which must be
gone through if our spiritual development is not to be arrested. The
lesser degree of life must be swallowed up in the greater; and for this
purpose it is necessary for us to learn that the smaller degree was only
a partial and limited aspect of that which is more universal, stronger,
and of a larger build every way.

Now, in going through the processes of spiritual growth, there is ample
scope for that training in self-knowledge and self-control which is
commonly understood by the word "submission." But the character of the
act is materially altered. It is no longer a half-despairing resignation
to a superior force external to ourselves, which we can only vaguely
hope is acting kindly and wisely, but it is an intelligent recognition
of the true nature of our own interior forces and of the laws by which a
robust spiritual constitution is to be developed; and the submission is
no longer to limitations which drain life of its livingness, and against
which we instinctively rebel, but to the law of our own evolution which
manifests itself in continually increasing degrees of life and strength.

The submission which we recognise is the price that has to be paid for
increase in any direction. Even in the Money Market we must invest
before we can realise profits. It is a universal rule that Nature obeys
us exactly in proportion as we first obey Nature; and this is as true in
regard to spiritual science as to physical. The only question is whether
we will yield an ignorant submission to the principle of Death, or a
joyous and intelligent obedience to the principle of Life.

If we have clearly grasped the fact of our identity with Universal
Spirit, we shall find that, in the right direction, there is really no
such thing as submission. Submission is to the power of another--a man
cannot be said to submit to himself. When the "I AM" in us recognises a
greater degree of I AM-ness (if I may coin the word) than it has
hitherto attained, then, by the very force of this recognition, it
_becomes what it sees_, and therefore naturally puts off from itself
whatever would limit its expression of its own completeness.

But this is a natural process of growth, and not an unnatural act of
submission; it is not the pouring-out of ourselves in weakness, but the
gathering of ourselves together in increasing strength. There is no
weakness in Spirit, it is all strength; and we must therefore always be
watchful against the insidious approaches of the Negative which would
invert the true position. The Negative always points to some external
source of strength. Its formula is "I AM NOT." It always seeks to fix a
gulf between us and the Infinite Sufficiency. It would always have us
believe that that sufficiency is not our own, but that by an act of
uncertain favour we may have occasional spoonfuls of it doled out to us.
Christ's teaching is different. We do not need to come with our pitcher
to the well to draw water, like the woman of Samaria, but we have _in
ourselves_ an inexhaustible supply of the living water springing up into
everlasting life.

Let us then inscribe "No Surrender" in bold characters upon our banner,
and advance undaunted to claim our rightful heritage of liberty and
life.




