X

PRESENT TRUTH


If Thought power is good for anything it is good for everything. If it
can produce one thing it can produce all things. For what is to hinder
it? Nothing can stop us from thinking. We can _think_ what we please,
and if to think is to form, then we can form what we please. The whole
question, therefore, resolves itself into this: Is it true that to think
is to form? If so, do we not see that our limitations are formed in
precisely the same way as our expansions? We think that conditions
outside our thought have power over us, and so we think power into them.
So the great question of life is whether there is any _other_ creative
power than Thought. If so, where is it, and what is it?

Both philosophy and religion lead us to the truth that "in the
beginning" there was no other creative power than Spirit, and the only
mode of activity we can possibly attribute to Spirit is Thought, and so
we find Thought as the root of all things. And if this was the case "in
the beginning" it must be so still; for if all things originate in
Thought, all things must be modes of Thought, and so it is impossible
for Spirit ever to hand over its creations to some power which is not
itself--that is to say, which is not Thought-power; and consequently all
the forms and circumstances that surround us are manifestations of the
creative power of Thought.

But it may be objected that this is God's Thought; and that the creative
power is in God and not Man. But this goes away from the self-evident
axiomatic truth that "in the beginning" nothing could have had any
origin except Thought. It is quite true that nothing has any origin
except in the Divine Mind, and Man himself is therefore a mode of the
Divine Thought. Again, Man is self-conscious; therefore Man is the
Divine Thought evolved into _individual_ consciousness, and when he
becomes sufficiently enlightened to realise this as his origin, then he
sees that he is a reproduction _in individuality_ of the _same_ spirit
which produces all things, and that his own thought in individuality has
exactly the same quality as the Divine Thought in universality, just as
fire is equally igneous whether burning round a large centre of
combustion or a small one, and thus we are logically brought to the
conclusion that our thought must have creative power.

But people say, "We have not found it so. We are surrounded by all sorts
of circumstances that we do not desire." Yes, you _fear_ them, and in so
doing you _think_ them; and in this way you are constantly exercising
this Divine prerogative of creation by Thought, only through ignorance
you use it in a wrong direction. Therefore the Book of Divine
Instructions so constantly repeats "Fear not; doubt not," because we can
never divest our Thought of its inherent creative quality, and the only
question is whether we shall use it ignorantly to our injury or
understandingly to our benefit.

The Master summed up his teaching in the aphorism that knowledge of the
Truth would make us free. Here is no announcement of anything we have to
do, or of anything that has to be done for us, in order to gain our
liberty, neither is it a statement of anything _future_. Truth _is_ what
is. He did not say, you must wait till something becomes true which is
not true _now_. He said: "Know what _is_ Truth now, and you will find
that the Truth concerning yourself is Liberty." If the knowledge of
Truth makes us free it can only be because in truth we are free already,
only we do not know it.

Our liberty consists in our reproducing on the scale of the individual
the same creative power of Thought which first brought the world into
existence, "so that the things which are seen were not made of things
which do appear." Let us, then, confidently claim our birthright as
"sons and daughters of the Almighty," and by habitually thinking the
good, the beautiful, and the true, surround ourselves with conditions
corresponding to our thoughts, and by our teaching and example help
others to do the same.




XI

YOURSELF


I want to talk to you about the livingness there is in being yourself.
It has at least the merit of simplicity, for it must surely be easier to
be oneself than to be something or somebody else. Yet that is what so
many are constantly trying to do; the self that is their own is not good
enough for them, and so they are always trying to go one better than
what God has made them, with endless strain and struggle as the
consequence. Of course, they are right to put before them an ideal
infinitely grander than anything they have yet attained--the only
possible way of progress is by following an ideal that is always a stage
ahead of us--but the mistake is in not seeing that its attainment is a
matter of growth, and that growth must be the expansion of something
that already exists in us, and therefore implies our being what we are
and where we are as its starting point. This growth is a continuous
process, and we cannot do next month's growth without first doing this
month's; but we are always wanting to jump into some ideal of the
future, not seeing that we can reach it only by steadily going on from
where we are now.

These considerations should make us more confident and more comfortable.
We are employing a force which is much greater than we believe ourselves
to be, yet it is not separate from us and needing to be persuaded or
compelled, or inveigled into doing what we want; it is the substratum of
our own being which is continually passing up into manifestation on the
visible plane and becoming that personal self to which we often limit
our attention without considering whence it proceeds. But in truth the
outer self is the surface growth of that individuality which lies
concealed far down in the deeps below, and which is none other than the
Spirit-of-Life which underlies all forms of manifestation.

Endeavour to realise what this Spirit must be in itself--that is to say,
apart from any of the conditions that arise from the various relations
which necessarily establish themselves between its various forms of
individualisation. In its homogeneous self what else can it be but pure
life--Essence-of-Life, if you like so to call it? Then realise that as
Essence-of-Life it exists in the innermost of _every one_ of its forms
of manifestation in as perfect simplicity as any we can attribute to it
in our most abstract conceptions. In this light we see it to be the
eternally self-generating power which, to express itself, flows into
form.

This universal Essence-of-Life is a continual becoming (into form), and
since we are a part of Nature we do not need to go further than
ourselves to find the life-giving energy at work with all its powers.
Hence all we have to do is to allow it to rise to the surface. We do not
have to _make_ it rise any more than the engineer who sinks the
bore-pipe for an artesian well has to make the water rise in it; the
water does that by its own energy, springing as a fountain a hundred
feet into the air. Just so we shall find a fountain of Essence-of-Life
ready to spring up in ourselves, inexhaustible and continually
increasing in its flow, as One taught long ago to a woman at a wayside
well.

This up-springing of Life-Essence is not another's--it is our own. It
does not require deep studies, hard labours, weary journeyings to attain
it; it is not the monopoly of this teacher or that writer, whose
lectures we must attend or whose books we must read to get it. It is the
innermost of _ourselves_, and a little common-sense thought as to how
anything comes to be anything will soon convince us that the great
inexhaustible life must be the very root and substance of us, permeating
every fibre of our being.

Surely to be this vast infinitude of living power must be enough to
satisfy all our desires, and yet this wonderful ideal is nothing else
but what we already are _in principio_--it is all there in ourselves
now, only awaiting our recognition for its manifestation. It is not the
Essence-of-Life which has to grow, for that is eternally perfect in
itself; but it is our recognition of it that has to grow, and this
growth cannot be forced. It must come by a natural process, the first
necessity of which is to abstain from all straining after being
something which at the present time we cannot naturally be. The Law of
our Evolution has put us in possession of certain powers and
opportunities, and our further development depends on our doing just
what these powers and opportunities make it possible for us to do, here
and now.

If we do what we are able to do to-day, it will open the way for us to
do something better to-morrow, and in this manner the growing process
will proceed healthily and happily in a rapidly increasing ratio. This
is so much easier than striving to compel things to be what they are
not, and it is also so much more fruitful in good results. It is not
sitting still doing nothing, and there is plenty of room for the
exercise of all our mental faculties, but these faculties are themselves
the outcome of the Essence-of-Life, and are not the creating power, but
only that which gives direction to it Now it is this moving power at the
back of the various faculties that is the true innermost self; and if we
realise the identity between the innermost and the outermost, we shall
see that we therefore have at our present disposal all that is necessary
for our unlimited development in the future.

Thus our livingness consists simply in being ourselves, only more so;
and in recognising this we get rid of a great burden of unnecessary
straining and striving, and the place of the old _sturm und drang_ will
be taken, not by inertia, but by a joyous activity which knows that it
always has the requisite power to manifest itself in forms of good and
beauty. What matters it whither this leads us? If we are following the
line of the beautiful and good, then we shall produce the beautiful and
good, and thus bring increasing joy into the world, whatever particular
form it may assume.

We limit ourselves when we try to fix accurately beforehand the
particular form of good that we shall produce. We should aim not so much
at having or making some particular thing as at expressing all that we
are. The expressing will grow out of realising the treasures that are
ours already, and contemplating the beauty, the affirmative side, of all
that we are _now_, apart from the negative conceptions and detractions
which veil this positive good from us. When we do this we shall be
astonished to see what possibilities reside in ourselves as we are and
with our present surroundings, all unlovely as we may deem them: and
commencing to work at once upon whatever we find of affirmative in
these, and withdrawing our thought from what we have hitherto seen of
negative in them, the right road will open up before us, leading us in
wonderful ways to the development of powers that we never suspected, and
the enjoyment of happiness that we never anticipated.

We have never been out of our right path, only we have been walking in
it backwards instead of forwards, and now that we have begun to follow
the path in the right direction, we find that it is none other than the
way of peace, the path of joy, and the road to eternal life. These
things we may attain by simply living naturally with ourselves. It is
because we are trying to be or do something which is not natural to us
that we experience weariness and labour, where we should find all our
activities joyously concentrated on objects which lead to their own
accomplishment by the force of the love that we have for them. But when
we make the grand discovery of how to live naturally, we shall find it
to be all, and more than all, that we had ever desired, and our daily
life will become a perpetual joy to ourselves, and we shall radiate
light and life wherever we go.




