CHAPTER VIII

RELIGION AND ASTRONOMY


In the early Church, astronomy, like other branches of science, was
looked upon as futile, since the New Testament taught that the earth was
soon to be destroyed and new heavens created.

The heavenly bodies were looked upon by the theologians as either living
beings possessing souls, or as the habitation of the angels. However, as
time passed, the geocentric doctrine, the doctrine that the earth is the
center of the universe and that the sun and planets revolve about it,
was the theory that held the highest respect.

Copernicus, in 1543, was first to bring clearly before the world the
then astounding theory that the earth and planets revolve about the sun.
But not until he was on his deathbed did he dare to publish it, for he
well knew the opposition with which it would be met. Even then he
published it with an apologetic lie by a friend Osiander, that
Copernicus had propounded the doctrine of the earth's movement not as a
fact, but as a hypothesis.

"Thus was the greatest and most ennobling, perhaps, of scientific
truths--a truth not less ennobling to religion than to science--forced
in coming before the world, to sneak and crawl." (_White: "History of
Warfare of Science with Theology."_)

During the next seventy years the matter slumbered, until Galileo upheld
the Copernican doctrine as the truth, and proved it to be the truth by
his telescope. Immediately the Church condemned the statements of
Copernicus and forbade Galileo to teach or discuss them. All books which
affirmed the motion of the earth were forbidden, and to read the work of
Copernicus was declared to risk damnation. All branches of the
Protestant Church, Lutheran, Calvinist, Anglican, vied with each other
in denouncing the Copernican doctrine.

One man, Giordano Bruno dared to assert the truth in the hearing of the
Papacy. For this heresy he was hunted from land to land, finally trapped
in Venice, imprisoned at Rome, burned alive, and his ashes scattered to
the winds!

Against Galileo, the war against the Copernican theory was concentrated.
His discoveries were declared to be deceptions, and his announcements
blasphemy when, in 1610, he announced that his telescope had revealed
the moons of the planet Jupiter.

In 1615, Galileo was summoned before the Inquisition at Rome, and forced
to promise that he would "relinquish altogether the opinion that the sun
is the center of the world, and immovable, and that the earth moves, nor
henceforth to hold, teach, or defend it in any way whatsoever verbally
or in writing."

Pope Paul V solemnly rendered the decree that "the doctrine of the
double motion of the earth about its axis and about the sun is false and
entirely contrary to Holy Scripture."

The climax of this instance of the infallibility of the Church occurred
when in his seventieth year Galileo was again brought before the
Inquisition; he was forced to abjure under threats of torture and
imprisonment by command of Pope Urban a truth which, in this day, is
taken for granted by the youngest of children. Galileo was then kept in
exile for the rest of his days, died, and was buried ignobly, apart
from his family, without fitting ceremony, without monument or epitaph.

As late as 1873 there was published, in St. Louis, a work by a president
of a Lutheran teachers' seminary in which he stated that the earth is
the principal body of the universe, that it stands fixed, and that the
sun and moon only serve to light it.

Astronomy brings forth a noble array of men who have, by their intense
desire for the truth, persevered against the Church, and in spite of the
vilest opposition of that Church, brought to the attention of man laws
that have given a meaning and order to our universe.

Copernicus escaping persecution only by death; Bruno burned alive;
Galileo imprisoned; Kepler reviled, and Newton bitterly attacked. In
this manner has religion aided astronomy!




CHAPTER IX

RELIGION AND GEOGRAPHY


The ancient Greeks, especially the Pythagoreans, Plato, and Aristotle,
had evolved theories of the earth's sphericity, which, while vague, were
basic for subsequent accurate ideas that developed later.

When Christianity sprang into existence Eusebius, St. John Chrysostom,
and Cosmos evolved a complete description of the earth. They considered
the earth as a parallelogram, flat, and surrounded by four seas, as a
kind of house, with heaven as its upper story and the earth as its
ground floor. To the north of the earth was a great mountain; at night
the sun was pushed into a pit and pulled out again in the morning, with
heaven as a loft and hell as a cellar. In the Atlantic Ocean, at some
unknown distance from Europe, was one of the openings into hell, into
which a ship sailing to this point, would tumble. The terror of this
conception was one of the chief obstacles of the great voyage of
Columbus. Luther, Melanchthon, Calvin, and Zwingli held to the opinion
that a great firmament, or floor, separated the heavens from the earth;
that above it were the waters and angels, and below it, the earth and
man.

During the time that the sphericity of the earth was still undecided,
another question arose that was considered of far greater importance,
namely, the conception of the antipodes and the problem of deciding
whether human beings existed on the earth's opposite side. It was
Lactantius who asked, "Is there any one so senseless as to believe that
there are men whose footsteps are higher than their heads? That the
crops and trees grow downward? That the rains and snow and hail fall
upwards toward the earth? I am at a loss as to what to say of those,
who, when they have once erred, steadily persevere in their folly, and
defend one vain thing by another."

St. Augustine insisted that men could not be allowed by the Almighty to
live there, since, if they did, they could not see Christ at His second
coming, descending through the air.

In the eighth century, a Bishop Virgil of Salzburg dared to assert that
there were men living in the antipodes. He was strongly attacked by St.
Boniface of Germany, who appealed to Pope Zachary for a decision. The
Pope, as the infallible teacher of Christendom, made the following
response: He declared it, "Perverse, iniquitous, and against Virgil's
soul." And again another infallible statement by the infallible Pope
Zachary became a doctrine of the Church.

In Italy, in 1316, Peter of Abano, famous as a physician, promulgated
the opposite view to that of the Church, for which he was persecuted by
the Inquisition, and barely escaped with his life. In 1327, Cecco
d'Ascoli, an astronomer, was burned alive at Florence for daring to
assert that men lived in the antipodes.

The difficulties that beset Columbus are well known. How he was hounded
both in Portugal and in Spain by the clergy; and even after his
discovery of America, the Papacy still maintained its theory of the
flatness of the earth and the nonsense of the antipodes. Pope Alexander
VI and Pope Julius II attempted to settle the disputes between Spain and
Portugal by drawing some remarkable maps that may still be found; but no
one dares to disturb the quiet of the ridiculous bulls that the popes
issued on this dispute.

In 1519 Magellan made his famous voyage and proved the earth to be round
and that men actually lived in the antipodes. But the force of
ecclesiastical stultification was so great, as it is today, that men
still believed the opposite view for two hundred years after the voyage
of Magellan.




