XXII. ACHELOUS.

Achelous is a river of Aetolia; formerly called Thestius. This Thestius
was the son of Mars and Pisidice, who upon some domestic discontent
travelled as far as Sicyon, where after he had resided for some time,
he returned to his native home. But finding there his son Calydon
and his mother both upon the bed together, believing him to be an
adulterer, he slew his own child by a mistake. But when he beheld the
unfortunate and unexpected fact he had committed, he threw himself into
the river Axenos, which from thence was afterwards called Thestius. And
after that, it was called Achelous upon this occasion.

Achelous, the son of Oceanus and the Nymph Nais, having deflowered his
daughter Cletoria by mistake, flung himself for grief into the river
Thestius, which then by his own name was called Achelous.

In this river grows an herb, which they call zaclon, very much
resembling wool; this if you bruise and cast into wine, it becomes
water, and preserves the smell but not the virtues of the wine.

In the same river also is found a certain stone of a mixed black and
lead color, called linurgus from the effect; for if you throw it upon a
linen cloth, by a certain affectionate union it assumes the form of the
linen, and turns white;—as Antisthenes relates in the Third Book of his
Meleagris, though Diocles the Rhodian more accurately tells us the same
thing in his Aetolics.

Near to this river lies the mountain Calydon, so called from Calydon,
the son of Mars and Astynome; for that he, by an accident having seen
Diana bathing herself, was transformed into a rock; and the mountain
which before was named Gyrus was afterwards by the providence of the
Gods called Calydon.

Upon this mountain grows an herb called myops. This if any one steep
in water and wash his face with it, he shall lose his sight, but upon
his atoning Diana, he shall recover it again;—as Dercyllus writes in
his Third Book of Aetolics.


XXIII. ARAXES.

Araxes is a river in Armenia, so called from Araxus the son of Pylus.
For he, contending with his grandfather Arbelus for the empire, shot
him with an arrow. For which being haunted by the Furies, he threw
himself into the river Bactros, for that reason called Araxes;—as
Ctesiphon testifies in his First Book of the Persian Affairs. Araxes,
king of the Armenians, being at war with his neighbors the Persians,
before they came to a battle, was told by the oracle that he should win
the victory if he sacrificed to the Gods two of the most noble virgins
in his kingdom. Now he, out of his paternal affection to his children,
spared his own daughters, and caused two lovely virgins, the daughters
of one of his nobility, to be laid upon the altar. Which Mnesalces,
the father of the victims, laying to heart, for a time concealed his
indignation; but afterwards, observing his opportunity, he killed
both the king’s daughters, and then leaving his native soil fled into
Scythia. Which when Araxes understood, for grief he threw himself into
the river Halmus, which then was altered and called Araxes.

In this river grows a plant which is called araxa, which in the
language of the natives signifies a virgin-hater. For that if it happen
to be found by any virgin, it falls a bleeding and dies away.

In the same river there is also found a stone of a black color,
called sicyonus. This stone, when the oracle advises the sacrificing
of a human victim, is laid upon the altar of the mischief-diverting
Gods. And then, no sooner does the priest touch it with his knife,
but it sends forth a stream of blood; at what time the superstitious
sacrificers retire, and with howlings and loud ohoning carry the stone
to the temple;—as Dorotheus the Chaldaean relates in his Second Book of
Stones.

Near to this river lies the mountain Diorphus, so called from Diorphus
the son of the Earth, of whom this story is reported. Mithras desirous
to have a son, yet hating woman-kind, lay with a stone, till he had
heated it to that degree that the stone grew big, and at the prefixed
time was delivered of a son, called Diorphus; who, growing up and
contending with Mars for courage and stoutness, was by him slain, and
by the providence of the Gods was transformed into the mountain which
was called Diorphus by his name.

In this mountain grows a tree, not unlike a pomegranate-tree, which
yields plenty of apples, in taste like grapes. Now if any one gather
the ripest of this fruit, and do but name Mars while he holds it in his
hand, it will presently grow green again;—as Ctesiphon witnesses in his
Thirteenth Book of Trees.


XXIV. TIGRIS.

Tigris is a river of Armenia flowing into Araxes and the lake of
Arsacis, formerly called Sollax, which signifies running and carried
downward. It was called Tigris upon this occasion.

Bacchus, through the design of Juno running mad, wandered over sea
and land, desirous to be quit of his distemper. At length coming
into Armenia, and not being able to pass the river before-mentioned,
he called upon Jupiter; who, listening to his prayers, sent him a
tiger that carried him safely over the water. In remembrance of which
accident, he called the river Tigris;—as Theophilus relates in his
First Book of Stones. But Hermesianax the Cyprian tells the story
thus:—

Bacchus falling in love with the Nymph Alphesiboea, and being able to
vanquish her neither with presents nor entreaties, turned himself into
the shape of the river Tigris, and overcoming his beloved by fear, took
her away and carrying her over the river, begat a son whom he called
Medus; who growing up in years, in remembrance of the accident he
called the river by the name of Tigris;—as Aristonymus relates in his
Third Book....

In this river a stone is to be found, called myndan, very white;
which whoever possesses shall never be hurt by wild beasts;—as Leo of
Byzantium relates in his Third Book of Rivers.

Near to this river lies the mountain Gauran; so called from Gauran the
son of the satrap Roxanes; who, being extremely religious and devout
towards the Gods, received this reward of his piety, that of all the
Persians he only lived three hundred years; and dying at last without
being ever afflicted with any disease, was buried upon the top of the
mountain Gauran, where he had a sumptuous monument erected to his
memory. Afterwards, by the providence of the Gods, the name of the
mountain was changed to that of Mausorus.

In this mountain grows an herb, which is like to wild barley. This herb
the natives heat over the fire, and anointing themselves with the oil
of it, are never sick, till the necessity of dying overtakes them;—as
Sostratus writes in his First Collection of Fabulous History.


