OF THE NAMES OF RIVERS AND MOUNTAINS, AND OF SUCH THINGS AS ARE TO BE
FOUND THEREIN.[175]


I. HYDASPES.

This is a river of India, which falls with an extraordinary swift
stream into the Saronitic Syrtis: Chrysippe, by the impulse of Venus,
whom she had offended, fell in love with her father Hydaspes, and
not being able to curb her preternatural desires, by the help of
her nurse, in the dead of the night got to his bed and received his
caresses; after which, the king proving unfortunate in his affairs,
he buried alive the old bawd that had betrayed him, and crucified his
daughter. Nevertheless such was the excess of his grief for the loss
of Chrysippe, that he threw himself into the river Indus, which was
afterwards called by his name Hydaspes.

Moreover in this river there grows a stone, which is called Lychnis,
which resembles the color of oil, and is very bright in appearance.
And when they are searching after it, which they do when the moon
increases, the pipers play all the while. Nor is it to be worn by any
but the richer sort. Also near that part of the river which is called
Pylae, there grows an herb which is very like a heliotrope, with the
juice of which the people anoint their skins to prevent sunburning, and
to secure them against the scorching of the excessive heat.

The natives whenever they take their virgins tardy, nail them to a
wooden cross, and fling them into this river, singing at the same
time in their own language a hymn to Venus. Every year also they bury
a condemned old woman near the top of the hill called Therogonos;
at which time an infinite multitude of creeping creatures come down
from the top of the hill, and devour the insects that hover about the
buried carcass. This Chrysermus relates in his History of India, though
Archelaus gives a more exact account of these things in his Treatise of
Rivers.

Near to this river lies the mountain Elephas, so called upon this
occasion. When Alexander the Macedonian advanced with his army into
India, and the natives were resolved to withstand him with all their
force, the elephant upon which Porus, king of that region, was wont
to ride, being of a sudden stung with a gad-bee, ran up to the top of
the mountain of the sun, and there uttered these words distinctly in
human speech: “O king, my lord, descended from the race of Gegasius,
forbear to attempt any thing against Alexander, for he is descended
from Jupiter.” And having so said, he presently died. Which when Porus
understood, afraid of Alexander, he fell at his feet and sued for
peace. Which when he had obtained, he called the mountain Elephas;—as
Dercyllus testifies in his Third Book of Mountains.


II. ISMENUS.

Ismenus is a river of Boeotia, that washes the walls of Thebes. It was
formerly called the foot of Cadmus, upon this occasion. When Cadmus
had slain the dragon which kept the fountain of Mars, he was afraid
to taste of the water, believing it was poisoned; which forced him to
wander about in search of another fountain to allay his thirst. At
length, by the help of Minerva, he came to the Corycian den, where his
right leg stuck deep in the mire. And from that hole it was that, after
he had pulled his leg out again, sprung a fair river, which the hero,
after the solemnity of his sacrifices performed, called by the name of
Cadmus’s foot.

Some time after, Ismenus, the son of Amphion and Niobe, being wounded
by Apollo and in great pain, threw himself into the said river, which
was then from his name called Ismenus;—as Sostratus relates in his
Second Book of Rivers.

Near to this river lies the mountain Cithaeron, formerly called
Asterion for this reason. Boeotus the son of Neptune was desirous,
of two noble ladies, to marry her that should be most beneficial to
him; and while he tarried for both in the night-time upon the top of
a certain nameless mountain, of a sudden a star fell from heaven upon
the shoulders of Eurythemiste, and immediately vanished. Upon which
Boeotus, understanding the meaning of the prodigy, married the virgin,
and called the mountain Asterion from the accident that befell him.
Afterwards it was called Cithaeron upon this occasion. Tisiphone,
one of the Furies, falling in love with a most beautiful youth whose
name was Cithaeron, and not being able to curb the impatience of her
desires, declared her affection to him in a letter, to which he would
not return any answer. Whereupon the Fury, missing her design, pulled
one of the serpents from her locks, and flung it upon the young lad as
he was keeping his sheep on the top of the mountain Asterion; where
the serpent twining about his neck choked him to death. And thereupon
by the will of the Gods the mountain was called Cithaeron;—as Leo of
Byzantium writes in his History of Boeotia.

But Hermesianax of Cyprus tells the story quite otherwise. For he says,
that Helicon and Cithaeron were two brothers, quite different in their
dispositions. For Helicon was affable and mild, and cherished his
aged parents. But Cithaeron, being covetous and greedily gaping after
the estate, first killed his father, and then treacherously threw his
brother down from a steep precipice, but in striving together, fell
himself along with him. Whence, by the providence of the Gods, the
names of both the mountains were changed. Cithaeron, by reason of his
impiety, became the haunt of the Furies. Helicon, for the young man’s
love to his parents, became the habitation of the Muses.


III. HEBRUS.

Hebrus is a river of Thrace, deriving its former name of Rhombus from
the many gulfs and whirlpools in the water.

Cassander, king of that region, having married Crotonice, had by her a
son whom he named Hebrus. But then being divorced from his first wife,
he married Damasippe, the daughter of Atrax, and brought her home over
his son’s head; with whom the mother-in-law falling in love, invited
him by letters to her embraces. But he, avoiding his mother-in-law as
a Fury, gave himself over to the sport of hunting. On the other side
the impious woman, missing her purpose, belied the chaste youth, and
accused him of attempting to ravish her. Upon this Cassander, raging
with jealousy, flew to the wood in a wild fury, and with his sword
drawn pursued his son, as one that treacherously sought to defile
his father’s bed. Upon which the son, finding he could no way escape
his father’s wrath, threw himself into the river Rhombus, which was
afterwards called Hebrus from the name of the young man;—as Timotheus
testifies in his Eleventh Book of Rivers.

Near to this river lies the mountain Pangaeus, so called upon this
occasion. Pangaeus, the son of Mars and Critobule, by a mistake lay
with his own daughter; which perplexed him to that degree that he fled
to the Carmanian mountain, where, overwhelmed with a sorrow that he
could not master, he drew his sword and slew himself. Whence, by the
providence of the Gods, the place was called Pangaeus.

In the river before mentioned, grows an herb not much unlike to
origanum; the tops of which the Thracians cropping off burn upon a
fire, and after they are filled with the fruits of Ceres, they hold
their heads over the smoke, and snuff it up into their nostrils,
letting it go down their throats; till at last they fall into a
profound sleep.

Also upon the mountain Pangaeus grows an herb, which is called the
harp upon this occasion. The women that tore Orpheus in pieces cast
his limbs into the river Hebrus; and his head being changed, the whole
body was turned into the shape of a dragon. But as for his harp, such
was the will of Apollo, it remained in the same form. And from the
streaming blood grew up the herb which was called the harp; which,
during the solemnity of the sacrifices to Bacchus, sends forth a sound
like that of an harp when played upon. At which time the natives, being
covered with the skins of young hinds and waving their thyrsuses in
their hands, sing a hymn, of which these are part of the words,

    When wisdom all in vain must be,
    Then be not wise at all;—

as Clitonymus reports, in his Third Book of Thracian Relations.


