_QUESTION V._

  WHY, SINCE BODIES AND FIGURES ARE CONTAINED PARTLY BY RECTILINEARS
  AND PARTLY BY CIRCLES, DOES HE MAKE ISOSCELES TRIANGLES AND TRIANGLES
  OF UNEQUAL SIDES THE PRINCIPLES OF RECTILINEARS; OF WHICH THE
  ISOSCELES TRIANGLE FORMS THE CUBE, THE ELEMENT OF THE EARTH; AND A
  SCALENE TRIANGLE FORMS THE PYRAMID WHICH IS THE SEED OF FIRE, THE
  OCTAHEDRON WHICH IS THE SEED OF AIR, AND THE ICOSAHEDRON WHICH IS THE
  SEED OF WATER;—WHILE HE DOES NOT MEDDLE WITH CIRCULARS, THOUGH HE
  DOES MENTION THE GLOBE, WHERE HE SAYS THAT EACH OF THE AFORE-RECKONED
  FIGURES DIVIDES A ROUND BODY THAT ENCLOSES IT INTO EQUAL PARTS.[157]

1. Is their opinion true who think that he ascribed a dodecahedron
to the globe, when he says that God made use of it in delineating
the universe? For upon account of the multitude of its bases and the
obtuseness of its angles, avoiding all rectitude, it is flexible,
and by circumtension, like globes made of twelve skins, it becomes
circular and comprehensive. For it has twenty solid angles, each of
which is contained by three obtuse planes, and each of these contains
one and the fifth part of a right angle. Now it is made up of twelve
equilateral and equangular quinquangles (or pentagons), each of which
consists of thirty of the first scalene triangles. Therefore it seems
to resemble both the Zodiac and the year, it being divided into the
same number of parts as these.

2. Or is a right line in Nature prior to circumference; or is
circumference but an accident of rectilinear? For a right line is said
to bend; and a circle is described by a centre and distance, which is
the place of a right line by which a circumference is measured, this
being everywhere equally distant from the middle. And a cone and a
cylinder are made by rectilinears; a cone by keeping one side of a
triangle fixed and carrying another round with the base,—a cylinder,
by doing the like with a parallelogram. Further, that is nearest to
principle which is less; but a right is the least of all lines, as
it is simple; whereas in a circumference one part is convex without,
another concave within. Besides, numbers are before figures, as unity
is before a point, which is unity in position. But indeed unity is
triangular; for every triangular number[158] taken eight times, by
adding unity, becomes quadrate; and this happens to unity. Therefore
a triangle is before a circle, whence a right line is before a
circumference. Besides, no element is divided into things compounded
of itself; indeed there is a dissolution of all other things into the
elements. Now a triangle is divided into no circumference, but two
diameters cut a circle into four triangles; therefore a rectilinear
figure is before a circular, and has more of the nature of an element.
And Plato himself shows that a rectilinear is in the first place, and
a circular is only consequential and accidental. For when he says the
earth consists of cubes, each of which is contained with rectilinear
superficies, he says the earth is spherical and round. Therefore there
was no need of making a peculiar element for round things, since
rectilinears, fitted after a certain manner among themselves, do make
up this figure.

3. Besides, a right line, whether great or little, preserves the same
rectitude; but as to the circumference of a circle, the less it is,
the crookeder it is; the larger, the straighter. Therefore if a convex
superficies stands on a plane, it sometimes touches the subject plane
in a point, sometimes in a line. So that a man may imagine that a
circumference is made up of little right lines.

4. But observe whether this be not true, that no circle or sphere in
this world is exact; but since by the tension and circumtension of
the right lines, or by the minuteness of the parts, the difference
disappears, the figure seems circular and round. Therefore no
corruptible body moves circularly, but altogether in a right line. To
be truly spherical is not in a sensible body, but is the element of
the soul and mind, to which he has given circular motion, as being
agreeable to their nature.


_QUESTION VI._

  HOW COMES IT TO PASS THAT IN PHAEDRUS IT IS SAID, THAT THE NATURE
  OF A WING, BY WHICH ANY THING THAT IS HEAVY IS CARRIED UPWARDS,
  PARTICIPATES MOST OF THE BODY OF GOD?[159]

Is it because the discourse is of love, and love is of beauty inherent
in a body? Now beauty, by similitude to things divine, moves and
reminds the soul. Or it may be (without too much curiosity) he may
be understood in plain meaning, to wit, that the several faculties
of the soul being employed about bodies, the power of reasoning and
understanding partakes most about divine and heavenly things; which he
did not impertinently call a wing, it raising the soul from mean and
mortal things to things above.


_QUESTION VII._

  IN WHAT SENSE DOES PLATO SAY, THAT THE ANTIPERISTASIS (OR REACTION)
  OF MOTION—BY REASON THERE IS NO VACUUM—IS THE CAUSE OF THE EFFECTS IN
  PHYSICIANS’ CUPPING-GLASSES, IN SWALLOWING, IN THROWING OF WEIGHTS,
  IN THE RUNNING OF WATER, IN THUNDER, IN THE ATTRACTION OF THE
  LOADSTONE, AND IN THE HARMONY OF SOUNDS?[160]

1. For it seems unreasonable to ascribe the reason of such different
effects to the selfsame cause.

2. How respiration is made by the reaction of the air he has
sufficiently shown. But the rest, he says, seem to be done
miraculously, but really the bodies thrust each other aside and change
places with one another; while he has left for us to determine how each
is particularly done.

3. As to cupping-glasses, the case is thus: the air next to the flesh
being comprehended and inflamed by the heat, and being made more rare
than the pores of the brass, does not go into a vacuum (for there is no
such thing), but into the air that is without the cupping-glass, and
has an impulse upon it. This air drives that before it; and each, as it
gives way, strives to succeed into the place which was vacuated by the
cession of the first. And so the air approaching the flesh comprehended
by the cupping-glass, and exciting it, draws the humors into the
cupping-glass.

4. Swallowing takes place in the same way. For the cavities about the
mouth and stomach are full of air; when therefore the meat is squeezed
down by the tongue and tonsils, the elided air follows what gives way,
and also forces down the meat.

5. Weights also thrown cleave the air and dissipate it, as they fall
with force; the air recoiling back, according to its natural tendency
to rush in and fill the vacuity, follows the impulse, and accelerates
the motion.

6. The fall also of thunderbolts is like to darting any thing. For by
the blow in the cloud, the fiery matter exploded breaks into the air;
and it being broken gives way, and again being contracted above, by
main force it presses the thunderbolt downwards contrary to Nature.

7. And neither amber nor the loadstone draws any thing to it which is
near, nor does any thing spontaneously approach them. But this stone
emits strong exhalations, by which the adjoining air being impelled
forceth that which is before it; and this being carried round in the
circle, and returning into the vacuated place, forcibly draws the iron
in the same direction. In amber there is a flammeous and spirituous
nature, and this by rubbing on the surface is emitted by recluse
passages, and does the same that the loadstone does. It also draws the
lightest and driest of adjacent bodies, by reason of their tenuity
and weakness; for it is not so strong nor so endued with weight and
strength as to force much air and to act with violence and to have
power over great bodies, as the magnet has. But what is the reason the
air never draws a stone, nor wood, but iron only, to the loadstone?
This is a common question both by them who think the coition of these
bodies is made by the attraction of the loadstone, and by such as think
it done by the incitement of the iron. Iron is neither so rare as wood,
nor altogether so solid as gold or a stone; but has certain pores and
asperities, which in regard of the inequality are proportionable to
the air; and the air being received in certain seats, and having (as
it were) certain stays to cling to, does not slip away; but when it is
carried up to the stone and strikes against it, it draws the iron by
force along with it to the stone. Such then may be the reason of this.

8. But the manner of the waters running over the earth is not so
evident. But it is observable that the waters of lakes and ponds stand
immovable, because the air about them stagnates immovable and admits of
no vacuity. For the water on the surface of lakes and seas is troubled
and fluctuates as the air is moved, it following the motion of the
air, and moving as it is moved. For the force from below causes the
hollowness of the wave, and from above the swelling thereof; until
the air ambient and containing the water is still. Therefore the flux
of such waters as follow the motion of the retreating air, and are
impelled by that which presses behind, is continued without end. And
this is the reason that the stream increases with the waters, and is
slow where the water is weak, the air not giving way, and therefore
suffering less reaction. So the water of fountains must needs flow
upwards, the extrinsic air succeeding into the vacuity and throwing the
water out. In a close house, that keeps in the air and wind, the floor
sprinkled with water causes an air or wind, because, as the sprinkled
water falls, the air gives way. For it is so provided by Nature that
air and water force one another and give way to one another; because
there is no vacuity in which one can be settled without feeling the
change and alteration in the other.

9. Concerning symphony, he shows how sounds harmonize. A quick sound
is acute, a slow is grave. Therefore acute sounds move the senses the
quicker; and these dying and grave sounds supervening, what arises
from the contemperation of one with the other causes pleasure to the
ear, which we call harmony. And by what has been said, it may easily
be understood that air is the instrument of these things. For sound is
the stroke upon the sense of the hearer, caused by the air; and the air
strikes as it is struck by the thing moving,—if violent, acutely,—if
languid, softly. The violent stroke comes quick to the ear; then the
circumambient air receiving a slower, it affects and carries the sense
along with it.


