X. MARSYAS.

Marsyas is a river of Phrygia, flowing by the city Celaenae, and
formerly called the fountain of Midas for this reason. Midas, king of
Phrygia, travelling in the remoter parts of the country, and wanting
water, stamped upon the ground; and there presently appeared a golden
fountain. But the water proving gold, and both he and his soldiers
being ready to perish for thirst, he invoked the compassion of Bacchus,
who listening to his prayers supplied him with water. The Phrygians
having by this means quenched their thirst, Midas named the river that
issued from the spring the Fountain of Midas. Afterwards it was called
Marsyas, upon this occasion.

Marsyas being overcome and flayed by Apollo, certain Satyrs are said to
have sprung from the stream of his blood; as also a river bearing the
name of Marsyas;—as Alexander Cornelius recites in his Third Book of
Phrygian Relations.

But Euemeridas the Cnidian tells the story after this manner. It
happened that the wine-bag which was made of Marsyas’s skin, being
corroded by time and carried away negligently by the wind, fell at last
from the land into Midas’s well; and driving along with the stream, was
taken up by a fisherman. At what time Pisistratus the Lacedaemonian,
being commanded by the oracle to build near the place where the relics
of the Satyr were found, reflected upon the accident, and in obedience
to the oracle having built a fair city, called it Noricum, which in the
Phrygian language signifies a wine-bag.

In this river grows an herb called the pipe, which being moved in the
wind yields a melodious sound;—as Dercyllus reports in his First Book
of Satyrics.

Near to this river also lies the mountain Berecyntus, deriving its
name from Berecyntus, the first priest to the Mother of the Gods. Upon
this mountain is found a stone which is called machaera, very much
resembling iron; which if any one happens to light upon while the
solemnities of the Mother of the Gods are performing, he presently runs
mad;—as Agatharchides reports in his Phrygian Relations.


XI. STRYMON.

Strymon is a river of Thrace, that flows along by the city Edonis. It
was formerly called Palaestinus, from Palaestinus the son of Neptune.
For he being at war with his neighbors, and seized with a violent
sickness, sent his son Haliacmon to be general of his army; who, rashly
giving battle to his enemies, was slain in the fight. The tidings of
which misfortune being brought to Palaestinus, he privately withdrew
himself from his guards, and in the desperation of his grief flung
himself into the River Conozus, which from that accident was afterwards
called Palaestinus. But as for Strymon, he was the son of Mars and
Helice; and hearing that his son Rhesus was slain, he flung himself
into the river Palaestinus, which was after that called Strymon, by his
own name.

In this river grows a stone which is called pausilypus, or the
grief-easing stone. This stone if any one find who is oppressed with
grief, he shall presently be eased of his sorrow;—as Jason of Byzantium
relates in his Thracian Histories.

Near to this river lie the mountains Rhodope and Haemus. These being
brother and sister, and both falling in love with each other, the one
was so presumptuous as to call his sister his Juno, the other to call
her brother her Jupiter; which so offended the Deities, that they
changed them into mountains bearing their own names.

In these two mountains grow certain stones, which are called
philadelphi, or the loving brethren. These stones are of a crow-color,
and resembling human shape, and if they chance to be named when they
are separated one from another, they presently and separately, as they
lie, dissolve and waste away; as Thrasyllus the Mendesian testifies in
his Third Book of Stones, but more accurately in his Thracian Histories.


XII. SAGARIS.

Sagaris is a river of Phrygia, formerly called Xerobates because in
the summer time it was generally dry. But it was called Sagaris for
this reason: Sagaris, the son of Myndon and Alexirrhoe, contemning and
slighting the mysteries of the Mother of the Gods, frequently affronted
and derided her priests the Galli. At which the Goddess heinously
offended, struck him with madness to that degree, that in one of his
raging fits he flung himself into the river Xerobates, which from that
time forward was called Sagaris.

In this river grows a stone, which is called autoglyphus, that is,
naturally engraved; for it is found with the Mother of the Gods by
nature engraved upon it. This stone, which is rarely to be found, if
any of the Galli or gelded priests happen to light upon, he makes no
wonder at it, but undauntedly brooks the sight of a preternatural
action;—as Aretazes reports in his Phrygian Relations.

Near to this river lies the mountain Ballenaeus, which in the Phrygian
language signifies _royal_; so called from Ballenaeus, the son of
Ganymede and Medesigiste, who perceiving his father almost wasted with
a consumption, instituted the Ballenaean festival, observed among the
natives to this day.

In this river is to be found a stone called aster, which from the
latter end of autumn shines at midnight like fire. It is called in the
language of the natives _ballen_, which being interpreted signifies
a king;—as Hermesianax the Cyprian affirms in his Second Book of his
Phrygian Relations.


