V. ISAEUS.

ISAEUS was born in Chalcis. When he came to Athens, he read Lysias’s
works, whom he imitated so well, both in his style and in his skill in
managing causes, that he who was not very well acquainted with their
manner of writing could not tell which of the two was author of many
of their orations. He flourished after the Peloponnesian war, as we
may conjecture from his orations, and was in repute till the reign of
Philip. He taught Demosthenes—not at his school, but privately—who gave
him ten thousand drachms, by which business he became very famous. Some
say that he composed orations for Demosthenes, which he pronounced in
opposition to his guardians. He left behind him sixty-four orations,
of which fifty are his own; as likewise some peculiar institutions of
rhetoric. He was the first that used to speak or write figuratively,
and that addicted himself to civil matters; which Demosthenes chiefly
followed. Theopompus the comedian makes mention of him in his Theseus.


VI. AESCHINES.

HE was the son of Atrometus—who, being banished by the Thirty Tyrants,
was thereby a means of reducing the commonwealth to the government
of the people—and of his wife Glaucothea; by birth a Cothocidian. He
was neither nobly born nor rich; but in his youth, being strong and
well set, he addicted himself to all sorts of bodily exercises; and
afterwards, having a very clear voice, he took to playing of tragedies,
and if we may credit Demosthenes, he was a petty clerk, and also served
Aristodemus as a player of third parts at the Bacchanalian festivals,
in his times of leisure rehearsing the ancient tragedies. When he was
but a boy, he was assisting to his father in teaching little children
their letters, and when he was grown up, he listed himself a private
soldier. Some think he was brought up under Socrates and Plato; but
Caecilius will have it that Leodamas was his master. Being concerned
in the affairs of the commonwealth, he openly acted in opposition to
Demosthenes and his faction; and was employed in several embassies,
and especially in one to Philip, to treat about articles of peace. For
which Demosthenes accused him for being the cause of the overthrow and
ruin of the Phocians, and the inflamer of war; which part he would
have him thought to have acted when the Amphictyons chose him one of
their deputies to the Amphissians who were building up the harbor
[of Crissa]. On which the Amphictyons put themselves under Philip’s
protection, who, being assisted by Aeschines, took the affair in hand
and soon conquered all Phocis.[15] But Aeschines, notwithstanding
all that Demosthenes could do, being favored by Eubulus the son of
Spintharus, a Probalisian, who pleaded in his behalf, carried his cause
by thirty voices, and so was cleared. Though some tell us, that there
were orations prepared by the orators, but the news of the conquest of
Chaeronea put a stop to the present proceedings, and so the suit fell.

Some time after this, Philip being dead, and his son Alexander marching
into Asia, Aeschines impeached Ctesiphon for acting against the laws,
in passing a decree in favor of Demosthenes. But he having not the
fifth part of the voices of the judges on his side, was forced to go
in exile to Rhodes, because he would not pay his mulct of a thousand
drachms. Others say, that he incurred disfranchisement also, because he
would not depart the city, and that he went to Alexander at Ephesus.
But upon the death of Alexander, when a tumult had been excited, he
went to Rhodes, and there opened a school and taught. And on a time
pronouncing the oration which he had formerly made against Ctesiphon,
to pleasure the Rhodians, he did it with that grace, that they wondered
how he could fail of carrying his cause if he pleaded so well for
himself. But ye would not wonder, said he, that I was overthrown, if
ye had heard Demosthenes pleading against me. He left a school behind
him at Rhodes, which was afterwards called the Rhodian school. Thence
he sailed to Samos, and there in a short time died. He had a very good
voice, as both Demosthenes and Demochares testified of him.

Four orations bear his name, one of which was against Timarchus,
another concerning false embassage, and a third against Ctesiphon,
which three are really his own; but the fourth, called Deliaca, is
none of his; for though he was named to plead the cause of the temple
at Delos, yet Demosthenes tells us that Hyperides was chosen in his
stead.[16] He says himself, that he had two brothers, Aphobetus and
Philochares. He was the first that brought the Athenians the news of
the victory obtained at Tamynae, for which he was crowned for the
second time. Some report that Aeschines was never any man’s scholar,
but having passed his time chiefly in courts of justice, he raised
himself from the office of clerk to that of orator. His first public
appearance was in a speech against Philip; with which the people being
pleased, he was immediately chosen to go ambassador to the Arcadians;
and being come thither, he excited the Ten Thousand against Philip. He
indicted Timarchus for profligacy; who, fearing the issue, deserted his
cause and hanged himself, as Demosthenes somewhere informs us. Being
employed with Ctesiphon and Demosthenes in an embassage to Philip to
treat of peace, he appeared the most accomplished of the three. Another
time also he was one of ten men sent in embassage to conclude a peace;
and being afterwards called to answer for it, he was acquitted, as we
said.


VII. LYCURGUS.

LYCURGUS was the son of Lycophron, and grandson of that Lycurgus whom
the Thirty Tyrants put to death, by the procurement of Aristodemus
the Batesian, who, also being treasurer of the Greeks, was banished
in the time of the popular government. He was a Butadian by birth,
and of the line or family of the Eteobutades. He received his first
institutions of philosophy from Plato the philosopher. But afterward
entering himself a scholar to Isocrates the orator, he employed his
study about affairs of the commonwealth. And to his care was committed
the disposal and management of the city stock, and so he executed the
office of treasurer-general for the space of twelve years; in which
time there went through his hands fourteen thousand talents, or (as
some will have it) eighteen thousand six hundred and fifty. It was the
orator Stratocles that procured him this preferment. At first he was
chosen in his own name; but afterwards he nominated one of his friends
to the office, while he himself performed the duties; for there was
a law just passed, that no man should be chosen treasurer for above
the term of four years. But Lycurgus plied his business closely,
both summer and winter, in the administration of public affairs. And
being entrusted to make provision of all necessaries for the wars, he
reformed many abuses that were crept into the commonwealth. He built
four hundred galleys for the use of the public, and prepared and fitted
a place for public exercises in Lyceum, and planted trees before it;
he likewise built a wrestling-court, and being made surveyor of the
theatre of Bacchus, he finished this building. He was likewise of so
great repute among all sorts, that he was entrusted with two hundred
and fifty talents of private citizens. He adorned and beautified the
city with gold and silver vessels of state, and golden images of
victory. He likewise finished many things that were as yet imperfect,
as the dock-yards and the arsenal. He built a wall also about the
spacious Panathenaic race-course, and made level a piece of uneven
ground, given by one Dinias to Lycurgus for the use of the city. The
keeping of the city was committed wholly to his care, and power to
apprehend malefactors, of whom he cleared the city utterly; so that
some sophisters were wont to say, that Lycurgus did not dip his pen in
ink, but in blood. And therefore it was, that when Alexander demanded
him of the people, they would not deliver him up. When Philip made
the second war upon the Athenians, he was employed with Demosthenes
and Polyeuctus in an embassy to Peloponnesus and other cities. He
was always in great repute and esteem with the Athenians, and looked
upon as a man of that justice and integrity, that in the courts of
judicature his good word was at all times prevalent on the behalf of
those persons for whom he undertook to speak. He was the author of
several laws; one of which was, that there should be certain comedies
played at the Chytrian solemnities, and whoever of the poets or players
should come off victor, he should thereby be invested with the freedom
of the city, which before was not lawful; and so he revived a solemnity
which for want of encouragement had for some time before been out of
request. Another of his laws was, that the city should erect statues
to the memory of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides; and that their
tragedies, being fairly engrossed, should be preserved in the public
consistory, and that the public clerks should read these copies as
the plays were acted, that nothing might be changed by the players;
and that otherwise it should be unlawful to act them. A third law
proposed by him was, that no Athenian, nor any person inhabiting in
Athens, should be permitted to buy a captive, who was once free, to be
a slave, without the consent of his former master. Further, that in
the Piraeus there should be at least three circular dances played to
Neptune; and that to the victor in the first should be given not less
than ten minas; in the second, eight; in the third, six. Also, that no
woman should go to Eleusis in a coach, lest the poor should appear more
despicable than the rich, and so be dejected and cast down; and that
whoever should ride in a coach contrary to this law should be fined six
thousand drachms. And when even his own wife was taken in the violation
of it, he paid to the discoverers of it a whole talent; for which being
afterwards called in question by the people: See therefore, said he, I
am called to answer for giving, and not for receiving money.

As he was walking one day in the streets, he saw an officer lay hand
on Xenocrates the philosopher; and when nothing would serve his turn
but the philosopher must to prison, because he had not deposited the
tribute due from strangers, he with his staff struck the officer on the
head for his unmannerly roughness toward a person of that character,
and freeing Xenocrates, cast the other into prison in his stead. And
not many days after, Xenocrates meeting with the children of Lycurgus
said: I have returned thanks unto your father right speedily, my good
children, for his friendship towards me, for I hear his kindness
commended by all people where I go. He made likewise several decrees,
in which he made use of the help of an Olynthian named Euclides, one
very expert in such matters. Though he was rich enough, yet he was
used to wear the same coat every day, both summer and winter; but he
wore shoes only when he was compelled to do it. Because he was not
ready to speak extempore, he used to practise and study day and night.
And to the end he might not at any time oversleep himself and so lose
time from his study, he used to cover himself on his bed only with a
sheepskin with the wool on, and to lay a hard bolster under his head.
When one reproached him for being in fee with rhetoricians when he
studied his orations, he answered, that, if a man would promise to
restore his sons better, he would give him not only a thousand drachms,
but half what he was worth. He took the liberty of speaking boldly upon
all occasions, by reason of his greatness; as when once the Athenians
interrupted him in his speaking, he cried out, O thou Corcyraean whip,
how many talents art thou worth? And another time, when some would rank
Alexander among the Gods, What manner of God, said he, must he be, when
all that go out of his temple had need to be dipped in water to purify
themselves?

After his death Menesaechmus accusing and indicting them by virtue
of an instrument drawn by Thracycles, his sons were delivered to the
eleven executioners of Justice. But Demosthenes, being in exile,
wrote to the Athenians, to let them know that they were wrongfully
accused, and that therefore they did not well to hear their accusers;
upon which they recanted what they had done, and set them at liberty
again,—Democles, who was Theophrastus’s scholar, likewise pleading in
their defence. Lycurgus and some of his posterity were buried publicly,
at or near the temple of Minerva Paeonia, where their monuments stand
in the garden of Melanthius the philosopher, on which are inscriptions
to Lycurgus and his children, which are yet extant. The greatest thing
he did while he lived was his raising the revenue of the commons
totally from sixty talents, as he found it, to twelve hundred. When
he found he must die, he was by his own appointment carried into the
temple of the Mother of the Gods, and into the senate-house, being
willing before his death to give an account of his administration. And
no man daring to accuse him of any thing except Menesaechmus, having
purged himself from those calumnies which he cast upon him, he was
carried home again, where in a short time he ended his life. He was
always accounted honest; his orations were commended for the eloquence
they carried in them; and though he was often accused, yet he never was
overthrown in any suit.

He had three children by Callisto, the daughter of Abron, and sister
of Callias, Abron’s son, by descent a Batesian,—I mean, of him who,
when Chaerondas was magistrate, was paymaster to the army. Of this
affinity Dinarchus speaks in his oration against Pastius. He left
behind him three sons, Abron, Lycurgus, and Lycophron; of which,
Abron and Lycurgus died without issue, though the first, Abron, did
for some time act very acceptably and worthily in affairs of the
commonwealth. Lycophron, marrying Callistomacha, the daughter of
Philip of Aexone, begat Callisto, who married Cleombrotus the son
of Dinocrates the Acharnian, to whom she bare Lycophron, who, being
adopted by his grandfather, died without issue. He being dead, Socrates
married Callisto, of whom he had his son Symmachus. To him was born
Aristonymus; to Aristonymus, Charmides, who was the father of Philippe.
Of her and Lysander came Medeius, who also was an interpreter, one
of the Eumolpids. He begat two children of Timothea, the daughter
of Glaucus, viz. Laodamia and Medius, who were priests of Neptune
Erechtheus; also Philippe a daughter, who was afterward priestess of
Minerva; for before, she was married to Diocles of Melite, to whom
she bare a son named Diocles, who was a colonel of a regiment of
foot. He married Hediste, the daughter of Abron, and of her begat
Philippides and Nicostrata, whom Themistocles the torch-bearer, son of
Theophrastus, married, and by her had Theophrastus and Diocles; and he
likewise constituted the priesthood of Neptune Erechtheus.

It is said that he penned fifteen orations. He was often crowned by the
people, and had statues dedicated to him. His image in brass was set
up in Ceramicus by order of the public, in the year of Anaxicrates; in
whose time also it was ordered that he and his eldest son should be
provided for with diet in the Prytaneum; but he being dead, Lycophron
his eldest son was forced to sue for that donation. This Lycurgus also
was used frequently to plead on the account of sacred things; and
accused Autolycus the Areopagite, Lysicles the general, Demades the
son of Demeas, Menesaechmus, and many others, all whom he caused to be
condemned as guilty. Diphilus also was called in question by him, for
impairing and diminishing the props of the metal mines, and unjustly
making himself rich therefrom; and he caused him to be condemned to
die, according to the provision made by the laws in that case. He gave
out of his own stock fifty drachms to every citizen, the sum total of
which donation amounted to one hundred and sixty talents;[17] but some
say he gave a mina of silver to each. He likewise accused Aristogiton,
Leocrates, and Autolycus for cowardice. He was called the Ibis:...

    The ibis to Lycurgus, to Chaerephon the bat.[18]

His ancestors derived their pedigree from Erechtheus, the son of the
Earth and of Vulcan; but he was nearest to Lycomedes and Lycurgus,
whom the people honored with public solemnities. There is a succession
of those of the race who were priests of Neptune, in a complete table
placed in the Erechtheum, painted by Ismenias the Chalcidian; in the
same place stood wooden images of Lycurgus, and of his sons, Abron,
Lycurgus, and Lycophron; made by Timarchus and Cephisodotus, the
sons of Praxiteles. His son Abron dedicated the table; and coming to
the priesthood by right of succession, he resigned to his brother
Lycophron, and hence he is painted as giving a trident. But Lycurgus
had made a draught of all his actions, and hung it on a column before
the wrestling-court built by himself, that all might read that would;
and no man could accuse him of any peculation. He likewise proposed to
the people to crown Neoptolemus, the son of Anticles, and to dedicate
statues to him, because he had promised and undertaken to cover the
altar of Apollo in the market with gold, according to the order of the
oracle. He decreed honors likewise to Diotimus, the son of Diopithes
of Euonymus, in the year when Ctesicles was magistrate.


