XIII. SCAMANDER.

Scamander is a river of Troas, which was formerly called Xanthus, but
changed its name upon this occasion. Scamander, the son of Corybas and
Demodice, having suddenly beheld the ceremonies while the mysteries of
Rhea were solemnizing, immediately ran mad, and being hurried away by
his own fury to the River Xanthus, flung himself into the stream, which
from thence was called Scamander.

In this river grows an herb like a vetch, that bears a cod with berries
rattling in it when they are ripe; whence it derived the name of
_sistrum_, or the _rattle_; whoever has this herb in possession fears
no apparition nor the sight of any God;—as Demostratus writes in his
Second Book of Rivers.

Near to this river lies the mountain Ida, formerly Gargarus; on the top
of which stand the altars of Jupiter and of the Mother of the Gods.
But it was called Ida upon this occasion. Aegesthius, who descended
from Jupiter, falling passionately in love with the nymph Ida, obtained
her good-will, and begat the Idaean Dactyli, or priests of the Mother
of the Gods. After which, Ida running mad in the temple of Rhea,
Aegesthius, in remembrance of the love which he bare her, called the
mountain by her name.

In this mountain grows a stone called cryphius, as being never to be
found but when the mysteries of the Gods are solemnizing;—as Heraclitus
the Sicyonian writes in his Second Book of Stones.


XIV. TANAIS.

Tanais is a river of Scythia, formerly called the Amazonian river,
because the Amazons bathed themselves therein; but it altered its name
upon this occasion. Tanais, the son of Berossus and Lysippe, one of
the Amazons, became a vehement hater of the female sex, and looking
upon marriage as ignominious and dishonorable, applied himself wholly
to martial affairs. This so offended Venus, that she caused him to
fall passionately in love with his own mother. True it is, at first he
withstood the force of his passion; but finding he could not vanquish
the fatal necessity of yielding to divine impulse, and yet desirous to
preserve his respect and piety towards his mother, he flung himself
into the Amazonian river, which was afterwards called Tanais, from the
name of the young man.

In this river grows a plant which is called halinda, resembling a
colewort; which the inhabitants bruising, and anointing their bodies
with the juice of it, find themselves in a condition better able to
endure the extremity of the cold; and for that reason, in their own
language they call it Berossus’s oil.

In this river grows a stone not unlike to crystal, resembling the shape
of a man with a crown upon his head. Whoever finds the stone when the
king dies, and has it ready against the time that the people meet upon
the banks of the river to choose a new sovereign, is presently elected
king, and receives the sceptre of the deceased prince;—as Ctesiphon
relates in his Third Book of Plants; and Aristobulus gives us the same
account in his First Book of Stones.

Near to this river also lies a mountain, in the language of the
natives called Brixaba, which signifies the _forehead of a ram_. And
it was so called upon this occasion. Phryxus having lost his sister
Helle near the Euxine Sea, and, as Nature in justice required, being
extremely troubled for his loss, retired to the top of a certain hill
to disburden himself of his sorrow. At which time certain barbarians
espying him, and mounting up the hill with their arms in their hands,
a gold-fleeced ram leaping out of a thicket, and seeing the multitude
coming, with articulate language and the voice of a man, awakened
Phryxus, who was fast asleep, and taking him upon his back, carried him
to Colchis. From this accident it was that the mountainous promontory
was called the ram’s forehead.

In this mountain grows an herb, by the barbarians called phryxa (which
being interpreted signifies _hating the wicked_), not unlike our common
rue. If the son of a former mother have it in his possession, he can
never be injured by his step-dame. It chiefly grows near the place
which is called Boreas’s Den, and being gathered, is colder than snow.
But if any step-dame be forming a design against her son-in-law, it
sets itself on fire and sends forth a bright flame. By which means they
who are thus warned avoid the danger they are in;—as Agatho the Samian
testifies in his Second Book of Scythian Relations.


XV. THERMODON.

Thermodon is a river of Scythia, deriving its name from this accident.
It was formerly called Crystallus, as being often frozen in the summer,
the situation of the place producing this effect. But that name was
altered upon this occasion....


XVI. NILE.

The Nile is a river in Egypt, that runs by the city of Alexandria.
It was formerly called Melas, from Melas the son of Neptune; but
afterwards it was called Aegyptus upon this occasion. Aegyptus, the son
of Vulcan and Leucippe, was formerly king of the country, between whom
and his own subjects happened a civil war; on which account the river
Nile not increasing, the Egyptians were oppressed with famine. Upon
which the oracle made answer, that the land should be again blessed
with plenty, if the king would sacrifice his daughter to atone the
anger of the Gods. Upon which the king, though greatly afflicted in his
mind, gave way to the public good, and suffered his daughter to be led
to the altar. But so soon as she was sacrificed, the king, not able to
support the burden of his grief, threw himself into the river Melas,
which after that was called Aegyptus. But then it was called Nilus upon
this occasion.

Garmathone, queen of Egypt, having lost her son Chrysochoas while he
was yet very young, with all her servants and friends most bitterly
bemoaned her loss. At what time Isis appearing to her, she surceased
her sorrow for a while, and putting on the countenance of a feigned
gratitude, kindly entertained the goddess. She, willing to make a
suitable return to the queen for the piety which she expressed in her
reception, persuaded Osiris to bring back her son from the subterranean
regions. When Osiris undertook to do this, at the importunity of his
wife, Cerberus—whom some call the Terrible—barked so loud, that Nilus,
Garmathone’s husband, struck with a sudden frenzy, threw himself into
the river Aegyptus, which from thence was afterwards called Nilus.

In this river grows a stone, not unlike to a bean, which so soon as any
dog happens to see, he ceases to bark. It also expels the evil spirit
out of those that are possessed, if held to the nostrils of the party
afflicted.

There are other stones which are found in this river, called kollotes,
which the swallows picking up against the time that Nilus overflows,
build up the wall which is called the Chelidonian wall, which restrains
the inundation of the water and will not suffer the country to be
injured by the fury of the flood;—as Thrasyllus tells us in his
Relation of Egypt.

Upon this river lies the mountain Argyllus, so called for this reason.

Jupiter in the heat of his amorous desires ravished away the Nymph Arge
from Lyctus, a city of Crete, and then carried her to a mountain of
Egypt called Argillus, and there begat a son, whom he named Dionysus
(or Bacchus); who, growing up to years of manhood, in honor of his
mother called the hill Argillus; and then mustering together an army
of Pans and Satyrs, first conquered the Indians, and then subduing
Spain, left Pan behind him there, the chief commander and governor of
those places. Pan by his own name called that country Pania, which was
afterward by his posterity called Spania;—as Sosthenes relates in the
Thirteenth Book of Iberian Relations.


