XIX. ALPHEUS.

Alpheus is a river of Arcadia, running by the walls of Pisa, a city of
Olympia. It was formerly called Stymphelus, from Stymphelus the son
of Mars and Dormothea; who, having lost his brother Alcmaeon, threw
himself for grief into the river Nyctimus, for that reason called
Stymphelus. Afterwards it was called Alpheus upon this occasion.

Alpheus, one of those that derive their descent from the Sun,
contending with his brother Cercaphus about the kingdom, slew him. For
which being chased away and pursued by the Furies, he flung himself
into the river Nyctimus, which after that was called Alpheus.

In this river grows a plant which is called cenchritis, resembling a
honey-comb, the decoction of which, being given by the physicians to
those that are mad, cures them of their frenzy;—as Ctesias relates in
his First Book of Rivers.

Near to this river lies the mountain Cronium, so called upon this
occasion. After the Giants’ war, Saturn, to avoid the threats of
Jupiter, fled to the mountain Cturus, and called it Cronium from his
own name. Where after he had absconded for some time, he took his
opportunity, and retired to Caucasus in Scythia.

In this mountain is found a stone, which is called the cylinder, upon
this occasion. For as oft as Jupiter either thunders or lightens,
so often this stone through fear rolls down from the top of the
mountain;—as Dercyllus writes in his First Book of Stones.


XX. EUPHRATES.

Euphrates is a river of Parthia, washing the walls of Babylon, formerly
called Medus from Medus the son of Artaxerxes. He, in the heat of his
lust, having ravished away and deflowered Roxane, and finding he was
sought after by the king, in order to be brought to punishment, threw
himself into the river Xaranda, which from thenceforward was called by
his name Medus. Afterwards it was called Euphrates upon this occasion.

Euphrates the son of Arandacus, finding his son Axurta abed with his
mother, and thinking him to be some one of the citizens, provoked by
his jealousy, drew his sword and nailed him to the bed. But perceiving
himself the author of what could not be recalled, he flung himself for
grief into the river Medus, which from that time forward was called by
his name Euphrates.

In this river grows a stone called aetites, which midwives applying to
the navels of women that are in hard labor, it causes them to bring
forth with little pain.

In the same river also there grows an herb which is called axalla,
which signifies heat. This herb they that are troubled with
quartan-agues apply to their breasts, and are presently delivered from
the fit;—as Chrysermus writes in his Thirteenth Book of Rivers.

Near this river lies the mountain Drimylus, where grows a stone not
unlike a sardonyx; worn by kings and princes upon their diadems, and
greatly available against dimness of sight;—as Nicias Mallotes writes
in his Book of Stones.


XXI. CAICUS.

Caicus is a river of Mysia, formerly called Astraeus, from Astraeus
the son of Neptune. For he, in the height of Minerva’s nocturnal
solemnities having deflowered his sister by a mistake, took a ring
at the same time from her finger; by which when he understood the
next day the error which he had committed, for grief he threw himself
headlong into the river Adurus, which from thence was called Astraeus.
Afterwards it came to be called Caicus upon this occasion.

Caicus, the son of Hermes and Ocyrrhoe the Nymph, having slain Timander
one of the noblemen of the country, and fearing the revenge of his
relations, flung himself into the river Astraeus, which from that
accident was called Caicus.

In this river grows a sort of poppy, which instead of fruit bears
stones. Of these there are some which are black and shaped like harps,
which the Mysians throw upon their ploughed lands; and if the stones
lie still in the place where they are thrown, it is a sign of a barren
year; but if they fly away like so many locusts, they prognosticate a
plentiful harvest.

In the same river also grows an herb which is called elipharmacus,
which the physicians apply to such as are troubled with immoderate
fluxes of blood, as having a peculiar virtue to stop the orifices of
the veins;—according to the relation of Timagoras in his First Book of
Rivers.

Adjoining to the banks of this river lies the mountain Teuthras, so
called from Teuthras king of the Mysians; who in pursuance of his
sport, as he was a hunting, ascending the hill Thrasyllus and seeing
a monstrous wild boar, followed him close with the rest of his train.
On the other side, the boar, to prevent the hunters, like a suppliant
fled to the temple of Orthosian Diana, into which when the hunters
were about to force their entrance, the boar in articulate words cried
out, Spare, O king, the nursling of the Goddess. However, Teuthras,
exalted with his good success, killed the poor boar. At which Diana
was so highly offended, that she restored the boar to life, but struck
the offender with scurf and madness. Which affliction the king not
enduring betook himself to the tops of the mountains. But his mother
Leucippe, understanding what had befallen her son, ran to the forest,
taking along with her the soothsayer Polyidus, the son of Coeranus; by
whom being informed of all the several circumstances of the matter, by
many sacrifices she at last atoned the anger of the Goddess, and having
quite recovered and cured her son, erected an altar to Orthosian Diana,
and caused a golden boar to be made with a man’s face. Which to this
day, if pursued by the hunters, enters the temple, and speaks with the
voice of a man the word “spare.” Thus Teuthras, being restored to his
former health, called the mountain by his own name Teuthras.

In this mountain grows a stone called antipathes (or the resister),
which is of excellent virtue to cure scabs and leprosies, being
powdered and mixed with wine;—as Ctesias the Cnidian tells us in his
Second Book of Mountains.


