VII. PACTOLUS.

Pactolus is a river of Lydia, that washes the walls of Sardis,
formerly called, Chrysorrhoas. For Chrysorrhoas, the son of Apollo
and Agathippe, being a mechanic artist, and one that only lived from
hand to mouth upon his trade, one time in the middle of the night made
bold to break open the treasury of Croesus; and conveying thence a
good quantity of gold, he made a distribution of it to his family. But
being pursued by the king’s officers, when he saw he must be taken, he
threw himself into the river which was afterwards from his name called
Chrysorrhoas, and afterwards changed into that of Pactolus upon this
occasion.

Pactolus, the son of ... and Leucothea, during the performance of
the mysteries sacred to Venus, ravished Demodice his own sister, not
knowing who she was; for which being overwhelmed with grief, he threw
himself into the river Chrysorrhoas, which from that time forward was
called Pactolus, from his own name. In this river is found a most pure
gold sand, which the force of the stream carries into the bosom of the
Happy Gulf.

Also in this river is to be found a stone which is called the preserver
of the fields, resembling the color of silver, very hard to be found,
in regard of its being mixed with the gold sand. The virtue of which is
such, that the more wealthy Lydians buy it and lay it at the doors of
their treasuries, by which means they preserve their treasure, whatever
it be, safe from the seizure of pilfering hands. For upon the approach
of thieves or robbers, the stone sends forth a sound like that of a
trumpet. Upon which the thieves surprised, and believing themselves
apprehended by officers, throw themselves headlong and break their
necks; insomuch that the place where the thieves thus frighted come by
their violent deaths is called Pactolus’s prison.

In this river also there grows an herb that bears a purple flower, and
is called chrysopolis; by which the inhabitants of the neighboring
cities try their purest gold. For just before they put their gold
into the melting-pot, they touch it with this herb; at what time,
if it be pure and unmixed, the leaves of the herb will be tinctured
with the gold and preserve the substance of the matter; but if it
be adulterated, they will not admit the discoloring moisture;—as
Chrysermus relates in his Third Book of Rivers.

Near to this river lies the mountain Tmolus, full of all manner of wild
beasts, formerly called Carmanorion, from Carmanor the son of Bacchus
and Alexirrhoea, who was killed by a wild boar as he was hunting; but
afterward Tmolus upon this occasion.

Tmolus, the son of Mars and Theogone, king of Lydia, while he was a
hunting upon Carmanorion, chanced to see the fair virgin Arrhippe that
attended upon Diana, and fell passionately in love with her. And such
was the heat of his love, that not being able to gain her by fair
means, he resolved to vitiate her by force. She, seeing she could by
no means escape his fury otherwise, fled to the temple of Diana, where
the tyrant, contemning all religion, ravished her,—an infamy which the
nymph not being able to survive immediately hanged herself. But Diana
would not pass by so great a crime; and therefore, to be revenged upon
the king for his irreligious insolence, she set a mad bull upon him, by
which the king being tossed up in the air, and falling down upon stakes
and stones, ended his days in torment. But Theoclymenus his son, so
soon as he had buried his father, altered the name of the mountain, and
called it Tmolus after his father’s name.

Upon this mountain grows a stone not unlike a pumice-stone, which is
very rare to be found. This stone changes its color four times a day;
and is to be seen only by virgins that are not arrived at the years of
understanding. But if marriageable virgins happen to see it, they can
never receive any injury from those that attempt their chastity;—as
Clitophon reports.


VIII. LYCORMAS.

Lycormas is a river of Aetolia, formerly called Evenus for this reason.
Idas the son of Aphareus, after he had ravished away by violence
Marpessa, with whom he was passionately in love, carried her away to
Pleuron, a city of Aetolia. This rape of his daughter Evenus could by
no means endure, and therefore pursued after the treacherous ravisher,
till he came to the river Lycormas But then despairing to overtake the
fugitive, he threw himself for madness into the river, which from his
own name was called Evenus.

In this river grows an herb which is called sarissa, because it
resembles a spear, of excellent use for those that are troubled with
dim sight;—as Archelaus relates in his First Book of Rivers.

Near to this river lies Myenus, from Myenus the son of Telestor and
Alphesiboea; who, being beloved by his mother-in-law and unwilling to
defile his father’s bed, retired himself to the mountain Alphius. But
Telestor, being made jealous of his wife, pursued his son into the
wilderness; and followed him so close, that Myenus, not being able to
escape, flung himself headlong from the top of the mountain, which for
that reason was afterwards called Myenus.

Upon this mountain grows a flower called the white violet, which, if
you do but name the word step-dame, presently dies away;—as Dercyllus
reports in his Third Book of Mountains.


IX. MAEANDER.

Maeander is a river of Asia, formerly called the Returner. For of all
rivers in the world it is the only stream which, taking its rise from
its own fountain, seems to run back to its own head.

It is called Maeander from Maeander, the son of Cercaphus and Anaxibia,
who, waging war with the Pessinuntines, made a vow to the Mother of the
Gods, that if he obtained the victory, he would sacrifice the first
that came to congratulate him for his good success. Now it happened
that the first that met him were his son Archelaus, his mother, and
his sister. All which, though so nearly related to him, he offered in
sacrifice to the satisfaction of his vow. But then no less grieved for
what he had done, he cast himself into the river, which from this
accident was afterwards called by his own name Maeander;—as Timolaus
tells us in his First Book of Phrygian Relations. Agathocles the Samian
also makes mention of this story, in his Commonwealth of Pessinus.

But Demostratus of Apamea relates the story thus: Maeander being a
second time elected general against the Pessinuntines, and obtaining
the victory quite contrary to his expectation, gave to his soldiers the
offerings due to the Mother of the Gods. At which the Goddess being
offended, she deprived him of his reason to that degree, that in the
height of his madness he slew both his wife and his son. But coming
somewhat to himself and repenting of what he had done, he threw himself
into the river, which by his name was called Maeander.

In this river there is a certain stone, which by Antiphrasis is called
sophron, or the sober-stone; which if you drop into the bosom of
any man, it presently makes him mad to that degree as to murder his
nearest relations, but having once atoned the Mother of the Gods, he
is presently restored to his wits;—as Damaratus testifies in his Third
Book of Rivers. And Archelaus makes mention of the same in his First
Book of Stones.

Near to this river lies the mountain Sipylus, so called from Sipylus
the son of Agenor and Dioxippe. For he having killed his mother by
mistake, and being haunted by the Furies, retired to the Ceraunian
mountain, and there hanged himself for grief. After which, by the
providence of the Gods, the mountain was called Sipylus.

In this mountain grows a stone that resembles a cylinder, which when
children that are obedient to their parents find, they lay it up in
the temple of the Mother of the Gods. Nor do they ever transgress out
of impiety; but reverence their parents, and are obedient to their
superior relations;—as Agatharchides the Samian relates in his Fourth
Book of Stones, and Demaratus in his Fourth Book of Phrygia.


