_QUESTION III._

In the Republic,[155] he supposes the universe, as one line, to be cut
into two unequal sections; again he cuts each of these sections in two
after the same proportion, and supposes the two sections first made to
constitute the two genera of things sensible and things intelligible
in the universe. The first represents the genus of intelligibles,
comprehending in the first subdivision the primitive forms or ideas,
in the second the mathematics. Of sensibles, the first subdivision
comprehends solid bodies, the second comprehends the images and
representations of them. Moreover, to every one of these four he has
assigned its proper judicatory faculty;—to the first, reason; to the
mathematics, the understanding; to sensibles, belief; to images and
likenesses, conjecture.

  BUT WHAT DOES HE MEAN BY DIVIDING THE UNIVERSE INTO UNEQUAL PARTS?
  AND WHICH OF THE SECTIONS, THE INTELLIGIBLE OR THE SENSIBLE, IS THE
  GREATER? FOR IN THIS HE HAS NOT EXPLAINED HIMSELF.

1. At first sight it will appear that the sensible is the greater
portion. For the essence of intelligibles being indivisible, and in
the same respect ever the same, is contracted into a little, and pure;
but an essence divisible and pervading bodies constitutes the sensible
part. Now what is immaterial is limited; but body in respect of matter
is infinite and unlimited, and it becomes sensible only when it is
defined by partaking of the intelligible. Besides, as every sensible
has many images, shadows, and representations, and from one and the
same original several copies may be taken both by nature and art;
so the latter must needs exceed the former in number, according to
Plato, who makes things intelligible to be patterns or ideas of things
sensible, like the originals of images and reflections. Further, Plato
derives the knowledge of ideas from body by abstraction and cutting
away, leading us by various steps in mathematical discipline from
arithmetic to geometry, thence to astronomy, and setting harmony above
them all. For things become geometrical by the accession of magnitude
to quantity; solid, by the accession of profundity to magnitude;
astronomical, by the accession of motion to solidity; harmonical, by
the accession of sound to motion. Abstract then sound from moving
bodies, motion from solids, profundity from superficies, magnitude from
quantity, we are then come to pure intelligible ideas, which have no
distinction among themselves in respect of the one single intelligible
essence. For unity makes no number, unless joined by the infinite
binary; then it makes a number. And thence we proceed to points, thence
to lines, from them to superficies, and profundities, and bodies, and
to the qualities of the bodies so and so qualified. Now the reason is
the only judicatory faculty of intelligibles; and the understanding
is the reason in the mathematics, where intelligibles appear as by
reflection in mirrors. But as to the knowledge of bodies, because of
their multitude, Nature has given us five powers or distinctions of
senses; nor are all bodies discerned by them, many escaping sense by
reason of their smallness. And though every one of us consists of a
body and soul, yet the hegemonic and intellectual faculty is small,
being hid in the huge mass of flesh. And the case is the same in the
universe, as to sensible and intelligible. For intelligibles are the
principles of bodily things, but every thing is greater than the
principle whence it came.

2. Yet, on the contrary, some will say that, by comparing sensibles
with intelligibles, we match things mortal with divine, in some
measure; for God is in intelligibles. Besides, the thing contained is
ever less than the containing, and the nature of the universe contains
the sensible in the intelligible. For God, having placed the soul in
the middle, hath extended it through all, and hath covered it all round
with bodies. The soul is invisible, and cannot be perceived by any of
the senses, as Plato says in his Book of Laws; therefore every man
must die, but the world shall never die. For mortality and dissolution
surround every one of our vital faculties. The case is quite otherwise
in the world; for the corporeal part, contained in the middle by the
more noble and unalterable principle, is ever preserved. And a body is
said to be without parts and indivisible for its minuteness; but what
is incorporeal and intelligible is so, as being simple and sincere, and
void of all firmness and difference. Besides, it were folly to think
to judge of incorporeal things by corporeal. The present, or _now_, is
said to be without parts and indivisible, since it is everywhere and no
part of the world is void of it. But all affections and actions, and
all corruptions and generations in the world, are contained by this
_now_. But the mind is judge only of what is intelligible, as the sight
is of light, by reason of its simplicity and similitude. But bodies,
having several differences and diversities, are comprehended, some
by one judicatory faculty, others by another, as by several organs.
Yet they do not well who despise the intelligible and intelligent
faculty in us; for being great, it comprehends all sensibles, and
attains to things divine. The most important thing he himself teaches
in his Banquet, where he shows us how we should use amatorious matters,
turning our minds from sensible goods to things discernible only by the
reason, that we ought not to be enslaved by the beauty of any body,
study, or learning, but laying aside such pusillanimity, should turn to
the vast ocean of beauty.[156]


_QUESTION IV._

  WHAT IS THE REASON THAT, THOUGH PLATO ALWAYS SAYS THAT THE SOUL IS
  ANCIENTER THAN THE BODY, AND THAT IT IS THE CAUSE AND PRINCIPLE OF
  ITS RISE, YET HE LIKEWISE SAYS, THAT NEITHER COULD THE SOUL EXIST
  WITHOUT THE BODY, NOR THE REASON WITHOUT THE SOUL, BUT THE SOUL IN
  THE BODY, AND THE REASON IN THE SOUL? FOR SO THE BODY WILL SEEM TO BE
  AND NOT TO BE, BECAUSE IT BOTH EXISTS WITH THE SOUL, AND IS BEGOT BY
  THE SOUL.

Perhaps what we have often said is true; viz., that the soul without
reason and the body without form did mutually ever coexist, and neither
of them had generation or beginning. But after the soul did partake of
reason and harmony, and being through consent made wise, it wrought
a change in matter, and being stronger than the other’s motions, it
drew and converted these motions to itself. So the body of the world
drew its original from the soul, and became conformable and like to
it. For the soul did not make the Nature of the body out of itself, or
out of nothing; but it wrought an orderly and pliable body out of one
disorderly and formless. Just as if a man should say that the virtue
of the seed is with the body, and yet that the body of the fig-tree
or olive-tree was made of the seed, he would not be much out; for the
body, its innate motion and mutation proceeding from the seed, grew
up and became what it is. So, when formless and indefinite matter
was once formed by the inbeing soul, it received such a form and
disposition.


