IV. GANGES.

Ganges is a river in India, so called for this reason. A certain
Calaurian nymph had by Indus a son called Ganges, conspicuous for his
beauty. Who growing up to manhood, being once desperately overcome with
wine, in the heat of his intoxication lay with his mother. The next
day he was informed by the nurse of what he had done; and such was
the excess of his sorrow, that he threw himself into a river called
Chliarus, afterwards called Ganges from his own name.

In this river grows an herb resembling bugloss, which the natives
bruise, and keep the juice very charily. With this juice in the dead of
the night they go and besprinkle the tigers’ dens; the virtue of which
is such, that the tigers, not being able to stir forth by reason of
the strong scent of the juice, are starved to death;—as Callisthenes
reports in his Third Book of Hunting.

Upon the banks of this river lies the mountain called the Anatole for
this reason. The Sun, beholding the nymph Anaxibia innocently spending
her time in dancing, fell passionately in love with her, and not able
to curb his loose amours, pursued her with a purpose to ravish her.
She therefore, finding no other way to escape him, fled to the temple
of Orthian Diana, which was seated upon the mountain called Coryphe,
and there immediately vanished away. Upon which the Sun, that followed
her close at the heels, not knowing what was become of his beloved,
overwhelmed with grief, rose in that very place. And from this accident
it was that the natives called the top of that mountain Anatole, or the
rising of the Sun;—as Caemaron reports in his Tenth Book of the Affairs
of India.


V. PHASIS.

Phasis is a river of Scythia, running by a city of the same name. It
was formerly called Arcturus, deriving its name from the situation of
the cold regions through which it runs. But the name of it was altered
upon this occasion.

Phasis, the child of the Sun and Ocyrrhoe daughter of Oceanus, slew
his mother, whom he took in the very act of adultery. For which being
tormented by the Furies appearing to him, he threw himself into the
river Arcturus, which was afterwards called by his own name Phasis.

In this river grows a reed, which is called leucophyllus, or the reed
with the white leaf. This reed is found at the dawning of the morning
light, at what time the sacrifices are offered to Hecate, at the time
when the divinely inspired paean is chanted, at the beginning of the
spring; when they who are troubled with jealous heads gather this reed,
and strew it in their wives’ chambers to keep them chaste. And the
nature of the reed is such, that if any wild extravagant person happens
to come rashly in drink into the room where it lies, he presently
becomes deprived of his rational thoughts, and immediately confesses
whatever he has wickedly done and intended to do. At what time they
that are present to hear him lay hold of him, sew him up in a sack, and
throw him into a hole called the Mouth of the Wicked, which is round
like the mouth of a well. This after thirty days empties the body into
the Lake Maeotis, that is full of worms; where of a sudden the body is
seized and torn to pieces by several vultures unseen before, nor is it
known from whence they come;—as Ctesippus relates in his Second Book of
Scythian Relations.

Near to this river lies the mountain Caucasus, which was before called
Boreas’s Bed, upon this occasion. Boreas in the heat of his amorous
passion ravished away by force Chione, the daughter of Arcturus, and
carried her to a certain hill which was called Niphantes, and upon her
begot a son whom he called Hyrpax, who succeeded Heniochus in his
kingdom. For which reason the mountain was first called Boreas’s Bed;
but afterwards Caucasus upon this occasion. After the fight of the
Giants, Saturn, to avoid the menaces of Jupiter, fled to the top of
Boreas’s Bed, and there being turned into a crocodile [lay concealed.
But Prometheus] slew Caucasus, one of the shepherds inhabiting that
place; and cutting him up and observing the disposition of his
entrails, he foresaw that his enemies were not far off. Presently
Jupiter appearing, and binding his father with a woollen list, threw
him down to hell. Then changing the name of the mountain in honor of
the shepherd Caucasus, he chained Prometheus to it, and caused him to
be tormented by an eagle that fed upon his entrails, because he was the
first that found out the inspection of bowels, which Jupiter deemed a
great cruelty;—as Cleanthes relates in his Third Book of the Wars of
the Gods.

Upon this mountain grows an herb which is called Prometheus, which
Medea gathering and bruising made use of to protect Jason against her
father’s obstinacy.


VI. ARAR.

Arar is a river in Gallia Celtica, deriving the name from its being
mixed with the river Rhone. For it falls into the Rhone within the
country of the Allobroges. It was formerly called Brigulus, but
afterwards changed its name upon this occasion. Arar, as he was a
hunting, entering into the wood, and there finding his brother Celtiber
torn in pieces by the wild beasts, mortally wounded himself for
grief, and fell into the river Brigulus; which from that accident was
afterwards called by his own name Arar.

In this river there breeds a certain large fish, which by the natives
is called Clupaea. This fish during the increase of the moon is white;
but all the while the moon is in the wane, it is altogether black;
and when it grows over bulky, it is (as it were) stabbed by its own
fins. In the head of it is found a stone like a corn of salt, which,
being applied to the left parts of the body when the moon is in the
wane, cures quartan agues;—as Callisthenes the Sybarite tells us in the
Thirteenth Book of Gallic Relations, from whom Timagenes the Syrian
borrowed his argument.

Near to this river stands a mountain called Lugdunum, which changed its
name upon this occasion. When Momorus and Atepomarus were dethroned
by Seseroneus, in pursuance of the oracle’s command they designed to
build a city upon the top of the hill. But when they had laid the
foundations, great numbers of crows with their wings expanded covered
all the neighboring trees. Upon which Momorus, being a person well
skilled in augury, called the city Lugdunum. For _lugdon_ in their
language signifies a crow, and _dunum_[176] any spacious hill.—This
Clitophon reports, in his Thirteenth Book of the Building of Cities.


