_QUESTION VIII._

  WHAT MEANS TIMAEUS,[161] WHEN HE SAYS THAT SOULS ARE DISPERSED INTO
  THE EARTH, THE MOON, AND INTO OTHER INSTRUMENTS OF TIME?

1. Does the earth move like the sun, moon, and five planets, which
for their motions he calls organs or instruments of time? Or is the
earth fixed to the axis of the universe; yet not so built as to remain
immovable, but to turn and wheel about, as Aristarchus and Seleucus
have shown since; Aristarchus only supposing it, Seleucus positively
asserting it? Theophrastus writes how that Plato, when he grew old,
repented him that he had placed the earth in the middle of the
universe, which was not its place.

2. Or is this contradictory to Plato’s opinion elsewhere, and in the
Greek instead of χρόνου should it be written χρόνῳ, taking the dative
case instead of the genitive, so that the stars will not be said to
be instruments, but the bodies of animals? So Aristotle has defined
the soul to be “the actual being of a natural organic body, having
the power of life.”[162] The sense then must be this, that souls are
dispersed into meet organical bodies in time. But this is far besides
his opinion. For it is not once, but several times, that he calls the
stars instruments of time; as when he says, the sun was made, as well
as other planets, for the distinction and conservation of the numbers
of time.

3. It is therefore most proper to understand the earth to be here an
instrument of time; not that the earth is moved, as the stars are;
but that, they being carried about it, it standing still makes sunset
and sunrising, by which the first measures of time, nights and days,
are circumscribed. Wherefore he called it the infallible guard and
artificer of night and day. For the gnomons of dials are instruments
and measures of time, not in being moved with the shadows, but in
standing still; they being like the earth in intercepting the light of
the sun when it is down,—as Empedocles says that the earth makes night
by intercepting light. This therefore may be Plato’s meaning.

4. And so much the rather might we consider whether the sun is not
absurdly and without probability said to be made for the distinction
of time, with the moon and the rest of the planets. For as in
other respects the dignity of the sun is great; so by Plato in his
Republic[163] the sun is called the king and lord of the whole sensible
nature, as the Chief Good is of the intelligible. For it is said to
be the offspring of Good, it giving both generation and appearance to
things visible; as it is from Good that things intelligible both are
and are understood. But that this God, having such a nature and so
great power, should be only an instrument of time, and a sure measure
of the difference that happens among the eight orbs, as they are slow
or swift in motion, seems neither decent nor highly rational. It must
therefore be said to such as are startled at these things, that it is
their ignorance to think that time is the measure of motion in respect
of sooner or later, as Aristotle calls it; or quantity in motion, as
Speusippus; or an interval of motion and nothing more, as some of the
Stoics define it, by an accident, not comprehending its essence and
power, which Pindar has not ineptly expressed in these words: Time,
who surpasses all in the seats of the blest. Pythagoras also, when he
was asked what time was, answered, it was the soul of this world. For
time is no affection or accident of motion, but the cause, power, and
principle of that symmetry and order that confines all created beings,
by which the animated nature of the universe is moved. Or rather, this
order and symmetry itself—so far as it is motion—is called time. For
this,

    Walking by still and silent ways,
    Mortal affairs with justice guides.[164]

According to the ancients, the essence of the soul is a number moving
itself. Therefore Plato says that time and heaven were coexistent,
but that motion was before heaven had being. But time was not. For
then there neither was order, nor measure, nor determination; but
indefinite motion, as it were, the formless and rude matter of time.

... But when matter was informed with figures, and motion with
circuitions, from that came the world, from this time. Both are
representations of God; the world, of his essence; time, of his
eternity in the form of motion, as the world is God in creation.
Therefore they say heaven and motion, being bred together, will perish
together, if ever they do perish. For nothing is generated without
time, nor is any thing intelligible without eternity; if this is to
endure for ever, and that never to die when once bred. Time therefore,
having a necessary connection and affinity with heaven, cannot be
called simple motion, but (as it were) motion in order having terms and
periods; whereof since the sun is prefect and overseer, to determine,
moderate, produce, and observe changes and seasons, which (according
to Heraclitus) produce all things, he is coadjutor to the governing
and chief God, not in trivial things, but in the greatest and most
momentous affairs.


_QUESTION IX._

Since Plato in his Commonwealth, discoursing of the faculties of
the soul, has very well compared the symphony of reason and of the
irascible and the concupiscent faculties to the harmony of the middle,
lowest, and highest chord,[165] some men may properly ask this
question:—

  DID PLATO PLACE THE RATIONAL OR THE IRASCIBLE FACULTY IN THE MIDDLE?
  FOR HE IS NOT CLEAR IN THE POINT.

1. Indeed, according to the natural order of the parts, the place of
the irascible faculty must be in the middle, and of the rational in
the highest, which the Greeks call hypate. For they of old called
the chief and supreme ὕπατος. So Xenocrates calls Jove, in respect of
immutable things, ὕπατος (or _highest_), in respect of sublunary things
νέατος (or _lowest_). And long before him, Homer calls the chief God
ὕπατος κρειόντων, _Highest of Rulers_. And Nature has of due given
the highest place to what is most excellent, having placed reason as
a steersman in the head, and the concupiscent faculty at a distance,
last of all and lowest. And the lowest place they call νεάτη, as the
names of the dead, νέρτεροι and ἔνεροι, do show. And some say, that
the south wind, inasmuch as it blows from a low and obscure place, is
called νότος. Now since the concupiscent faculty stands in the same
opposition to reason in which the lowest stands to the highest and the
last to the first, it is not possible for the reason to be uppermost
and first, and yet for any other part to be the one called ὕπατος (or
_highest_). For they that ascribe the power of the middle to it, as
the ruling power, are ignorant how they deprive it of a higher power,
namely, of the highest, which is competible neither to the irascible
nor to the concupiscent faculty; since it is the nature of them both
to be governed by and obsequious to reason, and the nature of neither
of them to govern and lead it. And the most natural place of the
irascible faculty seems to be in the middle of the other two. For it is
the nature of reason to govern, and of the irascible faculty both to
govern and be governed, since it is obsequious to reason, and commands
the concupiscent faculty when this is disobedient to reason. And as
in letters the semi-vowels are middling between mutes and vowels,
having something more than those and less than these; so in the soul
of man, the irascible faculty is not purely passive, but hath often
an imagination of good mixed with the irrational appetite of revenge.
Plato himself, after he had compared the soul to a pair of horses and
a charioteer, likened (as every one knows) the rational faculty to
the charioteer, and the concupiscent to one of the horses, which was
resty and unmanageable altogether, bristly about the ears, deaf and
disobedient both to whip and spur; and the irascible he makes for the
most part very obsequious to the bridle of reason, and assistant to
it. As therefore in a chariot, the middling one in virtue and power
is not the charioteer, but that one of the horses which is worse than
his guider and yet better than his fellow; so in the soul, Plato gives
the middle place not to the principal part, but to that faculty which
has less of reason than the principal part and more than the third.
This order also observes the analogy of the symphonies, i.e. the
relation of the irascible to the rational (which is placed as hypate)
forming the diatessaron (or fourth), that of the irascible to the
concupiscent (or nete) forming the diapente (or fifth), and that of the
rational to the concupiscent (as hypate to nete) forming an octave or
diapason. But should you place the rational in the middle, you would
make the irascible farther from the concupiscent; though some of the
philosophers have taken the irascible and the concupiscent faculty for
the selfsame, by reason of their likeness.

2. But it may be ridiculous to describe the first, middle, and last by
their place; since we see hypate highest in the harp, lowest in the
pipe; and wheresoever you place the mese in the harp, provided it is
tunable, it sounds more acute than hypate, and more grave than nete.
Nor does the eye possess the same place in all animals; but wherever
it is placed, it is natural for it to see. So a pedagogue, though he
goes not foremost but follows behind, is said to lead (ἄγειν), as the
general of the Trojan army,

    Now in the front, now in the rear was seen,
    And kept command;[166]

but wherever he was, he was first and chief in power. So the faculties
of the soul are not to be ranged by mere force in order of place or
name, but according to their power and analogy. For that in the body
of man reason is in the highest place, is accidental. But it holds
the chief and highest power, as mese to hypate, in respect of the
concupiscent; as mese to nete, in respect of the irascible; insomuch
as it depresses and heightens,—and in fine makes a harmony,—by abating
what is too much and by not suffering them to flatten and grow dull.
For what is moderate and symmetrous is defined by mediocrity. Still
more is it the object of the rational faculty to reduce the passions
to moderation, which is called sacred, as effecting a harmony of the
extremes with reason, and through reason with each other. For in
chariots the best of the beasts is not in the middle; nor is the skill
of driving to be placed as an extreme, but it is a mediocrity between
the inequality of the swiftness and the slowness of the horses. So the
force of reason takes up the passions irrationally moved, and reducing
them to measure, constitutes a mediocrity betwixt too much and too
little.


