PART I.

THE ELEMENTS OF PROPOSITIONS.




CHAPTER I.

GENERAL NAMES AND ALLIED DISTINCTIONS.

To discipline us against the errors we are liable to in receiving
knowledge through the medium of words--such is one of the objects of
Logic, the main object of what may be called the Logic of Consistency.

Strictly speaking, we may receive knowledge about things through signs
or single words, as a nod, a wink, a cry, a call, a command. But an
assertory sentence, proposition, or predication, is the unit with
which Logic concerns itself--a sentence in which a subject is
named and something is said or predicated about it. Let a man once
understand the errors incident to this regular mode of communication,
and he may safely be left to protect himself against the errors
incident to more rudimentary modes.

A proposition, whether long or short, is a unit, but it is an
analysable unit. And the key to syllogistic analysis is the General
Name. Every proposition, every sentence in which we convey knowledge
to another, contains a general name or its equivalent. That is to say,
every proposition may be resolved into a form in which the predicate
is a general name. A knowledge of the function of this element of
speech is the basis of all logical discipline. Therefore, though we
must always remember that the proposition is the real unit of speech,
and the general name only an analytic element, we take the general
name and its allied distinctions in thought and reality first.

How propositions are analysed for syllogistic purposes will be shown
by-and-by, but we must first explain various technical terms that
logicians have devised to define the features of this cardinal
element. The technical terms CLASS, CONCEPT, NOTION, ATTRIBUTE,
EXTENSION or DENOTATION, INTENSION or CONNOTATION, GENUS, SPECIES,
DIFFERENTIA, SINGULAR NAME, COLLECTIVE NAME, ABSTRACT NAME, all centre
round it.

A general name is a name applicable to a number of different things on
the ground of some likeness among them, as _man_, _ratepayer_, _man of
courage_, _man who fought at Waterloo_.

From the examples it will be seen that a general name logically is
not necessarily a single word. Any word or combination of words that
serves a certain function is technically a general name. The different
ways of making in common speech the equivalent of a general name
logically are for the grammarian to consider.

In the definition of a general name attention is called to two
distinct considerations, the individual objects to each of which
the name is applicable, and the points of resemblance among them, in
virtue of which they have a common name. For those distinctions there
are technical terms.

CLASS is the technical term for the objects, different yet agreeing,
to each of which a general name may be applied.

The points of resemblance are called the common ATTRIBUTES of the
class.

A class may be constituted on one attribute or on several.
_Ratepayer_, _woman ratepayer_, _unmarried woman ratepayer_;
_soldier_, _British soldier_, _British soldier on foreign service_.
But every individual to which the general name can be applied must
possess the common attribute or attributes.

These common attributes are also called the NOTION of the class,
inasmuch as it is these that the mind notes or should note when the
general name is applied. CONCEPT is a synonym perhaps in more common
use than notion; the rationale of this term (derived from _con_ and
_capere_, to take or grasp together) being that it is by means of
the points of resemblance that the individuals are grasped or held
together by the mind. These common points are the one in the many, the
same amidst the different, the identity signified by the common name.
The name of an attribute as thought of by itself without reference to
any individual or class possessing it, is called an ABSTRACT name. By
contradistinction, the name of an individual or a class is CONCRETE.

Technical terms are wanted also to express the relation of the
individuals and the attributes to the general name. The individuals
jointly are spoken of as the DENOTATION, or EXTENSION or SCOPE of
the name; the common attributes as its CONNOTATION, INTENSION,
COMPREHENSION, or GROUND. The whole denotation, etc., is the class;
the whole connotation, etc., is the concept.[1] The limits of a
"class" in Logic are fixed by the common attributes. Any individual
object that possesses these is a member. The statement of them is the
DEFINITION.

To predicate a general name of any object, as, "This is a cat," "This
is a very sad affair," is to refer that object to a class, which is
equivalent to saying that it has certain features of resemblance with
other objects, that it reminds us of them by its likeness to them.
Thus to say that the predicate of every proposition is a general name,
expressed or implied, is the same as to say that every predication may
be taken as a reference to a class.

Ordinarily our notion or concept of the common features signified by
general names is vague and hazy. The business of Logic is to make them
clear. It is to this end that the individual objects of the class are
summoned before the mind. In ordinary thinking there is no definite
array or muster of objects: when we think of "dog" or "cat,"
"accident," "book," "beggar," "ratepayer," we do not stop to call
before the mind a host of representatives of the class, nor do we take
precise account of their common attributes. The concept of "house" is
what all houses have in common. To make this explicit would be no
easy matter, and yet we are constantly referring objects to the
class "house". We shall see presently that if we wish to make the
connotation or concept clear we must run over the denotation or class,
that is to say, the objects to which the general name is applied in
common usage. Try, for example, to conceive clearly what is meant
by house, tree, dog, walking-stick. You think of individual objects,
so-called, and of what they have in common.

A class may be constituted on one property or on many. There are
several points common to all houses, enclosing walls, a roof, a means
of exit and entrance. For the full concept of the natural kinds,
_men_, _dogs_, _mice_, etc., we should have to go to the natural
historian.

DEGREES OF GENERALITY. One class is said to be of higher generality
than another when it includes that other and more. Thus animal
includes man, dog, horse, etc.; man includes Aryan, Semite, etc.;
Aryan includes Hindoo, Teuton, Celt, etc.

The technical names for higher and lower classes are GENUS and
SPECIES. These terms are not fixed as in Natural History to certain
grades, but are purely relative one to another, and movable up and
down a scale of generality. A class may be a species relatively to one
class, which is above it, and a genus relatively to one below it. Thus
Aryan is a species of the genus man, Teuton a species of the genus
Aryan.

In the graded divisions of Natural History genus and species are fixed
names for certain grades. Thus: Vertebrates form a "division"; the
next subdivision, _e.g._, Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, etc., is called a
"class"; the next, _e.g_., Rodents, Carnivora, Ruminants, an "order";
the next, _e.g._, Rats, Squirrels, Beavers, a "genus"; the next,
_e.g._, Brown rats, Mice, a "species".

                Vertebrates (division).
                      |
             Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, etc. (class).
                |
         Rodents, Ruminants, Carnivors, etc. (order).
            |
     Rats, Squirrels, Beavers, etc. (genus).
       |
  Brown rats, Mice, etc. (species).

If we subdivide a large class into smaller classes, and, again,
subdivide these subdivisions, we come at last to single objects.

              Men
               |
             ------------
          Europeans, Asiatics, etc.
              |
          -------------
      Englishmen, Frenchmen, etc.
           |
      ---------------------
  John Doe, Richard Roe, etc.

A table of higher and lower classes arranged in order has been known
from of old as a _tree_ of division or classification. The following
is Porphyry's "tree":--

            Being
           /     \
  Corporeal       Incorporeal
           \     /
            (Body)
           /     \
    Animate       Inanimate
           \     /
         (Living Being)
           /     \
   Sensible       Insensible
           \     /
           (Animal)
           /     \
   Rational       Irrational
           \     /
            (Man)
              |
  ---------------------------------------
  Socrates, Plato, and other individuals.

The single objects are called INDIVIDUALS, because the division cannot
be carried farther. The highest class is technically the SUMMUM GENUS,
or _Genus generalissimum_; the next highest class to any species is
the PROXIMUM GENUS; the lowest group before you descend to individuals
is the INFIMA SPECIES, or _Species specialissima_.

The attribute or attributes whereby a species is distinguished
from other species of the same genus, is called its DIFFERENTIA or
DIFFERENTIAE. The various species of houses are differentiated by their
several uses, dwelling-house, town-house, ware-house, public-house.
Poetry is a species of Fine Art, its differentia being the use of
metrical language as its instrument.

A lower class, indicated by the name of its higher class qualified by
adjectives or adjective phrases expressing its differential property
or properties, is said to be described PER GENUS ET DIFFERENTIAM.
Examples: "Black-bird," "note-book," "clever man," "man of Kent,"
"eminent British painter of marine subjects". By giving a combination
of attributes common to him with nobody else, we may narrow down the
application of a name to an individual: "The Commander-in-Chief of the
British forces at the battle of Waterloo".

Other attributes of classes as divided and defined, have received
technical names.

An attribute common to all the individuals of a class, found in that
class only, and following from the essential or defining attributes,
though not included among them, is called a PROPRIUM.

An attribute that belongs to some, but not to all, or that belongs to
all, but is not a necessary consequence of the essential attributes,
is called an ACCIDENT.

The clearest examples of Propria are found in mathematical figures.
Thus, the defining property of an equilateral triangle is the equality
of the sides: the equality of the angles is a proprium. That the
three angles of a triangle are together equal to two right angles is
a proprium, true of all triangles, and deducible from the essential
properties of a triangle.

Outside Mathematics, it is not easy to find _propria_ that satisfy
the three conditions of the definition. It is a useful exercise of
the wits to try for such. Educability--an example of the proprium
in mediaeval text-books--is common to men, and results from man's
essential constitution; but it is not peculiar; other animals are
educable. That man cooks his food is probably a genuine proprium.

That horses run wild in Thibet: that gold is found in California: that
clergymen wear white ties, are examples of Accidents. Learning is an
accident in man, though educability is a proprium.

What is known technically as an INSEPARABLE ACCIDENT, such as the
black colour of the crow or the Ethiopian, is not easy to distinguish
from the Proprium. It is distinguished only by the third character,
deducibility from the essence.[2]

Accidents that are both common and peculiar are often useful for
distinguishing members of a class. Distinctive dresses or badges, such
as the gown of a student, the hood of a D.D., are accidents, but mark
the class of the individual wearer. So with the colours of flowers.

_Genus_, _Species_, _Differentia_, _Proprium_, and _Accidens_ have
been known since the time of Porphyry as the FIVE PREDICABLES. They
are really only terms used in dividing and defining. We shall return
to them and endeavour to show that they have no significance except
with reference to fixed schemes, scientific or popular, of Division or
Classification.

Given such a fixed scheme, very nice questions may be raised as to
whether a particular attribute is a defining attribute, or a proprium,
or an accident, or an inseparable accident. Such questions afford
great scope for the exercise of the analytic intellect.


We shall deal more particularly with degrees of generality when
we come to Definition. This much has been necessary to explain an
unimportant but much discussed point in Logic, what is known as the
inverse variation of Connotation and Denotation.

Connotation and Denotation are often said to vary inversely in
quantity. The larger the connotation the smaller the denotation, and
_vice versa_. With certain qualifications the statement is correct
enough, but it is a rough compendious way of expressing the facts and
it needs qualification.

The main fact to be expressed is that the more general a name is, the
thinner is its meaning. The wider the scope, the shallower the ground.
As you rise in the scale of generality, your classes are wider but the
number of common attributes is less. Inversely, the name of a species
has a smaller denotation than the name of its genus, but a richer
connotation. _Fruit-tree_ applies to fewer objects than _tree_,
but the objects denoted have more in common: so with _apple_ and
_fruit-tree_, _Ribston Pippin_ and _apple_.

Again, as a rule, if you increase the connotation you contract the
area within which the name is applicable. Take any group of things
having certain attributes in common, say, _men of ability_: add
_courage_, _beauty_, _height of six feet_, _chest measurement of 40
inches_, and with each addition fewer individuals are to be found
possessing all the common attributes.

This is obvious enough, and yet the expression inverse variation is
open to objection. For the denotation may be increased in a sense
without affecting the connotation. The birth of an animal may be said
to increase the denotation: every year thousands of new houses are
built: there are swarms of flies in a hot summer and few in a cold.
But all the time the connotation of _animal_, _house_, or _fly_
remains the same: the word does not change its meaning.

It is obviously wrong to say that they vary in inverse proportion.
Double or treble the number of attributes, and you do not necessarily
reduce the denotation by one-half or one-third.

It is, in short, the meaning or connotation that is the main thing.
This determines the application of a word. As a rule if you increase
meaning, you restrict scope. Let your idea, notion, or concept of
_culture_ be a knowledge of Mathematics, Latin and Greek: your _men of
culture_ will be more numerous than if you require from each of them
these qualifications _plus_ a modern language, an acquaintance with
the Fine Arts, urbanity of manners, etc.

It is just possible to increase the connotation without decreasing the
denotation, to thicken or deepen the concept without diminishing
the class. This is possible only when two properties are exactly
co-extensive, as equilaterality and equiangularity in triangles.

SINGULAR and PROPER NAMES. A Proper or Singular name is a name used to
designate an individual. Its function, as distinguished from that of
the general name, is to be used purely for the purpose of distinctive
reference.

A man is not called Tom or Dick because he is like in certain respects
to other Toms or other Dicks. The Toms or the Dicks do not form a
logical class. The names are given purely for purposes of distinction,
to single out an individual subject. The Arabic equivalent for a
Proper name, _alam_, "a mark," "a sign-post," is a recognition of
this.

In the expressions "a Napoleon," "a Hotspur," "a Harry," the names
are not singular names logically, but general names logically, used to
signify the possession of certain attributes.

A man may be nicknamed on a ground, but if the name sticks and is
often used, the original meaning is forgotten. If it suggests
the individual in any one of his qualities, any point in which he
resembles other individuals, it is no longer a Proper or Singular name
logically, that is, in logical function. That function is fulfilled
when it has called to mind the individual intended.

To ask, as is sometimes done, whether Proper names are connotative or
denotative, is merely a confusion of language. The distinction between
connotation and denotation, extension and intension, applies only to
general names. Unless a name is general, it has neither extension nor
intension:[3] a Proper or Singular name is essentially the opposite of
a general name and has neither the one nor the other.

A nice distinction may be drawn between Proper and Singular names,
though they are strict synonyms for the same logical function. It is
not essential to the discharge of that function that the name should
be strictly appropriated to one object. There are many Toms and many
Dicks. It is enough that the word indicates the individual without
confusion in the particular circumstances.

This function may be discharged by words and combinations of words
that are not Proper in the grammatical sense. "This man," "the cover
of this book," "the Prime Minister of England," "the seer of Chelsea,"
may be Singular names as much as Honolulu or Lord Tennyson.

In common speech Singular names are often manufactured _ad hoc_
by taking a general name and narrowing it down by successive
qualifications till it applies only to one individual, as "The leading
subject of the Sovereign of England at the present time". If it so
happens that an individual has some attribute or combination peculiar
to himself, he may be suggested by the mention of that attribute
or combination:--"the inventor of the steam-engine," "the author of
Hudibras".

Have such names a connotation? The student may exercise his wits
on the question. It is a nice one, an excellent subject of debate.
Briefly, if we keep rigid hold of the meaning of connotation, this
Singular name has none. The combination is a singular name only
when it is the subject of a predication or an attribution, as in
the sentences, "The position of the leading subject of etc., is a
difficult one," or "The leading subject of etc., wears an eyeglass".
In such a sentence as "So-and-so is the leading subject of etc.," the
combined name has a connotation, but then it is a general and not a
singular name.

COLLECTIVE NAMES, as distinguished from General Names. A collective
name is a name for a number of similar units taken as a whole--a name
for a totality of similar units, as army, regiment, mob, mankind,
patrimony, personal estate.

A group or collection designated by a collective name is so far like
a class that the individual objects have something in common: they
are not heterogeneous but homogeneous. A mob is a collection of human
beings; a regiment of soldiers; a library of books.

The distinction lies in this, that whatever is said of a collective
name is said about the collection as a whole, and does not apply to
each individual; whatever is said of a general name applies to each
individual. Further, the collective name can be predicated only of
the whole group, as a whole; the general name is predicable of each,
distributively. "Mankind has been in existence for thousands of
years;" "The mob passed through the streets." In such expressions as
"An honest man's the noblest work of God," the subject is functionally
a collective name.

A collective name may be used as a general name when it is extended on
the ground of what is common to all such totalities as it designates.
"An excited mob is dangerous;" "An army without discipline is
useless." The collective name is then "connotative" of the common
characters of the collection.

MATERIAL OR SUBSTANTIAL NAMES. The question has been raised whether
names of material, gold, water, snow, coal, are general or collective
singular. In the case of pieces or bits of a material, it is true that
any predicate made concerning the material, such as "Sugar is sweet,"
or "Water quenches thirst," applies to any and every portion. But
the separate portions are not individuals in the whole signified by
a material name as individuals are in a class. Further, the name of
material cannot be predicated of a portion as a class name can be of
an individual. We cannot say, "This is a sugar". When we say, "This is
a piece of sugar," sugar is a collective name for the whole material.
There are probably words on the borderland between general names and
collective names. In such expressions as "This is a _coal_," "The
bonnie _water_ o' Urie," the material name is used as a general
name. The real distinction is between the distributive use and the
collective use of a name; as a matter of grammatical usage, the same
word may be used either way, but logically in any actual proposition
it must be either one or the other.

ABSTRACT NAMES are names for the common attributes or concepts on
which classes are constituted. A concrete name is a name directly
applicable to an individual in all his attributes, that is, as he
exists in the concrete. It may be written on a ticket and pinned to
him. When we have occasion to speak of the point or points in which a
number of individuals resemble one another, we use what is called an
abstract name. "Generous man," "clever man," "timid man," are concrete
names; "generosity," "cleverness," "timidity," are abstract names.

It is disputed whether abstract names are connotative. The question
is a confused one: it is like asking whether the name of a town is
municipal. An abstract name is the name of a connotation as a separate
object of thought or reference, conceived or spoken of in abstraction
from individual accidents. Strictly speaking it is notative rather
than _con_notative: it cannot be said to have a connotation because
it is itself the symbol of what is called the connotation of a general
name.[4]

The distinction between abstract names and concrete names is
virtually a grammatical distinction, that is, a distinction in mode
of predication. We may use concrete names or abstract names at our
pleasure to express the same meaning. To say that "John is a timid
man" is the same thing as saying that "Timidity is one of the
properties or characteristics or attributes of John". "Pride and
cruelty generally go together;" "Proud men are generally cruel men."

General names are predicable of individuals because they possess
certain attributes: to predicate the possession of those attributes is
the same thing as to predicate the general name.

Abstract forms of predication are employed in common speech quite as
frequently as concrete, and are, as we shall see, a great source of
ambiguity and confusion.

    [Footnote 1: It has been somewhat too hastily assumed on the
    authority of Mansel (Note to Aldrich, pp. 16, 17) that Mill
    inverted the scholastic tradition in his use of the word
    _Connotative_. Mansel puts his statement doubtfully, and
    admits that there was some licence in the use of the word
    Connotative, but holds that in Scholastic Logic an adjective
    was said to "signify _primarily_ the attribute, and to
    _connote_ or _signify secondarily_ ([Greek: prossemainein])
    the subject of inhesion". The truth is that Mansel's view was
    a theory of usage not a statement of actual usage, and he had
    good reason for putting it doubtfully.

    As a matter of fact, the history of the distinction follows
    the simple type of increasing precision and complexity, and
    Mill was in strict accord with standard tradition. By the
    Nominalist commentators on the _Summulae_ of Petrus Hispanus
    certain names, adjectives grammatically, are called
    _Connotativa_ as opposed to _Absoluta_, simply because they
    have a double function. White is connotative as signifying
    both a subject, such as Socrates, of whom "whiteness" is an
    attribute, and an attribute "whiteness": the names "Socrates"
    and "whiteness" are Absolute, as having but a single
    signification. Occam himself speaks of the subject as the
    primary signification, and the attribute as the secondary,
    because the answer to "What is white?" is "Something informed
    with whiteness," and the subject is in the nominative case
    while the attribute is in an oblique case (_Logic_, part I.
    chap. x.). Later on we find that Tataretus (_Expositio in
    Summulas_, A.D. 1501), while mentioning (Tract. Sept. _De
    Appellationibus_) that it is a matter of dispute among
    Doctores whether a connotative name _connotat_ the subject or
    the attribute, is perfectly explicit in his own definition,
    "Terminus connotativus est qui praeter illud pro quo supponit
    connotat aliquid adjacere vel non adjacere rei pro qua
    supponit" (Tract. Sept. _De Suppositionibus_). And this
    remained the standard usage as long as the distinction
    remained in logical text-books. We find it very clearly
    expressed by Clichtoveus, a Nominalist, quoted as an authority
    by Guthutius in his _Gymnasium Speculativum_, Paris, 1607 (_De
    Terminorum Cognitione_, pp. 78-9). "Terminus absolutus est,
    qui solum illud pro quo in propositione supponit, significat.
    Connotativus autem, qui ultra idipsum, aliud importat." Thus
    _man_ and _animal_ are absolute terms, which simply stand
    for (supponunt pro) the things they signify. _White_ is a
    connotative name, because "it stands for (supponit pro) a
    subject in which it is an accident: and beyond this, still
    signifies an accident, which is in that subject, and is
    expressed by an abstract name". Only Clichtoveus drops the
    verb _connotat_, perhaps as a disputable term, and says simply
    _ultra importat_.

    So in the Port Royal Logic (1662), from which possibly Mill
    took the distinction: "Les noms qui signifient les choses
    comme modifiees, marquant premierement et directement la
    chose, quoique plus confusement, et indirectement le mode,
    quoique plus distinctement, sont appeles _adjectifs_ ou
    _connotatifs_; comme rond, dur, juste, prudent" (part i. chap
    ii.).

    What Mill did was not to invert Scholastic usage but to revive
    the distinction, and extend the word connotative to general
    names on the ground that they also imported the possession
    of attributes. The word has been as fruitful of meticulous
    discussion as it was in the Renaissance of Logic, though
    the ground has changed. The point of Mill's innovation was,
    premising that general names are not absolute but are applied
    in virtue of a meaning, to put emphasis on this meaning as
    the cardinal consideration. What he called the connotation had
    dropped out of sight as not being required in the Syllogistic
    Forms. This was as it were the point at which he put in his
    horn to toss the prevalent conception of Logic as Syllogistic.

    The real drift of Mill's innovation has been obscured by
    the fact that it was introduced among the preliminaries
    of Syllogism, whereas its real usefulness and significance
    belongs not to Syllogism in the strict sense but to
    Definition. He added to the confusion by trying to devise
    forms of Syllogism based on connotation, and by discussing
    the Axiom of the Syllogism from this point of view. For
    syllogistic purposes, as we shall see, Aristotle's forms are
    perfect, and his conception of the proposition in extension
    the only correct conception. Whether the centre of gravity in
    Consistency Logic should not be shifted back from Syllogism to
    Definition, the latter being the true centre of consistency,
    is another question. The tendency of Mill's polemic was to
    make this change. And possibly the secret of the support it
    has recently received from Mr. Bradley and Mr. Bosanquet is
    that they, following Hegel, are moving in the same direction.

    In effect, Mill's doctrine of Connotation helped to fix
    a conception of the general name first dimly suggested by
    Aristotle when he recognised that names of genera and species
    signify Quality, in showing what sort a thing is. Occam
    carried this a step farther towards clear light by including
    among Connotative Terms such general names as "monk," name of
    classes that at once suggest a definite attribute. The third
    step was made by Mill in extending the term Connotation to
    such words as "man," "horse," the _Infimae Species_ of the
    Schoolmen, the Species of modern science.

    Whether connotation was the best term to use for this purpose,
    rather than extension, may be questioned: but at least it was
    in the line of tradition through Occam.]

    [Footnote 2: The history of the definition of the _Proprium_
    is an example of the tendency of distinctions to become more
    minute and at the same time more purposeless. Aristotle's
    [Greek: idion] was an attribute, such as the laugh of the man
    or the bark of the dog, common to all of a class and peculiar
    to the class (_quod convenit omni soli et semper_) yet not
    comprised in the definition of the class. Porphyry recognised
    three varieties of [Greek: idia] besides this, four in all,
    as follows:--(1) an attribute peculiar to a species but not
    possessed by all, as knowledge of medicine or geometry; (2)
    possessed by a whole species but not peculiar to it, as being
    a biped in man; (3) peculiar to a species, and possessed
    by all at a certain time, as turning grey in old age; (4)
    Aristotle's "proprium," peculiar and possessed by all, as
    risibility. The idea of the Proprium as deducible from or
    consequent on the essence would seem to have originated in
    the desire to find something common to all Poryphyry's four
    varieties.]

    [Footnote 3: It is a plausible contention that in the case
    of the Singular name the extension is at a minimum and the
    intension at a maximum, the extension being one individual,
    and the intension the totality of his attributes. But this is
    an inexact and confused use of words. A name does not _extend_
    beyond the individual except when it is used to signify one
    or more of his prominent qualities, that is, is used with the
    function of a general name. The _ex_tension of a Singular name
    is zero: it has no extension. On the other hand, it suggests,
    in its function as a Singular name, no properties or
    qualities; it suggests only a subject; _i.e._, it has no
    intension. The ambiguity of the term Denotation helps the
    confusion in the case of Singular names. "Denote" in common
    speech means to indicate, to distinguish. But when in Logic
    we say that a general name denotes individuals, we have no
    thought of indicating or distinguishing: we mean only that
    it is applicable to any one, without respect of individuals,
    either in predication or epithetic description.]

    [Footnote 4: Strictly speaking, as I have tried to indicate
    all along, the words Connotation and Denotation, or Extension
    and Intension, apply only to general names. Outside general
    names, they have no significance. An adjective with its noun
    is a general name, of which the adjective gives part of the
    Connotation. If we apply the word connotation to signify
    merely the suggestion of an attribute in whatever grammatical
    connexion, then an abstract name is undoubtedly as much
    connotative as an adjective. The word _Sweetness_ has the same
    meaning as _Sweet_: it indicates or signifies, conveys to the
    mind of the reader the same attribute: the only difference is
    that it does not at the same time indicate a subject in which
    the attribute is found, as _sweet apple_. The meaning is not
    _con_noted.]




