CHAPTER IV.

THE COUNTER-IMPLICATION OF PROPOSITIONS.

In discussing the Axioms of Dialectic, I indicated that the
propositions of common speech have a certain negative implication,
though this does not depend upon any of the so-called Laws of Thought,
Identity, Contradiction, and Excluded Middle. Since, however, the
counter-implicate is an important guide in the interpretation of
propositions, it is desirable to recognise it among the modes of
Immediate Inference.

I propose, then, first, to show that people do ordinarily infer at
once to a counter-sense; second, to explain briefly the Law of Thought
on which such an inference is justified; and, third, how this law
may be applied in the interpretation of propositions, with a view to
making subject and predicate more definite.

Every affirmation about anything is an implicit negation about
something else. Every say is a gainsay. That people ordinarily
act upon this as a rule of interpretation a little observation is
sufficient to show: and we find also that those who object to having
their utterances interpreted by this rule often shelter themselves
under the name of Logic.

Suppose, for example, that a friend remarks, when the conversation
turns on children, that John is a good boy, the natural inference is
that the speaker has in his mind another child who is not a good boy.
Such an inference would at once be drawn by any actual hearer, and the
speaker would protest in vain that he said nothing about anybody but
John. Suppose there are two candidates for a school appointment, A
and B, and that stress is laid upon the fact that A is an excellent
teacher. A's advocate would at once be understood to mean that B was
not equally excellent as a teacher.

The fairness of such inferences is generally recognised. A reviewer,
for example, of one of Mrs. Oliphant's historical works, after
pointing out some small errors, went on to say that to confine himself
to censure of small points, was to acknowledge by implication that
there were no important points to find fault with.

Yet such negative implications are often repudiated as illogical.
It would be more accurate to call them extra-logical. They are not
condemned by any logical doctrine: they are simply ignored. They are
extra-logical only because they are not legitimated by the Laws of
Identity, Contradiction, and Excluded Middle: and the reason why
Logic confines itself to those laws is that they are sufficient for
Syllogism and its subsidiary processes.

But, though extra-logical, to infer a counter-implicate is not
unreasonable: indeed, if Definition, clear vision of things in their
exact relations, is our goal rather than Syllogism, a knowledge of
the counter-implicate is of the utmost consequence. Such an implicate
there must always be under an all-pervading Law of Thought which has
not yet been named, but which may be called tentatively the law of
Homogeneous Counter-relativity. The title, one hopes, is sufficiently
technical-looking: though cumbrous, it is descriptive. The law itself
is simple, and may be thus stated and explained.


_The Law of Homogeneous Counter-relativity._

    Every positive in thought has a contrapositive, and the
    positive and contrapositive are of the same kind.

The first clause of our law corresponds with Dr. Bain's law of
Discrimination or Relativity: it is, indeed, an expansion and
completion of that law. Nothing is known absolutely or in isolation;
the various items of our knowledge are inter-relative; everything is
known by distinction from other things. Light is known as the opposite
of darkness, poverty of riches, freedom of slavery, in of out; each
shade of colour by contrast to other shades. What Dr. Bain lays stress
upon is the element of difference in this inter-relativity. He bases
this law of our knowledge on the fundamental law of our sensibility
that change of impression is necessary to consciousness. A long
continuance of any unvaried impression results in insensibility to it.
We have seen instances of this in illustrating the maxim that
custom blunts sensibility (p. 74). Poets have been beforehand with
philosophers in formulating this principle. It is expressed with the
greatest precision by Barbour in his poem of "The Bruce," where he
insists that men who have never known slavery do not know what freedom
is.

  Thus contrar thingis evermare
  Discoverings of t' other are.

Since, then, everything that comes within our consciousness comes as
a change or transition from something else, it results that our
knowledge is counter-relative. It is in the clash or conflict of
impressions that knowledge emerges: every item of knowledge has its
illuminating foil, by which it is revealed, over against which it is
defined. Every positive in thought has its contrapositive.

So much for the element of difference. But this is not the whole of
the inter-relativity. The Hegelians rightly lay stress on the common
likeness that connects the opposed items of knowledge.

    "Thought is not only _distinction_; it is, at the same time,
    _relation_.[1] If it marks off one thing from another, it, at
    the same time, connects one thing with another. Nor can either
    of these functions of thought be separated from the other: as
    Aristotle himself said, the knowledge of opposites is one. A
    thing which has nothing to distinguish it is unthinkable, but
    equally unthinkable is a thing which is so separated from all
    other things as to have no community with them. If then the
    law of contradiction be taken as asserting the self-identity
    of things or thoughts in a sense that excludes their
    community--in other words, if it be not taken as limited by
    another law which asserts the _relativity_ of the things or
    thoughts distinguished--it involves a false abstraction....
    If, then, the world, as an intelligible world, is a world of
    distinction, differentiation, individuality, it is equally
    true that in it as an intelligible world there are no absolute
    separations or oppositions, no antagonisms which cannot be
    reconciled."[2]

In the penultimate sentence of this quotation Dr. Caird
_differentiates_ his theory against a Logical counter-theory of
the Law of Identity, and in the last sentence against an Ethical
counter-theory: but the point here is that he insists on the relation
of likeness among opposites. Every impression felt is felt as a change
or transition from something else: but it is a variation of the same
impression--the something else, the contrapositive, is not entirely
different. Change itself is felt as the opposite of sameness,
difference of likeness, and likeness of difference. We do not
differentiate our impression against the whole world, as it were,
but against something nearly akin to it--upon some common ground. The
positive and the contrapositive are of the same kind.

Let us surprise ourselves in the act of thinking and we shall find
that our thoughts obey this law. We take note, say, of the colour
of the book before us: we differentiate it against some other colour
actually before us in our field of vision or imagined in our minds.
Let us think of the blackboard as black: the blackness is defined
against the whiteness of the figures chalked or chalkable upon it, or
against the colour of the adjacent wall. Let us think of a man as a
soldier; the opposite in our minds is not the colour of his hair,
or his height, or his birthplace, or his nationality, but some other
profession--soldier, sailor, tinker, tailor. It is always by means of
some contrapositive that we make the object of our thoughts definite;
it is not necessarily always the same opposite, but against
whatever opposite it is, they are always homogeneous. One colour is
contradistinguished from another colour, one shade from another shade:
colour may be contradistinguished from shape, but it is within the
common genus of sensible qualities.

A curious confirmation of this law of our thinking has been pointed
out by Mr. Carl Abel.[3] In Egyptian hieroglyphics, the oldest
extant language, we find, he says, a large number of symbols with
two meanings, the one the exact opposite of the other. Thus the
same symbol represents _strong_ and _weak_; _above_--_below_;
_with_--_without_; _for_--_against_. This is what the Hegelians mean
by the reconciliation of antagonisms in higher unities. They do not
mean that black is white, but only that black and white have something
in common--they are both colours.

I have said that this law of Homogeneous Counter-relativity has not
been recognised by logicians. This, however, is only to say that it
has not been explicitly formulated and named, as not being required
for Syllogism; a law so all-pervading could not escape recognition,
tacit or express. And accordingly we find that it is practically
assumed in Definition: it is really the basis of definition _per
genus et differentiam_. When we wish to have a definite conception
of anything, to apprehend what it is, we place it in some genus and
distinguish it from species of the same. In fact our law might be
called the Law of Specification: in obeying the logical law of what
we ought to do with a view to clear thinking, we are only doing with
exactness and conscious method what we all do and cannot help doing
with more or less definiteness in our ordinary thinking.

It is thus seen that logicians conform to this law when they are
not occupied with the narrow considerations proper to Syllogism. And
another unconscious recognition of it may be found in most logical
text-books. Theoretically the not-A of the Law of Contradiction--(A is
not not-A)--is an infinite term. It stands for everything but A. This
is all that needs to be assumed for Conversion and Syllogism. But take
the examples given of the Formal Obverse or Permutation, "All men are
fallible". Most authorities would give as the Formal Obverse of this,
"No men are infallible". But, strictly speaking, "infallible" is
of more limited and definite signification than not-fallible.
Not-fallible, other than fallible, is brown, black, chair, table,
and every other nameable thing except fallible. Thus in Obversion and
Conversion by Contraposition, the homogeneity of the negative term is
tacitly assumed; it is assumed that A and not-A are of the same kind.


Now to apply this Law of our Thought to the interpretation of
propositions. Whenever a proposition is uttered we are entitled to
infer at once (or _immediately_) that the speaker has in his mind
some counter-proposition, in which what is overtly asserted of the
ostensible subject is covertly denied of another subject. And we must
know what this counter-proposition, the counter-implicate is, before
we can fully and clearly understand his meaning. But inasmuch as
any positive may have more than one contrapositive, we cannot tell
immediately or without some knowledge of the circumstances or context,
what the precise counter-implicate is. The peculiar fallacy incident
to this mode of interpretation is, knowing that there must be some
counter-implicate, to jump rashly or unwarily to the conclusion that
it is some definite one.

Dr. Bain applies the term Material Obverse to the form, Not-S is not
P, as distinguished from the form S is not not-P, which he calls
the Formal Obverse, on the ground that we can infer the
Predicate-contrapositive at once from the form, whereas we cannot tell
the Subject-contrapositive without an examination of the matter.
But in truth we cannot tell either Predicate-contrapositive or
Subject-contrapositive as it is in the mind of the speaker from
the bare utterance. We can only tell that if he has in his mind a
proposition definitely analysed into subject and predicate, he must
have contrapositives in his mind of both, and that they must be
homogeneous. Let a man say, "This book is a quarto". For all that we
know he may mean that it is not a folio or that it is not an
octavo: we only know for certain, under the law of Homogeneous
Counter-relativity, that he means some definite other size. Under
the same law, we know that he has a homogeneous contrapositive of the
subject, a subject that admits of the same predicate, some other book
in short. What the particular book is we do not know.

It would however be a waste of ingenuity to dwell upon the
manipulation of formulae founded on this law. The practical concern is
to know that for the interpretation of a proposition, a knowledge of
the counter-implicate, a knowledge of what it is meant to deny, is
essential.

The manipulation of formulae, indeed, has its own special snare. We are
apt to look for the counterparts of them in the grammatical forms of
common speech. Thus, it might seem to be a fair application of our law
to infer from the sentence, "Wheat is dear," that the speaker had in
his mind that Oats or Sugar or Shirting or some other commodity is
cheap. But this would be a rash conclusion. The speaker may mean this,
but he _may_ also mean that wheat is dear now as compared with some
other time: that is, the Positive subject in his mind may be "Wheat as
now," and the Contrapositive "Wheat as then". So a man may say, "All
men are mortal," meaning that the angels never taste death, "angels"
being the contrapositive of his subject "men". Or he may mean merely
that mortality is a sad thing, his positive subject being men as
they are, and his contrapositive men as he desires them to be. Or his
emphasis may be upon the _all_, and he may mean only to deny that some
one man in his mind (Mr. Gladstone, for example) is immortal. It would
be misleading, therefore, to prescribe propositions as exercises in
Material Obversion, if we give that name to the explicit expression
of the Contrapositive Subject: it is only from the context that we can
tell what this is. The man who wishes to be clearly understood gives
us this information, as when the epigrammatist said: "We are all
fallible--even the youngest of us".

But the chief practical value of the law is as a guide in studying the
development of opinions. Every doctrine ever put forward has been
put forward in opposition to a previous doctrine on the same subject.
Until we know what the opposed doctrine is, we cannot be certain of
the meaning. We cannot gather it with precision from a mere study of
the grammatical or even (in the narrow sense of the word) the logical
content of the words used. This is because the framers of doctrines
have not always been careful to put them in a clear form of subject
and predicate, while their impugners have not moulded their denial
exactly on the language of the original. No doubt it would have been
more conducive to clearness if they had done so. But they have not,
and we must take them as they are. Thus we have seen that the Hegelian
doctrine of Relativity is directed against certain other doctrines
in Logic and in Ethics; that Ultra-Nominalism is a contradiction of
a certain form of Ultra-Realism; and that various theories of
Predication each has a backward look at some predecessor.

I quote from Mr. A.B. Walkley a very happy application of this
principle of interpretation:--

    "It has always been a matter for speculation why so sagacious
    an observer as Diderot should have formulated the wild paradox
    that the greatest actor is he who feels his part the least.
    Mr. Archer's bibliographical research has solved this riddle.
    Diderot's paradox was a protest against a still wilder one. It
    seems that a previous eighteenth century writer on the
    stage, a certain Saint-Albine, had advanced the fantastic
    propositions that none but a magnanimous man can act
    magnanimity, that only lovers can do justice to a love scene,
    and kindred assertions that read like variations on the
    familiar 'Who drives fat oxen must himself be fat'. Diderot
    saw the absurdity of this; he saw also the essentially
    artificial nature of the French tragedy and comedy of his own
    day; and he hastily took up the position which Mr. Archer has
    now shown to be untenable."

This instance illustrates another principle that has to be borne in
mind in the interpretation of doctrines from their historical context
of counter-implication. This is the tendency that men have to
put doctrines in too universal a form, and to oppose universal to
universal, that is, to deny with the flat contrary, the very reverse,
when the more humble contradictory is all that the truth admits of. If
a name is wanted for this tendency, it might be called the tendency to
Over-Contradiction. Between "All are" and "None are," the sober
truth often is that "Some are" and "Some are not," and the process of
evolution has often consisted in the substitution of these sober forms
for their more violent predecessors.

    [Footnote 1: It is significant of the unsuitableness of
    the vague unqualified word Relativity to express a logical
    distinction that Dr. Bain calls his law the Law of Relativity
    simply, having regard to the relation of difference, _i.e._,
    to Counter-Relativity, while Dr. Caird applies the name
    Relativity simply to the relation of likeness, _i.e._, to
    Co-relativity. It is with a view to taking both forms
    of relation into account that I name our law the Law of
    Homogeneous Counter-relativity. The Protagorean Law of
    Relativity has regard to yet another relation, the relation of
    knowledge to the knowing mind: these other logical laws are
    of relations among the various items of knowledge. Aristotle's
    category of Relation is a fourth kind of relation not to be
    confused with the others. "Father--son," "uncle--nephew,"
    "slave--master," are _relata_ in Aristotle's sense: "father,"
    "uncle" are homogeneous counter-relatives, varieties of
    kinship; so "slave," "freeman" are counter-relatives in social
    status.]

    [Footnote 2: Dr. Caird's _Hegel_, p. 134.]

    [Footnote 3: See article on Counter-Sense, _Contemporary
    Review_, April, 1884.]




