PART IV.

THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF PROPOSITIONS.--MEDIATE INFERENCE.
--SYLLOGISM.




CHAPTER I.

THE SYLLOGISM.

We have already defined mediate inference as the derivation of a
conclusion from more than one proposition. The type or form of a
mediate inference fully expressed consists of three propositions so
related that one of them is involved or implied in the other two.

          Distraction is exhausting.
          Modern life is full of distraction
    [.'.] Modern life is exhausting.

We say nothing of the truth of these propositions. I purposely choose
questionable ones. But do they hang together? If you admit the first
two, are you bound in consistency to admit the third? Is the truth of
the conclusion a necessary consequence of the truth of the premisses?
If so, it is a valid mediate inference from them.

When one of the two premisses is more general than the conclusion, the
argument is said to be Deductive. You lead down from the more general
to the less general. The general proposition is called the Major
Premiss, or Grounding Proposition, or Sumption: the other premiss the
Minor, or Applying Proposition, or Subsumption.

          Undue haste makes waste.
          This is a case of undue hasting.
    [.'.] It is a case of undue wasting.

We may, and constantly do, apply principles and draw conclusions
in this way without making any formal analysis of the propositions.
Indeed we reason mediately and deductively whenever we make any
application of previous knowledge, although the process is not
expressed in propositions at all and is performed so rapidly that we
are not conscious of the steps.

For example, I enter a room, see a book, open it and begin to read. I
want to make a note of something: I look round, see a paper case,
open it, take a sheet of paper and a pen, dip the pen in the ink
and proceed to write. In the course of all this, I act upon certain
inferences which might be drawn out in the form of Syllogisms. First,
in virtue of previous knowledge I recognise what lies before me as a
book. The process by which I reach the conclusion, though it passes in
a flash, might be analysed and expressed in propositions.

        Whatever presents certain outward appearances,
          contains readable print.
        This presents such appearances.
    [.'.]It contains readable print.
So with the paper case, and the pen, and the ink. I infer from
peculiar appearances that what I see contains paper, that the liquid
will make a black mark on the white sheet, and so forth.

We are constantly in daily life subsuming particulars under known
universals in this way. "Whatever has certain visible properties, has
certain other properties: this has the visible ones: therefore, it has
the others" is a form of reasoning constantly latent in our minds.

The Syllogism may be regarded as the explicit expression of this type
of deductive reasoning; that is, as the analysis and formal expression
of this every-day process of applying known universals to particular
cases. Thus viewed it is simply the analysis of a mental process, as a
psychological fact; the analysis of the procedure of all men when they
reason from signs; the analysis of the kind of assumptions they make
when they apply knowledge to particular cases. The assumptions may be
warranted, or they may not: but as a matter of fact the individual who
makes the confident inference has such assumptions and subsumptions
latent in his mind.

But practically viewed, that is _logically_ viewed, if you regard
Logic as a practical science, the Syllogism is a contrivance to
assist the correct performance of reasoning together or syllogising in
difficult cases. It applies not to mental processes but to results of
such expressed in words, that is, to propositions. Where the Syllogism
comes in as a useful form is when certain propositions are delivered
to you _ab extra_ as containing a certain conclusion; and the
connexion is not apparent. These propositions are analysed and thrown
into a form in which it is at once apparent whether the alleged
connexion exists. This form is the Syllogism: it is, in effect, an
analysis of given arguments.

It was as a practical engine or organon that it was invented by
Aristotle, an organon for the syllogising of admissions in Dialectic.
The germ of the invention was the analysis of propositions into terms.
The syllogism was conceived by Aristotle as a reasoning together
of terms. His prime discovery was that whenever two propositions
necessarily contain or imply a conclusion, they have a common term,
that is, only three terms between them: that the other two terms which
differ in each are the terms of the conclusion; and that the relation
asserted in the conclusion between its two terms is a necessary
consequence of their relations with the third term as declared in the
premisses.

Such was Aristotle's conception of the Syllogism and such it has
remained in Logic. It is still, strictly speaking, a syllogism of
terms: of propositions only secondarily and after they have been
analysed. The conclusion is conceived analytically as a relation
between two terms. In how many ways may this relation be established
through a third term? The various moods and figures of the Syllogism
give the answer to that question.

The use of the very abstract word "relation" makes the problem appear
much more difficult than it really is. The great charm of Aristotle's
Syllogism is its simplicity. The assertion of the conclusion is
reduced to its simplest possible kind, a relation of inclusion or
exclusion, contained or not contained. To show that the one term is
or is not contained in the other we have only to find a third which
contains the one and is contained or not contained in the other.

The practical difficulties, of course, consist in the reduction of
the conclusions and arguments of common speech to definite terms thus
simply related. Once they are so reduced, their independence or the
opposite is obvious. Therein lies the virtue of the Syllogism.

Before proceeding to show in how many ways two terms may be Syllogised
through a third, we must have technical names for the elements.

The third term is called the MIDDLE (M) ([Greek: to meson]): the other
two the Extremes ([Greek: akra]).

The EXTREMES are the Subject (S) and the Predicate (P) of the
conclusion.

In an affirmative proposition (the normal form) S is contained in P:
hence P is called the MAJOR[1] term ([Greek: to meixon]), and S the
MINOR ([Greek: to elatton]), being respectively larger and smaller in
extension. All difficulty about the names disappears if we remember
that in bestowing them we start from the conclusion. That was the
problem ([Greek: problema]) or thesis in dialectic, the question in
dispute.

The two Premisses, or propositions giving the relations between the
two Extremes and the Middle, are named on an equally simple ground.

One of them gives the relation between the Minor Term, S, and the
Middle, M. S, All or Some, is or is not in M. This is called the Minor
Premiss.

The other gives the relation between the Major Term and the Middle. M,
All or Some, is or is not in P. This is called the Major Premiss.[2]

    [Footnote 1: Aristotle calls the Major the First ([Greek:
    to proton]) and the Minor the last ([Greek: to eschaton]),
    probably because that was their order in the conclusion when
    stated in his most usual form, "P is predicated of S," or "P
    belongs to S".]

    [Footnote 2: When we speak of the Minor or the Major simply,
    the reference is to the terms. To avoid a confusion into
    which beginners are apt to stumble, and at the same time to
    emphasise the origin of the names, the Premisses might be
    spoken of at first as the Minor's Premiss and the Major's
    Premiss. It was only in the Middle Ages when the origin of
    the Syllogism had been forgotten, that the idea arose that the
    terms were called Major and Minor because they occurred in the
    Major and the Minor Premiss respectively.]




