PART II.

DEFINITION.




CHAPTER I.

IMPERFECT UNDERSTANDING OF WORDS AND THE REMEDIES
THEREFOR.--DIALECTIC.--DEFINITION.

We cannot inquire far into the meaning of proverbs or traditional
sayings without discovering that the common understanding of general
and abstract names is loose and uncertain. Common speech is a
quicksand.

Consider how we acquire our vocabulary, how we pick up the words that
we use from our neighbours and from books, and why this is so soon
becomes apparent. Theoretically we know the full meaning of a name
when we know all the attributes that it connotes, and we are not
justified in extending it except to objects that possess all the
attributes. This is the logical ideal, but between the _ought to be_
of Logic and the _is_ of practical life, there is a vast difference.
How seldom do we conceive words in their full meaning! And who is to
instruct us in the full meaning? It is not as in the exact sciences,
where we start with a knowledge of the full meaning. In Geometry, for
example, we learn the definitions of the words used, _point_, _line_,
_parallel_, etc., before we proceed to use them. But in common speech,
we learn words first in their application to individual cases. Nobody
ever defined _good_ to us, or _fair_, or _kind_, or _highly educated_.
We hear the words applied to individual objects: we utter them in the
same connexion: we extend them to other objects that strike us as like
without knowing the precise points of likeness that the convention
of common speech includes. The more exact meaning we learn by
gradual induction from individual cases. _Ugly_, _beautiful_, _good_,
_bad_--we learn the words first as applicable to things and persons:
gradually there arises a more or less definite sense of what the
objects so designated have in common. The individual's extension of
the name proceeds upon what in the objects has most impressed him
when he caught the word: this may differ in different individuals; the
usage of neighbours corrects individual eccentricities. The child
in arms shouts _Da_ at the passing stranger who reminds him of his
father: for him at first it is a general name applicable to every man:
by degrees he learns that for him it is a singular name.

The mode in which words are learnt and extended may be studied most
simply in the nursery. A child, say, has learnt to say _mambro_ when
it sees its nurse. The nurse works a hand-turned sewing machine,
and sings to it as she works. In the street the child sees an
organ-grinder singing as he turns his handle: it calls _mambro_:
the nurse catches the meaning and the child is overjoyed. The
organ-grinder has a monkey: the child has an india-rubber monkey toy:
it calls this also _mambro_. The name is extended to a monkey in
a picture-book. It has a toy musical box with a handle: this also
becomes _mambro_, the word being extended along another line of
resemblance. A stroller with a French fiddle comes within the
denotation of the word: a towel-rail is also called _mambro_ from some
fancied resemblance to the fiddle. A very swarthy hunch-back _mambro_
frightens the child: this leads to the transference of the word to a
terrific coalman with a bag of coals on his back. In a short time
the word has become a name for a great variety of objects that have
nothing whatever common to all of them, though each is strikingly like
in some point to a predecessor in the series. When the application
becomes too heterogeneous, the word ceases to be of use as a sign and
is gradually abandoned, the most impressive meaning being the last
to go. In a child's vocabulary where the word _mambro_ had a run of
nearly two years, its last use was as an adjective signifying ugly or
horrible.

The history of such a word in a child's language is a type of what
goes on in the language of men. In the larger history we see similar
extensions under similar motives, checked and controlled in the same
way by surrounding usage.

It is obvious that to avoid error and confusion, the meaning or
connotation of names, the concepts, should somehow be fixed: names
cannot otherwise have an identical reference in human intercourse. We
may call this ideal fixed concept the LOGICAL CONCEPT: or we may call
it the SCIENTIFIC CONCEPT, inasmuch as one of the main objects of the
sciences is to attain such ideals in different departments of study.
But in actual speech we have also the PERSONAL CONCEPT, which varies
more or less with the individual user, and the POPULAR or VERNACULAR
CONCEPT, which, though roughly fixed, varies from social sect to
social sect and from generation to generation.

The variations in Popular Concepts may be traced in linguistic
history. Words change with things and with the aspects of things,
as these change in public interest and importance. As long as the
attributes that govern the application of words are simple, sensible
attributes, little confusion need arise: the variations are matters of
curious research for the philologist, but are logically insignificant.
Murray's Dictionary, or such books as Trench's _English Past and
Present_, supply endless examples, as many, indeed as there are
words in the language. _Clerk_ has almost as many connotations as
our typical _mambro_: clerk in holy orders, church clerk, town clerk,
clerk of assize, grocer's clerk. In Early English, the word meant "man
in a religious order, cleric, clergyman"; ability to read, write, and
keep accounts being a prominent attribute of the class, the word was
extended on this simple ground till it has ceased altogether to cover
its original field except as a formal designation. But no confusion is
caused by the variation, because the property connoted is simple.[1]
So with any common noun: street, carriage, ship, house, merchant,
lawyer, professor. We might be puzzled to give an exact definition of
such words, to say precisely what they connote in common usage; but
the risk of error in the use of them is small.

When we come to words of which the logical concept is a complex
relation, an obscure or intangible attribute, the defects of the
popular conception and its tendencies to change and confusion, are
of the greatest practical importance. Take such words as _Monarchy_,
_tyranny_, _civil freedom_, _freedom of contract_, _landlord_,
_gentleman_, _prig_, _culture_, _education_, _temperance_,
_generosity_. Not merely should we find it difficult to give an
analytic definition of such words: we might be unable to do so, and
yet flatter ourselves that we had a clear understanding of their
meaning. But let two men begin to discuss any proposition in which any
such word is involved, and it will often be found that they take the
word in different senses. If the relation expressed is complex, they
have different sides or lines of it in their minds; if the meaning
is an obscure quality, they are guided in their application of it by
different outward signs.

Monarchy, in its original meaning, is applied to a form of government
in which the will of one man is supreme, to make laws or break them,
to appoint or dismiss officers of state and justice, to determine
peace or war, without control of statute or custom. But supreme power
is never thus uncontrolled in reality; and the word has been extended
to cover governments in which the power of the titular head is
controlled in many different modes and degrees. The existence of a
head, with the title of King or Emperor, is the simplest and most
salient fact: and wherever this exists, the popular concept of a
monarchy is realised. The President of the United States has more real
power than the Sovereign of Great Britain; but the one government
is called a Republic and the other a Monarchy. People discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of monarchy without first deciding
whether they take the word in its etymological sense of unlimited
power, or its popular sense of titular kingship, or its logical sense
of power definitely limited in certain ways. And often in debate,
monarchy is really a singular term for the government of Great
Britain.

_Culture_, _religious_, _generous_, are names for inward states or
qualities: with most individuals some simple outward sign directs
the application of the word--it may be manner, or bearing, or routine
observances, or even nothing more significant than the cut of the
clothes or of the hair. Small things undoubtedly are significant, and
we must judge by small things when we have nothing else to go by: but
instead of trying to get definite conceptions for our moral epithets,
and suspending judgment till we know that the use of the epithet is
justified, the trifling superficial sign becomes for us practically
the whole meaning of the word. We feel that we must have a judgment of
some sort at once: only simple signs are suited to our impatience.

It was with reference to this state of things that Hegel formulated
his paradox that the true abstract thinker is the plain man who laughs
at philosophy as what he calls abstract and unpractical. He holds
decided opinions for or against this or the other abstraction,
_freedom_, _tyranny_, _revolution_, _reform_, _socialism_, but what
these words mean and within what limits the things signified are
desirable or undesirable, he is in too great a hurry to pause and
consider.

The disadvantages of this kind of "abstract" thinking are obvious.
The accumulated wisdom of mankind is stored in language. Until we have
cleared our conceptions, and penetrated to the full meaning of words,
that wisdom is a sealed book to us. Wise maxims are interpreted by
us hastily in accordance with our own narrow conceptions. All the
vocables of a language may be more or less familiar to us, and yet we
may not have learnt it as an instrument of thought. Outside the very
limited range of names for what we see and use in the daily routine of
life, food and clothes and the common occupations of men, words
have little meaning for us, and are the vehicles merely of thin
preconceptions and raw prejudices.


The remedy for "abstract" thinking is more thinking, and in pursuing
this two aims may be specified for the sake of clearness, though they
are closely allied, and progress towards both may often be made by
one and the same operation. (1) We want to reach a clear and full
conception of the meaning of names as used now or at a given time.
Let us call this the _Verification of the Meaning_. (2) We want to fix
such conceptions, and if necessary readjust their boundaries. This is
the province of _Definition_, which cannot be effectually performed
without _Scientific Classification_ or _Division_.


I.--VERIFICATION OF THE MEANING--DIALECTIC.

This can only be done by assembling the objects to which the words are
applied, and considering what they have in common. To ascertain the
actual connotation we must run over the actual denotation. And since
in such an operation two or more minds are better than one, discussion
or dialectic is both more fruitful and more stimulating than solitary
reflection or reading.

The first to practise this process on a memorable scale, and with
a distinct method and purpose, was Socrates. To insist upon the
necessity of clear conceptions, and to assist by his dialectic
procedure in forming them, was his contribution to philosophy.

His plan was to take a common name, profess ignorance of its meaning,
and ask his interlocutor whether he would apply it in such and such
an instance, producing one after another. According to Xenophon's
_Memorabilia_ he habitually chose the commonest names, _good_,
_unjust_, _fitting_, and so forth, and tried to set men thinking
about them, and helped them by his questions to form an intelligent
conception of the meaning.

For example, what is the meaning of injustice? Would you say that
the man who cheats or deceives is unjust? Suppose a man deceives his
enemies, is there any injustice in that? Can the definition be that
a man who deceives his friends is unjust? But there are cases where
friends are deceived for their own good: are these cases of injustice?
A general may inspirit his soldiers by a falsehood. A man may cajole
a weapon out of his friend's hand when he sees him about to commit
suicide. A father may deceive his son into taking medicine. Would you
call these men unjust? By some such process of interrogation we
are brought to the definition that a man is unjust who deceives his
friends to their hurt.

Observe that in much of his dialectic the aim of Socrates was merely
to bring out the meaning lying vague and latent, as it were, in
the common mind. His object was simply what we have called the
verification of the meaning. And a dialectic that confines itself to
the consideration of what is ordinarily meant as distinct from what
ought to be meant may often serve a useful purpose. Disputes about
words are not always as idle as is sometimes supposed. Mr. H. Sidgwick
truly remarks (_a propos_ of the terms of Political Economy) that
there is often more profit in seeking a definition than in finding it.
Conceptions are not merely cleared but deepened by the process. Mr.
Sidgwick's remarks are so happy that I must take leave to quote them:
they apply not merely to the verification of ordinary meaning but also
to the study of special uses by authorities, and the reasons for those
special uses.

    "The truth is--as most readers of Plato know, only it is a
    truth difficult to retain and apply--that what we gain by
    discussing a definition is often but slightly represented in
    the superior fitness of the formula that we ultimately adopt;
    it consists chiefly in the greater clearness and fulness in
    which the characteristics of the matter to which the formula
    refers have been brought before the mind in the process of
    seeking for it. While we are apparently aiming at definitions
    of terms, our attention should be really fixed on distinctions
    and relations of fact. These latter are what we are concerned
    to know, contemplate, and as far as possible arrange and
    systematise; and in subjects where we cannot present them to
    the mind in ordinary fulness by the exercise of the organs of
    sense, there is no way of surveying them so convenient as
    that of reflecting on our use of common terms.... In comparing
    different definitions our aim should be far less to decide
    which we ought to adopt, than to apprehend and duly consider
    the grounds on which each has commended itself to reflective
    minds. We shall generally find that each writer has noted some
    relation, some resemblance or difference, which others have
    overlooked; and we shall gain in completeness, and often
    in precision, of view by following him in his observations,
    whether or not we follow him in his conclusions."[2]

Mr. Sidgwick's own discussions of _Wealth_, _Value_, and _Money_ are
models. A clue is often found to the meaning in examining startlingly
discrepant statements connected with the same leading word. Thus
we find some authorities declaring that "style" cannot be taught or
learnt, while others declare that it can. But on trying to ascertain
what they mean by "style," we find that those who say it cannot be
taught mean either a certain marked individual character or manner of
writing--as in Buffon's saying, _Le style c'est l'homme meme_--or a
certain felicity and dignity of expression, while those who say style
can be taught mean lucid method in the structure of sentences or in
the arrangement of a discourse. Again in discussions on the rank of
poets, we find different conceptions of what constitutes greatness in
poetry lying at the root of the inclusion of this or the other poet
among great poets. We find one poet excluded from the first rank of
greatness because his poetry was not serious; another because his
poetry was not widely popular; another because he wrote comparatively
little; another because he wrote only songs or odes and never
attempted drama or epic. These various opinions point to different
conceptions of what constitutes greatness in poets, different
connotations of "great poet". Comparing different opinions concerning
"education" we may be led to ask whether it means more than
instruction in the details of certain subjects, whether it does not
also import the formation of a disposition to learn or an interest in
learning or instruction in a certain method of learning.


Historically, dialectic turning on the use of words preceded the
attempt to formulate principles of Definition, and attempts at precise
definition led to Division and Classification, that is to systematic
arrangement of the objects to be defined. Attempt to define any such
word as "education," and you gradually become sensible of the needs in
respect of method that forced themselves upon mankind in the history
of thought. You soon become aware that you cannot define it by itself
alone; that you are beset by a swarm of more or less synonymous words,
_instruction_, _discipline_, _culture_, _training_, and so on; that
these various words represent distinctions and relations among things
more or less allied; and that, if each must be fixed to a definite
meaning, this must be done with reference to one another and to the
whole department of things that they cover.

The first memorable attempts at scientific arrangement were
Aristotle's treatises on Ethics and Politics, which had been the
subjects of active dialectic for at least a century before. That
these the most difficult of all departments to subject to scientific
treatment should have been the first chosen was due simply to their
preponderating interest: "The proper study of mankind is man". The
systems of what are known as the Natural Sciences are of modern
origin: the first, that of Botany, dates from Cesalpinus in the
sixteenth century. But the principles on which Aristotle proceeded in
dividing and defining, principles which have gradually themselves been
more precisely formulated, are principles applicable to all systematic
arrangements for purposes of orderly study. I give them in the precise
formulae which they have gradually assumed in the tradition of Logic.
The principles of Division are often given in Formal Logic, and the
principles of Classification in Inductive Logic, but there is no
valid reason for the separation. The classification of objects in the
Natural Sciences, of animals, plants, and stones, with a view to
the thorough study of them in form, structure, and function, is
more complex than classifications for more limited purposes, and the
tendency is to restrict the word classification to these elaborate
systems. But really they are only a series of divisions and
subdivisions, and the same principles apply to each of the subordinate
divisions as well as to the division of the whole department of study.


II.--PRINCIPLES OF DIVISION OR CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION.

Confusion in the boundaries of names arises from confused ideas
regarding the resemblances and differences of things. As a protective
against this confusion, things must be clearly distinguished in their
points of likeness and difference, and this leads to their arrangement
in systems, that is, to division and classification. A name is not
secure against variation until it has a distinct place in such a
system as a symbol for clearly distinguished attributes. Nor must we
forget, further, that systems have their day, that the best system
attainable is only temporary, and may have to be recast to correspond
with changes of things and of man's way of looking at them.

The leading principles of DIVISION may be stated as follows:--

    I. Every division is made on the ground of differences in
    some attribute common to all the members of the whole to be
    divided.

This is merely a way of stating what a logical division is. It is
a division of a generic whole or _genus_, an indefinite number of
objects thought of together as possessing some common character or
attribute. All have this attribute, which is technically called the
_fundamentum divisionis_, or generic attribute. But the whole is
divisible into smaller groups (_species_), each of which possesses the
common character with a difference (_differentia_). Thus, mankind may
be divided into White men, Black men, Yellow men, on ground of the
differences in the colour of their skins: all have skins of some
colour: this is the _fundamentum divisionis_: but each subdivision or
species has a different colour: this is the _differentia_. Rectilineal
figures are divided into triangles, quadrangles, pentagons, etc., on
the ground of differences in the number of angles.

Unless there is a _fund. div._, _i.e._, unless the differences are
differences in a common character, the division is not a logical
division. To divide men into Europeans, opticians, tailors, blondes,
brunettes, and dyspeptics is not to make a logical division. This is
seen more clearly in connexion with the second condition of a perfect
division.

    II. In a perfect division, the subdivisions or species are
    mutually exclusive.

Every object possessing the common character should be in one or other
of the groups, and none should be in more than one.

Confusion between classes, or overlapping, may arise from two
causes. It may be due (1) to faulty division, to want of unity in
the _fundamentum divisionis_; (2) to the indistinct character of the
objects to be defined.

(1) Unless the division is based upon a single ground, unless each
species is based upon some mode of the generic character, confusion is
almost certain to arise. Suppose the field to be divided, the objects
to be classified, are three-sided rectilineal plane figures, each
group must be based upon some modification of the three sides. Divide
them into equilateral, isosceles, and scalene according as the three
sides are all of equal length, or two of equal length, or each of
different length, and you have a perfect division. Similarly you can
divide them perfectly according to the character of the angles into
acute-angled, right-angled and obtuse-angled. But if you do not keep
to a single basis, as in dividing them into equilateral, isosceles,
scalene, and right-angled, you have a cross-division. The same
triangle might be both right-angled and isosceles.

(2) Overlapping, however, may be unavoidable in practice owing to
the nature of the objects. There may be objects in which the dividing
characters are not distinctly marked, objects that possess the
differentiae of more than one group in a greater or less degree. Things
are not always marked off from one another by hard and fast lines.
They shade into one another by imperceptible gradations. A clear
separation of them may be impossible. In that case you must allow a
certain indeterminate margin between your classes, and sometimes it
may be necessary to put an object into more than one class.

To insist that there is no essential difference unless a clear
demarcation can be made is a fallacy. A sophistical trick called the
_Sorites_ or Heap from the classical example of it was based upon this
difficulty of drawing sharp lines of definition. Assuming that it is
possible to say how many stones constitute a heap, you begin by asking
whether three stones form a heap. If your respondent says No, you
ask whether four stones form a heap, then five, and so on and he is
puzzled to say when the addition of a single stone makes that a heap
which was not a heap before. Or you may begin by asking whether twenty
stones form a heap, then nineteen, then eighteen, and so on, the
difficulty being to say when what was a heap ceases to be so.

Where the objects classified are mixed states or affections, the
products of interacting factors, or differently interlaced or
interfused growths from common roots, as in the case of virtues, or
emotions, or literary qualities, sharp demarcations are impossible.
To distinguish between wit and humour, or humour and pathos, or pathos
and sublimity is difficult because the same composition may partake
of more than one character. The specific characters cannot be made
rigidly exclusive one of another.

Even in the natural sciences, where the individuals are concrete
objects of perception, it may be difficult to decide in which of
two opposed groups an object should be included. Sydney Smith has
commemorated the perplexities of Naturalists over the newly
discovered animals and plants of Botany Bay, in especial with the
_Ornithorynchus_,--"a quadruped as big as a large cat, with the
eyes, colour, and skin of a mole, and the bill and web-feet of a
duck--puzzling Dr. Shaw, and rendering the latter half of his life
miserable, from his utter inability to determine whether it was a bird
or a beast".

    III. The classes in any scheme of division should be of
    co-ordinate rank.

The classes may be mutually exclusive, and yet the division imperfect,
owing to their not being of equal rank. Thus in the ordinary division
of the Parts of Speech, parts, that is, of a sentence, Prepositions
and Conjunctions are not co-ordinate in respect of function, which is
the basis of the division, with Nouns, Adjectives, Verbs, and Adverbs.
The preposition is a part of a phrase which serves the same function
as an adjective, _e.g._, _royal_ army, army _of the king_; it is thus
functionally part of a part, or a particle. So with the conjunction:
it also is a part of a part, _i.e._, part of a clause serving the
function of adjective or adverb.

    IV. The basis of division (_fundamentum divisionis_) should be
    an attribute admitting of important differences.

The importance of the attribute chosen as basis may vary with the
purpose of the division. An attribute that is of no importance in one
division, may be important enough to be the basis of another division.
Thus in a division of houses according to their architectural
attributes, the number of windows or the rent is of little importance;
but if houses are taxed or rated according to the number of windows
or the rent, these attributes become important enough to be a basis
of division for purposes of taxation or rating. They then admit of
important differences.

That the importance is relative to the purpose of the division should
be borne in mind because there is a tendency to regard attributes that
are of importance in any familiar or pre-eminent division as if they
had an absolute importance. In short, disregard of this relativity is
a fallacy to be guarded against.

In the sciences, the purpose being the attainment and preservation
of knowledge, the objects of study are divided so as to serve that
purpose. Groups must be formed so as to bring together the objects
that have most in common. The question, Who are to be placed together?
in any arrangement for purposes of study, receives the same answer
for individuals and for classes that have to be grouped into higher
classes, namely, Those that have most in common. This is what Dr. Bain
happily calls "the golden rule" of scientific classification: "Of the
various groupings of resembling things, preference is given to such as
have the greatest number of attributes in common". I slightly
modify Dr. Bain's statement: he says "the most numerous and the most
important attributes in common". But for scientific purposes number of
attributes constitutes importance, as is well recognised by Dr. Fowler
when he says that the test of importance in an attribute proposed as a
basis of classification is the number of other attributes of which it
is an index or invariable accompaniment. Thus in Zoology the
squirrel, the rat, and the beaver are classed together as Rodents, the
difference between their teeth and the teeth of other Mammalia being
the basis of division, because the difference in teeth is accompanied
by differences in many other properties. So the hedge-hog, the
shrew-mouse, and the mole, though very unlike in outward appearance
and habits, are classed together as Insectivora, the difference in
what they feed on being accompanied by a number of other differences.


_The Principles of_ DEFINITION. The word "definition" as used in Logic
shows the usual tendency of words to wander from a strict meaning and
become ambiguous. Throughout most of its uses it retains this much of
a common signification, the fixing or determining of the boundaries
of a class[3] by making clear its constituent attributes. Now in this
making clear two processes may be distinguished, a material process
and a verbal process. We have (1) the clearing up of the common
attributes by a careful examination of the objects included in the
class: and we have (2) the statement of these common attributes in
language. The rules of definition given by Dr. Bain, who devotes a
separate Book in his Logic to the subject of Definition, concern the
first of these processes: the rules more commonly given concern mainly
the second.

One eminent merit in Dr. Bain's treatment is that it recognises the
close connexion between Definition and Classification. His cardinal
rules are reduced to two.

    I. _Assemble for comparison representative individuals of the
    class._

    II. _Assemble for comparison representative individuals of the
    contrasted class or classes._

Seeing that the contrasted classes are contrasted on some basis of
division, this is in effect to recognise that you cannot clearly
define any class except in a scheme of classification. You must have
a wide _genus_ with its _fundamentum divisionis_, and, within this,
_species_ distinguished by their several _differentiae_.

Next, as to the verbal process, rules are commonly laid down mostly
of a trifling and obvious character. That "a definition should state
neither more nor less than the common attributes of the class," or
than the attributes signified by the class-name, is sometimes given
as a rule of definition. This is really an explanation of what a
definition is, a definition of a definition. And as far as mere
statement goes it is not strictly accurate, for when the attributes
of a genus are known it is not necessary to give all the attributes of
the species, which include the generic attributes as well, but it is
sufficient to give the generic name and the differentia. Thus
Poetry may be defined as "a Fine Art having metrical language as its
instrument". This is technically known as definition _per genus
et differentiam_. This mode of statement is a recognition of the
connexion between Definition and Division.

The rule that "a definition should not be a synonymous repetition of
the name of the class to be defined," is too obvious to require formal
statement. To describe a Viceroy as a man who exercises viceregal
functions, may have point as an epigram in the case of a _faineant_
viceroy, but it is not a definition.

So with the rule that "a definition should not be couched in ambiguous
unfamiliar, or figurative language". To call the camel "the ship of
the desert" is a suggestive and luminous description of a property,
but it is not a definition. So with the noble description of Faith as
"the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen".
But if one wonders why so obvious a "rule" should be laid down, the
answer is that it has its historical origin in the caprices of
two classes of offenders, mystical philosophers and pompous
lexicographers.[4]

That "the definition should be simply convertible with the term for
the class defined," so that we may say, for example, either: "Wine is
the juice of the grape," or, "The juice of the grape is wine," is an
obvious corollary from the nature of definition, but should hardly be
dignified with the name of a "rule".


_The Principles of_ NAMING. Rules have been formulated for the choice
of names in scientific definition and classification, but it may be
doubted whether such choice can be reduced to precise rule. It is
enough to draw attention to certain considerations obvious enough on
reflection.

We may take for granted that there should be distinct names for every
defining attribute (a _Terminology_) and for every group or class (a
_Nomenclature_). What about the selection of the names? Suppose an
investigator is struck with likenesses and differences that seem to
him important enough to be the basis of a new division, how should he
be guided in his choice of names for the new groups that he proposes?
Should he coin new names, or should he take old names and try to fit
them with new definitions?

The balance of advantages is probably in favour of Dr. Whewell's
dictum that "in framing scientific terms, the appropriation of old
words is preferable to the invention of new ones". Only care must be
taken to keep as close as possible to the current meaning of the
old word, and not to run counter to strong associations. This is
an obvious precept with a view to avoiding confusion. Suppose, for
example, that in dividing Governments you take the distribution of
political power as your basis of division and come to the conclusion
that the most important differences are whether this power is vested
in a few or in the majority of the community. You want names to
fix this broad division. You decide instead of coining the new word
_Pollarchy_ to express the opposite of _Oligarchy_ to use the old
words _Republic_ and _Oligarchy_. You would find, as Sir George
Cornewall Lewis found, that however carefully you defined the word
Republic, a division under which the British Government had to be
ranked among Republics would not be generally understood and accepted.
Using the word in the sense explained above, Mr. Bagehot maintained
that the constitution of Great Britain was more Republican than that
of the United States, but his meaning was not taken except by a few.

The difficulty in choosing between new words and old words to express
new meanings is hardly felt in the exact sciences. It is at least at
a minimum. The innovator may encounter violent prejudice, but, arguing
with experts, he can at least make sure of being understood, if his
new division is based upon real and important differences. But in
other subjects the difficulty of transmitting truth or of expressing
it in language suited for precise transmission, is almost greater than
the difficulty of arriving at truth. Between new names and old
names redefined, the possessor of fresh knowledge, assuming it to be
perfectly verified, is in a quandary. The objects with which he deals
are already named in accordance with loose divisions resting on strong
prejudices. The names in current use are absolutely incapable of
conveying his meaning. He must redefine them if he is to use them. But
in that case he runs the risk of being misunderstood from people being
too impatient to master his redefinition. His right to redefine may
even be challenged without any reference to the facts to be expressed:
he may simply be accused of circulating false linguistic coin, of
debasing the verbal currency. The other alternative open to him is
to coin new words. In that case he runs the risk of not being read at
all. His contribution to verified knowledge is passed by as pedantic
and unintelligible. There is no simple rule of safety: between Scylla
and Charybdis the mariner must steer as best he may. Practically the
advantage lies with old words redefined, because thereby discussion is
provoked and discussion clears the air.

Whether it is best to attempt a formal definition or to use words in a
private, peculiar, or esoteric sense, and leave this to be gathered by
the reader from the general tenor of your utterances, is a question of
policy outside the limits of Logic. It is for the logician to expound
the method of Definition and the conditions of its application: how
far there are subjects that do not admit of its application profitably
must be decided on other grounds. But it is probably true that no
man who declines to be bound by a formal definition of his terms is
capable of carrying them in a clear unambiguous sense through a heated
controversy.

    [Footnote 1: Except, perhaps, in new offices to which the
    name is extended, such as _Clerk_ of School Board. The name,
    bearing its most simple and common meaning, may cause popular
    misapprehension of the nature of the duties. Any uncertainty
    in meaning may be dangerous in practice: elections have been
    affected by the ambiguity of this word.]

    [Footnote 2: Sidgwick's _Political Economy_, pp. 52-3. Ed.
    1883.]

    [Footnote 3: Some logicians, however, speak of defining a
    thing, and illustrate this as if by a thing they meant a
    concrete individual, the realistic treatment of Universals
    lending itself to such expressions. But though the authority
    of Aristotle might be claimed for this, it is better to
    confine the name in strictness to the main process of defining
    a class. Since, however, the method is the same whether it is
    an individual or a class that we want to make distinct, there
    is no harm in the extension of the word definition to both
    varieties. See Davidson's _Logic of Definition_, chap. ii.]

    [Footnote 4: See Davidson's _Logic of Definition_, chap. iii.]




