CHAPTER IX.

FORMAL OR ARISTOTELIAN INDUCTION.--INDUCTIVE ARGUMENT.

The distinction commonly drawn between Deduction and Induction is
that Deduction is reasoning from general to particular, and Induction
reasoning from particular to general.

But it is really only as modes of argumentation that the two processes
can be thus clearly and fixedly opposed. The word Induction is used in
a much wider sense when it is the title of a treatise on the Methods
of Scientific Investigation. It is then used to cover all the
processes employed in man's search into the system of reality; and in
this search deduction is employed as well as induction in the narrow
sense.

We may call Induction in the narrow sense Formal Induction or
Inductive Argument, or we may simply call it Aristotelian Induction
inasmuch as it was the steps of Inductive argument that Aristotle
formulated, and for which he determined the conditions of validity.

Let us contrast it with Deductive argument. In this the questioner's
procedure is to procure the admission of a general proposition with a
view to forcing the admission of a particular conclusion which is in
dispute. In Inductive argument, on the other hand, it is a general
proposition that is in dispute, and the procedure is to obtain the
admission of particular cases with a view to forcing the admission of
this general proposition.

Let the question be whether All horned animals ruminate. You engage to
make an opponent admit this. How do you proceed? You ask him whether
he admits it about the various species. Does the ox ruminate? The
sheep? The goat? And so on. The bringing in of the various particulars
is the induction ([Greek: epagoge]).

When is this inductive argument complete? When is the opponent bound
to admit that all horned animals ruminate? Obviously, when he has
admitted it about every one. He must admit that he has admitted it
about every one, in other words, that the particulars enumerated
constitute the whole, before he can be held bound in consistency to
admit it about the whole.

The condition of the validity of this argument is ultimately the
same with that of Deductive argument, the identity for purposes of
predication of a generic whole with the sum of its constituent parts.
The Axiom of Inductive Argument is, _What is predicated of every one
of the parts is predicable of the whole._ This is the simple converse
of the Axiom of Deductive argument, the _Dictum de Omni_, "What is
predicated of the whole is predicable about every one of the parts".
The Axiom is simply convertible because for purposes of predication
generic whole and specific or individual parts taken all together are
identical.

Practically in inductive argument an opponent is worsted when he
cannot produce an instance to the contrary. Suppose he admits the
predicate in question to be true of this, that and the other, but
denies that this, that and the other constitute the whole class in
question, he is defeated in common judgement if he cannot instance
a member of the class about which the predicate does not hold. Hence
this mode of induction became technically known as _Inductio per
enumerationem simplicem ubi non reperitur instantia contradictoria_.
When this phrase is applied to a generalisation of fact, Nature or
Experience is put figuratively in the position of a Respondent unable
to contradict the inquirer.

Such in plain language is the whole doctrine of Inductive Argument.
Aristotle's Inductive Syllogism is, in effect, an expression of this
simple doctrine tortuously in terms of the Deductive Syllogism. The
great master was so enamoured of his prime invention that he desired
to impress its form upon everything: otherwise, there was no reason
for expressing the process of Induction syllogistically. Here is his
description of the Inductive Syllogism:--

    "Induction, then, and the Inductive Syllogism, consists in
    syllogising one extreme with the middle through the other
    extreme. For example, if B is middle to A and C, to prove
    through C that A belongs to B."[1]

This may be interpreted as follows: Suppose a general proposition is
in dispute, and that you wish to make it good by obtaining severally
the admission of all the particulars that it sums up. The type of a
general proposition in Syllogistic terminology is the Major Premiss,
All M is P. What is the type of the particulars that it sums up?
Obviously, the Conclusion, S is P. This particular is contained in the
Major Premiss, All M is P; its truth is accepted as contained in the
truth of All M is P. S is one of the parts of the generic whole M; one
of the individuals or species contained in the class M. If you wish,
then, to establish P of All M by Induction, you must establish P of
all the parts, species, or individuals contained in M, that is, of all
possible S_s:_ you must make good that this, that and the other S is
P, and also that this, that and the other S constitute the whole of M.
You are then entitled to conclude that All M is P: you have syllogised
one Extreme with the Middle through the other Extreme. The formal
statement of these premisses and conclusion is the Inductive
Syllogism.

      This, that and the other S is P, _Major_.
      This, that and the other S is all M, _Minor_.
  [.'.] All M is P, _Conclusion_.
      This, that and the other magnet (_i.e._, magnets individually)
          attract iron.
      This, that and the other magnet (_i.e._, the individuals
         separately admitted) are all magnets.
  [.'.] All magnets attract iron.

This, that and the other S being simply convertible with All M, you
have only to make this conversion and you have a syllogism in Barbara
where this, that and the other S figures as the Middle Term.

The practical value of this tortuous expression is not obvious.
Mediaeval logicians shortened it into what was known as the Inductive
Enthymeme: "This, that and the other, therefore all," an obvious
conclusion when this, that and the other constitute all. It is
merely an evidence of the great master's intoxication with his
grand invention. It is a proof also that Aristotle really looked
at Induction from the point of view of Interrogative Dialectic.
His question was, When is a Respondent bound to admit a general
conclusion? And his answer was, When he has admitted a certain number
of particulars, and cannot deny that those particulars constitute the
whole whose predicate is in dispute. He was not concerned primarily
with the analysis of the steps of an inquirer generalising from
Nature.

    [Footnote 1: [Greek: epagoge men oun esti kai ho ex epagoges
    syllogismos to dia tou eterou thateron akron to meso
    syllogisasthai; Oion ei ton A G meson to B, dia tou G deixai
    to A to B hyparchon.] (An. Prior., ii. 23.)]




