CHAPTER IV.

THE ANALYSIS OF ARGUMENTS INTO SYLLOGISTIC FORMS.

Turning given arguments into syllogistic form is apt to seem as
trivial and useless as it is easy and mechanical. In most cases the
necessity of the conclusion is as apparent in the plain speech form as
in the artificial logical form. The justification of such exercises
is that they give familiarity with the instrument, serving at the same
time as simple exercises in ratiocination: what further uses may be
made of the instrument once it is mastered, we shall consider as we
proceed.


I.--FIRST FIGURE.

Given the following argument to be put into Syllogistic form: "No war
is long popular: for every war increases taxation; and the popularity
of anything that touches the pocket is short-lived".

The simplest method is to begin with the conclusion--"No war is long
popular"--No S is P--then to examine the argument to see whether it
yields premisses of the necessary form. Keeping the form in mind,
Celarent of Fig. I.--

  No M is P
  All S is M
  No S is P--
we see at once that "Every war increases taxation" is of the form All
S is M. Does the other sentence yield the Major Premiss No M is P,
when M represents the increasing of taxation, _i.e._, a class bounded
by that attribute? We see that the last sentence of the argument is
equivalent to saying that "Nothing that increases taxation is long
popular"; and this with the Minor yields the conclusion in Celarent.

  Nothing that increases taxation is long popular.
  Every war increases taxation.
  No war is long popular.

Observe, now, what in effect we have done in thus reducing the
argument to the First Figure. In effect, a general principle being
alleged as justifying a certain conclusion, we have put that principle
into such a form that it has the same predicate with the conclusion.
All that we have then to do in order to inspect the validity of the
argument is to see whether the subject of the conclusion is contained
in the subject of the general principle. Is war one of the things that
increase taxation? Is it one of that class? If so, then it cannot long
be popular, long popularity being an attribute that cannot be affirmed
of any of that class.

Reducing to the first figure, then, amounts simply to making the
predication of the proposition alleged as ground uniform with the
conclusion based upon it. The minor premiss or applying proposition
amounts to saying that the subject of the conclusion is contained in
the subject of the general principle. Is the subject of the conclusion
contained in the subject of the general principle when the two have
identical predicates? If so, the argument falls at once under the
_Dictum de Omni et Nullo_.


Two things may be noted concerning an argument thus simplified.

1. It is not necessary, in order to bring an argument under the
_dictum de omni_, to reduce the predicate to the form of an extensive
term. In whatever form, abstract or concrete, the predication is made
of the middle term, it is applicable in the same form to that which is
contained in the middle term.

2. The quantity of the Minor Term does not require special attention,
inasmuch as the argument does not turn upon it. In whatever quantity
it is contained in the Middle, in that quantity is the predicate of
the Middle predicable of it.

These two points being borne in mind, the attention may be
concentrated on the Middle Term and its relations with the extremes.

That the predicate may be left unanalysed without affecting the
simplicity of the argument or in any way obscuring the exhibition
of its turning-point, has an important bearing on the reduction of
Modals. The modality may be treated as part of the predicate without
in any way obscuring what it is the design of the syllogism to make
clear. We have only to bear in mind that however the predicate may be
qualified in the premisses, the same qualification must be transferred
to the conclusion. Otherwise we should have the fallacy of Four Terms,
_quaternio terminorum_.

To raise the question: What is the proper form for a Modal of
Possibility, A or I? is to clear up in an important respect our
conceptions of the Universal proposition, "Victories may be gained
by accident". Should this be expressed as A or I? Is the predicate
applicable to All victories or only to Some? Obviously the meaning is
that of any victory it may be true that it was gained by accident, and
if we treat the "mode" as part of the predicate term "things that may
be gained by accident," the form of the proposition is All S is in P.

But, it may be asked, does not the proposition that victories may be
gained by accident rest, as a matter of fact, on the belief that some
victories have been gained in this way? And is not, therefore, the
proper form of proposition Some S is P?

This, however, is a misunderstanding. What we are concerned with is
the formal analysis of propositions as given. And Some victories have
been gained by accident is not the formal analysis of Victories may be
gained by accident. The two propositions do not give the same meaning
in different forms: the meaning as well as the form is different.
The one is a statement of a matter of fact: the other of an inference
founded on it. The full significance of the Modal proper may be stated
thus: In view of the fact that some victories have been gained by
accident, we are entitled to say of any victory, in the absence of
certain knowledge, that it may be one of them.

A general proposition, in short, is a proposition about a genus, taken
universally.


II.--SECOND FIGURE.

For testing arguments from general principles, the First Figure is the
simplest and best form of analysis.

But there is one common class of arguments that fall naturally,
as ordinarily expressed, into the Second Figure, namely, negative
conclusions from the absence of distinctive signs or symptoms, or
necessary conditions.

Thirst, for example, is one of the symptoms of fever: if a patient is
not thirsty, you can conclude at once that his illness is not fever,
and the argument, fully expressed, is in the Second Figure.

        All fever-stricken patients are thirsty.
        This patient is not thirsty.
  [.'.] He is not fever-stricken.

Arguments of this type are extremely common.

Armed with the general principle that ill-doers are ill-dreaders,
we argue from a man's being unsuspicious that he is not guilty.
The negative diagnosis of the physician, as when he argues from the
absence of sore throat or the absence of a white speck in the throat
that the case before him is not one of scarlatina or diphtheria,
follows this type: and from its utility in making such arguments
explicit, the Second Figure may be called the Figure of Negative
Diagnosis.

It is to be observed, however, that the character of the argument is
best disclosed when the Major Premiss is expressed by its Converse by
Contraposition. It is really from the absence of a symptom that the
physician concludes; as, for example: "No patient that has not a sore
throat is suffering from scarlatina". And the argument thus expressed
is in the First Figure. Thus the reduction of Baroko to the First
Figure by contraposition of the Middle is vindicated as a really
useful process. The real Middle is a contrapositive term, and the form
corresponds more closely to the reasoning when the argument is put in
the First Figure.

The truth is that if the positive term or sign or necessary condition
is prominent as the basis of the argument, there is considerable risk
of fallacy. Sore throat being one of the symptoms of scarlatina, the
physician is apt on finding this symptom present to jump to a positive
conclusion. This is equivalent technically to drawing a positive
conclusion from premisses of the Second Figure.

  All scarlatina patients have sore throat.
  This patient has sore throat.

A positive conclusion is technically known as a Non-Sequitur (Doesn't
follow). So with arguments from the presence of a necessary condition
which is only one of many. Given that it is impossible to pass without
working at the subject, or that it is impossible to be a good marksman
without having a steady hand, we are apt to argue that given also the
presence of this condition, a conclusion is implicated. But really the
premisses given are only two affirmatives of the Second Figure.

    "It is impossible to pass without working at the subject."

This, put into the form No not-M is P, is to say that "None who
have not worked can pass". This is equivalent, as the converse by
contraposition, with--

    All capable of passing have worked at the subject.

But though Q has worked at the subject, it does not follow that he is
capable of passing. Technically the middle is undistributed. On the
other hand, if he has not worked at the subject, it follows that he
is not capable of passing. We can draw a conclusion at once from the
absence of the necessary condition, though none can be drawn from its
presence alone.


THIRD FIGURE.

Arguments are sometimes advanced in the form of the Third Figure. For
instance: Killing is not always murder: for tyrannicide is not murder,
and yet it is undoubtedly killing. Or again: Unpleasant things
are sometimes salutary: for afflictions are sometimes so, and no
affliction can be called pleasant.

These arguments, when analysed into terms, are, respectively, Felapton
and Disamis.

  No tyrannicide is murder;
  All tyrannicide is killing;
  Some killing is not murder.

  Some afflictions are salutary things;
  All afflictions are unpleasant things;
  Some unpleasant things are salutary things.

The syllogistic form cannot in such cases pretend to be a
simplification of the argument. The argument would be equally
unmistakable if advanced in this form: Some S is not P, for example,
M. Some killing is not murder, _e.g.,_ tyrannicide. Some unpleasant
things are salutary, _e.g.,_ some afflictions.

There is really no "deduction" in the third figure, no leading down
from general to particular. The middle term is only an example of the
minor. It is the syllogism of Contradictory Examples.

In actual debate examples are produced to disprove a universal
assertion, affirmative or negative. Suppose it is maintained that
every wise man has a keen sense of humour. You doubt this: you
produce an instance of the opposite, say Milton. The force of your
contradictory instance is not increased by exhibiting the argument in
syllogistic form: the point is not made clearer.

The Third Figure was perhaps of some use in Yes and No Dialectic.
When you had to get everything essential to your conclusion definitely
admitted, it was useful to know that the production of an example to
refute a generality involved the admission of two propositions. You
must extract from your opponent both that Milton was a wise man, and
that Milton had not a keen sense of humour, before you could drive him
from the position that all wise men possess that quality.


_Examples for Analysis._

Scarlet flowers have no fragrance: this flower has no fragrance: does
it follow that this flower is of a scarlet colour?

Interest in the subject is an indispensable condition of learning
easily; Z is interested in the subject: he is bound, therefore, to
learn easily.

It is impossible to be a good shot without having a steady hand: John
has a steady hand: he is capable, therefore, of becoming a good shot.

Some victories have been won by accident; for example, Maiwand.

Intemperance is more disgraceful than cowardice, because people have
more opportunities of acquiring control of their bodily appetites.

"Some men are not fools, yet all men are fallible." What follows?

"Some men allow that their memory is not good: every man believes in
his own judgment." What is the conclusion, and in what Figure and Mood
may the argument be expressed?

"An honest man's the noblest work of God: Z is an honest man":
therefore, he is--what?

Examine the logical connexion between the following "exclamation"
and "answer": "But I hear some one exclaiming that wickedness is not
easily concealed. To which I answer, Nothing great is easy."

"If the attention is actively aroused, sleep becomes impossible: hence
the sleeplessness of anxiety, for anxiety is a strained attention upon
an impending disaster."

"To follow truth can never be a subject of regret: free inquiry does
lead a man to regret the days of his childish faith; therefore it is
not following truth."--_J. H. Newman._

He would not take the crown: Therefore 'tis certain he was not
ambitious.

As he was valiant, I honour him; as he was ambitious, I slew him.

The Utopians learned the language of the Greeks with more readiness
because they were originally of the same race with them.

Nothing which is cruel can be expedient, for cruelty is most revolting
to the nature of man.

"The fifth century saw the foundation of the Frank dominion in Gaul,
and the first establishment of the German races in Britain. The former
was effected in a single long reign, by the energy of one great ruling
tribe, which had already modified its traditional usages, and now, by
the adoption of the language and religion of the conquered, prepared
the way for a permanent amalgamation with them." In the second of the
above sentences a general proposition is assumed. Show in syllogistic
form how the last proposition in the sentence depends upon it.

"I do not mean to contend that active benevolence may not hinder a
man's advancement in the world: for advancement greatly depends upon
a reputation for excellence in some one thing of which the world
perceives that it has present need: and an obvious attention to other
things, though perhaps not incompatible with the excellence itself,
may easily prevent a person from obtaining a reputation for it." Pick
out the propositions here given as interdependent. Examine whether the
principle alleged is sufficiently general to necessitate a conclusion.
In what form would it be so?




