CHAPTER III.

THE DEMONSTRATION OF THE SYLLOGISTIC MOODS.--THE CANONS OF THE
SYLLOGISM.

How do we know that the nineteen moods are the only possible forms of
valid syllogism?

Aristotle treated this as being self-evident upon trial and simple
inspection of all possible forms in each of his three Figures.

Granted the parity between predication and position in or out of
a limited enclosure (term, [Greek: horos]), it is a matter of the
simplest possible reasoning. You have three such terms or enclosures,
S, P and M; and you are given the relative positions of two of them to
the third as a clue to their relative positions to one another. Is
S in or out of P, and is it wholly in or wholly out or partly in or
partly out? You know how each of them lies toward the third: when can
you tell from this how S lies towards P?

We have seen that when M is wholly in or out of P, and S wholly or
partly in M, S is wholly or partly in or out of P.

Try any other given positions in the First Figure, and you find that
you cannot tell from them how S lies relatively to P. Unless the Major
Premiss is Universal, that is, unless M lies wholly in or out of
P, you can draw no conclusion, whatever the Minor Premiss may give.
Given, _e.g._, All S is in M, it may be that All S is in P, or that No
S is in P, or that Some S is in P, or that Some S is not in P.

[Illustration:

  Circles of M and P, overlapping,
  with 3 instances of a circle of S:
    1. S in M, but not in P;
    2. S in the overlap of M and P;
    3. S in M, some S in P.
]

Again, unless the Minor Premiss is affirmative, no matter what the
Major Premiss may be, you can draw no conclusion. For if the Minor
Premiss is negative, all that you know is that All S or Some S lies
somewhere outside M; and however M may be situated relatively to P,
that knowledge cannot help towards knowing how S lies relatively to P.
All S may be P, or none of it, or part of it. Given all M is in P; the
All S (or Some S) which we know to be outside of M may lie anywhere in
P or out of it.

[Illustration:

  Concentric circles of P and M, M in center,
  with 5 instances of circle of S:
  1. S wholly outside P and M;
  2. S partly overlapping both P and M, and partly outside both;
  3. S overlapping P, but outside M;
  4. S wholly within P, but wholly outside M;
  5. S touching circle of P, but outside both circles.
]

Similarly, in the Second Figure, trial and simple inspection of all
possible conditions shows that there can be no conclusion unless the
Major Premiss is universal, and one of the premisses negative.

Another and more common way of eliminating the invalid forms,
elaborated in the Middle Ages, is to formulate principles applicable
irrespective of Figure, and to rule out of each Figure the moods that
do not conform to them. These regulative principles are known as The
Canons of the Syllogism.

_Canon I._ In every syllogism there should be three, and not more than
three, terms, and the terms must be used throughout in the same sense.

It sometimes happens, owing to the ambiguity of words, that there seem
to be three terms when there are really four. An instance of this is
seen in the sophism:--

      He who is most hungry eats most.
      He who eats least is most hungry.
  [.'.] He who eats least eats most.

This Canon, however, though it points to a real danger of error in the
application of the syllogism to actual propositions, is superfluous
in the consideration of purely formal implication, it being a primary
assumption that terms are univocal, and remain constant through any
process of inference.

Under this Canon, Mark Duncan says (_Inst. Log._, iv. 3, 2), is
comprehended another commonly expressed in this form: There should be
nothing in the conclusion that was not in the premisses: inasmuch as
if there were anything in the conclusion that was in neither of the
premisses, there would be four terms in the syllogism.

The rule that in every syllogism there must be three, and only three,
propositions, sometimes given as a separate Canon, is only a corollary
from Canon I.

_Canon II._ The Middle Term must be distributed once at least in the
Premisses.

The Middle Term must either be wholly in, or wholly out of, one or
other of the Extremes before it can be the means of establishing a
connexion between them. If you know only that it is partly in both,
you cannot know from that how they lie relatively to one another: and
similarly if you know only that it is partly outside both.

The Canon of Distributed Middle is a sort of counter-relative
supplement to the _Dictum de Omni_. Whatever is predicable of a whole
distributively is predicable of all its several parts. If in neither
premiss there is a predication about the whole, there is no case for
the application of the axiom.

_Canon III._ No term should be distributed in the conclusion that was
not distributed in the premisses.

If an assertion is not made about the whole of a term in the
premisses, it cannot be made about the whole of that term in the
conclusion without going beyond what has been given.

The breach of this rule in the case of the Major term is technically
known as the Illicit Process of the Major: in the case of the Minor
term, Illicit Process of the Minor.

Great use is made of this canon in cutting off invalid moods. It
must be remembered that the Predicate term is "distributed" or taken
universally in O (Some S is not in P) as well as in E (No S is in P);
and that P is never distributed in affirmative propositions.

_Canon IV._ No conclusion can be drawn from two negative premisses.

Two negative premisses are really tantamount to a declaration that
there is no connexion whatever between the Major and Minor (as
quantified in the premisses) and the term common to both premisses; in
short, that this is not a Middle term--that the condition of a valid
Syllogism does not exist.

There is an apparent exception to this when the real Middle in an
argument is a contrapositive term, not-M. Thus:--

        Nobody who is not thirsty is suffering from fever.
        This person is not thirsty.
  [.'.] He is not suffering from fever.

But in such cases it is really the absence of a quality or rather
the presence of an opposite quality on which we reason; and the Minor
Premiss is really Affirmative of the form S is in not-M.

_Canon V._ If one premiss is negative, the conclusion must be
negative.

If one premiss is negative, one of the Extremes must be excluded in
whole or in part from the Middle term. The other must therefore (under
Canon IV.) declare some coincidence between the Middle term and the
other extreme; and the conclusion can only affirm exclusion in whole
or in part from the area of this coincidence.

_Canon VI._ No conclusion can be drawn from two particular premisses.

This is evident upon a comparison of terms in all possible positions,
but it can be more easily demonstrated with the help of the preceding
canons. The premisses cannot both be particular and yield a conclusion
without breaking one or other of those canons.

Suppose both are affirmative, II, the Middle is not distributed in
either premiss.

Suppose one affirmative and the other negative, IO, or OI. Then,
whatever the Figure may be, that is, whatever the order of the terms,
only one term can be distributed, namely, the predicate of O. This
(Canon II.) must be the Middle. But in that case there must be Illicit
Process of the Major (Canon III.), for one of the premisses being
negative, the conclusion is negative (Canon V.), and P its predicate
is distributed. Briefly, in a negative mood, both Major and Middle
must be distributed, and if both premisses are particular this cannot
be.

_Canon VII._ If one Premiss is particular the conclusion is
particular.

This canon is sometimes combined with what we have given as Canon V.,
in a single rule: "The conclusion follows the weaker premiss".

It can most compendiously be demonstrated with the help of the
preceding canons.

Suppose both premisses affirmative, then, if one is particular, only
one term can be distributed in the premisses, namely, the subject
of the Universal affirmative premiss. By Canon II., this must be the
Middle, and the Minor, being undistributed in the Premisses, cannot
be distributed in the conclusion. That is, the conclusion cannot be
Universal--must be particular.

Suppose one Premiss negative, the other affirmative. One premiss being
negative, the conclusion must be negative, and P must be distributed
in the conclusion. Before, then, the conclusion can be universal, all
three terms, S, M, and P, must, by Canons II. and III., be distributed
in the premisses. But whatever the Figure of the premisses, only two
terms can be distributed. For if one of the Premisses be O, the other
must be A, and if one of them is E, the other must be I. Hence the
conclusion must be particular, otherwise there will be illicit process
of the Minor, or of the Major, or of the Middle.

The argument may be more briefly put as follows:

In an affirmative mood, with one premiss particular, only one term can
be distributed in the premisses, and this cannot be the Minor without
leaving the Middle undistributed. In a negative mood, with one premiss
particular, only two terms can be distributed, and the Minor cannot
be one of them without leaving either the Middle or the Major
undistributed.


Armed with these canons, we can quickly determine, given any
combination of three propositions in one of the Figures, whether it is
or is not a valid Syllogism.

Observe that though these canons hold for all the Figures, the Figure
must be known, in all combinations containing A or O, before we can
settle a question of validity by Canons II. and III., because
the distribution of terms in A and O depends on their order in
predication.

Take AEE. In Fig. I.--

  All M is in P
  No S is in M
  No S is in P--

the conclusion is invalid as involving an illicit process of the
Major. P is distributed in the conclusion and not in the premisses.

In Fig. II. AEE--

  All P is in M
  No S is in M
  No S is in P--

the conclusion is valid (Camestres).

In Fig. III. AEE--

  All M is in P
  No M is in S
  No S is in P--

the conclusion is invalid, there being illicit process of the Major.

In Fig. IV. AEE is valid (Camenes).

Take EIO. A little reflection shows that this combination is valid in
all the Figures if in any, the distribution of the terms in both cases
not being affected by their order in predication. Both E and I are
simply convertible. That the combination is valid is quickly seen
if we remember that in negative moods both Major and Middle must be
distributed, and that this is done by E.

EIE is invalid, because you cannot have a universal conclusion with
one premiss particular.

AII is valid in Fig. I. or Fig. III., and invalid in Figs. II. and
IV., because M is the subject of A in I. and III. and predicate in II.
and IV.

OAO is valid only in Fig. III., because only in that Figure would this
combination of premisses distribute both M and P.

Simple exercises of this kind may be multiplied till all possible
combinations are exhausted, and it is seen that only the recognised
moods stand the test.


If a more systematic way of demonstrating the valid moods is desired,
the simplest method is to deduce from the Canons special rules for
each Figure. Aristotle arrived at these special rules by simple
inspection, but it is easier to deduce them.


I. In the First Figure, the Major Premiss must be Universal, and the
Minor Premiss affirmative.

To make this evident by the Canons, we bear in mind the Scheme or
Figure--

  M in P
  S in M--

and try the alternatives of Affirmative Moods and Negative Moods.
Obviously in an affirmative mood the Middle is undistributed unless
the Major Premiss is Universal. In a negative mood, (1) If the Major
Premiss is O, the Minor must be affirmative, and M is undistributed;
(2) if the Major Premiss is I, M may be distributed by a negative
Minor Premiss, but in that case there would be an illicit process of
the Major--P being distributed in the conclusion (Canon V.) and not in
the Premisses. Thus the Major Premiss can neither be O nor I, and must
therefore be either A or E, _i.e._, must be Universal.

That the Minor must be affirmative is evident, for if it were
negative, the conclusion must be negative (Canon V.) and the Major
Premiss must be affirmative (Canon IV.), and this would involve
illicit process of the Major, P being distributed in the conclusion
and not in the Premisses.

These two special rules leave only four possible valid forms in the
First Figure. There are sixteen possible combinations of premisses,
each of the four types of proposition being combinable with itself and
with each of the others.

  AA    EA    IA    OA
  AE    EE    IE    OE
  AI    EI    II    OI
  AO    EO    IO    OO

Special Rule I. wipes out the columns on the right with the particular
major premisses; and AE, EE, AO, and EO are rejected by Special Rule
II., leaving BA_rb_A_r_A, CE_l_A_r_E_nt_, DA_r_II and FE_r_IO.


II. In the Second Figure, only Negative Moods are possible, and the
Major Premiss must be universal.

Only Negative moods are possible, for unless one premiss is negative,
M being the predicate term in both--

  P in M
  S in M--

is undistributed.

Only negative moods being possible, there will be illicit process of
the Major unless the Major Premiss is universal, P being its subject
term.

These special rules reject AA and AI, and the two columns on the
right.

To get rid of EE and EO, we must call in the general Canon IV.;
which leaves us with EA, AE, EI, and AO--CE_s_A_r_E, CA_m_E_str_E_s_,
FE_st_I_n_O BA_r_O_k_O.


III. In the Third Figure, the Minor Premiss must be affirmative.

Otherwise, the conclusion would be negative, and the Major Premiss
affirmative, and there would be illicit process of the Major, P being
the predicate term in the Major Premiss.

  M in P
  M in S.

This cuts off AE, EE, IE, OE, AO, EO, IO, OO,--the second and fourth
rows in the above list.

II and OI are inadmissible by Canon VI.; which leaves AA, IA, AI,
EA, OA, EI--DA_r_A_pt_I, DI_s_A_m_I_s_, DA_t_I_s_I, FE_l_A_pt_O_n_,
BO_k_A_rd_O, FE_r_I_s_O--three affirmative moods and three negative.


IV. The Fourth Figure is fenced by three special rules. (1) In
negative moods, the Major Premiss is universal. (2) If the Minor
is negative, both premisses are universal. (3) If the Major is
affirmative, the Minor is universal.

(1) Otherwise, the Figure being

  P in M
  M in S,

there would be illicit process of the Major.

(2) The Major must be universal by special rule (1), and if the Minor
were not also universal, the Middle would be undisturbed.

(3) Otherwise M would be undistributed.

Rule (1) cuts off the right-hand column, OA, OE, OI, and OO; also IE
and IO.

Rule (2) cuts off AO, EO.

Rule (3) cuts off AI, II.

EE goes by general Canon IV.; and we are left with AA, AE, IA, EA,
EI--B_r_A_m_A_nt_I_p_, CA_m_E_n_E_s_, DI_m_A_r_I_s_, FE_s_A_p_O,
F_r_E_s_I_s_O_n_.




