PART III.

THE INTERPRETATION OF PROPOSITIONS.--OPPOSITION AND IMMEDIATE
INFERENCE.




CHAPTER I.

THEORIES OF PREDICATION.--THEORIES OF JUDGMENT.

We may now return to the Syllogistic Forms, and the consideration of
the compatibility or incompatibility, implication, and interdependence
of propositions.

It was to make this consideration clear and simple that what we have
called the Syllogistic Form of propositions was devised. When are
propositions incompatible? When do they imply one another? When do
two imply a third? We have seen in the Introduction how such questions
were forced upon Aristotle by the disputative habits of his time.
It was to facilitate the answer that he analysed propositions into
Subject and Predicate, and viewed the Predicate as a reference to a
class: in other words, analysed the Predicate further into a Copula
and a Class Term.

But before showing how he exhibited the interconnexion of propositions
on this plan, we may turn aside to consider various so-called Theories
of Predication or of Judgment. Strictly speaking, they are not
altogether relevant to Logic, that is to say, as a practical science:
they are partly logical, partly psychological theories: some of
them have no bearing whatever on practice, but are matters of pure
scientific curiosity: but historically they are connected with the
logical treatment of propositions as having been developed out of
this.

The least confusing way of presenting these theories is to state
them and examine them both logically and psychologically. The logical
question is, Has the view any advantage for logical purposes? Does it
help to prevent error, to clear up confusion? Does it lead to firmer
conceptions of the truth? The psychological question is, Is this a
correct theory of how men actually think when they make propositions?
It is a question of _what is_ in the one case, and of _what ought to
be for a certain purpose_ in the other.

Whether we speak of Proposition or of Judgment does not materially
affect our answer. A Judgment is the mental act accompanying a
Proposition, or that may be expressed in a proposition and cannot be
expressed otherwise: we can give no other intelligible definition or
description of a judgment. So a proposition can only be defined as the
expression of a judgment: unless there is a judgment underneath them,
a form of words is not a proposition.

Let us take, then, the different theories in turn. We shall find that
they are not really antagonistic, but only different: that each is
substantially right from its own point of view: and that they seem to
contradict one another only when the point of view is misunderstood.

I. _That the Predicate term may be regarded as a class in or
from which the Subject is included or excluded._ Known as the
Class-Inclusion, Class-Reference, or Denotative view.

This way of analysing propositions is possible, as we have seen,
because every statement implies a general name, and the extension
or denotation of a general name is a class defined by the common
attribute or attributes. It is useful for syllogistic purposes:
certain relations among propositions can be most simply exhibited in
this way.

But if this is called a Theory of Predication or Judgment, and taken
psychologically as a theory of what is in men's minds whenever they
utter a significant Sentence, it is manifestly wrong. When discussed
as such, it is very properly rejected. When a man says "P struck Q,"
he has not necessarily a class of "strikers of Q" definitely in his
mind. What he has in his mind is the logical equivalent of this,
but it is not this directly. Similarly, Mr. Bradley would be quite
justified in speaking of Two Terms and a Copula as a superstition, if
it were meant that these analytic elements are present to the mind of
an ordinary speaker.

II. _That every Proposition may be regarded as affirming or denying
an attribute of a subject._ Known sometimes as the Connotative or
the Denotative-Connotative view. This also follows from the implicit
presence of a general name in every sentence. But it should not be
taken as meaning that the man who says: "Tom came here yesterday,"
or "James generally sits there," has a clearly analysed Subject and
Attribute in his mind. Otherwise it is as far wrong as the other view.

III. _That every proposition may be regarded as an equation between
two terms._ Known as the Equational View.

This is obviously not true for common speech or ordinary thought.
But it is a possible way of regarding the analytic components of
a proposition, legitimate enough if it serves any purpose. It is a
modification of the Class-Reference analysis, obtained by what is
known as Quantification of the Predicate. In "All S is in P," P
is undistributed, and has no symbol of Quantity. But since the
proposition imports that All S is a part of P, _i.e._, Some P, we may,
if we choose, prefix the symbol of Quantity, and then the proposition
may be read "All S = Some P". And so with the other forms.

Is there any advantage in this? Yes: it enables us to subject the
formulae to algebraic manipulation. But any logical advantage--any
help to thinking? None whatever. The elaborate syllogistic systems of
Boole, De Morgan, and Jevons are not of the slightest use in helping
men to reason correctly. The value ascribed to them is merely an
illustration of the Bias of Happy Exercise. They are beautifully
ingenious, but they leave every recorded instance of learned
Scholastic trifling miles behind.

IV. _That every proposition is the expression of a comparison between
concepts._ Sometimes called the Conceptualist View.

"To judge," Hamilton says, "is to recognise the relation of congruence
or confliction in which two concepts, two individual things, or a
concept and an individual compared together stand to each other."

This way of regarding propositions is permissible or not according to
our interpretation of the words "congruence" and "confliction," and
the word "concept". If by concept we mean a conceived attribute of
a thing, and if by saying that two concepts are congruent or
conflicting, we mean that they may or may not cohere in the same
thing, and by saying that a concept is congruent or conflicting with
an individual that it may or may not belong to that individual, then
the theory is a corollary from Aristotle's analysis. Seeing that we
must pass through that analysis to reach it, it is obviously not
a theory of ordinary thought, but of the thought of a logician
performing that analysis.

The precise point of Hamilton's theory was that the logician does not
concern himself with the question whether two concepts are or are
not as a matter of fact found in the same subject, but only with the
question whether they are of such a character that they may be found,
or cannot be found, in the same subject. In so far as his theory
is sound, it is an abstruse and technical way of saying that we may
consider the consistency of propositions without considering whether
or not they are true, and that consistency is the peculiar business of
syllogistic logic.

V. _That the ultimate subject of every judgment is reality._

This is the form in which Mr. Bradley and Mr. Bosanquet deny the
Ultra-Conceptualist position. The same view is expressed by Mill when
he says that "propositions are concerned with things and not with our
ideas of them".

The least consideration shows that there is justice in the view thus
enounced. Take a number of propositions:--

          The streets are wet.
          George has blue eyes.
          The Earth goes round the Sun.
          Two and two make four.

Obviously, in any of these propositions, there is a reference beyond
the conceptions in the speaker's mind, viewed merely as incidents
in his mental history. They express beliefs about things and the
relations among things _in rerum natura_: when any one understands
them and gives his assent to them, he never stops to think of the
speaker's state of mind, but of what the words represent. When states
of mind are spoken of, as when we say that our ideas are confused, or
that a man's conception of duty influences his conduct, those states
of mind are viewed as objective facts in the world of realities. Even
when we speak of things that have in a sense no reality, as when we
say that a centaur is a combination of man and horse, or that centaurs
were fabled to live in the vales of Thessaly, it is not the passing
state of mind expressed by the speaker as such that we attend to or
think of; we pass at once to the objective reference of the words.

Psychologically, then, the theory is sound: what is its logical
value? It is sometimes put forward as if it were inconsistent with
the Class-reference theory or the theory that judgment consists in
a comparison of concepts. Historically the origin of its formal
statement is its supposed opposition to those theories. But really
it is only a misconception of them that it contradicts. It is
inconsistent with the Class-reference view only if by a class we
understand an arbitrary subjective collection, not a collection of
things on the ground of common attributes. And it is inconsistent with
the Conceptualist theory only if by a concept we understand not the
objective reference of a general name, but what we have distinguished
as a conception or a conceptual image. The theory that the ultimate
subject is reality is assumed in both the other theories, rightly
understood. If every proposition is the utterance of a judgment, and
every proposition implies a general name, and every general name has
a meaning or connotation, and every such meaning is an attribute of
things and not a mental state, it is implied that the ultimate subject
of every proposition is reality. But we may consider whether or not
propositions are consistent without considering whether or not they
are true, and it is only their mutual consistency that is considered
in the syllogistic formulae. Thus, while it is perfectly correct to say
that every proposition expresses either truth or falsehood, or that
the characteristic quality of a judgment is to be true or false, it
is none the less correct to say that we may temporarily suspend
consideration of truth or falsehood, and that this is done in what is
commonly known as Formal Logic.

VI. _That every proposition may be regarded as expressing relations
between phenomena._

Bain follows Mill in treating this as the final import of Predication.
But he indicates more accurately the logical value of this view in
speaking of it as important for laying out the divisions of Inductive
Logic. They differ slightly in their lists of Universal Predicates
based upon Import in this sense--Mill's being Resemblance,
Coexistence, Simple Sequence, and Causal Sequence, and Bain's being
Coexistence, Succession, and Equality or Inequality. But both lay
stress upon Coexistence and Succession, and we shall find that the
distinctions between Simple Sequence and Causal Sequence, and between
Repeated and Occasional Coexistence, are all-important in the Logic of
Investigation. But for syllogistic purposes the distinctions have no
relevance.




