CHAPTER II.

THE SYLLOGISTIC ANALYSIS OF PROPOSITIONS INTO TERMS.


I.--THE BARE ANALYTIC FORMS.

The word "term" is loosely used as a mere synonym for a name: strictly
speaking, a term ([Greek: horos], a boundary) is one of the parts of
a proposition as analysed into Subject and Predicate. In Logic, a term
is a technical word in an analysis made for a special purpose, that
purpose being to test the mutual consistency of propositions.

For this purpose, the propositions of common speech may be viewed as
consisting of two TERMS, a linkword called the copula (positive or
negative) expressing a relation between them, and certain symbols of
quantity used to express that relation more precisely.

Let us indicate the Subject term by S, and the Predicate term by P.

All propositions may be analysed into one or other of four forms:--

  All S is P,
  No S is P,
  Some S is P,
  Some S is not P.

All S is P is called the UNIVERSAL AFFIRMATIVE, and is indicated by
the symbol A (the first vowel of Affirmo).

No S is P is called the UNIVERSAL NEGATIVE, symbol E (the first vowel
of Nego).

Some S is P is called the PARTICULAR AFFIRMATIVE, symbol I (the second
vowel of _aff_Irmo).

Some S is not P is called the PARTICULAR NEGATIVE, symbol O (the
second vowel of _neg_O).

The distinction between Universal and Particular is called a
distinction in QUANTITY; between Affirmative and Negative, a
distinction in QUALITY. A and E, I and O, are of the same quantity,
but of different quality: A and I, E and O, same in quality, different
in quantity.

In this symbolism, no provision is made for expressing degrees of
particular quantity. _Some_ stands for any number short of all: it may
be one, few, most, or all but one. The debates in which Aristotle's
pupils were interested turned mainly on the proof or disproof of
general propositions; if only a proposition could be shown to be not
universal, it did not matter how far or how little short it came. In
the Logic of Probability, the degree becomes of importance.

Distinguish, in this Analysis, to avoid subsequent confusion, between
the Subject and the Subject Term, the Predicate and the Predicate
Term. The Subject is the Subject Term quantified: in A and E,[1] "All
S"; in I and O, "Some S". The Predicate is the Predicate Term with the
Copula, positive or negative: in A and I, "is P"; in E and O, "is not
P".

It is important also, in the interest of exactness, to note that S and
P, with one exception, represent general names. They are symbols
for classes. P is so always: S also except when the Subject is an
individual object. In the machinery of the Syllogism, predications
about a Singular term are treated as Universal Affirmatives. "Socrates
is a wise man" is of the form All S is P.

S and P being general names, the signification of the symbol "is" is
not the same as the "is" of common speech, whether the substantive
verb or the verb of incomplete predication. In the syllogistic form,
"is" means _is contained in_, "is not," _is not contained in_.

The relations between the terms in the four forms are represented by
simple diagrams known as Euler's circles.

[Illustration:

  1  concentric circles of P and S - S in centre        A
  2  S and P in the same circle                         A
  3  S and P each in a circle, overlapping circle.      I & O
  4  S in one circle and P in another circle.           E
  5  concentric circles of S and P - P in centre        I?
]


Diagram 5 is a purely artificial form, having no representative in
common speech. In the affirmations of common speech, P is always a
term of greater extent than S.

No. 2 represents the special case where S and P are coextensive, as in
All equiangular triangles are equilateral.

S and P being general names, they are said to be DISTRIBUTED when the
proposition applies to them in their whole extent, that is, when the
assertion covers every individual in the class.

In E, the Universal Negative, both terms are distributed: "No S is P"
wholly excludes the two classes one from the other, imports that not
one individual of either is in the other.

In A, S is distributed, but not P. S is wholly in P, but nothing is
said about the extent of P beyond S.

In O, S is undistributed, P is distributed. A part of S is declared to
be wholly excluded from P.

In I, neither S nor P is distributed.

It will be seen that the Predicate term of a Negative proposition is
always distributed, of an Affirmative, always undistributed.

A little indistinctness in the signification of P crept into mediaeval
text-books, and has tended to confuse modern disputation about the
import of Predication. Unless P is a class name, the ordinary doctrine
of distribution is nonsense; and Euler's diagrams are meaningless. Yet
many writers who adopt both follow mediaeval usage in treating P as the
equivalent of an adjective, and consequently "is" as identical with
the verb of incomplete predication in common speech.


It should be recognised that these syllogistic forms are purely
artificial, invented for a purpose, namely, the simplification of
syllogising. Aristotle indicated the precise usage on which his
syllogism is based (_Prior Analytics_, i. 1 and 4). His form[2] for
All S is P, is S is wholly in P; for No S is P, S is wholly not in P.
His copula is not "is," but "is in," and it is a pity that this usage
was not kept. "All S is in P" would have saved much confusion. But,
doubtless for the sake of simplicity, the besetting sin of tutorial
handbooks, All S is P crept in instead, illustrated by such examples
as "All men are mortal".

Thus the "is" of the syllogistic form became confused with the "is"
of common speech, and the syllogistic view of predication as
being equivalent to inclusion in, or exclusion from a class, was
misunderstood. The true Aristotelian doctrine is not that predication
consists in referring subjects to classes, but only that for certain
logical purposes it may be so regarded. The syllogistic forms are
artificial forms. They were not originally intended to represent the
actual processes of thought expressed in common speech. To argue
that when I say "All crows are black," I do not form a class of
black things, and contemplate crows within it as one circle is within
another, is to contradict no intelligent logical doctrine.

The root of the confusion lies in quoting sentences from common speech
as examples of the logical forms, forgetting that those forms are
purely artificial. "Omnis homo est mortalis," "All men are mortal," is
not an example formally of All S is P. P is a symbol for a substantive
word or combination of words, and mortal is an adjective. Strictly
speaking, there is no formal equivalent in common speech, that is,
in the forms of ordinary use--no strict grammatical formal
equivalent--for the syllogistic propositional symbols. We can make
an equivalent, but it is not a form that men would use in ordinary
intercourse. "All man is in mortal being" would be a strict
equivalent, but it is not English grammar.

Instead of disputing confusedly whether All S is P should be
interpreted in extension or in comprehension, it would be better to
recognise the original and traditional use of the symbols S and P
as class names, and employ other symbols for the expression in
comprehension or connotation. Thus, let _s_ and _p_ stand for the
connotation. Then the equivalent for All S is P would be All S has
_p_, or _p_ always accompanies _s_, or _p_ belongs to all S.

It may be said that if predication is treated in this way, Logic is
simplified to the extent of childishness. And indeed, the manipulation
of the bare forms with the help of diagrams and mnemonics is a very
humble exercise. The real discipline of Syllogistic Logic lies in the
reduction of common speech to these forms.

This exercise is valuable because it promotes clear ideas about the
use of general names in predication, their ground in thought and
reality, and the liabilities to error that lurk in this fundamental
instrument of speech.

    [Footnote 1: For perfect symmetry, the form of E should be
    All S is not P. "No S is P" is adopted for E to avoid conflict
    with a form of common speech, in which All S is not P conveys
    the meaning of the Particular Negative. "All advices are not
    safe" does not mean that safeness is denied of all advices,
    but that safeness cannot be affirmed of all, _i.e._, Not all
    advices are safe, _i.e._, some are not.]

    [Footnote 2: His most precise form, I should say, for in "P is
    predicated of every S" he virtually follows common speech.]


II.--THE PRACTICE OF SYLLOGISTIC ANALYSIS.

The basis of the analysis is the use of general names in predication.
To say that in predication a subject is referred to a class, is only
another way of saying that in every categorical sentence the predicate
is a general name express or implied: that it is by means of general
names that we convey our thoughts about things to others.

"Milton is a great poet." "Quoth Hudibras, _I smell a rat_." _Great
poet_ is a general name: it means certain qualities, and applies to
anybody possessing them. _Quoth_ implies a general name, a name for
persons _speaking_, connoting or meaning a certain act and applicable
to anybody in the performance of it. _Quoth_ expresses also past time:
thus it implies another general name, a name for persons _in past
time_, connoting a quality which differentiates a species in the genus
persons speaking, and making the predicate term "persons speaking in
past time". Thus the proposition _Quoth Hudibras_, analysed into the
syllogistic form S is in P, becomes S (Hudibras) is in P (persons
speaking in past time). The Predicate term P is a class constituted on
those properties. _Smell a rat_ also implies a general name, meaning
an act or state predicable of many individuals.

Even if we add the grammatical object of _Quoth_ to the analysis, the
Predicate term is still a general name. Hudibras is only one of the
persons speaking in past time who have spoken of themselves as being
in a certain mood of suspicion.[1]

The learner may well ask what is the use of twisting plain speech into
these uncouth forms. The use is certainly not obvious. The analysis
may be directly useful, as Aristotle claimed for it, when we wish
to ascertain exactly whether one proposition contradicts another, or
forms with another or others a valid link in an argument. This is
to admit that it is only in perplexing cases that the analysis is of
direct use. The indirect use is to familiarise us with what the
forms of common speech imply, and thus strengthen the intellect for
interpreting the condensed and elliptical expression in which common
speech abounds.

There are certain technical names applied to the components of
many-worded general names, CATEGOREMATIC and SYNCATEGOREMATIC, SUBJECT
and ATTRIBUTIVE. The distinctions are really grammatical rather than
logical, and of little practical value.

A word that can stand by itself as a term is said to be Categorematic.
_Man_, _poet_, or any other common noun.

A word that can only form part of a term is Syncategorematic. Under
this definition come all adjectives and adverbs.

The student's ingenuity may be exercised in applying the
distinction to the various parts of speech. A verb may be said to be
_Hypercategorematic_, implying, as it does, not only a term, but also
a copula.

A nice point is whether the Adjective is categorematic or
syncategorematic. The question depends on the definition of "term"
in Logic. In common speech an adjective may stand by itself as a
predicate, and so might be said to be Categorematic. "This heart is
merry." But if a term is a class, or the name of a class, it is not
Categorematic in the above definition. It can only help to specify a
class when attached to the name of a higher genus.

Mr. Fowler's words SUBJECT and ATTRIBUTIVE express practically the
same distinction, except that Attributive is of narrower extent than
syncategorematic. An Attributive is a word that connotes an attribute
or property, as _hot_, _valorous_, and is always grammatically an
adjective.

The EXPRESSION OF QUANTITY, that is, of Universality or
non-universality, is all-important in syllogistic formulae. In them
universality is expressed by _All_ or _None_. In ordinary speech
universality is expressed in various forms, concrete and abstract,
plain and figurative, without the use of "all" or "none".

  Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
  He can't be wrong whose life is in the right.
  What cat's averse to fish?
  Can the leopard change his spots?
  The longest road has an end.
  Suspicion ever haunts the guilty mind.
  Irresolution is always a sign of weakness.
  Treason never prospers.

A proposition in which the quantity is not expressed is called by
Aristotle INDEFINITE ([Greek: adioristos]). For "indefinite"[2]
Hamilton suggests PREINDESIGNATE, undesignated, that is, before being
received from common speech for the syllogistic mill. A proposition is
PREDESIGNATE when the quantity is definitely indicated. All the above
propositions are "Predesignate" universals, and reducible to the form
All S is P, or No S is P.

The following propositions are no less definitely particular,
reducible to the form I or O. In them as in the preceding quantity
is formally expressed, though the forms used are not the artificial
syllogistic forms:--

  Afflictions are often salutary.
  Not every advice is a safe one.
  All that glitters is not gold.
  Rivers generally[3] run into the sea.

Often, however, it is really uncertain from the form of common speech
whether it is intended to express a universal or a particular. The
quantity is not formally expressed. This is especially the case
with proverbs and loose floating sayings of a general tendency. For
example:--

  Haste makes waste.
  Knowledge is power.
  Light come, light go.
  Left-handed men are awkward antagonists.
  Veteran soldiers are the steadiest in fight.

Such sayings are in actual speech for the most part delivered as
universals.[4] It is a useful exercise of the Socratic kind to decide
whether they are really so. This can only be determined by a survey of
facts. The best method of conducting such a survey is probably (1)
to pick out the concrete subject, "hasty actions," "men possessed of
knowledge," "things lightly acquired"; (2) to fix the attribute or
attributes predicated; (3) to run over the individuals of the subject
class and settle whether the attribute is as a matter of fact meant to
be predicated of each and every one.

This is the operation of INDUCTION. If one individual can be found of
whom the attribute is not meant to be predicated, the proposition is
not intended as Universal.

Mark the difference between settling what is intended and settling
what is true. The conditions of truth and the errors incident to the
attempt to determine it, are the business of the Logic of Rational
Belief, commonly entitled Inductive Logic. The kind of "induction"
here contemplated has for its aim merely to determine the quantity of
a proposition in common acceptation, which can be done by considering
in what cases the proposition would generally be alleged. This
corresponds nearly as we shall see to Aristotelian Induction, the
acceptance of a universal statement when no instance to the contrary
is alleged.

It is to be observed that for this operation we do not practically use
the syllogistic form All S is P. We do not raise the question Is All
S, P? That is, we do not constitute in thought a class P: the class in
our minds is S, and what we ask is whether an attribute predicated of
this class is truly predicated of every individual of it.

Suppose we indicate by _p_ the attribute, knot of attributes, or
concept on which the class P is constituted, then All S is P is
equivalent to "All S has _p_": and Has All S _p_? is the form of a
question that we have in our minds when we make an inductive survey on
the above method. I point this out to emphasise the fact that there is
no prerogative in the form All S is P except for syllogistic purposes.

This inductive survey may be made a useful COLLATERAL DISCIPLINE. The
bare forms of Syllogistic are a useless item of knowledge unless they
are applied to concrete thought. And determining the quantity of a
common aphorism or saw, the limits within which it is meant to hold
good, is a valuable discipline in exactness of understanding. In
trying to penetrate to the inner intention of a loose general maxim,
we discover that what it is really intended to assert is a general
connexion of attributes, and a survey of concrete cases leads to
a more exact apprehension of those attributes. Thus in considering
whether _Knowledge is power_ is meant to be asserted of all knowledge,
we encounter along with such examples as the sailor's knowledge that
wetting a rope shortens it, which enabled some masons to raise a stone
to its desired position, or the knowledge of French roads possessed by
the German invaders,--along with such examples as these we encounter
cases where a knowledge of difficulties without a knowledge of the
means of overcoming them is paralysing to action. Samuel Daniel
says:--

  Where timid knowledge stands considering
  Audacious ignorance has done the deed.

Studying numerous cases where "Knowledge is power" is alleged or
denied, we find that what is meant is that a knowledge of the right
means of doing anything is power--in short, that the predicate is not
made of all knowledge, but only of a species of knowledge.

Take, again, _Custom blunts sensibility_. Putting this in the
concrete, and inquiring what predicate is made about "men accustomed
to anything" (S), we have no difficulty in finding examples where such
men are said to become indifferent to it. We find such illustrations
as Lovelace's famous "Paradox":--

  Through foul we follow fair
    For had the world one face
  And earth been bright as air
    We had known neither place.
  Indians smell not their nest
  The Swiss and Finn taste best
    The spices of the East.

So men accustomed to riches are not acutely sensible of their
advantages: dwellers in noisy streets cease to be distracted by the
din: the watchmaker ceases to hear the multitudinous ticking in his
shop: the neighbours of chemical works are not annoyed by the smells
like the casual passenger. But we find also that wine-tasters
acquire by practice an unusual delicacy of sense; that the eyes once
accustomed to a dim light begin to distinguish objects that were at
first indistinguishable; and so on. What meanings of "custom" and of
"sensibility" will reconcile these apparently conflicting examples?
What are the exact attributes signified by the names? We should
probably find that by sensibility is meant emotional sensibility as
distinguished from intellectual discrimination, and that by custom is
meant familiarity with impressions whose variations are not attended
to, or subjection to one unvarying impression.

To verify the meaning of abstract proverbs in this way is to travel
over the road by which the Greek dialecticians were led to feel the
importance of definition. Of this more will be said presently. If
it is contended that such excursions are beyond the bounds of Formal
Logic, the answer is that the exercise is a useful one and that it
starts naturally and conveniently from the formulae of Logic. It is the
practice and discipline that historically preceded the Aristotelian
Logic, and in the absence of which the Aristotelian formulae would have
a narrowing and cramping effect.

CAN ALL PROPOSITIONS BE REDUCED TO THE SYLLOGISTIC FORM? Probably: but
this is a purely scientific inquiry, collateral to Practical Logic.
The concern of Practical Logic is chiefly with forms of proposition
that favour inaccuracy or inexactness of thought. When there is no
room for ambiguity or other error, there is no virtue in artificial
syllogistic form. The attempt so to reduce any and every proposition
may lead, however, to the study of what Mr. Bosanquet happily calls
the "Morphology" of Judgment, Judgment being the technical name for
the mental act that accompanies the utterance of a proposition. Even
in such sentences as "How hot it is!" or "It rains," the rudiment of
subject and predicate may be detected. When a man says "How hot it
is," he conveys the meaning, though there is no definitely formed
subject in his mind, that the outer world at the moment of his
speaking has a certain quality or attribute. So with "It rains". The
study of such examples in their context, however, reveals the fact
that the same form of Common speech may cover different subjects and
predicates in different connexions. Thus in the argument:--

  "Whatever is, is best.
    It rains!"--

the Subject is _Rain_ and the Predicate _is now_, "is at the present
time," "is in the class of present events".

    [Footnote 1: Remember that when we speak of a general name,
    we do not necessarily mean a single word. A general name,
    logically viewed, is simply the name of a _genus_, kind, or
    class: and whether this is single-worded or many-worded
    is, strictly speaking, a grammatical question. "Man,"
    "man-of-ability," "man-of-ability-and-courage,"
    "man-of-ability-and-courage-and-gigantic-stature,"
    "man-who-fought-at-Marathon"--these are all general names
    in their logical function. No matter how the constitutive
    properties of the class are indicated, by one word or in
    combination, that word or combination is a general name. In
    actual speech we can seldom indicate by a single word the
    meaning predicated.]

    [Footnote 2: The objection taken to the word "indefinite,"
    that the quantity of particular propositions is indefinite,
    _some_ meaning any quantity less than all, is an example of
    the misplaced and frivolous subtlety that has done so much
    to disorder the tradition of Logic. By "indefinite" is
    simply meant not definitely expressed as either Universal
    or Particular, Total or Partial. The same objection might be
    taken to any word used to express the distinction: the degree
    of quantity in Some S is not "designate" any more than it is
    "definite" or "dioristic".]

    [Footnote 3: _Generally._ In this word we have an instance of
    the frequent conflict between the words of common speech and
    logical terminology. How it arises shall be explained in next
    chapter. A General proposition is a synonym for a Universal
    proposition (if the forms A and E are so termed): but
    "generally" in common speech means "for the most part," and is
    represented by the symbol of particular quantity, _Some_.]

    [Footnote 4: With some logicians it is a mechanical rule in
    reducing to syllogistic form to treat as I or O all sentences
    in which there is no formal expression of quantity. This is to
    err on the safe side, but common speakers are not so guarded,
    and it is to be presumed rather that they have a universal
    application in their minds when they do not expressly
    qualify.]


III.--SOME TECHNICAL DIFFICULTIES.

_The formula for_ EXCLUSIVE PROPOSITIONS. "None but the brave deserve
the fair": "No admittance except on business": "Only Protestants can
sit on the throne of England".

These propositions exemplify different ways in common speech of naming
a subject _exclusively_, the predication being made of all outside a
certain term. "None that are not brave, etc.;" "none that are not on
business, etc.;" "none that are not Protestants, etc.". No not-S is
P. It is only about all outside the given term that the universal
assertion is made: we say nothing universally about the individuals
within the term: we do not say that all Protestants are eligible, nor
that all persons on business are admitted, nor that every one of the
brave deserves the fair. All that we say is that the possession of the
attribute named is an indispensable condition: a person may possess
the attribute, and yet on other grounds may not be entitled to the
predicate.

The justification for taking special note of this form in Logic is
that we are apt by inadvertence to make an inclusive inference from
it. Let it be said that None but those who work hard can reasonably
expect to pass, and we are apt to take this as meaning that all who
work hard may reasonably expect to pass. But what is denied of every
Not-S is not necessarily affirmed of every S.

_The expression of_ TENSE or TIME _in the Syllogistic Forms_. Seeing
that the Copula in S is P or S is in P does not express time, but only
a certain relation between S and P, the question arises Where are we
to put time in the analytic formula? "Wheat is dear;" "All had fled;"
time is expressed in these propositions, and our formula should
render the whole content of what is given. Are we to include it in
the Predicate term or in the Subject term? If it must not be left out
altogether, and we cannot put it with the copula, we have a choice
between the two terms.

It is a purely scholastic question. The common technical treatment is
to view the tense as part of the predicate. "All had fled," All S is
P, _i.e._, the whole subject is included in a class constituted on the
attributes of flight at a given time. It may be that the Predicate is
solely a predicate of time. "The Board met yesterday at noon." S is P,
_i.e._, the meeting of the Board is one of the events characterised by
having happened at a certain time, agreeing with other events in that
respect.

But in some cases the time is more properly regarded as part of the
subject. _E.g._, "Wheat is dear". S does not here stand for wheat
collectively, but for the wheat now in the market, the wheat of the
present time: it is concerning this that the attribute of dearness is
predicated; it is this that is in the class of dear things.

_The expression of_ MODALITY _in the Syllogistic Forms_. Propositions
in which the predicate is qualified by an expression of necessity,
contingency, possibility or impossibility [_i.e._, in English by
_must_, _may_, _can_, or _cannot_], were called in Mediaeval Logic
_Modal_ Propositions. "Two and two _must_ make four." "Grubs _may_
become butterflies." "Z _can_ paint." "Y _cannot_ fly."

There are two recognised ways of reducing such propositions to the
form S is P. One is to distinguish between the _Dictum_ and the
_Mode_, the proposition and the qualification of its certainty, and
to treat the _Dictum_ as the Subject and the _Mode_ as the Predicate.
Thus: "That two and two make four is necessary"; "That Y can fly is
impossible".

The other way is to treat the Mode as part of the predicate.
The propriety of this is not obvious in the case of Necessary
propositions, but it is unobjectionable in the case of the other three
modes. Thus: "Grubs are things that have the potentiality of becoming
butterflies"; "Z has the faculty of painting"; "Y has not the faculty
of flying".

The chief risk of error is in determining the quantity of the subject
about which the Contingent or Possible predicate is made. When it is
said that "Victories may be gained by accident," is the predicate made
concerning All victories or Some only? Here we are apt to confuse the
meaning of the contingent assertion with the matter of fact on which
in common belief it rests. It is true only that some victories have
been gained by accident, and it is on this ground that we assert in
the absence of certain knowledge concerning any victory that it
may have been so gained. The latter is the effect of the contingent
assertion: it is made about any victory in the absence of certain
knowledge, that is to say, formally about all.

The history of Modals in Logic is a good illustration of intricate
confusion arising from disregard of a clear traditional definition.
The treatment of them by Aristotle was simple, and had direct
reference to tricks of disputation practised in his time. He specified
four "modes," the four that descended to mediaeval logic, and he
concerned himself chiefly with the import of contradicting these
modals. What is the true contradictory of such propositions as, "It
is possible to be" ([Greek: dynaton einai]), "It admits of being"
([Greek: endechetai einai]), "It must be" ([Greek: anankaion einai]),
"It is impossible to be" ([Greek: adynaton einai])? What is implied in
saying "No" to such propositions put interrogatively? "Is it possible
for Socrates to fly?" "No." Does this mean that it is not possible for
Socrates to fly, or that it is possible for Socrates not to fly?

A disputant who had trapped a respondent into admitting that it is
possible for Socrates not to fly, might have pushed the concession
farther in some such way as this: "Is it possible for Socrates not to
walk?" "Certainly." "Is it possible for him to walk?" "Yes." "When you
say that it is possible for a man to do anything do you not believe
that it is possible for him to do it?" "Yes." "But you have admitted
that it is possible for Socrates not to fly?"

It was in view of such perplexities as these that Aristotle set forth
the true contradictories of his four Modals. We may laugh at such
quibbles now and wonder that a grave logician should have thought them
worth guarding against. But historically this is the origin of the
Modals of Formal Logic, and to divert the names of them to signify
other distinctions than those between modes of qualifying the
certainty of a statement is to introduce confusion.

Thus we find "Alexander was a great general," given as an example of
a Contingent Modal, on the ground that though as a matter of fact
Alexander was so he might have been otherwise. It was not _necessary_
that Alexander should be a great general: therefore the proposition
is _contingent_. Now the distinction between Necessary truth and
Contingent truth may be important philosophically: but it is merely
confusing to call the character of propositions as one or the other by
the name of Modality. The original Modality is a mode of expression:
to apply the name to this character is to shift its meaning.

A more simple and obviously unwarrantable departure from tradition
is to extend the name Modality to any grammatical qualification of
a single verb in common speech. On this understanding "Alexander
conquered Darius" is given by Hamilton as a _Pure_ proposition, and
"Alexander conquered Darius honourably" as a _Modal_. This is a merely
grammatical distinction, a distinction in the mode of composing the
predicate term in common speech. In logical tradition Modality is a
mode of qualifying the certainty of an affirmation. "The conquest
of Darius by Alexander was honourable," or "Alexander in conquering
Darius was an honourable conqueror," is the syllogistic form of the
proposition: it is simply assertory, not qualified in any "mode".

There is a similar misunderstanding in Mr. Shedden's treatment of
"generally" as constituting a Modal in such sentences, as "Rivers
_generally_ flow into the sea". He argues that as _generally_ is not
part either of the Subject term or of the Predicate term, it must
belong to the Copula, and is therefore a _modal_ qualification of the
whole assertion. He overlooked the fact that the word "generally" is
an expression of Quantity: it determines the quantity of the Subject
term.

Finally it is sometimes held (_e.g._, by Mr. Venn) that the question
of Modality belongs properly to Scientific or Inductive Logic, and is
out of place in Formal Logic. This is so far accurate that it is
for Inductive Logic to expound the conditions of various degrees of
certainty. The consideration of Modality is pertinent to Formal Logic
only in so far as concerns special perplexities in the expression of
it. The treatment of it by Logicians has been rendered intricate by
torturing the old tradition to suit different conceptions of the end
and aim of Logic.




