The Project Gutenberg eBook of Logic, Inductive and Deductive
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Logic, Inductive and Deductive

Author: William Minto


        
Release date: March 27, 2010 [eBook #31796]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/31796

Credits: Produced by Thierry Alberto, Lesley Halamek and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Thierry Alberto, Lesley Halamek and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





UNIVERSITY MANUALS

EDITED BY PROFESSOR KNIGHT


LOGIC

INDUCTIVE AND DEDUCTIVE

  PUBLISHED MAY, 1893
  _Reprinted December, 1893_
     "      _November, 1894_
     "      _January, 1899_
     "      _August, 1904_
     "      _June, 1909_
     "      _September, 1912_
     "      _July, 1913_
     "      _January, 1915_




  LOGIC

  INDUCTIVE AND DEDUCTIVE


  BY WILLIAM MINTO, M.A.
  HON. LL.D. ST. ANDREWS
  LATE PROFESSOR OF LOGIC IN THE UNIVERSITY OF ABERDEEN




  LONDON
  JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
  1915




PREFACE.

In this little treatise two things are attempted that at first might
appear incompatible. One of them is to put the study of logical
formulae on a historical basis. Strangely enough, the scientific
evolution of logical forms, is a bit of history that still awaits the
zeal and genius of some great scholar. I have neither ambition nor
qualification for such a _magnum opus_, and my life is already more
than half spent; but the gap in evolutionary research is so obvious
that doubtless some younger man is now at work in the field unknown to
me. All that I can hope to do is to act as a humble pioneer according
to my imperfect lights. Even the little I have done represents work
begun more than twenty years ago, and continuously pursued for the
last twelve years during a considerable portion of my time.

The other aim, which might at first appear inconsistent with this,
is to increase the power of Logic as a practical discipline. The main
purpose of this practical science, or scientific art, is conceived to
be the organisation of reason against error, and error in its various
kinds is made the basis of the division of the subject. To carry out
this practical aim along with the historical one is not hopeless,
because throughout its long history Logic has been a practical
science; and, as I have tried to show at some length in introductory
chapters, has concerned itself at different periods with the risks of
error peculiar to each.

To enumerate the various books, ancient and modern, to which I have
been indebted, would be a vain parade. Where I have consciously
adopted any distinctive recent contribution to the long line of
tradition, I have made particular acknowledgment. My greatest
obligation is to my old professor, Alexander Bain, to whom I owe my
first interest in the subject, and more details than I can possibly
separate from the general body of my knowledge.

  W. M.

  ABERDEEN, _January, 1893_.




Since these sentences were written, the author of this book has
died; and Professor Minto's _Logic_ is his last contribution to the
literature of his country. It embodies a large part of his teaching in
the philosophical class-room of his University, and doubtless reflects
the spirit of the whole of it.

Scottish Philosophy has lost in him one of its typical
representatives, and the University of the North one of its most
stimulating teachers. There have been few more distinguished men than
William Minto in the professoriate of Aberdeen; and the memory of what
he was, of his wide and varied learning, his brilliant conversation,
his urbanity, and his rare power of sympathy with men with whose
opinions he did not agree, will remain a possession to many who mourn
his loss.

It will be something if this little book keeps his memory alive, both
amongst the students who owed so much to him, and in the large circle
of friends who used to feel the charm of his personality.

  WILLIAM KNIGHT.




_GENERAL PLAN OF THE SERIES._

_This Series is primarily designed to aid the University Extension
Movement throughout Great Britain and America, and to supply the need
so widely felt by students, of Text-books for study and reference, in
connexion with the authorised Courses of Lectures._

_The Manuals differ from those already in existence in that they are
not intended for School use, or for Examination purposes; and that
their aim is to educate, rather than to inform. The statement of
details is meant to illustrate the working of general laws, and the
development of principles; while the historical evolution of the
subject dealt with is kept in view, along with its philosophical
significance._

_The remarkable success which has attended University Extension in
Britain has been partly due to the combination of scientific treatment
with popularity, and to the union of simplicity with thoroughness.
This movement, however, can only reach those resident in the larger
centres of population, while all over the country there are thoughtful
persons who desire the same kind of teaching. It is for them also that
this Series is designed. Its aim is to supply the general reader with
the same kind of teaching as is given in the Lectures, and to reflect
the spirit which has characterised the movement, viz., the combination
of principles with facts, and of methods with results._

_The Manuals are also intended to be contributions to the Literature
of the Subjects with which they respectively deal, quite apart from
University Extension; and some of them will be found to meet a general
rather than a special want._

_They will be issued simultaneously in England and America. Volumes
dealing with separate sections of Literature, Science, Philosophy,
History, and Art have been assigned to representative literary men,
to University Professors, or to Extension Lecturers connected with
Oxford, Cambridge, London, and the Universities of Scotland and
Ireland._

_A list of the works in this Series will be found at the end of the
volume._




  CONTENTS.

  INTRODUCTION.

  I.
                                                                  PAGE

  The Origin and Scope of Logic,                                    1

  II.

  Logic as a Preventive of Error or Fallacy--The Inner
 Sophist,                                                          17

  III.

  The Axioms of Dialectic and of Syllogism,                        29

  BOOK I.

  THE LOGIC OF CONSISTENCY--SYLLOGISM AND
  DEFINITION.

  PART I.

  THE ELEMENTS OF PROPOSITIONS.

  CHAPTER I.

  General Names and Allied Distinctions,                           43

  CHAPTER II.

  The Syllogistic Analysis of Proposition, into Terms. (1)
  The Bare Analytic Forms. (2) The Practice of Syllogistic
  Analysis. (3) Some Technical Difficulties,                        62

  PART II.

  DEFINITION.

  CHAPTER I.

  (1) Imperfect Understanding of Words. (2) Verification of
  the Meaning--Dialectic. (3) Fixation of the Meaning--Division
  or Classification, Definition, Naming,                           82

  CHAPTER II.

  The Five Predicables--Verbal and Real Predication,              105

  CHAPTER III.

  Aristotle's Categories,                                         112

  CHAPTER IV.

  The Controversy about Universals--Difficulties concerning
  the Relation of General Names to Thought and to Reality,        120

  PART III.

  THE INTERPRETATION OF PROPOSITIONS.

  CHAPTER I.

  Theories of Predication--Theories of Judgment,                  131

  CHAPTER II.

  The "Opposition" of Propositions--The Interpretation of
  "No,"                                                           139

  CHAPTER III.

  The Implication of Propositions--Immediate Formal Inference
  --Eduction,                                                     146

  CHAPTER IV.

  The Counter-Implication of Propositions,                        156

  PART IV.

  THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF PROPOSITIONS.

  CHAPTER I.

  The Syllogism,                                                  167

  CHAPTER II.

  The Figures and Moods of the Syllogism. (1) The First
  Figure. (2) The Minor Figures and their Reduction to
  the First. (3) Sorites,                                         173

  CHAPTER III.

  The Demonstration of the Syllogistic Moods--The Canons
  of the Syllogism,                                               185

  CHAPTER IV.

  The Analysis of Arguments into Syllogistic Forms,               196

  CHAPTER V.

  Enthymemes,                                                     205

  CHAPTER VI.

  The Utility of the Syllogism,                                   209

  CHAPTER VII.

  Conditional Arguments--Hypothetical Syllogism, Disjunctive
  Syllogism and Dilemma,                                          215

  CHAPTER VIII.

  Fallacies in Deductive Argument--_Petitio Principii_ and
  _Ignoratio Elenchi_,                                            226

  CHAPTER IX.

  Formal or Aristotelian Induction--Inductive Argument--The
  Inductive Syllogism,                                            235

  BOOK II.

  INDUCTIVE LOGIC, OR THE LOGIC OF SCIENCE.

  Introduction,                                                   243

  CHAPTER I.

  The Data of Experience as Grounds of Inference or Rational
  Belief,                                                         273

  CHAPTER II.

  Ascertainment of Simple Facts in their Order--Personal
  Observation--Hearsay Evidence--Method of Testing
  Traditional Evidence,                                           285

  CHAPTER III.

  Ascertainment of Facts of Causation. (1) _Post Hoc Ergo
  Propter Hoc._ (2) Meaning of Cause--Methods of Observation
  --Mill's Experimental Methods,                                  295

  CHAPTER IV.

  Method of Observation--Single Difference. (1) The Principle
  of Single Difference. (2) Application of the Principle,         308

  CHAPTER V.

  Methods of Observation--Elimination--Single Agreement.
  (1) The Principle of Elimination. (2) The Principle of
  Single Agreement. (3) Mill's "Joint Method of Agreement
  and Difference,"                                                318

  CHAPTER VI.

  Methods of Observation--Minor Methods. (1) Concomitant
  Variations. (2) Single Residue,                                 329

  CHAPTER VII.

  The Method of Explanation. (1) The Four Stages of Orderly
  Procedure. (2) Obstacles to Explanation--Plurality of Causes
  and Intermixture of Effects. (3) The Proof of a Hypothesis,     334

  CHAPTER VIII.

  Supplementary Methods of Investigation. (1) The Maintenance
  of Averages--Supplement to the Method of Difference.
  (2) The Presumption from Extra-Casual Coincidence,              351

  CHAPTER IX.

  Probable Inference to Particulars--The Measurement of
  Probability,                                                    362

  CHAPTER X.

  Inference from Analogy,                                         367




INTRODUCTION.


I.--THE ORIGIN AND SCOPE OF LOGIC.

The question has sometimes been asked, Where should we begin in Logic?
Particularly within the present century has this difficulty been felt,
when the study of Logic has been revived and made intricate by the
different purposes of its cultivators.

Where did the founder of Logic begin? Where did Aristotle begin? This
seems to be the simplest way of settling where we should begin, for
the system shaped by Aristotle is still the trunk of the tree, though
there have been so many offshoots from the old stump and so many
parasitic plants have wound themselves round it that Logic is now
almost as tangled a growth as the Yews of Borrowdale--

  An intertwisted mass of fibres serpentine
  Upcoiling and inveterately convolved.

It used to be said that Logic had remained for two thousand years
precisely as Aristotle left it. It was an example of a science or
art perfected at one stroke by the genius of its first inventor.
The bewildered student must often wish that this were so: it is only
superficially true. Much of Aristotle's nomenclature and his central
formulae have been retained, but they have been very variously
supplemented and interpreted to very different purposes--often to no
purpose at all.

The Cambridge mathematician's boast about his new theorem--"The best
of it all is that it can never by any possibility be made of the
slightest use to anybody for anything"--might be made with truth about
many of the later developments of Logic. We may say the same, indeed,
about the later developments of any subject that has been a playground
for generation after generation of acute intellects, happy in
their own disinterested exercise. Educational subjects--subjects
appropriated for the general schooling of young minds--are
particularly apt to be developed out of the lines of their original
intention. So many influences conspire to pervert the original aim.
The convenience of the teacher, the convenience of the learner,
the love of novelty, the love of symmetry, the love of subtlety;
easy-going indolence on the one hand and intellectual restlessness
on the other--all these motives act from within on traditional
matter without regard to any external purpose whatever. Thus in
Logic difficulties have been glossed over and simplified for the dull
understanding, while acute minds have revelled in variations and new
and ingenious manipulations of the old formulae, and in multiplication
and more exact and symmetrical definition of the old distinctions.

To trace the evolution of the forms and theories of Logic under these
various influences during its periods of active development is a task
more easily conceived than executed, and one far above the ambition of
an introductory treatise. But it is well that even he who writes for
beginners should recognise that the forms now commonly used have been
evolved out of a simpler tradition. Without entering into the details
of the process, it is possible to indicate its main stages, and thus
furnish a clue out of the modern labyrinthine confusion of purposes.

How did the Aristotelian Logic originate? Its central feature is the
syllogistic forms. In what circumstances did Aristotle invent these?
For what purpose? What use did he contemplate for them? In rightly
understanding this, we shall understand the original scope or province
of Logic, and thus be in a position to understand more clearly how it
has been modified, contracted, expanded, and supplemented.

Logic has always made high claims as the _scientia scientiarum_,
the science of sciences. The builders of this Tower of Babel are
threatened in these latter days with confusion of tongues. We may
escape this danger if we can recover the designs of the founder, and
of the master-builders who succeeded him.

Aristotle's Logic has been so long before the world in abstract
isolation that we can hardly believe that its form was in any way
determined by local accident. A horror as of sacrilege is excited by
the bare suggestion that the author of this grand and venerable work,
one of the most august monuments of transcendent intellect, was in his
day and generation only a pre-eminent tutor or schoolmaster, and
that his logical writings were designed for the accomplishment of his
pupils in a special art in which every intellectually ambitious young
Athenian of the period aspired to excel. Yet such is the plain fact,
baldly stated. Aristotle's Logic in its primary aim was as practical
as a treatise on Navigation, or "Cavendish on Whist". The latter is
the more exact of the two comparisons. It was in effect in its various
parts a series of handbooks for a temporarily fashionable intellectual
game, a peculiar mode of disputation or dialectic,[1] the game of
Question and Answer, the game so fully illustrated in the Dialogues of
Plato, the game identified with the name of Socrates.

We may lay stress, if we like, on the intellectuality of the game, and
the high topics on which it was exercised. It was a game that could
flourish only among a peculiarly intellectual people; a people less
acute would find little sport in it. The Athenians still take a
singular delight in disputation. You cannot visit Athens without being
struck by it. You may still see groups formed round two protagonists
in the cafes or the squares, or among the ruins of the Acropolis, in
a way to remind you of Socrates and his friends. They do not argue as
Gil Blas and his Hibernians did with heat and temper, ending in blows.
They argue for the pure love of arguing, the audience sitting
or standing by to see fair play with the keenest enjoyment of
intellectual thrust and parry. No other people could argue like the
Greeks without coming to blows. It is one of their characteristics
now, and so it was in old times two thousand years ago. And about
a century before Aristotle reached manhood, they had invented this
peculiarly difficult and trying species of disputative pastime, in
which we find the genesis of Aristotle's logical treatises.

To get a proper idea of this debate by Question and Answer, which we
may call Socratic disputation after its most renowned master, one
must read some of the dialogues of Plato. I will indicate merely
the skeleton of the game, to show how happily it lent itself to
Aristotle's analysis of arguments and propositions.

A thesis or proposition is put up for debate, _e.g._, that knowledge
is nothing else than sensible perception,[2] that it is a greater
evil to do wrong than to suffer wrong,[3] that the love of gain is not
reprehensible.[4] There are two disputants, but they do not speak on
the question by turns, so many minutes being allowed to each as in
a modern encounter of wits. One of the two, who may be called the
Questioner, is limited to asking questions, the other, the Respondent,
is limited to answering. Further, the Respondent can answer only "Yes"
or "No," with perhaps a little explanation: on his side the Questioner
must ask only questions that admit of the simple answer "Yes" or "No".
The Questioner's business is to extract from the Respondent admissions
involving the opposite of what he has undertaken to maintain. The
Questioner tries in short to make him contradict himself. Only a very
stupid Respondent would do this at once: the Questioner plies him
with general principles, analogies, plain cases; leads him on from
admission to admission, and then putting the admissions together
convicts him out of his own mouth of inconsistency.[5]

Now mark precisely where Aristotle struck in with his invention of the
Syllogism, the invention on which he prided himself as specially his
own, and the forms of which have clung to Logic ever since, even
in the usage of those who deride Aristotle's Moods and Figures as
antiquated superstitions. Suppose yourself the Questioner, where did
he profess to help you with his mechanism? In effect, as the word
Syllogism indicates, it was when you had obtained a number of
admissions, and wished to reason them together, to demonstrate how
they bore upon the thesis in dispute, how they hung together, how they
necessarily involved what you were contending for. And the essence of
his mechanism was the reduction of the admitted propositions to common
terms, and to certain types or forms which are manifestly equivalent
or inter-dependent. Aristotle advised his pupils also in the
tactics of the game, but his grand invention was the form or type
of admissions that you should strive to obtain, and the effective
manipulation of them when you had got them.

An example will show the nature of this help, and what it was worth.
To bring the thing nearer home, let us, instead of an example from
Plato, whose topics often seem artificial to us now, take a thesis
from last century, a paradox still arguable, Mandeville's famous--some
would say infamous--paradox that Private Vices are Public Benefits.
Undertake to maintain this, and you will have no difficulty in getting
a respondent prepared to maintain the negative. The plain men, such as
Socrates cross-questioned, would have declared at once that a vice is
a vice, and can never do any good to anybody. Your Respondent denies
your proposition simply: he upholds that private vices never are
public benefits, and defies you to extract from him any admission
inconsistent with this. Your task then is to lure him somehow into
admitting that in some cases what is vicious in the individual may
be of service to the State. This is enough: you are not concerned to
establish that this holds of all private vices. A single instance
to the contrary is enough to break down his universal negative. You
cannot, of course, expect him to make the necessary admission in
direct terms: you must go round about. You know, perhaps, that he
has confidence in Bishop Butler as a moralist. You try him with the
saying: "To aim at public and private good are so far from being
inconsistent that they mutually promote each other". Does he admit
this?

Perhaps he wants some little explanation or exemplification to enable
him to grasp your meaning. This was within the rules of the game. You
put cases to him, asking for his "Yes" or "No" to each. Suppose a man
goes into Parliament, not out of any zeal for the public good, but in
pure vainglory, or to serve his private ends, is it possible for him
to render the State good service? Or suppose a milk-seller takes
great pains to keep his milk pure, not because he cares for the public
health, but because it pays, is this a benefit to the public?

Let these questions be answered in the affirmative, putting you in
possession of the admission that some actions undertaken for private
ends are of public advantage, what must you extract besides to make
good your position as against the Respondent? To see clearly at this
stage what now is required, though you have to reach it circuitously,
masking your approach under difference of language, would clearly be
an advantage. This was the advantage that Aristotle's method offered
to supply. A disputant familiar with his analysis would foresee at
once that if he could get the Respondent to admit that all actions
undertaken for private ends are vicious, the victory was his, while
nothing short of this would serve.

Here my reader may interject that he could have seen this without any
help from Aristotle, and that anybody may see it without knowing
that what he has to do is, in Aristotelian language, to construct a
syllogism in Bokardo. I pass this over. I am not concerned at this
point to defend the utility of Aristotle's method. All that I want
is to illustrate the kind of use that it was intended for. Perhaps if
Aristotle had not habituated men's minds to his analysis, we should
none of us have been able to discern coherence and detect incoherence
as quickly and clearly as we do now.

But to return to our example. As Aristotle's pupil, you would have
seen at the stage we are speaking of that the establishment of your
thesis must turn upon the definition of virtue and vice. You must
proceed, therefore, to cross-examine your Respondent about this. You
are not allowed to ask him what he means by virtue, or what he means
by vice. In accordance with the rules of the dialectic, it is your
business to propound definitions, and demand his Yes or No to them.
You ask him, say, whether he agrees with Shaftesbury's definition of a
virtuous action as an action undertaken purely for the good of others.
If he assents, it follows that an action undertaken with any suspicion
of a self-interested motive cannot be numbered among the virtues.
If he agrees, further, that every action must be either vicious
or virtuous, you have admissions sufficient to prove your original
thesis. All that you have now to do to make your triumph manifest, is
to display the admissions you have obtained in common terms.

    Some actions done with a self-interested motive are public
    benefits. All actions done with a self-interested motive are
    private vices.

From these premisses it follows irresistibly that

    Some private vices are public benefits.

This illustration may serve to show the kind of disputation for which
Aristotle's logic was designed, and thus to make clear its primary
uses and its limitations.

To realise its uses, and judge whether there is anything analogous
to them in modern needs, conceive the chief things that it behoved
Questioner and Respondent in this game to know. All that a proposition
necessarily implies; all that two propositions put together imply; on
what conditions and to what extent one admission is inconsistent with
another; when one admission necessarily involves another; when two
necessarily involve a third. And to these ends it was obviously
necessary to have an exact understanding of the terms used, so as to
avoid the snares of ambiguous language.

That a Syllogistic or Logic of Consistency should emerge out of
Yes-and-No Dialectic was natural. Things in this world come when they
are wanted: inventions are made on the spur of necessity. It was above
all necessary in this kind of debate to avoid contradicting yourself:
to maintain your consistency. A clever interrogator spread out
proposition after proposition before you and invited your assent,
choosing forms of words likely to catch your prejudices and lure
you into self-contradiction. An organon, instrument, or discipline
calculated to protect you as Respondent and guide you as Questioner
by making clear what an admission led to, was urgently called for,
and when the game had been in high fashion for more than a century
Aristotle's genius devised what was wanted, meeting at the same time,
no doubt, collateral needs that had arisen from the application of
Dialectic to various kinds of subject-matter.

The thoroughness of Aristotle's system was doubtless due partly to
the searching character of the dialectic in which it had its birth.
No other mode of disputation makes such demands upon the disputant's
intellectual agility and precision, or is so well adapted to lay bare
the skeleton of an argument.

The uses of Aristotle's logical treatises remained when the fashion
that had called them forth had passed.[6] Clear and consistent
thinking, a mastery of the perplexities and ambiguities of language,
power to detect identity of meaning under difference of expression, a
ready apprehension of all that a proposition implies, all that may
be educed or deduced from it--whatever helps to these ends must be of
perpetual use. "To purge the understanding of those errors which lie
in the confusion and perplexities of an inconsequent thinking," is
a modern description of the main scope of Logic.[7] It is a good
description of the branch of Logic that keeps closest to the
Aristotelian tradition.

The limitations as well as the uses of Aristotle's logic may be traced
to the circumstances of its origin. Both parties to the disputation,
Questioner and Respondent alike, were mainly concerned with the
inter-dependence of the propositions put forward. Once the Respondent
had given his assent to a question, he was bound in consistency to all
that it implied. He must take all the consequences of his admission.
It might be true or it might be false as a matter of fact: all the
same he was bound by it: its truth or falsehood was immaterial to his
position as a disputant. On the other hand, the Questioner could not
go beyond the admissions of the Respondent. It has often been alleged
as a defect in the Syllogism that the conclusion does not go beyond
the premisses, and ingenious attempts have been made to show that
it is really an advance upon the premisses. But having regard to the
primary use of the syllogism, this was no defect, but a necessary
character of the relation. The Questioner could not in fairness assume
more than had been granted by implication. His advance could only be
an argumentative advance: if his conclusion contained a grain more
than was contained in the premisses, it was a sophistical trick, and
the Respondent could draw back and withhold his assent. He was bound
in consistency to stand by his admissions; he was not bound to go a
fraction of an inch beyond them.

We thus see how vain it is to look to the Aristotelian tradition
for an organon of truth or a criterion of falsehood. Directly and
primarily, at least, it was not so; the circumstances of its origin
gave it a different bent. Indirectly and secondarily, no doubt, it
served this purpose, inasmuch as truth was the aim of all serious
thinkers who sought to clear their minds and the minds of others by
Dialectic. But in actual debate truth was represented merely by the
common-sense of the audience. A dialectician who gained a triumph
by outraging this, however cleverly he might outwit his antagonist,
succeeded only in amusing his audience, and dialecticians of the
graver sort aimed at more serious uses and a more respectful homage,
and did their best to discountenance merely eristic disputation.
Further, it would be a mistake to conclude because Aristotle's Logic,
as an instrument of Dialectic, concerned itself with the syllogism
of propositions rather than their truth, that it was merely an art of
quibbling. On the contrary, it was essentially the art of preventing
and exposing quibbling. It had its origin in quibbling, no doubt,
inasmuch as what we should call verbal quibbling was of the essence
of Yes-and-No Dialectic, and the main secret of its charm for an
intellectual and disputatious people; but it came into being as a
safeguard against quibbling, not a serviceable adjunct.


The mediaeval developments of Logic retained and even exaggerated
the syllogistic character of the original treatises. Interrogative
dialectic had disappeared in the Middle Ages whether as a diversion or
as a discipline: but errors of inconsistency still remained the errors
against which principally educated men needed a safeguard. Men had
to keep their utterances in harmony with the dogmas of the Church. A
clear hold of the exact implications of a proposition, whether singly
or in combination with other propositions, was still an important
practical need. The Inductive Syllogism was not required, and its
treatment dwindled to insignificance in mediaeval text-books, but the
Deductive Syllogism and the formal apparatus for the definition of
terms held the field.

It was when observation of Nature and its laws became a paramount
pursuit that the defects of Syllogistic Logic began to be felt. Errors
against which this Logic offered no protection then called for a
safeguard--especially the errors to which men are liable in the
investigation of cause and effect. "Bring your thoughts into harmony
one with another," was the demand of Aristotle's age. "Bring your
thoughts into harmony with authority," was the demand of the Middle
Ages. "Bring them into harmony with fact," was the requirement most
keenly felt in more recent times. It is in response to this demand
that what is commonly but not very happily known as Inductive Logic
has been formulated.

In obedience to custom, I shall follow the now ordinary division of
Logic into Deductive and Inductive. The titles are misleading in many
ways, but they are fixed by a weight of usage which it would be vain
to try to unsettle. Both come charging down the stream of time
each with its cohort of doctrines behind it, borne forward with
irresistible momentum.

The best way of preventing confusion now is to retain the established
titles, recognise that the doctrines behind each have a radically
different aim or end, and supply the interpretation of this end from
history. What they have in common may be described as the prevention
of error, the organisation of reason against error. I have shown
that owing to the bent impressed upon it by the circumstances of its
origin, the errors chiefly safeguarded by the Aristotelian logic
were the errors of inconsistency. The other branch of Logic, commonly
called Induction, was really a separate evolution, having its origin
in a different practical need. The history of this I will trace
separately after we have seen our way through the Aristotelian
tradition and its accretions. The Experimental Methods are no less
manifestly the germ, the evolutionary centre or starting-point, of
the new Logic than the Syllogism is of the old, and the main errors
safeguarded are errors of fact and inference from fact.

At this stage it will be enough to indicate briefly the broad
relations between Deductive Logic and Inductive Logic.

Inductive Logic, as we now understand it--the Logic of Observation and
Explanation--was first formulated and articulated to a System of Logic
by J. S. Mill. It was he that added this wing to the old building.
But the need of it was clearly expressed as early as the thirteenth
century. Roger Bacon, the Franciscan friar (1214-1292), and not his
more illustrious namesake Francis, Lord Verulam, was the real founder
of Inductive Logic. It is remarkable that the same century saw
Syllogistic Logic advanced to its most complete development in the
system of Petrus Hispanus, a Portuguese scholar who under the title of
John XXI. filled the Papal Chair for eight months in 1276-7.

A casual remark of Roger Bacon's in the course of his advocacy of
Experimental Science in the _Opus Majus_ draws a clear line between
the two branches of Logic. "There are," he says, "two ways of knowing,
by Argument and by Experience. Argument concludes a question, but
it does not make us feel certain, unless the truth be also found in
experience."

On this basis the old Logic may be clearly distinguished from the new,
taking as the general aim of Logic the protection of the mind against
the errors to which it is liable in the acquisition of knowledge.

All knowledge, broadly speaking, comes either from Authority, _i.e._,
by argument from accepted premisses, or from Experience. If it comes
from Authority it comes through the medium of words: if it comes from
Experience it comes through the senses. In taking in knowledge through
words we are liable to certain errors; and in taking in knowledge
through the senses we are liable to certain errors. To protect against
the one is the main end of "Deductive" Logic: to protect against the
other is the main end of "Inductive" Logic. As a matter of fact the
pith of treatises on Deduction and Induction is directed to those ends
respectively, the old meanings of Deduction and Induction as formal
processes (to be explained afterwards) being virtually ignored.

There is thus no antagonism whatever between the two branches of
Logic. They are directed to different ends. The one is supplementary
to the other. The one cannot supersede the other.

Aristotelian Logic can never become superfluous as long as men are apt
to be led astray by words. Its ultimate business is to safeguard in
the interpretation of the tradition of language. The mere syllogistic,
the bare forms of equivalent or consistent expression, have a very
limited utility, as we shall see. But by cogent sequence syllogism
leads to proposition, and proposition to term, and term to a close
study of the relations between words and thoughts and things.

    [Footnote 1: We know for certain--and it is one of the
    evidences of the importance attached to this trivial-looking
    pastime--that two of the great teacher's logical treatises,
    the Topics and the Sophistical Refutations, were written
    especially for the guidance of Questioners and Respondents.
    The one instructs the disputant how to qualify himself
    methodically for discussion before an ordinary audience, when
    the admissions extracted from the respondent are matters of
    common belief, the questioner's skill being directed to make
    it appear that the respondent's position is inconsistent
    with these. The other is a systematic exposure of sophistical
    tricks, mostly verbal quibbles, whereby a delusive appearance
    of victory in debate may be obtained. But in the concluding
    chapter of the _Elenchi_, where Aristotle claims not only
    that his method is superior to the empirical methods of
    rival teachers, but that it is entirely original, it is the
    Syllogism upon which he lays stress as his peculiar and
    chief invention. The Syllogism, the pure forms of which are
    expounded in his Prior Analytics, is really the centre of
    Aristotle's logical system, whether the propositions to
    which it is applied are matters of scientific truth as in the
    Posterior Analytics, or matters of common opinion as in
    the Topics. The treatise on Interpretation, _i.e._, the
    interpretation of the Respondent's "Yes" and "No," is
    preliminary to the Syllogism, the reasoning of the admissions
    together. Even in the half-grammatical half-logical treatise
    on the Categories, the author always keeps an eye on the
    Syllogistic analysis.]

    [Footnote 2: Theaetetus, 151 E.]

    [Footnote 3: Gorgias, 473 D.]

    [Footnote 4: Hipparchus, 225 A.]

    [Footnote 5: In its leading and primary use, this was a mode
    of debate, a duel of wits, in which two men engaged before
    an audience. But the same form could be used, and was used,
    notably by Socrates, not in an eristic spirit but as a means
    of awakening people to the consequences of certain admissions
    or first principles, and thus making vague knowledge explicit
    and clear. The mind being detained on proposition after
    proposition as assent was given to it, dialectic was a
    valuable instrument of instruction and exposition. But
    whatever the purpose of the exercise, controversial triumph,
    or solid grounding in the first principles--"the evolution
    of in-dwelling conceptions"--the central interest lay in the
    syllogising or reasoning together of the separately assumed or
    admitted propositions.]

    [Footnote 6: Like every other fashion, Yes-and-No Dialectic
    had its period, its rise and fall. The invention of it is
    ascribed to Zeno the Eleatic, the answering and questioning
    Zeno, who flourished about the middle of the fifth century
    B.C. Socrates (469-399) was in his prime at the beginning of
    the great Peloponnesian War when Pericles died in 429. In that
    year Plato was born, and lived to 347, "the olive groves of
    Academe" being established centre of his teaching from
    about 386 onwards. Aristotle (384-322), who was the tutor of
    Alexander the Great, established his school at the Lyceum
    when Alexander became king in 336 and set out on his career
    of conquest. That Yes-and-No Dialectic was then a prominent
    exercise, his logical treatises everywhere bear witness. The
    subsequent history of the game is obscure. It is probable that
    Aristotle's thorough exposition of its legitimate arts and
    illegitimate tricks helped to destroy its interest as an
    amusement.]

    [Footnote 7: Hamilton's _Lectures_, iii. p. 37.]


II.--LOGIC AS A PREVENTIVE OF ERROR OR FALLACY.--THE INNER SOPHIST.

Why describe Logic as a system of defence against error? Why say that
its main end and aim is the organisation of reason against confusion
and falsehood? Why not rather say, as is now usual, that its end is
the attainment of truth? Does this not come to the same thing?

Substantially, the meaning is the same, but the latter expression
is more misleading. To speak of Logic as a body of rules for the
investigation of truth has misled people into supposing that Logic
claims to be an art of Discovery, that it claims to lay down rules
by simply observing which investigators may infallibly arrive at new
truths. Now, this does not hold even of the Logic of Induction, still
less of the older Logic, the precise relation of which to truth will
become apparent as we proceed. It is only by keeping men from going
astray and by disabusing them when they think they have reached their
destination that Logic helps men on the road to truth. Truth often
lies hid in the centre of a maze, and logical rules only help the
searcher onwards by giving him warning when he is on the wrong track
and must try another. It is the searcher's own impulse that carries
him forward: Logic does not so much beckon him on to the right path
as beckon him back from the wrong. In laying down the conditions of
correct interpretation, of valid argument, of trustworthy evidence,
of satisfactory explanation, Logic shows the inquirer how to test and
purge his conclusions, not how to reach them.

To discuss, as is sometimes done, whether Fallacies lie within the
proper sphere of Logic, is to obscure the real connexion between
Fallacies and Logic. It is the existence of Fallacies that calls Logic
into existence; as a practical science Logic is needed as a protection
against Fallacies. Such historically is its origin. We may, if we
like, lay down an arbitrary rule that a treatise on Logic should be
content to expound the correct forms of interpretation and reasoning
and should not concern itself with the wrong. If we take this view we
are bound to pronounce Fallacies extra-logical. But to do so is
simply to cripple the usefulness of Logic as a practical science.
The manipulation of the bare logical forms, without reference to
fallacious departures from them, is no better than a nursery exercise.
Every correct form in Logic is laid down as a safeguard against some
erroneous form to which men are prone, whether in the interpretation
of argument or the interpretation of experience, and the statement and
illustration of the typical forms of wrong procedure should accompany
_pari passu_ the exposition of the right procedure.


In accordance with this principle, I shall deal with special
fallacies, special snares or pitfalls--misapprehension of words,
misinterpretation of propositions, misunderstanding of arguments,
misconstruction of facts, evidences, or signs--each in connexion
with its appropriate safeguard. This seems to me the most profitable
method. But at this stage, it may be worth while, by way of
emphasising the need for Logic as a science of rational belief, to
take a survey of the most general tendencies to irrational belief,
the chief kinds of illusion or bias that are rooted in the human
constitution. We shall then better appreciate the magnitude of the
task that Logic attempts in seeking to protect reason against its own
fallibility and the pressure of the various forces that would usurp
its place.

It is a common notion that we need Logic to protect us against the
arts of the Sophist, the dishonest juggler with words and specious
facts. But in truth the Inner Sophist, whose instruments are our own
inborn propensities to error, is a much more dangerous enemy. For once
that we are the victims of designing Sophists, we are nine times the
victims of our own irrational impulses and prejudices. Men generally
deceive themselves before they deceive others.

Francis Bacon drew attention to these inner perverting influences,
these universal sources of erroneous belief, in his _De Augmentis_
and again in his _Novum Organum_, under the designation of _Idola_
([Greek: eidola]), deceptive appearances of truth, illusions. His
classification of _Idola--Idola Tribus_, illusions common to all men,
illusions of the race; _Idola Specus_, personal illusions, illusions
peculiar to the "den" in which each man lives; _Idola Fori_, illusions
of conversation, vulgar prejudices embodied in words; _Idola Theatri_,
illusions of illustrious doctrine, illusions imposed by the dazzling
authority of great names--is defective as a classification inasmuch as
the first class includes all the others, but like all his writings it
is full of sagacious remarks and happy examples. Not for the sake of
novelty, but because it is well that matters so important should be
presented from more than one point of view, I shall follow a division
adapted from the more scientific, if less picturesque, arrangement
of Professor Bain, in his chapter on the Fallacious Tendencies of the
Human Mind.[1]

The illusions to which we are all subject may best be classified
according to their origin in the depths of our nature. Let us try to
realise how illusory beliefs arise.

What is a belief? One of the uses of Logic is to set us thinking about
such simple terms. An exhaustive analysis and definition of belief is
one of the most difficult of psychological problems. We cannot enter
upon that: let us be content with a few simple characters of belief.

First, then, belief is a state of mind. Second, this state of mind is
outward-pointing: it has a reference beyond itself, a reference to the
order of things outside us. In believing, we hold that the world as it
is, has been, or will be, corresponds to our conceptions of it.
Third, belief is the guide of action: it is in accordance with what we
believe that we direct our activities. If we want to know what a man
really believes, we look at his action. This at least is the clue to
what he believes at the moment. "I cannot," a great orator once said,
"read the minds of men." This was received with ironical cheers. "No,"
he retorted, "but I can construe their acts." Promoters of companies
are expected to invest their own money as a guarantee of good faith.
If a man says he believes the world is coming to an end in a year,
and takes a lease of a house for fifteen years, we conclude that his
belief is not of the highest degree of strength.

The close connexion of belief with our activities, enables us to
understand how illusions, false conceptions of reality, arise. The
illusions of Feeling and the illusions of Custom are well understood,
but other sources of illusion, which may be designated Impatient
Impulse and Happy Exercise, are less generally recognised. An example
or two will show what is meant. We cannot understand the strength of
these perverting influences till we realise them in our own case. We
detect them quickly enough in others. Seeing that in common speech the
word illusion implies a degree of error amounting almost to insanity,
and the illusions we speak of are such as no man is ever quite free
from, it is perhaps less startling to use the word _bias_.


_The Bias of Impatient Impulse._

As a being formed for action, not only does healthy man take
a pleasure in action, physical and mental, for its own sake,
irrespective of consequences, but he is so charged with energy that
he cannot be comfortable unless it finds a free vent. In proportion
to the amount and excitability of his energy, restraint, obstruction,
delay is irksome, and soon becomes a positive and intolerable pain.
Any bar or impediment that gives us pause is hateful even to think of:
the mere prospect annoys and worries.

Hence it arises that belief, a feeling of being prepared for action,
a conviction that the way is clear before us for the free exercise of
our activities, is a very powerful and exhilarating feeling, as much
a necessity of happy existence as action itself. We see this when we
consider how depressing and uncomfortable a condition is the opposite
state to belief, namely, doubt, perplexity, hesitation, uncertainty as
to our course. And realising this, we see how strong a bias we have in
this fact of our nature, this imperious inward necessity for action;
how it urges us to act without regard to consequences, and to jump at
beliefs without inquiry. For, unless inquiry itself is our business, a
self-sufficient occupation, it means delay and obstruction.

This ultimate fact of our nature, this natural inbred constitutional
impatience, explains more than half of the wrong beliefs that we form
and persist in. We must have a belief of some kind: we cannot be happy
till we get it, and we take up with the first that seems to show the
way clear. It may be right or it may be wrong: it is not, of course,
necessarily always wrong: but that, so far as we are concerned, is a
matter of accident. The pressing need for a belief of some sort, upon
which our energies may proceed in anticipation at least, will not
allow us to stop and inquire. Any course that offers a relief from
doubt and hesitation, any conviction that lets the will go free, is
eagerly embraced.

It may be thought that this can apply only to beliefs concerning
the consequences of our own personal actions, affairs in which we
individually play a part. It is from them, no doubt, that our nature
takes this set: but the habit once formed is extended to all sorts
of matters in which we have no personal interest. Tell an ordinary
Englishman, it has been wittily said, that it is a question whether
the planets are inhabited, and he feels bound at once to have a
confident opinion on the point. The strength of the conviction bears
no proportion to the amount of reason spent in reaching it, unless it
may be said that as a general rule the less a belief is reasoned the
more confidently it is held.

"A grocer," writes Mr. Bagehot in an acute essay on "The Emotion of
Conviction,"[2] "has a full creed as to foreign policy, a young lady a
complete theory of the Sacraments, as to which neither has any doubt.
A girl in a country parsonage will be sure that Paris never can be
taken, or that Bismarck is a wretch." An attitude of philosophic
doubt, of suspended judgment, is repugnant to the natural man. Belief
is an independent joy to him.

This bias works in all men. While there is life, there is pressure
from within on belief, tending to push reason aside. The force of
the pressure, of course, varies with individual temperament, age, and
other circumstances. The young are more credulous than the old, as
having greater energy: they are apt, as Bacon puts it, to be "carried
away by the sanguine element in their temperament". Shakespeare's
Laertes is a study of the impulsive temperament, boldly contrasted
with Hamlet, who has more discourse of reason. When Laertes hears that
his father has been killed, he hurries home, collects a body of armed
sympathisers, bursts into the presence of the king, and threatens with
his vengeance--the wrong man. He never pauses to make inquiry: like
Hotspur he is "a wasp-stung and impatient fool"; he must wreak his
revenge on somebody, and at once. Hamlet's father also has been
murdered, but his reason must be satisfied before he proceeds to his
revenge, and when doubtful proof is offered, he waits for proof more
relative.

Bacon's _Idola Tribus_ and Dr. Bain's illustrations of incontinent
energy, are mostly examples of unreasoning intellectual activity,
hurried generalisations, unsound and superficial analogies, rash
hypotheses. Bacon quotes the case of the sceptic in the temple of
Poseidon, who, when shown the offerings of those who had made vows
in danger and been delivered, and asked whether he did not now
acknowledge the power of the god, replied: "But where are they who
made vows and yet perished?" This man answered rightly, says Bacon.
In dreams, omens, retributions, and such like, we are apt to remember
when they come true and to forget the cases when they fail. If we
have seen but one man of a nation, we are apt to conclude that all his
countrymen are like him; we cannot suspend our judgment till we have
seen more. Confident belief, as Dr. Bain remarks, is the primitive
attitude of the human mind: it is only by slow degrees that this is
corrected by experience. The old adage, "Experience teaches fools,"
has a meaning of its own, but in one sense it is the reverse of the
truth. The mark of a fool is that he is not taught by experience, and
we are all more or less intractable pupils, till our energies begin to
fail.


_The Bias of Happy Exercise._

If an occupation is pleasant in itself, if it fully satisfies our
inner craving for action, we are liable to be blinded thereby to its
consequences. Happy exercise is the fool's Paradise. The fallacy lies
not in being content with what provides a field for the full activity
of our powers: to be content in such a case may be the height of
wisdom: but the fallacy lies in claiming for our occupation results,
benefits, utilities that do not really attend upon it. Thus we see
subjects of study, originally taken up for some purpose, practical,
artistic, or religious, pursued into elaborate detail far beyond their
original purpose, and the highest value, intellectual, spiritual,
moral, claimed for them by their votaries, when in truth they merely
serve to consume so much vacant energy, and may be a sheer waste of
time that ought to be otherwise employed.

But as I am in danger of myself furnishing an illustration of this
bias--it is nowhere more prevalent than in philosophy--I will pass to
our next head.


_The Bias of the Feelings._

This source of illusion is much more generally understood. The
blinding and perverting influence of passion on reason has been a
favourite theme with moralists ever since man began to moralise, and
is acknowledged in many a popular proverb. "Love is blind;" "The wish
is father to the thought;" "Some people's geese are all swans;" and so
forth.

We need not dwell upon the illustration of it. Fear and Sloth magnify
dangers and difficulties; Affection can see no imperfection in its
object: in the eyes of Jealousy a rival is a wretch. From the nature
of the case we are much more apt to see examples in others than in
ourselves. If the strength of this bias were properly understood by
everybody, the mistake would not so often be committed of suspecting
bad faith, conscious hypocrisy, when people are found practising
the grossest inconsistencies, and shutting their eyes apparently in
deliberate wilfulness to facts held under their very noses. Men are
inclined to ascribe this human weakness to women. Reasoning from
feeling is said to be feminine logic. But it is a human weakness.

To take one very powerful feeling, the feeling of self-love or
self-interest--this operates in much more subtle ways than most people
imagine, in ways so subtle that the self-deceiver, however honest,
would fail to be conscious of the influence if it were pointed out to
him. When the slothful man saith, There is a lion in the path, we can
all detect the bias to his belief, and so we can when the slothful
student says that he will work hard to-morrow, or next week, or next
month; or when the disappointed man shows an exaggerated sense of
the advantages of a successful rival or of his own disadvantages. But
self-interest works to bias belief in much less palpable ways than
those. It is this bias that accounts for the difficulty that men of
antagonistic interests have in seeing the arguments or believing
in the honesty of their opponents. You shall find conferences
held between capitalists and workmen in which the two sides, both
represented by men incapable of consciously dishonest action, fail
altogether to see the force of each other's arguments, and are
mutually astonished each at the other's blindness.


_The Bias of Custom._

That custom, habits of thought and practice, affect belief, is also
generally acknowledged, though the strength and wide reach of the bias
is seldom realised. Very simple cases of unreasoning prejudice were
adduced by Locke, who was the first to suggest a general explanation
of them in the "Association of Ideas" (_Human Understanding_, bk. ii.
ch. xxxiii.). There is, for instance, the fear that overcomes many
people when alone in the dark. In vain reason tells them that there is
no real danger; they have a certain tremor of apprehension that they
cannot get rid of, because darkness is inseparably connected in
their minds with images of horror. Similarly we contract unreasonable
dislikes to places where painful things have happened to us. Equally
unreasoning, if not unreasonable, is our attachment to customary
doctrines or practices, and our invincible antipathy to those who do
not observe them.

Words are very common vehicles for the currency of this kind of
prejudice, good or bad meanings being attached to them by custom. The
power of words in this way is recognised in the proverb: "Give a dog
a bad name, and then hang him". These verbal prejudices are Bacon's
_Idola Fori_, illusions of conversation. Each of us is brought up in a
certain sect or party, and accustomed to respect or dishonour
certain sectarian or party names, Whig, Tory, Radical, Socialist,
Evolutionist, Broad, Low, or High Church. We may meet a man without
knowing under what label he walks and be charmed with his company:
meet him again when his name is known, and all is changed.

Such errors are called Fallacies of Association to point to the
psychological explanation. This is that by force of association
certain ideas are brought into the mind, and that once they are there,
we cannot help giving them objective reality. For example, a doctor
comes to examine a patient, and finds certain symptoms. He has lately
seen or heard of many cases of influenza, we shall say; influenza is
running in his head. The idea once suggested has all the advantage of
possession.

But why is it that a man cannot get rid of an idea? Why does it force
itself upon him as a belief? Association, custom, explains how it got
there, but not why it persists in staying.

To explain this we must call in our first fallacious principle, the
Impatience of Doubt or Delay, the imperative inward need for a belief
of some sort.

And this leads to another remark, that though for convenience of
exposition, we separate these various influences, they are not
separated in practice. They may and often do act all together, the
Inner Sophist concentrating his forces.

Finally, it may be asked whether, seeing that illusions are the
offspring of such highly respectable qualities as excess of energy,
excess of feeling, excess of docility, it is a good thing for man to
be disillusioned. The rose-colour that lies over the world for youth
is projected from the abundant energy and feeling within: disillusion
comes with failing energies, when hope is "unwilling to be fed". Is
it good then to be disillusioned? The foregoing exposition would
be egregiously wrong if the majority of mankind did not resent the
intrusion of Reason and its organising lieutenant Logic. But really
there is no danger that this intrusion succeeds to the extent of
paralysing action and destroying feeling, and uprooting custom.
The utmost that Logic can do is to modify the excess of these good
qualities by setting forth the conditions of rational belief. The
student who masters those conditions will soon see the practical
wisdom of applying his knowledge only in cases where the grounds of
rational belief are within his reach. To apply it to the consequences
of every action would be to yield to that bias of incontinent activity
which is, perhaps, our most fruitful source of error.

    [Footnote 1: Bain's _Logic_, bk. vi. chap. iii. Bacon intended
    his _Idola_ to bear the same relation to his _Novum Organum_
    that Aristotle's Fallacies or Sophistical Tricks bore to the
    old Organum. But in truth, as I have already indicated, what
    Bacon classifies is our inbred tendencies to form _idola_ or
    false images, and it is these same tendencies that make
    us liable to the fallacies named by Aristotle. Some of
    Aristotle's, as we shall see, are fallacies of Induction.]

    [Footnote 2: Bagehot's _Literary Studies_, ii. 427.]


III.--THE AXIOMS OF DIALECTIC AND OF SYLLOGISM.

There are certain principles known as the Laws of Thought or the
Maxims of Consistency. They are variously expressed, variously
demonstrated, and variously interpreted, but in one form or another
they are often said to be the foundation of all Logic. It is even said
that all the doctrines of Deductive or Syllogistic Logic may be educed
from them. Let us take the most abstract expression of them, and see
how they originated. Three laws are commonly given, named respectively
the Law of Identity, the Law of Contradiction and the Law of Excluded
Middle.

1. _The Law of Identity._ A is A. Socrates is Socrates. Guilt is
guilt.

2. _The Law of Contradiction._ A is not not-A. Socrates is not other
than Socrates. Guilt is not other than guilt. Or A is not at once _b_
and not-_b_. Socrates is not at once good and not-good. Guilt is not
at once punishable and not-punishable.

3. _The Law of Excluded Middle._ Everything is either A or not-A;
or, A is either _b_ or not-_b_. A given thing is either Socrates
or not-Socrates, either guilty or not-guilty. It must be one or the
other: no middle is possible.

Why lay down principles so obvious, in some interpretations, and so
manifestly sophistical in others? The bare forms of modern Logic have
been reached by a process of attenuation from a passage in Aristotle's
_Metaphysics_[1] (iii. 3, 4, 1005_b_ - 1008). He is there laying down
the first principle of demonstration, which he takes to be that "it is
impossible that the same predicate can both belong, and not belong,
to the same subject, at the same time, and in the same sense".[2]
That Socrates knows grammar, and does not know grammar--these two
propositions cannot both be true at the same time, and in the same
sense. Two contraries cannot exist together in the same subject. The
double answer Yes and No cannot be given to one and the same question
understood in the same sense.

But why did Aristotle consider it necessary to lay down a principle
so obvious? Simply because among the subtle dialecticians who
preceded him the principle had been challenged. The Platonic dialogue
Euthydemus shows the farcical lengths to which such quibbling was
carried. The two brothers vanquish all opponents, but it is by
claiming that the answer No does not preclude the answer Yes. "Is not
the honourable honourable, and the base base?" asks Socrates. "That is
as I please," replies Dionysodorus. Socrates concludes that there
is no arguing with such men: they repudiate the first principles of
dialectic.

There were, however, more respectable practitioners who canvassed on
more plausible grounds any form into which ultimate doctrines about
contraries and contradictions, truth and falsehood, could be put, and
therefore Aristotle considered it necessary to put forth and defend
at elaborate length a statement of a first principle of demonstration.
"Contradictions cannot both be true of the same subject at the same
time and in the same sense." This is the original form of the Law of
Contradiction.

The words "of the same subject," "at the same time," and "in the
same sense," are carefully chosen to guard against possible quibbles.
"_Socrates knows grammar._" By Socrates we must mean the same
individual man. And even of the same man the assertion may be true at
one time and not at another. There was a time when Socrates did not
know grammar, though he knows it now. And the assertion may be true
in one sense and not in another. It may be true that Socrates knows
grammar, yet not that he knows everything that is to be known about
grammar, or that he knows as much as Aristarchus.

Aristotle acknowledges that this first principle cannot itself be
demonstrated, that is, deduced from any other. If it is denied, you
can only reduce the denier to an absurdity. And in showing how to
proceed in so doing, he says you must begin by coming to an agreement
about the words used, that they signify the same for one and the other
disputant.[3] No dialectic is possible without this understanding.
This first principle of Dialectic is the original of the Law of
Identity. While any question as to the truth or falsehood of a
question is pending, from the beginning to the end of any logical
process, the words must continue to be accepted in the same sense.
Words must have an identical reference to things.

Incidentally in discussing the Axiom of Contradiction ([Greek:
axioma tes antiphaseos]),[4] Aristotle lays down what is now known
as the Law of Excluded Middle. Of two contradictories one or other
must be true: we must either affirm or deny any one thing of any
other: no mean or middle is possible.


In their origin, then, these so-called Laws of Thought were simply the
first principles of Dialectic and Demonstration. Consecutive argument,
coherent ratiocination, is impossible unless they are taken for
granted.

If we divorce or abstract them from their original application, and
consider them merely as laws of thinking or of being, any abstract
expression, or illustration, or designation of them may easily be
pushed into antagonism with other plain truths or first principles
equally rudimentary. Without entering into the perplexing and
voluminous discussion to which these laws have been subjected by
logicians within the last hundred years, a little casuistry is
necessary to enable the student to understand within what limits they
hold good.

_Socrates is Socrates._ The name Socrates is a name for something to
which you and I refer when we use the name. Unless we have the same
reference, we cannot hold any argument about the thing, or make any
communication one to another about it.

But if we take _Socrates is Socrates_ to mean that, "An object of
thought or thing is identical with itself," "An object of thought or
thing cannot be other than itself," and call this a law of thought, we
are met at once by a difficulty. Thought, properly speaking, does
not begin till we pass beyond the identity of an object with itself.
Thought begins only when we recognise the likeness between one object
and others. To keep within the self-identity of the object is to
suspend thought. "Socrates was a native of Attica," "Socrates was
a wise man," "Socrates was put to death as a troubler of the
commonweal"--whenever we begin to think or say anything about
Socrates, to ascribe any attributes to him, we pass out of his
self-identity into his relations of likeness with other men, into what
he has in common with other men.

Hegelians express this plain truth with paradoxical point when they
say: "Of any definite existence or thought, therefore, it may be said
with quite as much truth that it _is not_, as that it _is_, its own
bare self".[5] Or, "A thing must other itself in order to be itself".
Controversialists treat this as a subversion of the laws of Identity
and Contradiction. But it is only Hegel's fun--his paradoxical way of
putting the plain truth that any object has more in common with other
objects than it has peculiar to itself. Till we enter into those
aspects of agreement with other objects, we cannot truly be said to
think at all. If we say merely that a thing is itself, we may as well
say nothing about it. To lay down this is not to subvert the Law of
Identity, but to keep it from being pushed to the extreme of appearing
to deny the Law of Likeness, which is the foundation of all the
characters, attributes, or qualities of things in our thoughts.

That self-same objects are like other self-same objects, is an
assumption distinct from the Law of Identity, and any interpretation
of it that excludes this assumption is to be repudiated. But does not
the law of Identity as well as the law of the likeness of mutually
exclusive identities presuppose that there are objects self-same,
like others, and different from others? Certainly: this is one of the
presuppositions of Logic.[6] We assume that the world of which we talk
and reason is separated into such objects in our thoughts. We assume
that such words as _Socrates_ represent individual objects with a
self-same being or substance; that such words as _wisdom_, _humour_,
_ugliness_, _running_, _sitting_, _here_, _there_, represent
attributes, qualities, characters or predicates of individuals; that
such words as _man_ represent groups or classes of individuals.

Some logicians in expressing the Law of Identity have their eye
specially upon the objects signified by general names or abstract
names, _man_, _education_.[7] "A concept is identical with the sum
of its characters," or, "Classes are identical with the sum of
the individuals composing them". The assumptions thus expressed in
technical language which will hereafter be explained are undoubtedly
assumptions that Logic makes: but since they are statements of the
internal constitution of some of the identities that words represent,
to call them the Law of Identity is to depart confusingly from
traditional usage.[8]

That throughout any logical process a word must signify the same
object, is one proposition: that the object signified by a general
name is identical with the sum of the individuals to each of whom it
is applicable, or with the sum of the characters that they bear in
common, is another proposition. Logic assumes both: Aristotle assumed
both: but it is the first that is historically the original of all
expressions of the Law of Identity in modern text-books.

Yet another expression of a Law of Identity which is really distinct
from and an addition to Aristotle's original. _Socrates was an
Athenian, a philosopher, an ugly man, an acute dialectician, etc._
Let it be granted that the word Socrates bears the same signification
throughout all these and any number more of predicates, we may still
ask: "But what is it that Socrates signifies?" The title Law of
Identity is sometimes given[9] to a theory on this point. _Socrates is
Socrates._ "An individual is the identity running through the totality
of its attributes." Is this not, it may be asked, to confuse thought
and being, to resolve Socrates into a string of words? No: real
existence is one of the admissible predicates of Socrates: one of
the attributes under which we conceive him. But whether we accept
or reject this "Law of Identity," it is an addition to Aristotle's
dialectical "law of identity"; it is a theory of the metaphysical
nature of the identity signified by a Singular name. And the same may
be said of yet another theory of Identity, that, "An individual is
identical with the totality of its predicates," or (another way
of putting the same theory), "An individual is a conflux of
generalities".


To turn next to the Laws of Contradiction and Excluded Middle. These
also may be subjected to Casuistry, making clearer what they assert by
showing what they do not deny.

They do not deny that things change, and that successive states of the
same thing may pass into one another by imperceptible degrees. A thing
may be neither here nor there: it may be on the passage from here to
there: and, while it is in motion, we may say, with equal truth, that
it is neither here nor there, or that it is both here and there. Youth
passes gradually into age, day into night: a given man or a given
moment may be on the borderland between the two.

Logic does not deny the existence of indeterminate margins: it merely
lays down that for purposes of clear communication and coherent
reasoning the line must be drawn somewhere between _b_, and not-_b_.

A difference, however, must be recognised between logical negation
and the negations of common thought and common speech. The latter are
definite to a degree with which the mere Logic of Consistency does
not concern itself. To realise this is to understand more clearly the
limitations of Formal Logic.

In common speech, to deny a quality of anything is by implication to
attribute to it some other quality of the same kind. Let any man tell
me that "the streets of such and such a town are not paved with wood,"
I at once conclude that they are paved with some other material. It
is the legitimate effect of his negative proposition to convey this
impression to my mind. If, proceeding on this, I go on to ask: "Then
they are paved with granite or asphalt, or this or that?" and he turns
round and says: "I did not say they were paved at all," I should be
justified in accusing him of a quibble. In ordinary speech, to deny
one kind of pavement is to assert pavement of some kind. Similarly, to
deny that So-and-so is not in the Twenty-first Regiment, is to
imply that he is in another regiment, that he is in the army in some
regiment. To retort upon this inference: "He is not in the army at
all," is a quibble: as much so as it would be to retort: "There is no
such person in existence".

Now Logic does not take account of this implication, and nothing has
contributed more to bring upon it the reproach of quibbling. In Logic,
to deny a quality is simply to declare a repugnance between it and the
subject; negation is mere sublation, taking away, and implies nothing
more. Not-_b_ is entirely indefinite: it may cover anything except
_b_.

Is Logic then really useless, or even misleading, inasmuch as it
ignores the definite implication of negatives in ordinary thought
and speech? In ignoring this implication, does Logic oppose this
implication as erroneous? Does Logic shelter the quibbler who
trades upon it? By no means: to jump to this conclusion were a
misunderstanding. The fact only is that nothing beyond the logical
Law of Contradiction needs to be assumed for any of the processes
of Formal Logic. Aristotle required to assume nothing more for his
syllogistic formulae, and Logic has not yet included in its scope any
process that requires any further assumption. "If not-_b_ represent
everything except _b_, everything outside _b_, then that A is _b_, and
that A is not-_b_, cannot both be true, and one or other of them must
be true."

Whether the scope of Logic ought to be extended is another question.
It seems to me that the scope of Logic may legitimately be extended so
as to take account both of the positive implication of negatives and
the negative implication of positives. I therefore deal with this
subject in a separate chapter following on the ordinary doctrines of
Immediate Inference, where I try to explain the simple Law of Thought
involved. When I say that the extension is legitimate, I mean that it
may be made without departing from the traditional view of Logic as
a practical science, conversant with the nature of thought and its
expression only in so far as it can provide practical guidance against
erroneous interpretations and inferences. The extension that I propose
is in effect an attempt to bring within the fold of Practical Logic
some of the results of the dialectic of Hegel and his followers,
such as Mr. Bradley and Mr. Bosanquet, Professor Caird and Professor
Wallace.[10]

The logical processes formulated by Aristotle are merely stages in the
movement of thought towards attaining definite conceptions of reality.
To treat their conclusions as positions in which thought may dwell and
rest, is an error, against which Logic itself as a practical science
may fairly be called upon to guard. It may even be conceded that the
Aristotelian processes are artificial stages, courses that thought
does not take naturally, but into which it has to be forced for a
purpose. To concede this is not to concede that the Aristotelian logic
is useless, as long as we have reason on our side in holding that
thought is benefited and strengthened against certain errors by
passing through those artificial stages.

    [Footnote 1: The first statement of the Law of Identity in the
    form _Ens est ens_ is ascribed by Hamilton (_Lectures_, iii.
    91) to Antonius Andreas, a fourteenth century commentator
    on the _Metaphysics_. But Andreas is merely expounding what
    Aristotle sets forth in iii. 4, 1006 _a, b_. _Ens est ens_
    does not mean in Andreas what A is A means in Hamilton.]

    [Footnote 2: Greek: to gar auto hama huparchein te kai me
    huparchein adynaton to auto kai kata to auto, . . . ahute de
    pason esti bebaiotate ton archon. iii. 3, 1005_b_, 19-23.]

    [Footnote 3: Hamilton credits Andreas with maintaining,
    "against Aristotle," that "the principle of Identity, and not
    the principle of Contradiction, is the one absolutely first".
    Which comes first, is a scholastic question on which ingenuity
    may be exercised. But in fact Aristotle put the principle
    of Identity first in the above plain sense, and Andreas only
    expounded more formally what Aristotle had said.]

    [Footnote 4: [Greek: Metaxu antiphaseos endechetai einai outhen,
    all' ananke e phanai e apophanai en kath henos hotioun.]
    _Metaph._ iii. 7, 1011_b_, 23-4.]

    [Footnote 5: Prof. Caird's _Hegel_, p. 138.]

    [Footnote 6: See Venn, _Empirical Logic_, 1-8.]

    [Footnote 7: _E.g._, Hamilton, lect. v.; Veitch's _Institutes
    of Logic_, chaps, xii., xiii.]

    [Footnote 8: The confusion probably arises in this way. First,
    these "laws" are formulated as laws of thought that Logic
    assumes. Second, a notion arises that these laws are the
    only postulates of Logic: that all logical doctrines can be
    "evolved" from them. Third, when it is felt that more than the
    identical reference of words or the identity of a thing
    with itself must be assumed in Logic, the Law of Identity is
    extended to cover this further assumption.]

    [Footnote 9: _E.g._, Bosanquet's _Logic_, ii. 207.]

    [Footnote 10: Bradley, _Principles of Logic_; Bosanquet,
    _Logic or The Morphology of Knowledge_; Caird, _Hegel_ (in
    Blackwood's Philosophical Classics); Wallace, _The Logic of
    Hegel_.]




BOOK I.

THE LOGIC OF CONSISTENCY. SYLLOGISM AND DEFINITION.


