CHAPTER IV.

THE CONTROVERSY ABOUT UNIVERSALS.--DIFFICULTIES CONCERNING THE
RELATION OF GENERAL NAMES TO THOUGHT AND TO REALITY.

In the opening sentences of his Isagoge, before giving his simple
explanation of the Five Predicables, Porphyry mentions certain
questions concerning Genera and Species, which he passes over as being
too difficult for the beginner. "Concerning genera and species,"
he says, "the question whether they subsist (_i.e._, have real
substance), or whether they lie in the mere thoughts only, or whether,
granting them to subsist, they are corporeal or incorporeal, or
whether they subsist apart, or in sensible things and cohering round
them--this I shall pass over, such a question being a very deep affair
and one that needs other and greater investigation."

This passage, written about the end of the third century, A.D., is a
kind of isthmus between Greek Philosophy and Mediaeval: it summarises
questions which had been turned over on every side and most
intricately discussed by Plato and Aristotle and their successors,
and the bald summary became a starting-point for equally intricate
discussions among the Schoolmen, among whom every conceivable variety
of doctrine found champions. The dispute became known as the dispute
about Universals, and three ultra-typical forms of doctrine
were developed, known respectively as Realism, Nominalism, and
Conceptualism. Undoubtedly the dispute, with all its waste of
ingenuity, had a clearing effect, and we may fairly try now what
Porphyry shrank from, to gather some simple results for the better
understanding of general names and their relations to thoughts and to
things. The rival schools had each some aspect of the general name in
view, which their exaggeration served to render more distinct.

What does a general name signify? For logical purposes it is
sufficient to answer--the points of resemblance as grasped in
the mind, fixed by a name applicable to each of the resembling
individuals. This is the signification of the general name
_logically_, its connotation or concept, the identical element of
objective reference in all uses of a general name.

But other questions may be asked that cannot be so simply answered.
What is this concept in thought? What is there in our minds
corresponding to the general name when we utter it? How is its
signification conceived? What is the signification _psychologically_?

We may ask, further, What is there in nature that the general name
signifies? What is its relation to reality? What corresponds to it in
the real world? Has the unity that it represents among individuals
no existence except in the mind? Calling this unity, this one in
the many, the Universal (_Universale_, [Greek: to pan]), what is the
Universal _ontologically_?

It was this ontological question that was so hotly and bewilderingly
debated among the Schoolmen. Before giving the ultra-typical answers
to it, it may be well to note how this question was mixed up with
still other questions of Theology and Cosmogony. Recognising that
there is a unity signified by the general name, we may go on to
inquire into the ground of the unity. Why are things essentially like
one another? How is the unity maintained? How is it continued? Where
does the common pattern come from? The question of the nature of
the Universal thus links itself with metaphysical theories of the
construction of the world, or even with the Darwinian theory of the
origin of species.

Passing by these remoter questions, we may give the answers of
the three extreme schools to the ontological question, What is a
Universal?

The answer of the Ultra-Realists, broadly put, was that a Universal is
a substance having an independent existence in nature.

Of the Ultra-Nominalists, that the Universal is a name and nothing
else, _vox et praeterea nihil_; that this name is the only unity among
the individuals of a species, all that they have in common.

Of the Ultra-Conceptualists, that the individuals have more in common
than the name, that they have the name plus the meaning,
_vox_ + _significatio_, but that the Universals, the genera and
species, exist only in the mind.

Now these extreme doctrines, as literally interpreted by opponents,
are so easily refuted and so manifestly untenable, that it may be
doubted whether they were ever held by any thinker, and therefore I
call them Ultra-Realism, Ultra-Nominalism, and Ultra-Conceptualism.
They are mere exaggerations or caricatures, set up by opponents
because they can be easily knocked down.

To the Ultra-Realists, it is sufficient to say that if there existed
anywhere a substance having all the common attributes of a species
and only these, having none of the attributes peculiar to any of the
individuals of that species, corresponding to the general name as an
individual corresponds to a Proper or Singular name, it would not be
the Universal, the unity pervading the individuals, but only another
individual.

To the Ultra-Nominalists, it is sufficient to say that the individuals
must have more in common than the name, because the name is not
applied arbitrarily, but on some ground. The individuals must have in
common that on account of which they receive the common name: to call
them by the same name is not to make them of the same species.

To the Ultra-Conceptualists, it is sufficient to say that when we
employ a general name, as when we say "Socrates is a man," we do
not refer to any passing thought or state of mind, but to certain
attributes independent of what is passing in our minds. We cannot make
a thing of this or that species by merely thinking of it as such.

The ultra-forms of these doctrines are thus easily shown to
be inadequate, yet each of the three, Realism, Nominalism, and
Conceptualism, represents a phase of the whole truth.

Thus, take Realism. Although it is not true that there is anything
in reality corresponding to the general name such as there is
corresponding to the singular name, the general name merely signifying
attributes of what the singular name signifies, it does not follow, as
the opponents of Ultra-Realism hastily assume, that there is nothing
in the real world corresponding to the general name. Three senses may
be particularised in which Realism is justified.

(1) The points of resemblance from which the concept is formed are as
real as the individuals themselves. It is true in a sense that it
is our thought that gives unity to the individuals of a class, that
gathers the many into one, and so far the Conceptualists are right.
Still we should not gather them into one if they did not resemble one
another: that is the reason why we think of them together: and the
respects in which they resemble one another are as much independent of
us and our thinking as the individuals themselves, as much beyond the
power of our thought to change. We must go behind the activity of the
mind in unifying to the reason for the unification: and the ground of
unity is found in what really exists. We do not confer the unity:
we do not make all men or all dogs alike: we find them so. The curly
tails in a thousand domestic dogs, which serve to distinguish them
from wolves and foxes, are as real as the thousand individual domestic
dogs. In this sense the Aristotelian doctrine, _Universalia in re_,
expresses a plain truth.

(2) The Platonic doctrine, formulated by the Schoolmen as _Universalia
ante rem_, has also a plain validity. Individuals come and go, but
the type, the Universal, is more abiding. Men are born and die: man
remains throughout. The snows of last year have vanished, but snow is
still a reality to be faced. Wisdom does not perish with the wise
men of any generation. In this plain sense, at least, it is true that
Universals exist before Individuals, have a greater permanence, or, if
we like to say so, a higher, as it is a more enduring, reality.

(3) Further, the "idea," concept, or universal, though it cannot be
separated from the individual, and whether or not we ascribe to it
the separate suprasensual existence of the archetypal forms of Plato's
poetical fancy, is a very potent factor in the real world. Ideals of
conduct, of manners, of art, of policy, have a traditional life: they
do not pass away with the individuals in whom they have existed,
in whom they are temporarily materialised: they survive as potent
influences from age to age. The "idea" of Chaucer's Man of Law,
who always "seemed busier than he was," is still with us. Mediaeval
conceptions of chivalry still govern conduct. The Universal enters
into the Individual, takes possession of him, makes of him its
temporary manifestation.

Nevertheless, the Nominalists are right in insisting on the importance
of names. What we call the real world is a common object of perception
and knowledge to you and me: we cannot arrive at a knowledge of it
without some means of communication with one another: our means of
communication is language. It may be doubted whether even thinking
could go far without symbols with the help of which conceptions may
be made definite. A concept cannot be explained without reference to
a symbol. There is even a sense in which the Ultra-Nominalist doctrine
that the individuals in a class have nothing in common but the name
is tenable. Denotability by the same name is the only respect in which
those individuals are absolutely identical: in this sense the name
alone is common to them, though it is applied in virtue of their
resemblance to one another.

Finally, the Conceptualists are right in insisting on the mind's
activity in connexion with general names. Genera and species are not
mere arbitrary subjective collections: the union is determined by the
characters of the things collected. Still it is with the concept in
each man's mind that the name is connected: it is by the activity of
thought in recognising likenesses and forming concepts that we are
able to master the diversity of our impressions, to introduce unity
into the manifold of sense, to reduce our various recollections to
order and coherence.

So much for the Ontological question. Now for the PSYCHOLOGICAL. What
is in the mind when we employ a general name? What is the Universal
psychologically? How is it conceived?

What breeds confusion in these subtle inquiries is the want of fixed
unambiguous names for the things to be distinguished. It is only by
means of such names that we can hold on to the distinctions, and
keep from puzzling ourselves. Now there are three things to be
distinguished in this inquiry, which we may call the Concept, the
Conception, and the Conceptual or Generic Image. Let us call them by
these names, and proceed to explain them.

By the Concept, I understand the meaning of the general name, what the
general name signifies: by the Conception, the mental act or state
of him who conceives this meaning. The concept of "triangle," _i.e._,
what you and I mean by the word, is not my act of mind or your act of
mind when we think or speak of a triangle. The Conception, which is
this act, is an event or incident in our mental history, a psychical
act or state, a distinct occurrence, a particular fact in time as much
as the battle of Waterloo. The concept is the objective reference of
the name, which is the same, or at least is understood to be the
same, every time we use it. I make a figure on paper with ink or on a
blackboard with chalk, and recognise or conceive it as a triangle: you
also conceive it as such: we do the same to-morrow: we did the same
yesterday: each act of conception is a different event, but the
concept is the same throughout.

Now the psychological question about the Universal is, What is this
conception? We cannot define it positively further than by saying that
it consists in realising the meaning of a general name: the act being
unique, we can only make it intelligible by producing an example of
it. But we may define it negatively by distinguishing it from the
conceptual image. Whenever we conceive anything, "man," "horse," there
is generally present to our minds an image of a man or horse, with
accidents of size, colour, position or other categories. But this
conceptual image is not the concept, and the mental act of forming it
is not conception.

This distinction between mental picturing or imaging and the
conception of common attributes is variously expressed. The
correlative terms _Intuitive_ and _Symbolical_ Thinking,
_Presentative_ and _Representative_ Knowledge have been employed.[1]
But whatever terms we use, the distinction itself is vital, and the
want of it leads to confusion.

Thus the fact that we cannot form a conceptual image composed
solely of common attributes has been used to support the argument of
Ultra-Nominalism, that the individuals classed under a common name
have nothing in common but the name. What the word "dog" signifies,
_i.e._, the "concept" of dog, is neither big nor little, neither black
nor tan, neither here nor there, neither Newfoundland, nor Retriever,
nor Terrier, nor Greyhound, nor Pug, nor Bulldog. The concept consists
only of the attributes common to all dogs apart from any that are
peculiar to any variety or any individual. Now we cannot form any such
conceptual image. Our conceptual image is always of some definite
size and shape. Therefore, it is argued, we cannot conceive what a dog
means, and dogs have nothing in common but the name. This, however,
does not follow. The concept is not the conceptual image, and
forming the image is not conception. We may even, as in the case of
a chiliagon, or thousand-sided figure, conceive the meaning without
being able to form any definite image.

How then, do we ordinarily proceed in conceiving, if we cannot picture
the common attributes alone and apart from particulars? We attend, or
strive to attend, only to those aspects of an image which it has in
common with the individual things denoted. And if we want to make our
conception definite, we pass in review an indefinite number of the
individuals, case after case.

A minor psychological question concerns the nature of the conceptual
image. Is it a copy of some particular impression, or a confused blur
or blend of many? Possibly neither: possibly it is something like
one of Mr. Galton's composite photographs, photographs produced by
exposing the same surface to the impressions of a number of different
photographs in succession. If the individuals are nearly alike,
the result is an image that is not an exact copy of any one of the
components and yet is perfectly distinct. Possibly the image that
comes into our mind's eye when we hear such a word as "horse" or "man"
is of this character, the result of the impressions of a number of
similar things, but not identical with any one. As, however, different
persons have different conceptual images of the same concept, so we
may have different conceptual images at different times. It is only
the concept that remains the same.

But how, it may be asked, can the concept remain the same? If the
universal or concept psychologically is an intellectual act, repeated
every time we conceive, what guarantee have we for the permanence
of the concept? Does this theory not do away with all possibility of
defining and fixing concepts?

This brings us back to the doctrine already laid down about the truth
of Realism. The theory of the concept is not exhausted when it is
viewed only psychologically, as a psychic act. If we would understand
it fully, we must consider the act in its relations to the real
experience of ourselves and others. To fix this act, we give it a
separate name, calling it the conception: and then we must go behind
the activity of the mind to the objects on which it is exercised.
The element of fixity is found in them. And here also the truth of
Nominalism comes in. By means of words we enter into communication
with other minds. It is thus that we discover what is real, and what
is merely personal to ourselves.

    [Footnote 1: The only objection to these terms is that they
    have slipped from their moorings in philosophical usage. Thus
    instead of Leibnitz's use of Intuitive and Symbolical, which
    corresponds to the above distinction between Imaging and
    Conception, Mr. Jevons employs the terms to express a
    distinction among conceptions proper. We can understand what
    a chiliagon means, but we cannot form an image of it in our
    minds, except in a very confused and imperfect way; whereas we
    can form a distinct image of a triangle. Mr. Jevons would call
    the conception of the triangle _Intuitive_, of the chiliagon
    _Symbolical_.

    Again, while Mansel uses the words Presentative and
    Representative to express our distinction, a more common
    usage is to call actual Perception Presentative Knowledge, and
    ideation or recollection in idea Representative.]




