CHAPTER VI.

THE UTILITY OF THE SYLLOGISM.

The main use of the Syllogism is in dealing with incompletely
expressed or elliptical arguments from general principals. This may be
called Enthymematic argument, understanding by Enthymeme an argument
with only one premiss put forward or hinted at, the other being held
in the mind. In order to test whether such reasoning is sound
or unsound, it is of advantage to make the argument explicit in
Syllogistic form.

There have been heaps and mazes of discussion about the use of the
Syllogism, much of it being profitable as a warning against the
neglect of Formal Logic. Again and again it has been demonstrated that
the Syllogism is useless for certain purposes, and from this it has
been concluded that the Syllogism is of no use at all.

The inventor of the Syllogism had a definite practical purpose, to get
at the simplest, most convincing, undeniable and irresistible way
of putting admitted or self-evident propositions so that their
implication should be apparent. His ambition was to furnish a method
for the Yes and No Dialectician, and the expounder of science from
self-evident principles. A question being put up for discussion, it
was an advantage to analyse it, and formulate the necessary premisses:
you could then better direct your interrogations or guard your
answers. The analysis is similarly useful when you want to construct
an argument from self-evident principles.

All that the Syllogism could show was the consistency of the premisses
with the conclusion. The conclusion could not go beyond the premisses,
because the questioner could not go beyond the admissions of the
respondent. There is indeed an advance, but not an advance upon the
two premisses taken together. There is an advance upon any one of
them, and this advance is made with the help of the other. Both must
be admitted: a respondent may admit one without being committed to
the conclusion. Let him admit both and he cannot without
self-contradiction deny the conclusion. That is all.

Dialectic of the Yes and No kind is no longer practised. Does any
analogous use for the Syllogism remain? Is there a place for it as a
safeguard against error in modern debate? As a matter of fact it
is probably more useful now than it was for its original purpose,
inasmuch as modern discussion, aiming at literary grace and spurning
exact formality as smacking of scholasticism and pedantry, is
much more flabby and confused. In the old dialectic play there was
generally a clear question proposed. The interrogative form forced
this much on the disputants. The modern debater of the unpedantic,
unscholastic school is not so fettered, and may often be seen
galloping wildly about without any game in sight or scent, his maxim
being to--

  Spur boldly on, and dash through thick and thin,
  Through sense and nonsense, never out nor in.

Now the syllogistic analysis may often be of some use in helping us
to keep a clear head in the face of a confused argument. There is a
brilliant defence of the syllogism as an analysis of arguments in the
_Westminster Review_ for January, 1828. The article was a notice of
Whately's Logic: it was written by J. S. Mill. For some reason it
has never been reprinted, but it puts the utility of the Syllogism on
clearer ground than Mill afterwards sought for it.

Can a fallacy in argument be detected at once? Is common-sense
sufficient? Common-sense would require some inspection. How would
it proceed? Does common-sense inspect the argument in a lump or
piecemeal? All at once or step by step? It analyses. How? First, it
separates out the propositions which contribute to the conclusion from
those which do not, the essential from the irrelevant. Then it
states explicitly all that may have been assumed tacitly. Finally, it
enumerates the propositions in order.

Some such procedure as this would be adopted by common-sense in
analysing an argument. But when common-sense has done this, it has
exhibited the argument in a series of syllogisms.

Such is Mill's early defence of the Syllogism. It is weak only in one
point, in failing to represent how common-sense would arrive at the
peculiar syllogistic form. It is the peculiar form of logical analysis
that is the distinction of the syllogism. When you have disentangled
the relevant propositions you have not necessarily put them in this
form. The arguments given in text-books to be cast into syllogistic
form, consist only as a rule of relevant propositions, but they are
not yet formal syllogisms. But common-sense had only one other step to
make to reach the distinctive form. It had only to ask after analysing
the argument, Is there any form of statement specially suitable
for exhibiting the connexion between a conclusion and the general
principle on which it is alleged to depend? Ask yourself the question,
and you will soon see that there would be an obvious advantage in
making the conclusion and the general principle uniform, in stating
them with the same predicate. But when you do this, as I have already
shown (p. 197) you state the argument in the First Figure of the
Syllogism.


It must, however, be admitted that it is chiefly for exhibiting, or
forcing into light, tacit or lurking assumptions that the Syllogistic
form is of use. Unless identity of meaning is disguised or distorted
by puzzling difference of language, there is no special illuminative
virtue in the Syllogism. The argument in a Euclidean demonstration
would not be made clearer by being cast into formal Syllogisms.

Again, when the subject matter is simple, the Syllogistic form is not
really required for protection against error. In such enthymemes as
the following for example:--

  She must be clever: she is so uncompromisingly ugly.
  Romeo must be in love: for is he not seventeen?

it is plain to the average intelligence without any knowledge of
Syllogism that the argument takes for granted a general proposition
and what the general proposition is.

Another thing is plain to the average intelligence, perhaps plainer
than to a proficient in the use of the Syllogism. Clearly we cannot
infer with certainty that a woman is clever because she is ugly,
unless it is the case that all ugly women are clever. But a
Syllogiser, seeing that no certain conclusion can be drawn except
upon this condition, is apt to dismiss the argument as altogether
worthless. This may be specified as an error incident to the practice
of the Syllogism, that it inclines us to look for necessarily
conclusive premisses, and to deny all weight to anything short of
this. Now in ordinary life it is comparatively seldom that such
premisses can be found. We are obliged to proceed on maxims that are
not of universal scope, and which lend only a more or less strong
colour of probability to cases that can be brought under them. "A
little learning is a dangerous thing;" "Haste makes waste;" "Slowness
of speech is a sign of depth of thought;" "Vivacity is a sign of
shallowness:" such are the "endoxes" or commonplaces of popular
knowledge that men bring to bear in daily life. They are not true for
all cases, but some of them are true for most or for a good many, and
they may be applied with a certain probability though they are not
rigidly conclusive. The plain man's danger is that he apply them
unthinkingly as universals: the formal logician's danger is that,
seeing them to be inapplicable as universals, he dismisses them as
being void of all argumentative force.

It helps to fix the limits of Formal Logic to remember that it lies
outside its bounds to determine the degree of probability attaching
to the application of approximate truths, such as are the staple of
arguments in ordinary affairs. Formal Logic, we may repeat, is
not concerned with degrees of truth or falsehood, probability
or improbability. It merely shows the interdependency of certain
arguments, the consistency of conclusion with premisses.

This, however, is a function that might easily be underrated. Its
value is more indirect than direct. In showing what is required for a
certain conclusion, it puts us on the road to a more exact estimate of
the premisses alleged, a sounder judgment of their worth. Well begun
is half done: in undertaking the examination of any argument from
authority, a formal syllogism is a good beginning.




