CHAPTER III.

THE IMPLICATION OF PROPOSITIONS.--IMMEDIATE FORMAL INFERENCE.
--EDUCATION.

The meaning of Inference generally is a subject of dispute, and
to avoid entering upon debatable ground at this stage, instead of
attempting to define Inference generally, I will confine myself
to defining what is called Formal Inference, about which there is
comparatively little difference of opinion.

FORMAL INFERENCE then is the apprehension of what is implied in a
certain datum or admission: the derivation of one proposition,
called the CONCLUSION, from one or more given, admitted, or assumed
propositions, called the PREMISS or PREMISSES.

When the conclusion is drawn from one proposition, the inference is
said to be IMMEDIATE; when more than one proposition is necessary to
the conclusion, the inference is said to be MEDIATE.

Given the proposition, "All poets are irritable," we can immediately
infer that "Nobody that is not irritable is a poet"; and the one
admission implies the other. But we cannot infer immediately that "all
poets make bad husbands". Before we can do this we must have a second
proposition conceded, that "All irritable persons make bad husbands".
The inference in the second case is called Mediate.[1]

The modes and conditions of valid Mediate Inference constitute
Syllogism, which is in effect the reasoning together of separate
admissions. With this we shall deal presently. Meantime of Immediate
Inference.

To state all the implications of a certain form of proposition, to
make explicit all that it implies, is the same thing with showing
what immediate inferences from it are legitimate. Formal inference, in
short, is the eduction of all that a proposition implies.

Most of the modes of Immediate Inference formulated by logicians are
preliminary to the Syllogistic process, and have no other practical
application. The most important of them technically is the process
known as Conversion, but others have been judged worthy of attention.


AEQUIPOLLENT OR EQUIVALENT FORMS--OBVERSION.

AEquipollence or Equivalence ([Greek: Isodynamia]) is defined as the
perfect agreement in sense of two propositions that differ somehow in
expression.[2]

The history of AEquipollence in logical treatises illustrates two
tendencies. There is a tendency on the one hand to narrow a theme
down to definite and manageable forms. But when a useful exercise is
discarded from one place it has a tendency to break out in another
under another name. A third tendency may also be said to be specially
well illustrated--the tendency to change the traditional application
of logical terms.

In accordance with the above definition of AEquipollence or
Equivalence, which corresponds with ordinary acceptation, the term
would apply to all cases of "identical meaning under difference of
expression". Most examples of the reduction of ordinary speech into
syllogistic form would be examples of aequipollence; all, in fact,
would be so were it not that ordinary speech loses somewhat in the
process, owing to the indefiniteness of the syllogistic symbol for
particular quality, Some. And in truth all such transmutations
of expression are as much entitled to the dignity of being called
Immediate Inferences as most of the processes so entitled.

Dr. Bain uses the word with an approach to this width of application
in discussing all that is now most commonly called Immediate Inference
under the title of Equivalent Forms. The chief objection to this usage
is that the Converse _per accidens_ is not strictly equivalent. A
debater may want for his argument less than the strict equivalent, and
content himself with educing this much from his opponent's admission.
(Whether Dr. Bain is right in treating the Minor and Conclusion of
a Hypothetical Syllogism as being equivalent to the Major, is not so
much a question of naming.)

But in the history of the subject, the traditional usage has been
to confine AEquipollence to cases of equivalence between positive and
negative forms of expression. "Not all are," is equivalent to "Some
are not": "Not none is," to "Some are". In Pre-Aldrichian text-books,
AEquipollence corresponds mainly to what it is now customary to call
(_e.g._, Fowler, pt. iii. c. ii., Keynes, pt. ii. c. vii.) Immediate
Inference based on Opposition. The denial of any proposition involves
the admission of its contradictory. Thus, if the negative particle
"Not" is placed before the sign of Quantity, All or Some, in
a proposition, the resulting proposition is equivalent to the
Contradictory of the original. Not all S is P = Some S is not P.
Not any S is P = No S is P. The mediaeval logicians tabulated these
equivalents, and also the forms resulting from placing the negative
particle after, or both before and after, the sign of Quantity. Under
the title of AEquipollence, in fact, they considered the interpretation
of the negative particle generally. If the negative is placed after
the universal sign, it results in the Contrary: if both before and
after, in the Subaltern. The statement of these equivalents is a
puzzling exercise which no doubt accounts for the prominence given it
by Aristotle and the Schoolmen. The latter helped the student with the
following Mnemonic line: _Prae Contradic., post Contrar., prae postque
Subaltern._[3]

To AEquipollence belonged also the manipulation of the forms known
after the _Summulae_ as _Exponibiles_, notably _Exclusive_ and
_Exceptive propositions_, such as None but barristers are eligible,
The virtuous alone are happy. The introduction of a negative particle
into these already negative forms makes a very trying problem in
interpretation. The aequipollence of the Exponibiles was dropped from
text-books long before Aldrich, and it is the custom to laugh at them
as extreme examples of frivolous scholastic subtlety: but most modern
text-books deal with part of the doctrine of the _Exponibiles_ in
casual exercises.

Curiously enough, a form left unnamed by the scholastic logicians
because too simple and useless, has the name AEquipollent appropriated
to it, and to it alone, by Ueberweg, and has been adopted under
various names into all recent treatises.

Bain calls it the FORMAL OBVERSE,[4] and the title of OBVERSION (which
has the advantage of rhyming with CONVERSION) has been adopted by
Keynes, Miss Johnson, and others.

Fowler (following Karslake) calls it PERMUTATION. The title is not a
happy one, having neither rhyme nor reason in its favour, but it is
also extensively used.

This immediate inference is a very simple affair to have been honoured
with such a choice of terminology. "This road is long: therefore, it
is not short," is an easy inference: the second proposition is the
Obverse, or Permutation, or AEquipollent, or (in Jevons's title) the
Immediate Inference by Privative Conception, of the first.

The inference, such as it is, depends on the Law of Excluded Middle.
Either a term P, or its contradictory, not-P, must be true of any
given subject, S: hence to affirm P of all or some S, is equivalent
to denying not-P of the same: and, similarly, to deny P, is to affirm
not-P. Hence the rule of Obversion;--Substitute for the predicate term
its Contrapositive,[5] and change the Quality of the proposition.

       All S is P = No S is not-P.
        No S is P = All S is not-P.
      Some S is P = Some S is not not-P.
  Some S is not P = Some S is not-P.


CONVERSION.

The process takes its name from the interchange of the terms. The
Predicate-term becomes the Subject-term, and the Subject-term the
Predicate-term.

When propositions are analysed into relations of inclusion or
exclusion between terms, the assertion of any such relation between
one term and another, implies a Converse relation between the second
term and the first. The statement of this implied assertion is
technically known as the CONVERSE of the original proposition, which
may be called the _Convertend_.

Three modes of Conversion are commonly recognised:--(_a_) SIMPLE
CONVERSION; (_b_) CONVERSION _per accidens_ or by limitation; (_c_)
CONVERSION BY CONTRAPOSITION.

(_a_) E and I can be simply converted, only the terms being
interchanged, and Quantity and Quality remaining the same.

If S is wholly excluded from P, P must be wholly excluded from S. If
Some S is contained in P, then Some P must be contained in S.

(_b_) A cannot be simply converted. To know that All S is contained in
P, gives you no information about that portion of P which is outside
S. It only enables you to assert that Some P is S; that portion of P,
namely, which coincides with S.

O cannot be converted either simply or _per accidens_. Some S is not P
does not enable you to make any converse assertion about P. All P
may be S, or No P may be S, or Some P may be not S. All the three
following diagrams are compatible with Some S being excluded from P.

[Illustration:

  Concentric circles of S and P - P in centre

  S in one circle and P in another circle.

  S and P each in a circle, overlapping circle.
]

(_c_) Another mode of Conversion, known by mediaeval logicians
following Boethius as _Conversio per contra positionem terminorum_, is
useful in some syllogistic manipulations. This Converse is obtained
by substituting for the predicate term its Contrapositive or
Contradictory, not-P, making the consequent change of Quality, and
simply converting. Thus All S is P is converted into the equivalent No
not-P is S.[6]

Some have called it "Conversion by Negation," but "negation"
is manifestly too wide and common a word to be thus arbitrarily
restricted to the process of substituting for one term its opposite.

Others (and this has some mediaeval usage in its favour, though not the
most intelligent) would call the form All not-P is not-S (the Obverse
or Permutation of No not-P is S), the Converse by Contraposition. This
is to conform to an imaginary rule that in Conversion the Converse
must be of the same Quality with the Convertend. But the essence of
Conversion is the interchange of Subject and Predicate: the Quality is
not in the definition except by a bungle: it is an accident. No
not-P is S, and Some not-P is S are the forms used in Syllogism,
and therefore specially named. Unless a form had a use, it was left
unnamed, like the Subalternate forms of Syllogism: Nomen habent
nullum: nec, si bene colligis, usum.


TABLE OF CONTRAPOSITIVE CONVERSES.

                             Con. Con.
  All S is P                 No not-P is S
  No S is P                  Some not-P is S
  Some S is not P            Some not-P is S
  Some S is P                None.

When not-P is substituted for P, Some S is P becomes Some S is not
not-P, and this form is inconvertible.


OTHER FORMS OF IMMEDIATE INFERENCE.

I have already spoken of the Immediate Inferences based on the rules
of Contradictory and Contrary Opposition (see p. 145 - Part III, Ch.
II).

Another process was observed by Thomson, and named _Immediate
Inference by Added Determinants_. If it is granted that "A negro is
a fellow-creature," it follows that "A negro in suffering is a
fellow-creature in suffering". But that this does not follow for every
attribute[7] is manifest if you take another case:--"A tortoise is
an animal: therefore, a fast tortoise is a fast animal". The form,
indeed, holds in cases not worth specifying: and is a mere handle for
quibbling. It could not be erected into a general rule unless it
were true that whatever distinguishes a species within a class, will
equally distinguish it in every class in which the first is included.

MODAL CONSEQUENCE has also been named among the forms of Immediate
Inference. By this is meant the inference of the lower degrees of
certainty from the higher. Thus _must be_ is said to imply _may be_;
and _None can be_ to imply _None is_.

Dr. Bain includes also _Material Obversion_, the analogue of _Formal
Obversion_ applied to a Subject. Thus Peace is beneficial to commerce,
implies that War is injurious to commerce. Dr. Bain calls this
Material Obversion because it cannot be practised safely without
reference to the matter of the proposition. We shall recur to the
subject in another chapter.

    [Footnote 1: I purposely chose disputable propositions to
    emphasise the fact that Formal Logic has no concern with the
    truth, but only with the interdependence of its propositions.]

    [Footnote 2: Mark Duncan, _Inst. Log._, ii. 5, 1612.]

    [Footnote 3: There can be no doubt that in their doctrine of
    AEquipollents, the Schoolmen were trying to make plain a real
    difficulty in interpretation, the interpretation of the force
    of negatives. Their results would have been more obviously
    useful if they had seen their way to generalising them.
    Perhaps too they wasted their strength in applying it to the
    artificial syllogistic forms, which men do not ordinarily
    encounter except in the manipulation of syllogisms. Their
    results might have been generalised as follows:--

    (1) A "not" placed before the sign of Quantity contradicts
    the whole proposition. Not "All S is P," not "No S is P,"
    not "Some S is P," not "Some S is not P," are equivalent
    respectively to contradictories of the propositions thus
    negatived.

    (2) A "not" placed after the sign of Quantity affects the
    copula, and amounts to inverting its Quality, thus denying
    the predicate term of the same quantity of the subject term of
    which it was originally affirmed, and _vice versa_.

           All S is "not" P = No S is P.
            No S is "not" P = All S is P.
          Some S is "not" P = Some S is not P.
      Some S is "not" not P = Some S is P.

    (3) If a "not" is placed before as well as after, the
    resulting forms are obviously equivalent (under Rule 1) to the
    assertion of the contradictories of the forms on the right (in
    the illustration of Rule 2).

    Not | All S is "not" P      = No S is P       | = Some S is P.
    Not | No S is "not" P       = All S is P      | = Some S is not P.
    Not | Some S is "not" P     = Some S is not P | = All S is P.
    Not | Some S is "not" not P = Some S is P     | = No S is P.
    ]


    [Footnote 4: _Formal_ to distinguish it from what he called
    the _Material Obverse_, about which more presently.]

    [Footnote 5: The mediaeval word for the opposite of a term, the
    word Contradictory being confined to the propositional form.]

    [Footnote 6: It is to be regretted that a practice has
    recently crept in of calling this form, for shortness, the
    Contrapositive simply. By long-established usage, dating from
    Boethius, the word Contrapositive is a technical name for a
    terminal form, not-A, and it is still wanted for this use.
    There is no reason why the propositional form should not be
    called the Converse by Contraposition, or the Contrapositive
    Converse, in accordance with traditional usage.]

    [Footnote 7: _Cf._ Stock, part iii. c. vii.; Bain,
    _Deduction_, p. 109.]




