CHAPTER II

THE FILIAL DUTY OF AN EMPEROR


In order to prevent the people from treating their parents with
cruelty, the Emperor first sets an example to them by showing a dear
love to his mother; and in order to teach them not to treat their
parents with rudeness, he first treats his parents with respect. Having
loved and respected his own parents, his good conduct will influence
the minds of his people, and his good example will be followed by them.

So it is written in the _Fu Hsing_[3]: “When the Emperor has done a
good act, millions will be benefited.”


FOOTNOTES:

[2] A section of the _Canon of Poetry_.

[3] The 27th of the books of Chou in the _Canon of History_.




CHAPTER III

THE FILIAL DUTY OF FEUDAL PRINCES


Any man will be secure in his position, however high it may be, if he
does not behave himself in a haughty manner; and will be ever able to
keep his wealth if he is frugal and careful in his expenses.

When he is able to secure himself in his high position, he can, of
course, remain unimpaired in his dignity; and where he can keep his
wealth, he will always remain rich. Having placed himself in a position
of honour, and secured the possession of his wealth, he will be able to
protect his country and further the welfare of his people. This is the
filial duty of a feudal Prince.

In the _Shih Ching_ it is thus written: “Be careful as though you were
standing upon the brink of a high precipice or treading on thin ice.”




CHAPTER IV

THE FILIAL DUTY OF HIGH OFFICERS


If we do not put on such dress as our good Emperors of old would
forbid, if we do not speak such words as they would forbid, and if
we do not behave ourselves in such a way as they would forbid, then
we shall be always right in what we say and what we do. If so, then
nobody will be able to find fault with our words or with our deeds,
and therefore we shall be able to keep our family from being visited
with any serious misfortune, and to offer sacrifices to our ancestors
for ever. This is the filial duty of a high officer.

In the _Shih Ching_ it is thus written: “Be diligent every minute to
attend upon the one person” (meaning the Emperor).




CHAPTER V

THE FILIAL DUTY OF THE LITERARY CLASS


From the manner in which we should treat our father we learn how to
treat our mother. The love toward them is the same. From the manner
in which we should treat our father we also learn how to serve our
August Master. The respect shown to them is the same. To our mother
we show love, to our August Master respect, while to our father, both
love and respect. If we can serve our August Master with such feelings
as we have toward our father, then loyalty is shown; and if we treat
venerable persons with respect, then harmony will reign in the circle
of our life. Not failing to treat the August Master with loyalty and
the venerable with respect, we shall be able to make ourselves secure
in our high position and to offer sacrifices to our ancestors for ever.

This is the filial duty of the Literati. So in the _Shih Ching_ it is
written: “Do not do anything in the course of a day which will reflect
dishonour upon your ancestors.”




CHAPTER VI

THE FILIAL DUTY OF COMMON PEOPLE


To do the necessary in every season (such as growing crops in spring
and reaping harvest in autumn), to do the utmost to make lands as
fertile as possible, and to be frugal in their expense, in order to
keep their parents in comfort, is the filial duty of the common people.

From the Emperor downwards to the common people, every one has the same
duty imposed upon him, and there is no instance in which we can find
that a man cannot fulfil this duty.




