CHAPTER VII

THE “THREE POWERS”[4]


On hearing what Confucius said about filial duty, Tsêng Tzŭ remarked:
“How great is the use of filial duty!” Here Confucius continued:
“Filial duty is the constant doctrine of Heaven, the natural
righteousness of Earth, and the practical duty of man. Every member of
the community ought to observe it with the greatest care. We do what
is dictated by Heaven and what is good for the general public in order
to organise the community. On this account our education is widespread,
though it is not compulsory, and our government is sound, though it
is not rigorous. The effect of education upon the minds of the people
was well known to the good Emperors of old. They made every person
love his parents by loving their own parents first. They induced every
person to cultivate his virtue by expounding the advantages of virtue
to him. They behaved themselves respectfully and humbly, so that the
people might not quarrel with one another. They trained the people
with ceremonial observances, and educated them with music so that they
might live in harmony. They told the people what things they liked or
disliked to see done, so that they might understand what they were
forbidden to do.

In the _Shih Ching_ it is thus written: “The dignified statesman is
always the subject of the attention of the people.”


FOOTNOTES:

[4] _I.e._ Heaven, Earth, and Man.




CHAPTER VIII

FILIAL DUTY IN GOVERNMENT


The good Emperors of old ruled the Empire by means of filial duty, and
dared not neglect the ministers of their vassal states. How much less
the dukes, marquises, earls, viscounts, and barons! They thereby gained
the goodwill of all their vassal states, which sent their deputies
to represent them in any sacrifice offered to the ancestors of their
Supreme Master. This is what we mean by saying that the good Emperors
of old governed the world by filial duty.

As to the vassal states, their rulers dared not treat widowers and
widows with insolence; how then could they dare act so towards the
literary class and the people? Hence they gained the goodwill of their
subjects, and the latter would join them in offering sacrifices to
their ancestors.

Now we may say a word about a family. If the head of a family do not
act haughtily towards his servant, he cannot act so to his wife and
children. Hence he will gain the goodwill of all his people, and they
will help him in the fulfilment of his filial duty. In such a family
the parents must feel happy when they are living, and their spirits
must come to enjoy the sacrifice when they are dead. By the principle
of filial duty the whole world can be made happy and all calamities and
dangers can be averted. Such was the government of the Empire by the
enlightened rulers of old, in accordance with the principle of filial
duty.

In the _Shih Ching_ it is thus written: “If you adorn yourself with the
highest virtue, the whole world will follow you.”




CHAPTER IX

GOVERNMENT BY THE SAGE


Tsêng Tzŭ asked: “Is filial piety the highest of all the virtues
possessed by a great sage?” To this Confucius replied: “There is
nothing so great in the world as man, and there is nothing so great
in a man as filial piety. The first duty of a son is to venerate his
parent, and in order to show reverence for his dead father he has to
offer him sacrifice when he offers sacrifices to Heaven. A man who had
done this was the Duke of Chou. When he offered sacrifices to Heaven
in a suburban district, he also offered a sacrifice to his deceased
ancestor Hou Chi, and when he offered sacrifice to Heaven at the temple
named Ming Tang, he also made one to his deceased father Wên Wang.
His good action produced such an effect that all the feudal barons at
that time came to assist him in performing the ceremony of offering
sacrifice to Heaven. It is therefore evident that there is nothing so
great in human nature as filial piety. The feeling of affection is
fostered during the time of infancy, and from that affection springs
reverence. Since every man has a natural reverence, the great sages
of the time teach him how and when to show it; and since he has a
natural feeling of affection, they teach him when and how to cultivate
it. As the teachings of these sages are based on the principle of
filial piety, their doctrine is propagated without effort, and their
government is effectual without resorting to force. The affection
between a father and a son is natural, and also a source from which
springs the reverence which a minister ought to show to his sovereign.
When parents have a son born to them, the regular line of descent in
the family is thereby secured. This is the greatest duty in family
life. We must treat our parents with the same reverence as is shown
to our sovereign, because we receive boundless kindness from them and
are under a natural obligation to do so. If any one does not love his
parents, but others, he is a rebel against virtue; and if any one
does not respect his parents, but others, he is also a rebel against
the standard of rites. Any action which is against the law of nature
will certainly not be an example for the public; and any one who gets
a high position, such as that of a ruler, by undue influence instead
of by good actions, will be despised by good men. As to the latter,
they say what they ought to say, and do what they think is good for
the public. Their virtue and justice are estimable, their actions are
worthy of being followed, their behaviour is creditable, and their
manner is correct in every way. If such persons are rulers of a state,
they will afford to the people a good example to follow and will also
inspire them with reverence and affection. This is principally the
cause of their being successful in propagating their doctrines, and
in effectually carrying on their government. Do you not remember what
is said in the _Shih Ching_?—‘Look at that good man. How correct his
behaviour is!’”




