CHAPTER X

THE FILIAL DUTY OF A SON


Confucius said: “A filial son has five duties to perform to his
parents: (1) He must venerate them in daily life. (2) He must try to
make them happy in every possible way, especially when the meal is
served. (3) He must take extra care of them when they are sick. (4) He
ought to show great sorrow for them when they are dead. (5) He must
offer sacrifices to his deceased parents with the utmost solemnity. If
he fulfils these duties, then he can be considered as having done what
ought to be done by a son.”

A son ought not to feel proud of the high position he occupies, ought
not to show dissatisfaction with his inferior position to that of
others, and ought not to act against the natural feeling of the public.
If he is proud and haughty when he is a high official, he will soon
bring ruin upon himself and his family; if he feels dissatisfied with
his lower position, he may be led to do illegal acts; and if he does
anything contrary to the public feeling, he will probably be the
object of attacks. Having thus wronged himself, he cannot be considered
as a filial son, although he treats his parents every day to luxurious
meals.




CHAPTER XI

THE FIVE PUNISHMENTS


The criminal law consists principally of five punishments, which are
directed against three thousand offences. Of them, disobedience to
one’s parents is considered the most heinous crime.

To threaten the sovereign with force is an act which shows that the
wrongdoer does not know the duty of an inferior to a superior; to
say anything against the government founded by the wise men of many
generations gone by is an act which shows that the speaker does not
know what law is; and to say that a son need not be filial to his
parents is also an act which shows that the speaker does not know what
is the natural relation and duty between a son and parents. Such acts
will no doubt lead the man to a wrong course of life.




CHAPTER XII

AMPLIFICATION OF THE “IMPORTANT DOCTRINE”


Confucius said: “The best way to teach the people to love their
sovereign is for the sovereign first to love his own parents; to teach
them to be polite to each other is for the sovereign himself first to
be polite to all his elders; and to improve bad manners and customs is
for him first to pay attention to the composition of the music played
in the country.

“What is etiquette? It is simply due respect to one’s elders. If I
respect the parents, the son will be pleased; if I respect the elder
brothers, the younger ones will be pleased; and if I respect the
sovereign, all the ministers will be pleased. I respect only one
person, but I please thousands upon thousands. Those to whom the
respect is paid are few, and those whom I please are many. This is what
is called an ‘important doctrine.’”




CHAPTER XIII

AMPLIFICATION OF “THE HIGHEST VIRTUE”


Confucius said: “When a ruler wishes to teach his people to love their
parents, he does not go to their family every day to teach them. He
teaches them by his showing reverence to all old people. In the same
manner he teaches his people to show respect to their elders by doing
so first; and to be loyal to their ruler by his doing duty to his
superiors first.

“The _Shih Ching_ says, ‘The behaviour of the ruler is so good that he
is loved by the people as their parent.’ A ruler could not have been
so loved by his people had he not possessed the highest virtue.”




CHAPTER XIV

AMPLIFICATION OF “RAISING THE REPUTATION”


Confucius said: “A true gentleman is always filial to his parents, and
in order to fulfil his duty to them to the fullest extent, he also
serves his August Master with patriotism. He always shows reverence
to his elder brothers, and in order to fulfil his duty to them to the
fullest extent, he does the same towards every one who is older than he.

“As he can maintain order in his family affairs, so he can do the same
in the government. He bases the principle of the government of a State
upon that of a ruling family, and the consequent success will make his
name to be remembered throughout generations to come.”




