CHAPTER XV

THE QUESTION OF REMONSTRANCE IN CONNECTION WITH FILIAL DUTY


Tsêng Tzŭ said: “I have heard all that you said about parental love,
filial love, reverence to elders, how to treat parents every day, and
how to please them by making oneself known for good conduct; and now
I will venture to ask you whether it is filial that a son should obey
every command of his father, whether right or wrong?”

“What do you say?—what do you say?” replied Confucius. “Once upon a
time there was a certain Emperor who would have lost his empire through
his wickedness, but that he had seven good ministers who often checked
his illegal actions by strong protests; there was also a feudal baron
who would have lost his feudal estate through wantonness, but for the
fact that he had five good men who often made strong remonstrances to
him; and there was also a statesman who would have brought frightful
calamity upon his family, but for the fact that he had three good
servants who often strongly advised him not to do what he ought not.

“If a man has a good friend to resist him in doing bad actions, he will
have his reputation preserved; so if a father has a son to resist his
wrong commands, he will be saved from committing serious faults.

“When the command is wrong, a son should resist his father, and a
minister should resist his August Master.

“The maxim is, ‘Resist when wrongly commanded.’ Hence how can he be
called filial who obeys his father when he is commanded to do wrong?”




CHAPTER XVI

THE INFLUENCE AND FRUIT OF FILIAL PIETY


The good Emperors of old were not only filial to their parents, but
also to the Supreme Father and Mother—that is, Heaven and the Earth.
When an Emperor can live in harmony with his elders, there will be
harmony throughout his dominion between superiors and inferiors; and
when he is filial to the Supreme Father and Mother, he will be blessed
by them.

Although the Emperor is the highest of all ranks, yet he still has some
one to respect. He has his father and elder brothers.

Why do we offer sacrifices to our ancestors in our family shrine?
Because we ought not to forget them. Why must we cultivate our minds
and be circumspect in our actions? Because we do not wish to bring
disgrace upon the name of our ancestors. If we can show respect to them
when we offer them sacrifices in our family shrine, we shall be blessed
by the Supreme Father and Mother. Filiality to parents and reverence to
elders will be known to the Supreme Being, and will be followed by the
people in every part of the world; no place can remain unaffected by
their influence. In the _Shih Ching_ it is said that “from east to west
and from north to south there is no one who does not submit to rule.”




CHAPTER XVII

SERVING THE SOVEREIGN


Confucius said: “A good man always endeavours, while he is in the
service of his sovereign, to express the utmost loyalty during
audience with his August Master, and thinks at his leisure how to
repair any wrong his August Master may have done. He will carry out
any praiseworthy schemes projected by his master, and will correct
any fault which he may commit. In this way a great affection will be
fostered between them.

“Thus in the _Shih Ching_ it is written: ‘Although the minister may be
far away from his master, yet his affection will not be affected by the
distance. He is so attached to him that he thinks of him every day.’”




CHAPTER XVIII

MOURNING FOR ONE’S PARENTS


Confucius said: “When a filial son loses his parent, he, of course,
cannot help crying piteously. He cannot feel happy when he hears music.
He will have no appetite for food, however tempting a savoury. He will
greet no visitor, have no regard for elegance of speech, and will put
on a mourning-dress instead of a beautiful one. All these tell us
the extent of his sorrow for his lost parent. What is meant by the
saying that he must try to eat something after three days from the
death of his parent, though he has no appetite for it? It teaches us
that although we have to show great sorrow for the dead, yet we must
not sacrifice ourselves on their account, and that we must not carry
self-mortification so far as to destroy our life. This is the doctrine
laid down by good men of old. That mourning only extends to the period
of three years shows that there is a limit for our sorrow.

“For the corpse we make a coffin and some clothes. We set forth the
sacrificial vessels, and at the sight of them grief breaks forth
afresh. The women beat their breasts, the men stamp their feet, and
with weeping and wailing escort the coffin to its resting-place. For
its burial we buy a well-drained ground. In memory of our deceased
parent we build a shrine. For the purpose of showing our remembrance we
offer sacrifices every spring and autumn.

“When our parents are alive, we should treat them with love and
respect. When they are dead, we should have sorrow for them. By doing
so we shall have performed the duty of mankind, and have done what
ought to be done by a filial son, and by the living to the dead.




THE TWENTY-FOUR EXAMPLES


No. I

_The Filial Piety that influenced Heaven_

Yü Shun, the son of Ku Sou, had an exceedingly filial disposition;
his father, however, was stupid, his mother perverse, and his younger
brother, Hsiang, very conceited. His actions are related in the _Shang
Shu_, in the _Chung Yung_, and in the works of Mencius. Those who speak
of him say that Shun cultivated the hills of Li (in the province of
Shansi), where he had elephants to plough his fields and birds to weed
the grain. So widespread was the renown of his virtue that the Emperor
Yao heard of him, and sent his nine sons to serve him, and gave to him
two of his daughters in marriage, and afterwards resigned to him the
imperial dignity.

Of all those whose virtue and filial duty deserve to be illustrated,
Shun is pre-eminent; and his example, in obeying his parents, is worthy
of being handed down to posterity, through myriads of ages. Once he was
in great danger in a well, into which he was commanded by his father to
descend, and his brother cast down stones upon him; again, he was in a
granary, when it was set on fire; but from these, as well as from many
other dangers, he escaped unhurt. He fished, burned pottery, ploughed
and sowed, with great toil on the hills of Li. He laboriously performed
all these duties, but his parents were not affected, while his brother
Hsiang became more insolent and overbearing. His parents alleged crimes
against him, but Shun could not find that he had done wrong; he loved
and revered them, though they did not requite him with affection. His
feelings were grieved at these manifold troubles, and with strong
crying and tears he invoked Heaven.

His perfect sincerity was effectual to renovate his family; his parents
became pleasant, and his brother more conciliatory and virtuous.
Heaven also considered his excellency to be great, and regarded him
as truly good, thus establishing his reputation so firmly that it was
perpetuated to, and influenced, succeeding ages. Even Confucius is
regarded as elevated but a little above Shun, and I would praise and
extol them both to coming generations.


No. II

_Affection shown in tasting Soups and Medicines_

The Emperor Wên of the Han dynasty, the third son of his father, Kao
Tsu, was appointed Prince over the country of Tai. His own mother,
Po, was Queen-dowager, and Wên was constant in his attendance on her.
She was ill for three years, during which time his eyelids did not
close, nor was the girdle of his dress unloosed; and she took none of
the soups and medicines prepared for her till he had tasted them. This
benevolence and filial affection was heard of throughout the empire.

Wên received direction to go and arrange the imperial sacrifices, and
requested his mother to accompany him to the royal domains. Morning
and evening he visited her in her own apartments, and handed her the
fragrant dishes. If the provisions had lost their flavour, he was
vexed; and when tasting the medicines he commanded perfect silence. The
live-long night his girdle was not loosed, nor for three years were
his eyelids closed. By as much as his animal spirits were exhausted,
by so much the more did his heart become fixed on the subject of its
affection; and for a long time his thoughts were not distracted. Such
filial love and virtue so moved upon Heaven’s kind regard, that it
wrought upon his father to confer the throne upon him as his patrimony.


No. III

_Gnawing her Finger pained his Heart_

During the Chou dynasty there lived a lad named Tsêng Ts‘an, a disciple
of Confucius, who served his mother very dutifully. Tsêng was in the
habit of going to the hills to collect faggots; and once, while he was
thus absent, many guests came to his house, towards whom his mother was
at a loss to know how to act. She, while expecting her son, who delayed
his return, began to gnaw her fingers. Tsêng suddenly felt a pain in
his heart, and took up his bundle of faggots in order to return home;
and when he saw his mother, he kneeled and begged to know what was the
cause of her anxiety. She replied: “There have been some guests here
who came from a great distance, and I bit my finger in order to arouse
you to return to me.”

The faculties of mind and body in both mother and son sprang originally
from the same source, and are alike; but in common men this connection
is broken and interrupted, and they are dull and stupid. Those sages
whose nature is heavenly differ from the rest of mankind; and virtue,
as in a breath, permeates their whole souls. At a certain time, when
Tsêng was absent to collect faggots, visitors came and knocked at his
door in great haste; and as there was no man at home ready to receive
them, his mother was much grieved. He had entered the dense fog on the
hills and did not know where he was, when his mother leaned against the
door-post and gnawed her fingers as if she would go in quest of him.
Her son in the hills is suddenly seized with a pain in his heart, and
quickly takes up his bundle of faggots to return; although distant,
he sympathises with his mother’s grief and complaint. The hearts of
mother and son are mutually affected, one influencing the other, in the
same manner as the amber draws small straws and the loadstone attracts
the slender needle. From the remotest period sages have been able to
control their dispositions, and in the deepest silence have revolved
their actions as in a breath. The moving influence that such minds have
on each other the generality of men cannot understand. The devotedness
with which they serve their parents and the respect with which they
cherish them—who can comprehend.


No. IV

_Clad in a Single Garment, he was obedient to his Mother_

During the Chou dynasty lived Min Sun, a disciple of Confucius, who in
early life lost his mother. His father subsequently married another
wife, who bore him two children, but disliked Sun. In winter she
clothed him in garments made of rushes, while her own children wore
cotton clothes. Min was employed in driving his father’s chariot,
and his body was so cold that the reins dropped from his hands, for
which carelessness his father chastised him; yet he did not vindicate
himself. When his father knew the circumstances, he determined to
divorce his second wife; but Sun said, “Whilst mother remains, one
son is cold; if mother departs, three sons will be destitute.” The
father desisted from his purpose; and after this the mother was led to
repentance, and became a good and virtuous parent.

The filial piety of the renowned Shun influenced Heaven, whilst that of
Min renovated mankind. If Heaven be influenced, all below it will be
transformed; if men be renovated, from them will spring a power able
to cause their families to become good. In all ages men have exhibited
a great love for their wives; but dutiful children have often met with
unkindness. Min carefully concealed all his grievances, and refused to
indulge in any complaint; even while suffering severely from cold and
hunger, he maintained his affection unabated. During the long period
which he endured this oppressive treatment, his good disposition became
manifest; and by his own conduct he was able to maintain the harmony
of the family unimpaired. His father and mother were influenced by his
filial devotion; and his brothers joined in extolling his virtues.
All his friends and acquaintances, with united voice, celebrated his
merits; and the men of his native village joyfully combined to spread
the fame of his actions. The memory of his agreeable countenance and
pleasing manners was perpetuated to the remotest ages; and his example
was in many respects like that of Shun, whose parents were equally
perverse.


No. V

_He carried Rice for his Parents_

In the Chou dynasty lived Chung Yu, also a disciple of Confucius, who,
because his family was poor, usually ate herbs and coarse pulse; and
he also went more than a hundred li to procure rice for his parents.
Afterwards, when they were dead, he went south to the country of Ch‘u,
where he was made commander of a hundred companies of chariots. There
he became rich, storing up grain in myriads of measures, reclining
upon cushions, and eating food served to him in numerous dishes; but,
sighing, he said: “Although I should now desire to eat coarse herbs and
bring rice for my parents, it cannot be!”

“Alas!” said Chung Yu, “although I was a scholar, yet my parents were
poor; and how was I to nourish them?” Exhausted he travelled the long
road and cheerfully brought rice for his parents. Pleasantly he endured
the toil, and exerted his utmost strength without any commendation.
At that time his lot in life was hard and unfortunate, and he little
expected the official honours he afterwards enjoyed. But when his
parents were dead, and he had become rich and honourable, enjoying
all the luxuries of life, then he was unhappy and discontented; not
cheerful as in the days of his poverty, nor happy as when he ministered
to his parents’ wants.


No. VI

_With Sports and Embroidered Robes he amused his Parents_

In the Chou dynasty there flourished Lao Lai Tzŭ, who was very obedient
and reverent towards his parents, manifesting his dutifulness by
exerting himself to provide them with every delicacy. Although upwards
of seventy years of age, he declared that he was not yet too old, and,
dressed in gaudy-coloured garments, would frisk and cut capers like a
child in front of his parents. He would also take up buckets of water
and try to carry them into the house; but, feigning to slip, would fall
to the ground, wailing and crying like a child; and all these things he
did in order to divert his parents.

In the country of Ch‘u lived Lao Lai Tzŭ, who, when so old that he had
lost nearly all his teeth, made every effort to rejoice and comfort his
parents, constantly endeavouring to gladden their hearts. At times he
imitated the playfulness of a little child, and arraying himself in
gaudy and variegated clothes, amused them by his strutting and gambols.
He would likewise purposely fall on the ground, kicking and wailing
to the utmost of his power. His mother was delighted, and manifested
her joy in her countenance. Thus did Lai forget his age in order to
rejoice the hearts of his parents; and affection, harmony, and joy
prevailed among the family. If this ardent love for his parents had
been insincere and constrained, how could it be referred to as worthy
of imitation?


No. VII

_With Deer’s Milk he supplied his Parents_

In the time of the Chou dynasty lived Yen, who possessed a very filial
disposition. His father and mother were aged, and both were afflicted
with sore eyes, to cure which they desired to have some deer’s milk.
Yen concealed himself in the skin of a deer, and went deep into the
forests, among the herds of deer, to obtain some of their milk for his
parents. While amongst the trees the hunters saw him, and were about
to shoot at him with their arrows, when Yen disclosed to them his true
character and related the history of his family, with the reasons for
his conduct.

Do his parents desire some milk from the deer? He is not deterred by
the obstacles in the way of procuring it; but clothing himself in a
hairy garment, he goes carefully seeking for it among the multitudes
of wild beasts. He closely imitated the cry, _yew, yew_, of the fawns,
watching for the tracks of the herds. By this mode he obtained the
sweet secretion; he also surprised the hunters whom he met in the deep
and lonely forest.


No. VIII

_He sold himself to bury his Father_

During the Han dynasty lived Tung Yung, whose family was so very poor
that when his father died, he was obliged to sell himself in order to
procure money to bury his remains. After this he went to another place
to gain the means of redeeming himself; and on his way he met a lady
who desired to become his wife, and go with him to his master’s house.
She went with Tung, and wove three hundred pieces of silk, which being
completed in two months, they returned home; and on the way, having
reached the shade of the cassia-tree where they met before, the lady
bid him adieu and vanished from his sight.

Tung could not endure to behold his father’s bones lying exposed, but
had not sufficient means to bury them. He saw that his household goods
were not sufficient, and he said: “This little body of mine, what is
the use of it? If I sell it, I can redeem it again, and thus bury
my father, who will be saved from dishonour.” His filial piety moved
Heaven to direct a female spirit in human form to come and help him in
fulfilling his engagement; she wove three hundred pieces of silk, and
thus procured the redemption of a man of truly filial heart.


No. IX

_He hired himself out as a Labourer to support his Mother_

In the time of the Han dynasty lived Chiang Ko, who, when young, lost
his father, and afterwards lived alone with his mother. Times of
trouble arising, which caused them much distress, he took his mother
on his back, and fled. On the way he many times met with companies of
robbers, who would have compelled him to go with them and become a
bandit, but Chiang entreated them with tears to spare him, saying that
he had his aged mother with him; and the robbers could not bear to
kill him. Altering his course, he came into the district of Hsia-p‘ei,
extremely impoverished and reduced, where he hired himself out and
supported his mother; and such was his diligence that he was able to
supply her with whatever she personally required.

Passing over the hills and wading through the streams, he carried his
mother with much difficulty. It was during a year of famine, when
all the inhabitants of the land were in confusion from the scarcity
of food, and engagements were frequent between the soldiers and the
bandits, and signal fires were lighted on the high hills. Chiang was
fearful lest the robbers should meet him on the road and plunder him;
and they did seize him, regardless of his cries and tears, and were
about to rob him; but when they knew of his filial piety and affection
for his mother, they permitted him to proceed. While journeying, he was
too poor to procure any food beyond the bare necessaries of life; and
because he could not provide comforts and delicacies for his mother,
he was grieved as if it had been his fault. He went and hired himself
for labour; with the greatest diligence he adhered to his purpose to
maintain his mother; and soon the stranger obtained an abundance of
food and clothing. This success caused his mother to rejoice, and they
were both delighted, she forgetting her former hardships in the joy
that filled her breast.


No. X

_He fanned the Pillow and warmed the Bedclothes_

In the Han dynasty lived Huang Hsiang, who when only nine years old
lost his mother, whom he loved so ardently and remembered so well that
all the villagers praised his filial duty. He was employed in the
severest toil, and served his father with entire obedience. In summer,
when the weather was warm, he fanned and cooled his father’s pillow
and bed; and in winter, when it was cold, he warmed the bed-clothes
with his body. The magistrate sent him an honorary banner, as a mark of
distinction.

When the heat of summer made it difficult to sleep quietly, the lad
knew what would be for the comfort of his venerated parent. Taking a
fan, he slowly waved it about the silken curtains, and the cool air,
entering, enveloped and filled the pillows and bed. In winter, when
the snow threatened to crush in the roof and the fierce wind shook the
fences, and the cold penetrated to the bones, making it hazardous to
unloose the girdle, then Hsiang warmed his father’s bed that he might
not fear, because of the cold, to enter the “place of dreams.”


No. XI

_The Gushing Fountain and the Frisking Carp_

In the Han dynasty lived Chiang Shih, who served his mother
with perfect obedience; and his wife P‘ang also fulfilled her
mother-in-law’s commands without the least reluctance. The old lady
loved to drink of the water from the river six or seven li away from
her cottage, and P‘ang used to go to draw it and hand it to her.
She was also fond of carp, and when it was obtained, deeming herself
unable to consume alone what her children with great toil and trouble
continually prepared for her, usually invited some of the neighbours
to feast with her. By the side of the cottage there suddenly gushed a
fountain, the taste of whose waters was like that of the river, and
it also produced two living fishes daily. These were taken out and
prepared by Chiang Shih for his mother.

The fish from the river were fresh and delicious, and the water was
sweet; the mother of Chiang Shih wished to taste of both daily. Her
son went to purchase the fish and her daughter-in-law to bring the
water; as constantly as the revolution of morning and evening did they
exert themselves in this arduous labour. Having obtained the fish and
water, her countenance brightened, and, laughing, she invited in one
of the neighbours to rejoice and partake of them with her. Sitting
opposite at the table, together they ate them, she foolishly not even
regarding, but totally forgetting, her son and daughter, who with so
much trouble had prepared them for her. Heaven took pity on these two
filial children, and employed its divine power to assist them, sending
a spirit to strike the earth with an axe which caused a perennial
spring to bubble forth. The taste of the water from the fountain was
like that from the river, and two fish continually sported about in
it, which henceforth Chiang Shih took out for their sustenance, nor
was there any fear of the supply failing. To procure the fish now no
money was needed, to obtain the water no long and weary walk was to
be taken. It was as if the productions of this river and of the water
were transferred into the midst of the cottage; and Chiang Shih could
support his family with ease for many years.


No. XII

_He carved Wood and served his Parents_

During the Han dynasty lived Ting Lan, whose parents both died when he
was young, before he could obey and support them; and he reflected that
for all the trouble and anxiety he had caused them, no recompense had
yet been given. He then carved wooden images of his parents, and served
them as if they had been alive. For a long time his wife would not
reverence them; and one day, taking a bodkin, she pricked their fingers
in derision. Blood flowed immediately from the wound; and seeing Ting
coming, the images wept. He inquired into the circumstances, and
forthwith divorced his wife.

He remembers his parents, but cannot see them; so he carves wood to
represent their persons. He believes that their spirits are now the
same as when they were alive, and his quietless heart trusts that
their spirits have entered the carved images. He cannot rest until
he has made their statues, so strong is his desire to nourish and
reverence them. He now reveres them, although dead, as if they were
alive; and hopes they will condescend to dwell in his ancestral hall.


No. XIII

_For his Mother’s Sake he would bury his Child_

In the days of the Han dynasty lived Kuo Chü, who was very poor. He had
one child three years old; and such was his poverty that his mother
usually divided her portion of food with this little one. Kuo says to
his wife: “We are so poor that our mother cannot be supported, for the
child divides with her the portion of food that belongs to her. Why
not bury this child? Another child may be born to us, but a mother,
once gone, will never return.” His wife did not venture to object to
the proposal, and Kuo immediately digs a hole about three cubits deep,
when suddenly he lights upon a pot of gold, and on the metal reads the
following inscription: “Heaven bestows this treasure upon Kuo Chü, the
dutiful son; the magistrate may not seize it, nor shall the neighbours
take it from him.”

What a foolish action, that the sage Kuo should be willing to bury his
own child! Fearing lest his mother should not have enough to eat, he
is willing to resign his child to death; but when it is dead, what
relief will there be for the grief of its affectionate grandmother?
When a number of cares come at some future time, who then will be able
to disperse them if the child is dead? But at this time the reflection
that his mother would be in want filled his breast with grief, and
he had no time to think of the future when he would be childless.
Heaven having given him a dutiful mind, caused him to take a light hoe
for digging the earth. Together Kuo and his wife went, sorrowing and
distressed, by the way, until they came to a very hilly place, where
they stopped. Having dug into the ground, suddenly a gleam of light
shot forth, and the pot of yellow gold which Heaven had deposited there
was seen. Taking it up, they clasped their child with ecstasy in their
arms and returned home; for now they had sufficient to support their
whole family in plenty.


No. XIV

_He seized the Tiger and saved his Father_

In the Han dynasty lived Yang Hsiang, a lad of fourteen, who was in the
habit of following his father to the fields to cut grain. Once a tiger
seized his father, and was slowly carrying him off, when Yang, anxious
for his father and forgetting himself, although he had no iron weapon
in his hand, rushed forward and seized the tiger by the neck. The beast
let the prey fall from his teeth, and fled, and Yang’s father was thus
saved from injury and death.

A tiger suddenly appears in the borders of the field, and seizes the
man as lightly as he catches a sheep, and drags him off. Yang Hsiang,
seeing the sudden peril of his father, was vexed that he had no weapon
with an iron head; but being strongly excited and his feelings roused,
he ran forward in the path, crying with a loud voice, and grasped the
tiger by the neck. The frightened animal fled, nor stopped in its rapid
course until it reached the high hills. Yang then, in a gentle manner,
raised his father up and led him home, endeavouring to soothe his
mind and dispel his fears, and also presented him the golden winecup.
Among the great number of sages whose reputations are famous, how few
of them have been devoted and filial at the hazard of their lives!
But this lad, quite young and fair, as soon as he saw his father’s
danger, risked his own life; surely his fame will spread throughout the
country. We have heard of the lady T‘i Ying, who saved her father from
banishment, and of young Chu O, who lost her life in trying to rescue
her father from drowning; and I think that Yang Hsiang will form a trio
with them, and the three be celebrated in the same ode.


No. XV

_He collected Mulberries to support his Mother_

During the Han dynasty lived Ts‘ai Shun, whose father died when he was
young, and who served his mother very dutifully. It happened that,
during the troubles of the time, when Wang Mang was plotting to usurp
the throne, there were years of scarcity, in which he could not procure
food, and Ts‘ai was compelled to gather mulberries, which he assorted,
putting them into two vessels. The red-eyebrowed robber[5] saw him, and
inquired why he did thus. Ts‘ai replied: “The black and ripe berries I
give to my mother, the yellow and unripe ones I eat myself.” The bandit
admired his filial affection, and rewarded him with three measures of
white rice and the leg of an ox.

Anxious and fearful, he seeks for food; untiring in his toil, he takes
up his baskets and penetrates the thickets of the distant forests,
where he finds many mulberry-trees. His hunger now has something
to satisfy its cravings; he also remembers his mother, and that he
must carry some to her. The ripe and unripe berries he does not put
together, but divides them, so that mother and son can each have their
proper portion. The chieftain heard of his conduct, and highly praised
him, conferring a gift upon him, and speaking of his filial piety to
all around. Taking up his rice and flesh, Ts‘ai returned home to his
mother with the food; and in their joy they even forgot that the year
was one of dearth.


No. XVI

_He laid up the Oranges for his Mother_

Lu Chi, a lad six years old, who lived in the time of Han and in the
district of Kinkiang, once met the celebrated general Yüan Shu, who
gave him a few oranges. Two of them the lad put in his bosom, and when
turning to thank the giver, they fell out on the ground. When the
general saw this, he said: “Why does my young friend, who is now a
guest, put the fruit away in his bosom?” The youth, bowing, replied:
“My mother is very fond of oranges, and I wished, when I returned home,
to present them to her.” At this answer Yüan was much astonished.

On account of his love for his parent, he would not at first taste the
present of fruit, but put into his sleeve to carry home the fragrant
and luscious gift. I think that when he saw his mother, her pleasant
countenance must have brightened, for the fruit filled his bosom and
delighted all who came near him. Lu, although so young, had the true
heavenly disposition; even in the small matter of an orange he did not
forget his parent’s wishes. Many children are perhaps like this boy,
and those who requite their parents for the care bestowed upon them, we
hope, are not few.


No. XVII

_On hearing the Thunder he wept at the Tomb_

In the country of Wei lived Wang P‘ou, a very dutiful child, whose
mother, when alive, was much afraid of thunder. After her death
her grave was dug in the hilly forest; and whenever it blew and
rained furiously, and Wang heard the sound of the chariot of the
Thunder-goddess rolling along, he hastened immediately to the grave,
and, reverently kneeling, besought her with tears, saying: “I am here,
dear mother; do not be alarmed.” And afterwards, whenever he read
in _The Book of Odes_ this sentence, “Children should have deep and
ardent affection for their parents, who have endured so much anxiety in
nourishing them,” the tears flowed abundantly at the recollection of
his mother.

Suddenly the black clouds arise from the wilderness, whirled by the
wind; he hears the distant mutter of thunder from the southern hills.
Heedless of the rain, hastily he speeds over the rugged path leading
to the tomb, and as he goes round the grave his tones of grief and
entreaty are heard. The roaring of the dreadful thunder affrights the
ears of men, one clap following another in quick succession. If his
kind mother, when alive, always dreaded the voice of Heaven’s majesty,
how much more will she now, when lying alone in the depths of the wild
forest! If P‘ou was with his mother, he knew she would be comforted;
and he thinks that if in the green hills she has a companion, she will
not be terrified. Afterwards, being successful, he refused to take the
duties of an officer under the Emperor Ssŭ-ma, because he wished to go
frequently to visit the grave of his parent. And when he was going and
returning from it, he would weep at the recollection of his mother, and
ask himself: “If I have not yet recompensed the care and trouble my
mother endured for me, what more can I do?” And to this day, whenever
scholars read the pages of the _Liu O_, they remember how tears bedewed
the cheeks of Wang P‘ou.


No. XVIII

_He wept to the Bamboos, and Shoots sprang up_

Mêng Tsung, who lived in the Chin dynasty, lost his father when young.
His mother was very ill, and one winter’s day she longed to taste a
soup made of bamboo shoots, but Mêng could not procure any. At last he
went into the bamboo grove, and, clasping the bamboos with his hands,
wept bitterly. His filial love moved Nature, and the ground slowly
opened, sending forth several shoots, which he gathered and carried
home. He made a soup of them, which his mother tasted, and immediately
recovered from her malady.

In winter, when the forests are unsightly and bare, and the bamboos
sombre and gloomy, for plants to send forth their branches is
surprising and unexpected. But it is impossible to root out the true
filial nature from men who have it, although senseless and ignorant
people, not understanding its power, ridicule them, calling them mad.
The young Mêng Tsung dutifully served his mother, and morning and
evening waited on her to receive her commands. His mother was ill, and
desired the delicacy of a soup made from bamboo shoots; but in dreary
winter, Nature still concealed her fruits awaited. With anxious haste
he goes to the cheerless forest, which he enters, seeking for them;
but not finding the shoots, he entreats the bamboos with tears. One
petition from his inmost heart ascended to the threshold of heaven,
and the deities were delighted, laughing with pleasure. A miracle is
wrought, the ordinary course of nature is reversed, and suddenly the
pearly shoots appear in the forest.


No. XIX

_He slept on Ice to procure Carp_

During the Chin dynasty lived Wang Hsiang, who early lost his mother,
and whose stepmother Chu had no affection for him. His father also,
hearing many evil reports against him, in course of time ceased to
regard him with kindness. His mother was in the habit of eating fresh
fish at her meals, but winter coming, the ice bound up the rivers. Wang
unloosed his clothes, and went to sleep on the ice in order to seek
them; when suddenly the ice opened of itself, and two carp leapt out,
which he took up and carried to his mother. The villagers, hearing of
the affair, were surprised, and admired one whose filial duty was the
cause of such an unusual event.

The river is firmly bound up by ice, and the fish are hidden in their
deep retreats. Perturbed and anxious, Wang goes out to seek the fish,
apparently forgetting that it was winter. His resolution is fixed, and
although it is at the risk of his life, he will go. He was not dismayed
at the coldness of the snow, nor terrified at the fierceness of the
winds. Even the wicked spirits were deterred from injuring him, and
dared not molest him. If metals and stones can be opened, shall ice be
considered too difficult to cleave? The frisking fish came up on the
surface of the water, obedient to the hand of him who would take them
out. A thousand ages cannot efface the remembrance of the crack in the
ice, nor obliterate the fragrant traces of so worthy a deed.


No. XX

_Wu Mêng fed the Mosquitoes_

Wu Mêng, a lad eight years of age, who lived in the Chin dynasty, was
very dutiful to his parents. They were so poor that they could not
afford to furnish their beds with mosquito-curtains; and every summer
night myriads of mosquitoes attacked them without restraint, feasting
upon their flesh and blood. Although there were so many, yet Wu would
not drive them away from himself, lest they should go to his parents
and annoy them. Such was his filial affection!

The buzzing of the mosquitoes sounds like _ying, ying_, and their
united hum is almost equal to thunder. His tired parents are reclining
on their bed, their countenances already sunk in slumber. Legions of
mosquitoes fiercely attack them, alternately retreating and advancing.
The insects disturb the dreaming sleepers, and with annoyance they
toss from side to side. Wu sees them sucking his parents’ blood,
which causes his heart to grieve; his flesh, he thinks, can be easily
pierced, but that of his parents is hard to penetrate. Lying on the
bed, he threw off his clothes, and soon feeling the pain of their
attacks, he cried: “I have no dread of you, nor have you any reason to
fear me; although I have a fan, I will not use it, nor will I strike
you with my hand. I will lie very quietly, and let you gorge to the
full.”


No. XXI

This story, commemorating Yü Ch‘ien-lou of the southern Ch‘i dynasty,
is best left out.


No. XXII

The same applies to this story, commemorating the Lady T‘ang of the
T‘ang dynasty.


No. XXIII

_He resigned Office to seek his Mother_

In the Sung dynasty lived Chu Shou-ch‘ang, whose mother, Liu, when he
was seven years of age, left the family because she was hated by his
father’s wife; and mother and son did not see each other for about
fifty years. It was during the reign of Shên Tsung that Chu resigned
his official station and went into the Ch‘in country, and there made an
engagement with his family “that he would not return until he had found
his mother.” He then travelled into T‘ung-chou, where he discovered his
mother, who at that time was over seventy years of age.

Thus Chu exclaimed: “I have a mother; but, alas! separated, we abide in
different villages. It was not the free will of my mother which led
her thus to forsake her son, but the envious mistress who compelled her
to go. Without a mother, on whom shall I rely? to whom shall I pour out
my sorrows and cares? Now I am grown older and have become an officer,
but as yet I have been unable to return the kindness of my parent. In
what place, among all the countries under heaven, does she live? I am
determined to resign my office and seek her abode, not deterred from
the trouble of the search. To effect it, I will part from my family and
no longer be a companion with them; I will not return till I find my
mother, and they need not await in expectation of me.” Heaven directed
his way, and he came into T‘ung-chou, where she resided. When the
mother and the son met each other, joy and grief arose together—joy
for the meeting after fifty years, sorrow that they had been so long
apart. But now, in one hour, all their long-accumulated griefs were
laid aside, and joy and gladness filled their hearts. Chu possesses the
true heavenly disposition, and honours and riches cannot destroy his
affection for his mother.


No. XXIV

_He watched by his Mother’s Bedside_

In the Yüan-yu period of the Sung dynasty, Huang T‘ing-chien filled the
office of prefect. He was of a very filial disposition, and although
honourable and renowned, yet he received his mother’s commands with the
utmost deference. When his mother was seized with illness, he watched
her for a whole year without leaving her bedside or even taking off his
clothes; and at her death he mourned so bitterly that he himself fell
ill and nearly lost his life.

Well-written poetry flows along like rills meandering among the hills
and valleys. This instance of a dutiful heart has not as yet been
brought into much notice. For a whole year he tended his parent in
her illness; and both she who dwelt in the curtained room (_i.e._ his
mother) and he who remained in the hall (_i.e._ his father) strove to
express the merits of their son. It would be difficult to find another
child who would have done so—all would be dilatory and unwilling; and
where shall we meet another who would undergo such drudgery himself
with keenness and pleasure? Although raised to high office, he does
not hesitate to perform the most troublesome and minute duties, for he
loves his parents; how then can we suppose that he will change from
what he was when young and unhonoured?


_Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury._


FOOTNOTES:

[5] That is, the usurper Wang Mang himself.



