CHAPTER 11

Ralph Cometh Out of the Wilderness


Long he stood letting these thoughts run through his mind, but at last
when it was now midmorning, he stirred and gat him slowly down the
green slope, and for very pity of himself the tears brake out from him
as he crossed the stream and came into the bushy valley.  There he
stayed his feet a little, and said to himself:  "And whither then am I
going?" He thought of the Castle of Abundance and the Champions of the
Dry Tree, of Higham, and the noble warriors who sat at the Lord Abbot's
board, and of Upmeads and his own folk:  but all seemed naught to him,
and he thought:  "And how can I go back and bear folk asking me
curiously of my wayfarings, and whether I will do this, that, or the
other thing." Withal he thought of that fair damsel and her sweet mouth
in the hostelry at Bourton Abbas, and groaned when he thought of love
and its ending, and he said within himself:  "and now she is a wanderer
about the earth as I am;" and he thought of her quest, and the chaplet
of dame Katherine, his gossip, which he yet bore on his neck, and he
deemed that he had naught to choose but to go forward and seek that he
was doomed to; and now it seemed to him that there was that one thing
to do and no other.  And though this also seemed to him but weariness
and grief, yet whereas he had ever lightly turned him to doing what
work lay ready to hand; so now he knew that he must first of all get
him out of that wilderness, that he might hear the talk of folk
concerning the Well at the World's End, which he doubted not to hear
again when he came into the parts inhabited.

So now, with his will or without it, his feet bore him on, and he
followed up the stream which the Lady had said ran into the broad river
called the Swelling Flood; "for," thought he, "when I come thereabout I
shall presently find some castle or good town, and it is like that
either I shall have some tidings of the folk thereof, or else they will
compel me to do something, and that will irk me less than doing deeds
of mine own will."

He went his ways till he came to where the wood and the trees ended,
and the hills were lower and longer, well grassed with short grass, a
down country fit for the feeding of sheep; and indeed some sheep he
saw, and a shepherd or two, but far off.  At last, after he had left
the stream awhile, because it seemed to him to turn and wind round over
much to the northward, he came upon a road running athwart the down
country, so that he deemed that it must lead one way down to the
Swelling Flood; so he followed it up, and after a while began to fall
in with folk; and first two Companions armed and bearing long swords
over their shoulders: he stopped as they met, and stared at them in the
face, but answered not their greeting; and they had no will to meddle
with him, seeing his inches and that he was well armed, and looked no
craven: so they went on.

Next he came on two women who had with them an ass between two
panniers, laden with country stuff; and they were sitting by the
wayside, one old and the other young.  He made no stay for them, and
though he turned his face their way, took no heed of them more than if
they were trees; though the damsel, who was well-liking and somewhat
gaily clad, stood up when she saw his face anigh, and drew her gown
skirt about her and moved daintily, and sighed and looked after him as
he went on, for she longed for him.

Yet again came two men a-horseback, merchants clad goodly, with three
carles, their servants, riding behind them; and all these had weapons
and gave little more heed to him than he to them.  But a little after
they were gone, he stopped and said within himself: "Maybe I had better
have gone their way, and this road doubtless leadeth to some place of
resort."

But even therewith he heard horsehoofs behind him, and anon came up a
man a-horseback, armed with jack and sallet, a long spear in his hand,
and budgets at his saddle-bow, who looked like some lord's man going a
message.  He nodded to Ralph, who gave him good-day; for seeing these
folk and their ways had by now somewhat amended his mind; and now he
turned not, but went on as before.

At last the way clomb a hill longer and higher than any he had yet
crossed, and when he had come to the brow and looked down, he saw the
big river close below running through the wide valley which he had
crossed with Roger on that other day.  Then he sat down on the green
bank above the way, so heavy of heart that not one of the things he saw
gave him any joy, and the world was naught to him.  But within a while
he came somewhat to himself, and, looking down toward the river, he saw
that where the road met it, it was very wide, and shallow withal, for
the waves rippled merrily and glittered in the afternoon sun, though
there was no wind; moreover the road went up white from the water on
the other side, so he saw clearly that this was the ford of a highway.
The valley was peopled withal: on the other side of the river was a
little thorp, and there were carts and sheds scattered about the hither
side, and sheep and neat feeding in the meadows, and in short it was
another world from the desert.



CHAPTER 12

Ralph Falleth in With Friends and Rideth to Whitwall


Ralph looks on to the ford and sees folk riding through the thorp
aforesaid and down to the river, and they take the water and are many
in company, some two score by his deeming, and he sees the sun
glittering on their weapons.

Now he thought that he would abide their coming and see if he might
join their company, since if he crossed the water he would be on the
backward way: and it was but a little while ere the head of them came
up over the hill, and were presently going past Ralph, who rose up to
look on them, and be seen of them, but they took little heed of him.
So he sees that though they all bore weapons, they were not all
men-at-arms, nay, not more than a half score, but those proper men
enough.  Of the others, some half-dozen seemed by their attire to be
merchants, and the rest their lads; and withal they had many sumpter
horses and mules with them.  They greeted him not, nor he them, nor did
he heed them much till they were all gone by save three, and then he
leapt into the road with a cry, for who should be riding there but
Blaise, his eldest brother, and Richard the Red with him, both in good
case by seeming; for Blaise was clad in a black coat welted with gold,
and rode a good grey palfrey, and Richard was armed well and knightly.

They knew him at once, and drew rein, and Blaise lighted down from his
horse and cast his arms about Ralph, and said: "O happy day! when two
of the Upmeads kindred meet thus in an alien land!  But what maketh
thee here, Ralph?  I thought of thee as merry and safe in Upmeads?"

Ralph said smiling, for his heart leapt up at the sight of his kindred:
"Nay, must I not seek adventures like the rest?  So I stole myself away
from father and mother."  "Ill done, little lord!" said Blaise,
stroking Ralph's cheek.

Then up came Richard, and if Blaise were glad, Richard was twice glad,
and quoth he:  "Said I not, Lord Blaise, that this chick would be the
hardest of all to keep under the coop?  Welcome to the Highways, Lord
Ralph!  But where is thine horse? and whence and whither is it now?
Hast thou met with some foil and been held to ransom?"

Ralph found it hard and grievous and dull work to answer; for now again
his sorrow had taken hold of him:  so he said: "Yea, Richard, I have
had adventures, and have lost rather than won; but at least I am a free
man, and have spent but little gold on my loss."

"That is well," said Richard, "but whence gat ye any gold for
spending?" Ralph smiled, but sadly, for he called to mind the glad
setting forth and the kind face of dame Katherine his gossip, and he
said: "Clement Chapman deemed it not unmeet to stake somewhat on my
luck, therefore I am no pauper."

"Well," said Blaise, "if thou hast no great errand elsewhere, thou
mightest ride with us, brother.  I have had good hap in these days,
though scarce kingly or knightly, for I have been buying and selling:
what matter? few know Upmeads and its kings to wite me with fouling a
fair name.  Richard, go fetch a horse hither for Lord Ralph's riding,
and we will tarry no longer."  So Richard trotted on, and while they
abode him, Ralph asked after his brethren, and Blaise told him that he
had seen or heard naught of them.  Then Ralph asked of whither away,
and Blaise told him to Whitwall, where was much recourse of merchants
from many lands, and a noble market.

Back then cometh Richard leading a good horse while Ralph was pondering
his matter, and thinking that at such a town he might well hear tidings
concerning the Well at the World's End.

Now Ralph mounts, and they all ride away together.  On the way, partly
for brotherhood's sake, partly that he might not be questioned overmuch
himself, Ralph asked Blaise to tell him more of his farings; and Blaise
said, that when he had left Upmeads he had ridden with Richard up and
down and round about, till he came to a rich town which had just been
taken in war, and that the Companions who had conquered it were looking
for chapmen to cheapen their booty, and that he was the first or nearly
the first to come who had will and money to buy, and the Companions,
who were eager to depart, had sold him thieves' penny-worths, so that
his share of the Upmeads' treasure had gone far; and thence he had gone
to another good town where he had the best of markets for his newly
cheapened wares, and had brought more there, such as he deemed handy to
sell, and so had gone on from town to town, and had ever thriven, and
had got much wealth:  and so at last having heard tell of Whitwall as
better for chaffer than all he had yet seen, he and other chapmen had
armed them, and waged men-at-arms to defend them, and so tried the
adventure of the wildwoods, and come safe through.

Then at last came the question to Ralph concerning his adventures, and
he enforced himself to speak, and told all as truly as he might,
without telling of the Lady and her woeful ending.

Thus they gave and took in talk, and Ralph did what he might to seem
like other folk, that he might nurse his grief in his own heart as far
asunder from other men as might be.

So they rode on till it was even, and came to Whitwall before the
shutting of the gates and rode into the street, and found it a fair and
great town, well defensible, with high and new walls, and men-at-arms
good store to garnish them.

Ralph rode with his brother to the hostel of the chapmen, and there
they were well lodged.



