CHAPTER 22

Ralph Talks With Bull Shockhead


When they rode on again, Ralph rode beside Bull, who was merry and
blithe now he was full of meat and drink; and he spake anon:  "So thou
art a king's son, master?  I deemed from the first that thou wert of
lineage.  For as for these churls of chapmen, and the sworders whom
they wage, they know not the name of their mother's mother, nor have
heard one word of the beginner of their kindred; and their deeds are
like unto their kinlessness."

"And are thy deeds so good?" said Ralph.  "Are they ill," said Bull,
"when they are done against the foemen?"  Said Ralph: "And are all men
your foemen who pass through these mountains?" "All," said Bull, "but
they be of the kindred or their known friends."

"Well, Bull," said Ralph, "I like thy deeds little, that thou shouldest
ravish men and women from their good life, and sell them for a price
into toil and weariness and stripes."

Said Bull:  "How much worse do we than the chapmen by his debtor, and
the lord of the manor by his villein?"  Said Ralph: "Far worse, if ye
did but know it, poor men!"  Quoth Bull: "But I neither know it, nor
can know it, nay, not when thou sayest it; for it is not so.  And look
you, master, this life of a bought thrall is not such an exceeding evil
life; for oft they be dealt with softly and friendly, and have other
thralls to work for them under their whips."

Ralph laughed:  "Which shall I make thee, friend Bull, the upper or the
under?"  Bull reddened, but said naught.  Said Ralph: "Or where shall I
sell thee, that I may make the best penny out of my good luck and
valiancy?"  Bull looked chopfallen: "Nay," said he in a wheedling
voice, "thou wilt not sell me, thou?  For I deem that thou wilt be a
good master to me:  and," he broke into sudden heat hereat, "if I have
another master I shall surely slay him whate'er betide."

Ralph laughed again, and said:  "Seest thou what an evil craft ye
follow, when thou deemest it better to be slain with bitter torments
(as thou shouldest be if thou slewest thy master) than to be sold to
any master save one exceeding good?"

Bull held his peace hereat, but presently he said: "Well, be our craft
good or evil, it is gainful; and whiles there is prey taken right good,
which, for my part, I would not sell, once I had my hand thereon."
"Yea, women?" said Ralph.  "Even so," said Bull, "such an one was taken
by my kinsman Bull Nosy but a little while agone, whom he took down to
the market at Cheaping Knowe, as I had not done if I had once my arms
about her.  For she was as fair as a flower; and yet so well built,
that she could bear as much as a strong man in some ways; and, saith
Nosy, when she was taken, there was no weeping or screeching in her,
but patience rather and quietness, and intent to bear all and
live....Master, may I ask thee a question?"  "Ask on," said Ralph.
Said Bull:  "The pair of beads about thy neck, whence came they?" "They
were the gift of a dear friend," said Ralph.  "A woman?" quoth Bull.
"Yea," said Ralph.

"Now is this strange," said Bull, "and I wot not what it may betoken,
but this same woman had about her neck a pair of beads as like to thine
as if they had been the very same:  did this woman give thee the beads?
For I will say this of thee, master, that thou art well nigh as likely
a man as she is a woman."

Ralph sighed, for this talk of the woman and the beads brought all the
story into his mind, so that it was as if he saw it adoing again: the
Lady of the Wildwood led along to death before he delivered her, and
their flight together from the Water of the Oak, and that murder of her
in the desert.  And betwixt the diverse deeds of the day this had of
late become somewhat dim to him.  Yet after his grief came joy that
this man also had seen the damsel, whom his dream of the night had
called Dorothea, and that he knew of her captors; wherefore by his
means he might come on her and deliver her.

Now he spake aloud:  "Nay, it was not she that gave them to me, but yet
were I fain to find this woman that thou sawest; for I look to meet a
friend whenas I meet her.  So tell me, dost thou think that I may
cheapen her of thy kinsman?"

Bull shook his head, and said:  "It may be:  or it may be that he hath
already sold her to one who heedeth not treasure so much as fair flesh;
and fair is hers beyond most.  But, lord, I will do my best to find her
for thee; as thou art a king's son and no ill master, I deem."

"Do that," quoth Ralph, "and I in turn will do what more I may for thee
besides making thee free."  And therewith he rode forward that he might
get out of earshot, for Bull's tongue seemed like to be long.  And
presently he heard laughter behind him, as the carle began jesting and
talking with the chapman lads.



CHAPTER 23

Of the Town of Cheaping Knowe


Now when it was evening they pitched their camp down in the plain
fields amidst tall elmtrees, and had their banners still flying over
the tents to warn all comers of what they were.  But the next morning
the chapmen and their folk were up betimes to rummage their loads, and
to array their wares for the market; and they gat not to the road
before mid-morning. Meantime of their riding Ralph had more talk with
Bull, who said to him: "Fair lord, I rede thee when thou art in the
market of Cheaping Knowe, bid master Clement bring thee to the
thrall-merchant, and trust me that if such a fair image as that we were
speaking of hath passed through his hands within these three months, he
will remember it; and then thou shalt have at least some tale of what
hath befallen her but a little while ago."

That seemed good rede to Ralph, and when they went on their way he rode
beside Clement, and asked him many things concerning Cheaping Knowe;
and at last about the thrall-market therein.  And Clement said that,
though he dealt not in such wares, he had often seen them sold, and
knew the master of that market.  And when Ralph asked if the said
master would answer questions concerning the selling of men and of
women, Clement smiled and said: "Yea, yea, he will answer; for as he
lives by selling thralls, and every time a thrall is sold by him he
maketh some gain by it, it is to his profit that they change masters as
often as may be; and when thou askest of the woman whom thou art
seeking, he will be deeming that there will be some new chaffer ahead.
I will bring thee to him, and thou shalt ask him of what thou wilt, and
belike he will tell thee quietly over the wine-cup."

Therewith was Ralph well content, and he grew eager to enter into the
town.

They came to the gates a little before sunset, after they had passed
through much fair country; but nigh to the walls it was bare of trees
and thickets, whereas, said Clement, they had been cut down lest they
should serve as cover to strong-thieves or folk assailing the town.
The walls were strong and tall, and a great castle stood high up on a
hill, about which the town was builded; so that if the town were taken
there would yet be another town within it to be taken also.  But the
town within, save for the said castle, was scarce so fairly builded as
the worst of the towns which Ralph had seen erst, though there were a
many houses therein.

Much people was gathered about the gate to see the merchants enter with
banners displayed; and Ralph deemed many of the folk fair, such as were
goodly clad; for many had but foul clouts to cover their nakedness, and
seemed needy and hunger-pinched. Withal there were many warriors
amongst the throng, and most of these bore a token on their sleeves, to
wit, a sword reddened with blood.  And Clement, speaking softly in
Ralph's ear, did him to wit that this was the token of the lord who had
gotten the castle in those days, and was tyrant of the town; and how
that he had so many men-at-arms ready to do his bidding that none in
the town was safe from him if he deemed it more for his pleasure and
profit to rob or maim, or torment or slay, than to suffer them to live
peaceably.  "But with us chapmen," said Clement, "he will not meddle,
lest there be an end of chaffer in the town; and verily the market is
good."

Thus they rode through the streets into the market place, which was
wide and great, and the best houses of the town were therein, and so
came to the hostel of the Merchants, called the Fleece, which was a big
house, and goodly enough.

The next morning Clement and the other chapmen went up into the Castle,
bearing with them gifts out of their wares for the lord, and Clement
bade Ralph keep close till he came back, and especially to keep his
war-caught thrall, Bull Shockhead, safe at home, lest he be taken from
him, and to clothe him in the guise of the chapman lads, and to dock
his hair; and even so Ralph did, though Bull were loath thereto.

About noon the chapmen came back again well pleased; and Clement gave
Ralph a parchment from the lord, which bade all men help and let pass
Ralph of Upmeads, as a sergeant of the chapmen's guard, and said withal
that now he was free to go about the town if he listed, so that he were
back at the hostel of the Fleece by nightfall.

So Ralph went in company with some of the sergeants and others, and
looked at this and that about the town without hindrance, save that the
guard would not suffer them to pass further than the bailey of the
Castle.  And for the said bailey, forsooth, they had but little
stomach; for they saw thence, on the slopes of the Castle-hill, tokens
of the cruel justice of the said lord; for there were men and women
there, yea, and babes also, hanging on gibbets and thrust through with
sharp pales, and when they asked of folk why these had suffered, they
but looked at them as if astonished, and passed on without a word.

So they went thence, and found the master-church, and deemed it not
much fairer than it was great; and it was nowise great, albeit it was
strange and uncouth of fashion.

Then they came to great gardens within the town, and they were
exceeding goodly, and had trees and flowers and fruits in them which
Ralph had not seen hitherto, as lemons, and oranges, and pomegranates;
and the waters were running through them in runnels of ashlar; and the
weather was fair and hot; so they rested in those gardens till it was
evening, and then gat them home to Fleece, where they had good
entertainment.



