CHAPTER 11

They Come Through the Mountains Into the Plain


On the morrow early they all fared on together, and thereafter they
went for two days more till they came into a valley amidst of the
mountains which was fair and lovely, and therein was the dwelling or
town of this Folk of the Fells.  It was indeed no stronghold, save that
it was not easy to find, and that the way thither was well defensible
were foemen to try it.  The houses thereof were artless, the chiefest
of them like to the great barn of an abbey in our land, the others low
and small; but the people, both men and women, haunted mostly the big
house.  As for the folk, they were for the more part like those whom
they had met afore: strong men, but not high of stature, black-haired,
with blue or grey eyes, cheerful of countenance, and of many words.
Their women were mostly somewhat more than comely, smiling, kind of
speech, but not suffering the caresses of aliens.  They saw no thralls
amongst them; and when Ralph asked hereof, how that might be, since
they were men-catchers, they told him that when they took men and
women, as oft they did, they always sold them for what they would bring
to the plain-dwellers; or else slew them, or held them to ransom, but
never brought them home to their stead.  Howbeit, when they took
children, as whiles befell, they sometimes brought them home, and made
them very children of their Folk with many uncouth prayers and worship
of their Gods, who were indeed, as they deemed, but forefathers of the
Folk.

Now Ralph, he and his, being known for friends, these wild men could
not make enough of them, and as it were, compelled them to abide there
three days, feasting them, and making them all the cheer they might.
And they showed the wayfarers their manner of hunting, both of the hart
and the boar, and of wild bulls also.  At first Ralph somewhat loathed
all this (though he kept a pleasant countenance toward his host), for
sorely he desired the fields of Upmeads and his father's house.  But at
last when the hunt was up in the mountains, and especially of the wild
bulls, the heart and the might in him so arose that he enforced himself
to do well, and the wild men wondered at his prowess, whereas he was
untried in this manner of sports, and they deemed him one of the Gods,
and said that their kinsman had done well to get him so good a friend.
Both Ursula and the Sage withheld them from this hunting, and Ursula
abode with the women, who told her much of their ways of life, and
stories of old time; frank and free they were, and loved her much, and
she was fain of such manly-minded women after the sleight and lies of
the poor thralls of Utterbol.

On the fourth day the wayfarers made them ready and departed; and the
chief of the Folk went with them with a chosen band of weaponed men,
partly for the love of his guests, and partly that he might see the
Goldburg men-at-arms safe back to the road unto the plain and the
Midhouse of the Mountains, for they went now by other ways, which
missed the said House.  On this journey naught befell to tell of, and
they all came down safe into the plain.

There the Goldburg men took their wage, and bidding farewell, turned
back with the wild men, praising Ralph much for his frankness and open
hand.  As for the wild men, they exceeded in their sorrow for the
parting, and many of them wept and howled as though they had seen him
die before their faces.  But all that came to an end, and presently
their cheer was amended, and their merry speech and laughter came down
from the pass unto the wayfarers' ears as each band rode its way.



CHAPTER 12

The Roads Sunder Again


Ralph and Ursula, with the Sage and Michael-a-dale went their ways, and
all was smooth with them, and they saw but few folk, and those mild and
lowly.  At last, of an afternoon, they saw before them afar off the
towers and pinnacles of Whitwall, and Ralph's heart rose within him, so
that he scarce knew how to contain himself; but Ursula was shy and
silent, and her colour came and went, as though some fear had hold of
her.  Now they two were riding on somewhat ahead of the others, so
Ralph turned to Ursula, and asked what ailed her.  She smiled on him
and said: "A simple sickness.  I am drawing nigh to thy home, and I am
ashamed.  Beyond the mountains, who knew what and whence I was?  I was
fair, and for a woman not unvaliant, and that was enough.  But now when
I am coming amongst the baronages and the lineages, what shall I do to
hold up my head before the fools and the dastards of these high
kindreds?  And that all the more, my knight, because thou art changed
since yester-year, and since we met on the want-way of the Wood
Perilous, when I bade thee remember that thou wert a King's son and I a
yeoman's daughter; for then thou wert but a lad, high-born and
beautiful, but simple maybe, and untried; whereas now thou art meet to
sit in the Kaiser's throne and rule the world from the Holy City."

He laughed gaily and said:  "What! is it all so soon forgotten, our
deeds beyond the Mountains?  Belike because we had no minstrel to rhyme
it for us.  Or is it all but a dream? and has the last pass of the
mountains changed all that for us?  What then! hast thou never become
my beloved, nor lain in one bed with me?  Thou whom I looked to deliver
from the shame and the torment of Utterbol, never didst thou free
thyself without my helping, and meet me in the dark wood, and lead me
to the Sage who rideth yonder behind us!  No, nor didst thou ride
fearless with me, leaving the world behind; nor didst thou comfort me
when my heart went nigh to breaking in the wilderness!  Nor thee did I
deliver as I saw thee running naked from the jaws of death.  Nor were
we wedded in the wilderness far from our own folk.  Nor didst thou
deliver me from the venom of the Dry Tree.  Yea verily, nor did we
drink together of the Water of the Well!  It is all but tales of
Swevenham, a blue vapour hanging on the mountains yonder!  So be it
then!  And here we ride together, deedless, a man and a maid of whom no
tale may be told.  What next then, and who shall sunder us?"

Therewith he drew his sword from the sheath, and tossed it into the
air, and caught it by the hilts as it came down, and he cried out:
"Hearken, Ursula!  By my sword I swear it, that when I come home to the
little land, if my father and my mother and all my kindred fall not
down before thee and worship thee, then will I be a man without
kindred, and I will turn my back on the land I love, and the House
wherein I was born, and will win for thee and me a new kindred that all
the world shall tell of.  So help me Saint Nicholas, and all Hallows,
and the Mother of God!"

She looked on him with exceeding love, and said:  "Ah, beloved, how
fair thou art!  Is it not as I said, yea, and more, that now lieth the
world at thy feet, if thou wilt stoop to pick it up?  Believe me,
sweet, all folk shall see this as I see it, and shall judge betwixt
thee and me, and deem me naught."

"Beloved," he said, "thou dost not wholly know thyself; and I deem that
the mirrors of steel serve thee but ill; and now must thou have
somewhat else for a mirror, to wit, the uprising and increase of
trouble concerning thee and thy fairness, and the strife of them that
love thee overmuch, who shall strive to take thee from me; and then the
blade that hath seen the Well at the World's End shall come out of his
sheath and take me and thee from the hubbub, and into the quiet fields
of my father's home, and then shalt thou be learned of thyself, when
thou seest that thou art the desire of all hearts."

"Ah, the wisdom of thee," she said, "and thy valiancy, and I am become
feeble and foolish before thee!  What shall I do then?"

He said:  "Many a time shall it be shown what thou shalt do; but here
and now is the highway dry and long, and the plain meads and acres on
either hand, and a glimmer of Whitwall afar off, and the little cloud
of dust about us two in the late spring weather; and the Sage and
Michael riding behind us, and smiting dust from the hard road.  And now
if this also be a dream, let it speedily begone, and let us wake up in
the ancient House at Upmeads, which thou hast never seen--and thou and
I in each other's arms."



