CHAPTER 19

They Come Out of the Thirsty Desert


Past the Valley of the Dry Tree they saw but few dead men lying about,
and soon they saw never another: and, though the land was still utterly
barren, and all cast up into ridges as before, yet the salt slime grew
less and less, and before nightfall of that day they had done with it:
and the next day those stony waves were lower; and the next again the
waste was but a swelling plain, and here and there they came on patches
of dwarf willow, and other harsh and scanty herbage, whereof the horses
might have a bait, which they sore needed, for now was their fodder
done: but both men and horses were sore athirst; for, as carefully as
they had hoarded their water, there was now but little left, which they
durst not drink till they were driven perforce, lest they should yet
die of drought.

They journeyed long that day, and whereas the moon was up at night-tide
they lay not down till she was set; and their resting place was by some
low bushes, whereabout was rough grass mingled with willow-herb,
whereby Ralph judged that they drew nigh to water, so or ever they
slept, they and the horses all but emptied the water-skins. They heard
some sort of beasts roaring in the night, but they were too weary to
watch, and might not make a fire.

When Ralph awoke in the morning he cried out that he could see the
woodland; and Ursula arose at his cry and looked where he pointed, and
sure enough there were trees on a rising ground some two miles ahead,
and beyond them, not very far by seeming, they beheld the tops of great
dark mountains.  On either hand moreover, nigh on their right hand, far
off on their left, ran a reef of rocks, so that their way seemed to be
as between two walls.  And these said reefs were nowise like those that
they had seen of late, but black and, as to their matter, like to the
great mountains by the rock of the Fighting Man:  but as the reefs ran
eastward they seemed to grow higher.

Now they mounted their horses at once and rode on; and the beasts were
as eager as they were, and belike smelt the water.  So when they had
ridden but three miles, they saw a fair little river before them
winding about exceedingly, but flowing eastward on the whole.  So they
spurred on with light hearts and presently were on the banks of the
said river, and its waters were crystal-clear, though its sands were
black: and the pink-blossomed willow-herb was growing abundantly on the
sandy shores.  Close to the water was a black rock, as big as a man,
whereon was graven the sign of the way, so they knew that there was no
evil in the water, wherefore they drank their fill and watered their
horses abundantly, and on the further bank was there abundance of good
grass.  So when they had drunk their fill, for the pleasure of the cool
water they waded the ford barefoot, and it was scarce above Ursula's
knee.  Then they had great joy to lie on the soft grass and eat their
meat, while the horses tore eagerly at the herbage close to them.  So
when they had eaten, they rested awhile, but before they went further
they despoiled them, one after other, and bathed in a pool of the river
to wash the foul wilderness off them.  Then again they rested and let
the horses yet bite the grass, and departed not from that pleasant
place till it was two hours after noon.  As they were lying there Ralph
said he could hear a great roar like the sound of many waters, but very
far off: but to Ursula it seemed naught but the wind waxing in the
boughs of the woodland anigh them.



CHAPTER 20

They Come to the Ocean Sea


Being come to the wood they went not very far into it that day, for
they were minded to rest them after the weariness of the wilderness:
they feasted on a hare which Ralph shot, and made a big fire to keep
off evil beasts, but none came nigh them, though they heard the voices
of certain beasts as the night grew still.  To be short, they slept far
into the morrow's morn, and then, being refreshed, and their horses
also, they rode strongly all day, and found the wood to be not very
great; for before sunset they were come to its outskirts, and the
mountains lay before them.  These were but little like to that huge
wall they had passed through on their way to Chestnut-dale, being
rather great hills than mountains, grass-grown, and at their feet
somewhat wooded, and by seeming not over hard to pass over.

The next day they entered them by a pass marked with the token, which
led them about by a winding way till they were on the side of the
biggest fell of all; so there they rested that night in a fair little
hollow or dell in the mountain-side. There in the stillness of the
night both Ursula, as well as Ralph, heard that roaring of a great
water, and they said to each other that it must be the voice of the
Sea, and they rejoiced thereat, for they had learned by the Sage and
his books that they must needs come to the verge of the Ocean-Sea,
which girdles the earth about.  So they arose betimes on the morrow,
and set to work to climb the mountain, going mostly a-foot; and the way
was long, but not craggy or exceeding steep, so that in five hours'
time they were at the mountain-top, and coming over the brow beheld
beneath them fair green slopes besprinkled with trees, and beyond them,
some three or four miles away, the blue landless sea and on either hand
of them was the sea also, so that they were nigh-hand at the ending of
a great ness, and there was naught beyond it; and naught to do if they
missed the Well, but to turn back by the way they had come.

Now when they saw this they were exceedingly moved and they looked on
one another, and each saw that the other was pale, with glistening
eyes, since they were to come to the very point of their doom, and that
it should be seen whether there were no such thing as the Well in all
the earth, but that they had been chasing a fair-hued cloud; or else
their Quest should be achieved and they should have the world before
them, and they happy and mighty, and of great worship amidst all men.

Little they tarried, but gat them down the steep of the mountain, and
so lower and lower till they were come to ground nigh level; and then
at last it was but thus, that without any great rock-wall or girdle of
marvellous and strange land, there was an end of earth, with its grass
and trees and streams, and a beginning of the ocean, which stretched
away changeless, and it might be for ever.  Where the land ended there
was but a cliff of less than an hundred feet above the eddying of the
sea; and on the very point of the ness was a low green toft with a
square stone set atop of it, whereon as they drew nigh they saw the
token graven, yea on each face thereof.

Then they went along the edge of the cliff a mile on each side of the
said toft, and then finding naught else to note, naught save the grass
and the sea, they came back to that place of the token, and sat down on
the grass of the toft.

It was now evening, and the sun was setting beyond them, but they could
behold a kind of stair cut in the side of the cliff, and on the first
step whereof was the token done; wherefore they knew that they were
bidden to go down by the said stair; but it seemed to lead no whither,
save straight into the sea.  And whiles it came into Ralph's mind that
this was naught but a mock, as if to bid the hapless seekers cast
themselves down from the earth, and be done with it for ever.  But in
any case they might not try the adventure of that stair by the failing
light, and with the night long before them.  So when they had hoppled
their horses, and left them to graze at their will on the sweet grass
of the meadow, they laid them down behind the green toft, and, being
forwearied, it was no long time ere they twain slept fast at the
uttermost end of the world.



