CHAPTER 27

Clement Tells of Goldburg


Now when it was morning he rose early and roused Bull and the captain,
and they searched in divers places where they had not been the night
before, and even a good way back about the road they had ridden
yesterday, but found no tidings.  And Ralph said to himself that this
was naught but what he had looked for after that vision of the night.

So he rode with his fellows somewhat shamefaced that they had seen that
sudden madness in him; but was presently of better cheer than he had
been yet.  He rode beside Clement; they went downhill speedily, and the
wilderness began to better, and there was grass at whiles, and bushes
here and there.  A little after noon they came out of a pass cleft deep
through the rocks by a swift stream which had once been far greater
than then, and climbed up a steep ridge that lay across the road, and
looking down from the top of it, beheld the open country again.  But
this was otherwise from what they had beheld from the mountain's brow
above Cheaping Knowe.  For thence the mountains beyond Whiteness, even
those that they had just ridden, were clear to be seen like the wall of
the plain country.  But here, looking adown, the land below them seemed
but a great spreading plain with no hills rising from it, save that far
away they could see a certain break in it, and amidst that, something
that was brighter than the face of the land elsewhere.  Clement told
Ralph that this was Goldburg and that it was built on a gathering of
hills, not great, but going up steep from the plain.  And the plain,
said he, was not so wholly flat and even as it looked from up there,
but swelled at whiles into downs and low hills.  He told him that
Goldburg was an exceeding fair town to behold; that the lord who had
built it had brought from over the mountains masons and wood-wrights
and artificers of all kinds, that they might make it as fair as might
be, and that he spared on it neither wealth nor toil nor pains.  For in
sooth he deemed that he should find the Well at the World's End, and
drink thereof, and live long and young and fair past all record;
therefore had he builded this city, to be the house and home of his
long-enduring joyance.

Now some said that he had found the Well, and drank thereof; others
naysaid that; but all deemed that they knew how that Goldburg was not
done building ere that lord was slain in a tumult, and that what was
then undone was cobbled up after the uncomely fashion of the towns
thereabout.

Clement said moreover that, this happy lord dead, things had not gone
so well there as had been looked for.  Forsooth it had been that lord's
will and meaning that all folks in Goldburg should thrive, both those
who wrought and those for whom they wrought.  But it went not so, but
there were many poor folk there, and few wealthy.

Again said Clement that though the tillers and toilers of Goldburg were
not for the most part mere thralls and chattels, as in the lands beyond
the mountains behind them, yet were they little more thriving for that
cause; whereas they belonged not to a master, who must at worst feed
them, and to no manor, whose acres they might till for their
livelihood, and on whose pastures they might feed their cattle; nor had
they any to help or sustain them against the oppressor and the violent
man; so that they toiled and swinked and died with none heeding them,
save they that had the work of their hands good cheap; and they
forsooth heeded them less than their draught beasts whom they must
needs buy with money, and whose bellies they must needs fill; whereas
these poor wretches were slaves without a price, and if one died
another took his place on the chance that thereby he might escape
present death by hunger, for there was a great many of them.



CHAPTER 28

Now They Come to Goldburg


That night they slept yet amongst the mountains, or rather in the first
of the hill country at their feet; but on the morrow they rode down
into the lowlands, and thereby lost all sight of Goldburg, and it was
yet afar off, so that they rode four days through lands well-tilled,
but for the most part ill-housed, a country of little hills and hollows
and rising grounds, before they came in sight of it again heaving up
huge and bright under the sun.  It was built partly on three hills, the
buttresses of a long ridge which turned a wide river, and on the ridge
itself, and partly on the flat shore of the river, on either side,
hillward and plainward: but a great white wall girt it all about, which
went right over the river as a bridge, and on the plain side it was
exceeding high, so that its battlements might be somewhat evened with
those of the hill-wall above.  So that as they came up to the place
they saw little of the town because of the enormity of the wall; scarce
aught save a spire or a tall towering roof here and there.

So when they were come anigh the gate, they displayed their banners and
rode right up to it; and people thronged the walls to see their riding.
One by one they passed through the wicket of the gate:  which gate
itself was verily huge beyond measure, all built of great
ashlar-stones; and when they were within, it was like a hall somewhat
long and exceeding high, most fairly vaulted; midmost of the said hall
they rode through a noble arch on their right hand, and lo another hall
exceeding long, but lower than the first, with many glazen windows set
in its townward wall; and when they looked through these, they saw the
river running underneath; for this was naught but the lower bridge of
the city and they learned afterwards and saw, that above the vault of
this long bridge rose up the castle, chamber on chamber, till its
battlements were level with the highest towers of the wall on the hill
top.

Thus they passed the bridge, and turning to the left at its ending,
came into the Water-Street of Goldburg, where the river, with wide
quays on either side thereof, ran betwixt the houses.  As for these,
beneath the dwellings went a fair arched passage like to the ambulatory
of an abbey; and every house all along this street was a palace for its
goodliness.  The houses were built of white stones and red and grey;
with shapely pillars to the cloister, and all about carvings of imagery
and knots of flowers; goodly were the windows and all glazed, as fair
as might be.  On the river were great barges, and other craft such as
were not sea-goers, river-ships that might get them through the bridges
and furnished with masts that might be lowered and shipped.

Much people was gathered to see the chapmen enter, yet scarce so many
as might be looked for in so goodly a town; yea, and many of the folk
were clad foully, and were haggard of countenance, and cried on the
chapmen for alms.  Howbeit some were clad gaily and richly enough, and
were fair of favour as any that Ralph had seen since he left Upmeads:
and amongst these goodly folk were women not a few, whose gear and
bearing called to Ralph's mind the women of the Wheatwearers whom he
had seen erst in the Burg of the Four Friths, whereas they were
somewhat wantonly clad in scanty and thin raiment.  And of these,
though they were not all thralls, were many who were in servitude:
for, as Clement did Ralph to wit, though the tillers of the soil, and
the herdsmen, in short the hewers of wood and drawers of water, were
men masterless, yet rich men might and did buy both men and women for
servants in their houses, and for their pleasure and profit in divers
wise.

So they rode to their hostel in the market place, which lay a little
back from the river in an ingle of the ridge and one of its buttresses;
and all round the said market were houses as fair as the first they had
seen: but above, on the hill-sides, save for the castle and palace of
the Queen (for a woman ruled in Goldburg), were the houses but low,
poorly built of post and pan, and thatched with straw, or reed, or
shingle.  But the great church was all along one side of the market
place; and albeit this folk was somewhat wild and strange of faith for
Christian men, yet was it dainty and delicate as might be, and its
steeples and bell-towers were high and well builded, and adorned
exceeding richly.

So they lighted down at their hostel, and never had Ralph seen such
another, for the court within was very great and with a fair garden
filled with flowers and orchard-trees, and amidst it was a fountain of
fresh water, built in the goodliest fashion of many-coloured
marble-stones. And the arched and pillared way about the said court was
as fair as the cloister of a mitred abbey; and the hall for the guests
was of like fashion, vaulted with marvellous cunning, and with a row of
pillars amidmost.

There they abode in good entertainment; yet this noted Ralph, that as
goodly as was the fashion of the building of that house, yet the
hangings and beds, and stools, and chairs, and other plenishing were no
richer or better than might be seen in the hostelry of any good town.

So they went bedward, and Ralph slept dreamlessly, as was mostly his
wont.



