CHAPTER 31

Ralph Brings Ursula Home to the High House


Ralph speedily came to Richard's house and entered the chamber, and
found Ursula alone therein, clad in the daintiest of her woman's gear
of the web of Goldburg.  She rose up to meet him, and he took her in
his arms, and said: "Now is come the very ending of our journey that we
so often longed for; and all will be ready by then we come to the High
House."

"Ah," she said, as she clung to him, "but they were happy days the days
of our journey; and to-morrow begins a new life."

"Nay," he said, "but rather this even; shall it be loathly to thee,
lady?"

She said:  "There will be many people whom I knew not yesterday."
"There will be but me," he said, "when the night hath been dark for a
little."

She kissed him and said nought.  And therewithal came some of Richard's
folk, for it was his house, and led with them a white palfrey for
Ursula's riding, dight all gay and goodly.

"Come then," said Ralph, "thou needest not to fear the ancient house,
for it is kind and lovely, and my father and my mother thou hast seen
already, and they love thee.  Come then, lest the hall be grown too
dusk for men to see thy fairness."  "Yea, yea," she said, "but first
here is a garland I made for thee, and one also for me, while I was
abiding thee after the battle, and my love and my hope is woven into
it."  And she set it on his head, and said, "O thou art fair, and I did
well to meet thee in the dark wood." Then he kissed her dearly on the
mouth and led her forth, and none went with them, and they mounted and
went their ways.

But Ralph said:  "I deem that we should ride the meadow to the bridge,
because that way lies the great door of the hall, and if I know my
father and Nicholas they will look for us that way.  Dost thou yet fear
these dead men, sweetheart, whom our folk slew this morning?" "Nay,"
she said, "it has been a long time since the morning, and they, and
their fieriness which has so burned out, are now to me as a tale that
hath been told.  It is the living that I am going to, and I hope to do
well by them."

Came they then to the bridge-end and there was no man there, nought but
the kine that were wandering about over the dewy grass of eventide.
Then they rode over the bridge and through the orchard, and still there
was no man, and all gates were open wide.  So they came into the
base-court of the house, and it also was empty of folk; and they came
to the great doors of the hall and they were open wide, and they could
see through them that the hall was full of folk, and therein by the
light of the low sun that streamed in at the shot-window at the other
end they saw the faces of men and the gleam of steel and gold.

So they lighted down from their horses, and took hand in hand and
entered bright-faced and calm, and goodly beyond the goodliness of men;
then indeed all that folk burst forth into glad cries, and tossed up
their weapons, and many wept for joy.

As they went slowly up the long hall (and it was thirty fathom of
length) Ralph looked cheerfully and friendly from side to side, and
beheld the faces of the Shepherds and the Champions, and the men of
Wulstead, and his own folk; and all they cried hail to him and the
lovely and valiant Lady.  Then he looked up to the high-seat, and saw
that his father's throne was empty, and his mother's also; but behind
the throne stood a knight all armed in bright armour holding the banner
of Upmeads; but his father and mother stood on the edge of the dais to
meet him and Ursula; and when they came up thither these old folk
embraced them and kissed them and led them up to the table.  Then Ralph
bade Ursula sit by his mother, and made him ready to sit by his father
in all love and duty.  But King Peter stayed him and said:  "Nay, dear
son, not there, but here shalt thou sit, thou saviour of Upmeads and
conqueror of the hearts of men; this is a little land, but therein
shall be none above thee." And therewith he set Ralph down in the
throne, and Ralph, turning to his left hand, saw that it was Ursula,
and not his mother, who sat beside him.  But at the sight of these two
in the throne the glad cries and shouts shook the very timbers of the
roof, and the sun sank under while yet they cried hail to the King of
Upmeads.

Then were the lights brought and the supper, and all men fell to feast,
and plenteous was the wine in the hall; and sure since first men met to
eat together none have been merrier than they.

But now when men had well eaten, and the great cup called the River of
Upmeads was brought in, the cupbearers, being so bidden before, brought
it last of all to King Peter, and he stood up with the River in his
hand and spoke aloud, and said: "Lords and warriors, and good people
all, here I do you to wit, that it is not because my son Ralph has come
home to-day and wrought us a great deliverance, and that my love hath
overcome me; it is not for this cause that I have set him in my throne
this even; but because I see and perceive that of all the kindred he is
meetest to sit therein so long as he liveth; unless perchance this
lovely and valiant woman should bear him a son even better than
himself--and so may it be.  Therefore I do you all to wit that this
man is the King of Upmeads, and this woman is his Lady and Queen; and
so deem I of his prowess, and his wisdom, and kindliness, that I trow
he shall be lord and servant of other lands than Upmeads, and shall
draw the good towns and the kindreds and worthy good lords into peace
and might and well-being, such as they have not known heretofore.  Now
within three days shall mass be sung in the choir of St. Laurence, and
then shall King Ralph swear on the gospels such oaths as ye wot of, to
guard his people, and help the needy, and oppress no man, even as I
have sworn it.  And I say to you, that if I have kept the oath to my
power, yet shall he keep it better, as he is mightier than I.

"Furthermore, when he hath sworn, then shall the vassals swear to him
according to ancient custom, to be true to him and hardy in all due
service.  But so please you I will not abide till then, but will kneel
to him and to his Lady and Queen here and now."

Even so he did, and took Ralph's hand in his and swore service to him
such as was due; and he knelt to Ursula also, and bade her all thanks
for what she had done in the helping of his son; and they raised him up
and made much of him and of Ralph's mother; and great was the joy of
all folk in the hall.

So the feast went on a while till the night grew old, and folk must
fare bedward.  Then King Peter and his wife brought Ralph and Ursula to
the chamber of the solar, the kingly chamber, which was well and goodly
dight with hangings and a fair and glorious bed, and was newly decked
with such fair flowers as the summer might furnish; and at the
threshold King Peter stayed them and said: "Kinsman, and thou, dear
friend, this is become your due chamber and resting-place while ye live
in the world, and this night of all others it shall be a chamber of
love; for ye are, as it were, new wedded, since now first ye are come
amongst the kindred as lover and beloved; and thou, Ursula, art now at
last the bride of this ancient house; now tell me, doth it not look
friendly and kindly on thee?"

"O yea, yea," she said.  "Come thou, my man and my darling and let us
be alone in the master-chamber of this ancient House."

Then Ralph drew her unto him; and the old man blessed them and prayed
for goodly offspring for them, that the House of Upmeads might long
endure.

And thus were they two left alone amidst the love and hope of the
kindred, as erst they lay alone in the desert.



CHAPTER 32

Yet a Few Words Concerning Ralph of Upmeads


Certain it is that Ralph failed not of his promise to the good Prior of
St. Austin's at Wulstead, but went to see him speedily, and told him
all the tale of his wanderings as closely as he might, and hid naught
from him; which, as ye may wot, was more than one day's work or two or
three.  And ever when Ralph thus spoke was a brother of the House
sitting with the Prior, which brother was a learned and wise man and
very speedy and deft with his pen.  Wherefore it has been deemed not
unlike that from this monk's writing has come the more part of the tale
above told.  And if it be so, it is well.

Furthermore, it is told of Ralph of Upmeads that he ruled over his
lands in right and might, and suffered no oppression within them, and
delivered other lands and good towns when they fell under tyrants and
oppressors; and for as kind a man as he was in hall and at hearth, in
the field he was a warrior so wise and dreadful, that oft forsooth the
very sound of his name and rumour of his coming stayed the march of
hosts and the ravage of fair lands; and no lord was ever more beloved.
Till his deathday he held the Castle of the Scaur, and cleansed the
Wood Perilous of all strong-thieves and reivers, so that no high-street
of a good town was safer than its glades and its byways.  The new folk
of the Burg of the Four Friths made him their lord and captain, and the
Champions of the Dry Tree obeyed him in all honour so long as any of
them lasted.  He rode to Higham and offered himself as captain to the
abbot thereof, and drave out the tyrants and oppressors thence, and
gave back peace to the Frank of Higham.  Ever was he true captain and
brother to the Shepherd-folk, and in many battles they followed him;
and were there any scarcity or ill hap amongst them, he helped them to
the uttermost of his power.  The Wood Debateable also he cleared of
foul robbers and reivers, and rooted out the last of the Burg-devils,
and delivered three good towns beyond the wood from the cruelty of the
oppressor.

Once in every year he and Ursula his wife visited the Land of
Abundance, and he went into the castle there as into a holy place, and
worshipped the memory of the Lady whom he had loved so dearly.  With
all the friends of his quest he was kind and well-beloved.

In about two years from the day when he rode home, came to him the Lord
Bull of Utterbol with a chosen band, of whom were both Otter and
Redhead.  That very day they came he was about putting his foot in the
stirrup to ride against the foemen; so Bull and his men would not go
into the High House to eat, but drank a cup where they stood, and
turned and rode with him straightway, and did him right manly service
in battle; and went back with him afterwards to Upmeads, and abode with
him there in feasting and joyance for two months' wearing.  And thrice
in the years that followed, when his lands at home seemed safest and
most at peace, Ralph took a chosen band, and Ursula with them, and
Clement withal, and journeyed through the wastes and the mountains to
Utterbol, and passed joyous days with his old thrall of war, Bull Nosy,
now become a very mighty man and the warder of the peace of the
Uttermost lands.

Clement and Katherine came oft to the High House, and Katherine
exceeding often; and she loved and cherished Ursula and lived long in
health of body and peace of mind.

All the days that Ralph of Upmeads lived, he was the goodliest of men,
and no man to look on him had known it when he grew old; and when he
changed his life, an exceeding ancient man, he was to all men's eyes in
the very blossom of his age.

As to Ursula his wife, she was ever as valiant and true as when they
met in the dark night amidst of the Eastland wood.  Eight goodly
children she bore him, and saw four generations of her kindred wax up;
but even as it was with Ralph, never was she less goodly of body, nay
rather, but fairer than when first she came to Upmeads; and the day
whereon any man saw her was a day of joyful feast to him, a day to be
remembered for ever.  On one day they two died and were laid together
in one tomb in the choir of St. Laurence of Upmeads.  AND HERE ENDS THE
TALE OF THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END.


