Chapter XLVIII

The boat was well loaded that afternoon, and they had a heavy pull
round, and hard work afterwards to carry all the articles up. William
and Ready were, therefore, not sorry when their work was done, and they
went to bed as soon as they had taken their supper.

At sunrise, they went back to the bay in the boat, which they hauled
up, and then proceeded to the house, where they found that everyone was
ready to start. Mr. Seagrave had collected all the animals, and they
set off; the marks on the trees were very plain, and they had no
difficulty in finding their way; but they had a good deal of trouble
with the goats and sheep, and did not get on very fast. It was three
hours before they got clear of the cocoa-nut grove, and Mrs. Seagrave
was quite tired out. At last they arrived, and Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave
could not help exclaiming "How beautiful!"

When they came to where the tents were pitched by the side of the
bananas, they were equally pleased: it was quite a fairy spot. Mrs.
Seagrave went into her tent to repose after her fatigue; the goats and
sheep were allowed to stray away as they pleased; the dogs lay down,
panting with their long journey; Juno put Albert on the bed while she
went with William to collect fuel to cook the dinner; Ready went to the
pits to get some water, while Mr. Seagrave walked about, examining the
different clumps of trees with which the meadow was studded.

When Ready returned with the water, he called the dogs, and went back
towards the yam plantation. Tommy followed them; the dogs went into the
yams, and were soon barking furiously, which pleased Tommy very much;
when, of a sudden, out burst again in a drove all the pigs, followed by
the dogs, and so close to Tommy that he screamed with fright, and
tumbled head over heels.

"I thought you were there, my gentlemen," said Ready, looking after the
pigs; "the sooner we fence you out the better."

The pigs scampered away, and went into the cocoa-nut grove as they had
done before. The dogs followed the pigs, and did not return for a long
while afterwards.

It was late before the dinner was ready, and they were all very glad to
go early to bed.

At day dawn, William and Ready had again started, and walked through
the cocoa-nut grove back to the house, to bring round in the boat the
articles of furniture and the clothes which had been left. Having
collected everything in the house, and procured some more pork and
flour from the storehouse, they completed the load by spearing one of
the turtles which remained, and putting it into the bottom of the boat;
they then set off again for their new residence, and arrived in time
for breakfast.

"What a delightful spot this is!" said Mrs. Seagrave. "I think we ought
always to make it our summer residence, and only go back to the house
during the rainy season."

"It is much cooler here, madam, during the summer, and much more
pleasant; but we are more protected in the house by the cocoa-nut
grove."

"Yes; that is true, and it is very valuable during the rainy season;
but it makes it warmer in the summer time. I like the change, Ready,
and shall be sorry when we have to go back again."

"Now I must go, and help Juno to cut up the turtle," said Ready. "We
must make our larder among the banana trees."

"But what are we all to do, Ready?" said Mr. Seagrave. "We must not be
idle."

"No, sir; but I think we must give up this day to putting everything to
rights, and making everything comfortable inside the tents; to-morrow
we will commence the ditch and hedge round the yam plantation. We need
not work very hard at it, for I don't think the pigs will venture here
again, as I mean to tie up all the dogs round the yam patch every
night, and their barking will keep them off."

"That will be a very good plan, Ready. What beautiful food there is for
the sheep and goats!"

"Yes; this must be their future residence for the best part of the
year. I think to-morrow we will begin a piece of the ditch, and show
William how to put in the cuttings of prickly pear for the hedge, and
then, I should propose that you and I go to the cove to examine the
stores and select what it will be necessary to bring round. I think you
said that you must go yourself?"

"Yes, Ready, I wish to go. When we have made our selection, I will
return, and then you and William, who is more used to the boat than I
am, can bring the stores round. I presume we shall not bring them
here?"

"No, sir, we will take them round to the storehouse. When we have done
that job, we must then commence our alterations and our stockade."



Chapter XLIX

The next morning they went with their shovels to the yam plantation,
and commenced their work. As the ground was soft and swampy, the labour
was very easy. The ditch was dug nearly a yard wide, and the earth
thrown up on a bank inside. They then went to where the large patch of
prickly pears grew, and cut a quantity, which they planted on the top
of the bank. Before night, they had finished about nine or ten yards of
the hedge and ditch.

"I don't think that the pigs will get over that when it is finished,"
said Ready, "and William will be able to get on by himself when we are
gone, as well as if we were with him."

"I'll try if I cannot shoot a pig or two," said William.

"Let it be a young one, then; we must not kill the old ones. Now I
think we may as well go back. Juno is carrying in the supper."

Before Mr. Seagrave and Ready started on the following morning, the
latter gave William directions as to the boat. The provisions and the
knapsack having been already prepared, they took leave of Mrs.
Seagrave, and set off, each armed with a musket, and Ready with his axe
slung over his shoulder. They had a long walk before them, as they had
first to find their way back to the house, and from thence had to walk
through the wood to the cove.

In two hours after leaving the house they reached the spot where they
had first landed. The rocks near to it were strewed with timber and
planks, which lay bleaching in the sun, or half-buried in the sand. Mr.
Seagrave sat down, and sighed deeply as he said, "Ready, the sight of
these timbers, of which the good ship Pacific was built, recalls
feelings which I had hoped to have dismissed from my mind; but I cannot
help them rising up. The remains of this vessel appear to me as the
last link between us and the civilised world, which we have been torn
from, and all my thoughts of home and country, and I may say all my
longing for them, are revived as strong as ever."

"And very natural that they should, Mr. Seagrave; I feel it also. I am
content, it is true, because I have nothing to wish or look forward to;
but still I could not help thinking of poor Captain Osborn and my
shipmates, as I looked upon the wreck, and wishing that I might take
them by the hand again. It is very natural that one should do so. Why,
sir, do you know that I feel unhappy even about the poor ship. We
sailors love our vessels, especially when they have good qualities, and
the Pacific was as fine a vessel as ever was built. Now, sir, I feel
quite melancholy when I see her planks and timbers lying about here.
But, sir, if we cannot help feeling as we do, it is our duty to check
the feeling, so that it does not get the mastery over us. We can do no
more."

"Very true, Ready," said Mr. Seagrave, rising up; "it is not only
useless, but even sinful to indulge in them, as they only can lead to
our repining at the decrees of heaven. Let us now examine the rocks,
and see if anything has been thrown up that may be of use to us."

They walked round, but, with the exception of spars and a barrel or two
of tar, they could find nothing of value. There was no want of staves
and iron hoops of broken casks, and these, Ready observed, would make
excellent palings for the garden when they had time to bring them
round.

After they had returned, they sat down to rest themselves, and then
they went to the tents in the cocoa-nut grove, in which they had
collected the articles thrown up when the ship went to pieces.

"Why, the pigs have been at work here!" said Ready; "they have
contrived to open one cask of flour somehow or another; look, sir - I
suppose it must have been shaky, or they could not have routed into it;
the canvas is not good for much, I fear; fortunately, we have several
bolts of new, which I brought on shore. Now, sir, we will see what
condition the stores are in. All these are casks of flour, and we run
no risk in opening them, and seeing if they are in good order."

The first cask which was opened had a cake round it as hard as a board;
but when it was cut through with the axe, the inside was found in a
good state.

"That's all right, sir; and I presume the others will be the same; the
salt water has got in so far and made a crust, which has preserved the
rest. But now let us go to dinner, and to work afterwards."



