Chapter XX

Everything was now preparing for their removal to the leeward side of
the island. Ready had nearly completed the boat; he had given it a
thorough repair, and fitted a mast and sail. William and Mr. Seagrave
continued to collect and secure the various articles thrown on shore,
particularly such as would be injured by their exposure to the weather:
these they rolled or carried into the cocoa-nut grove, so as to be
sheltered from the sun; but there were so many things thrown on shore
day after day, that they hardly knew what they had: but they secured
case and cask one after another, waiting for a better opportunity to
examine their contents. At last they collected a great many articles
together, and, with their shovels, covered them over with sand, it
being impossible to get them from the beach without more time than they
could spare.

Neither was Mrs. Seagrave, who was now getting quite strong, or Juno,
idle. They had made up everything that they could in packages, ready
for moving. On the eighth day after the gale, they were ready, and it
was arranged that Ready should put into the boat the bedding and canvas
of one tent, and should take William with him on his expedition. Having
transported this safe, he should return for a load of the most
necessary articles, and then the family should walk through the grove
to the other side of the island, and remain there with Mr. Seagrave
while Ready and William returned for the other tent; and after that,
the boat should make as many trips as the weather would permit, till
they had brought all the things absolutely required. It was a lovely
calm morning when Ready and William pushed off in the boat, which was
well loaded; and as soon as they were clear of the cove they hoisted
the sail, and went away before the wind along the coast. In two hours
they had run to the eastern end of the island, and hauled up close
inshore: the point which ran out, and at the end of which there was an
inlet, was not a mile from them, and in a very short time they had
lowered the sail, and were pulling in for the sandy beach.

"You see, William, it is fortunate for us that we shall always have a
fair wind when we come down loaded, and only have to pull our empty
boat back again."

"Indeed it is. How many miles do you think it is from the cove to this
part of the island?"

"About six or seven, not more: the island, you see, is long and narrow.
Now let us get the things out and carry them up, and then we will be
back to the cove long before dark."

The boat was soon unloaded, but they had some way to carry up the
things. "We shall not mind such a gale as we had the other day when our
tents are pitched here, William," said Ready, "for we shall be
protected by the whole width of the cocoa-nut grove. We shall hardly
feel the wind, although we shall the rain, for that will come down in
torrents."

"I must go and see how our spring gets on," said William, "and get a
drink from it."

Willy reported the spring to be up to the brim with water, and that he
had never drunk water so excellent. They then pushed off the boat, and,
after rowing for about two hours or more, found themselves at the
entrance of the cove, and Mrs. Seagrave, with Tommy by her side, waving
her handkerchief to them.

They very soon pulled in to the beach, and, landing, received the
congratulations of the whole party at their first successful voyage,
and all expressed their delight at its having proved so much shorter
than had been anticipated.

"Tommy will go next time," said Master Tommy.

"By and by, when Tommy grows a little taller," replied Ready.

"Massa Tommy, you come help me to milk the goats," said Juno.

"Yes, Tommy milk the goats," said the little urchin, running after
Juno.

"You must be almost tired of eating nothing but salt meat and biscuit,
ma'am," said Ready, as they sat down to their meal; "but when we are
all safe on the other side of the island we hope to feed you better. At
present it is hard work and hard fare."

"As long as the children are well, I care very little about it; but I
must say that, after the last gale, I am as anxious as you to be on the
other side of the island, especially after the account William has
given me of it. It must be a paradise! When do we set off?"

"Not till the day after to-morrow, ma'am, I should think; for you see I
must have another trip for the cooking utensils and the bundles which
you have made up. If you will spare Juno to walk through the wood with
William to-morrow, we will then have the tent ready for you and the
children."



Chapter XXI

Old Ready had his boat loaded and had made sail for the other side of
the island long before the family were up; indeed, before they were
dressed he had landed his whole cargo on the beach, and was sitting
down quietly taking his breakfast. As soon as he had eaten the beef and
biscuit which he had taken with him, he carried up the things which he
had brought, and commenced arrangements for setting up the tent,
intending to await the arrival of William and Juno, that they might
assist him in getting up the spars and canvas over it.

About ten o'clock William made his appearance, leading one of the goats
by a string, followed by the others. Juno came after with the sheep,
also holding one with a cord; the rest had very quietly joined the
procession. "Here we are at last!" said William laughing; "we have had
terrible work in the woods, for Nanny would run on one side of a tree
when I went on the other, and then I had to let go the string. We fell
in with the pigs again, and Juno gave such a squall!"

"I tink 'em wild beast," said Juno. "Ah! what a nice place! Missis will
like to live here."

"Yes, it is a very nice place, Juno; and you'll be able to wash here,
and never mind about saving the water."

"I am thinking," said William, "how we are to get the fowls here; they
are not very wild, but still we cannot catch them."

"I'll bring them with me to-morrow, William."

"But how will you catch them?"

"Wait till they are gone to roost, and then you may catch them when you
please."

"And I suppose the pigeons and the pigs must run wild?"

"The best thing we can do with them."

"Then we shall have to shoot them, I suppose?"

"Well, William, so we shall; and the pigeons also, when they have
become plentiful, if we remain here so long. We shall soon be well
stocked and live in plenty. But now you must help me to get the tent up
and everything in order, so that your mamma may find things comfortable
on her arrival, for she will be very tired, I dare say, walking through
the wood."

"Mamma is much better than she was," replied William. "I think she will
soon be quite strong again, especially when she comes to live at this
beautiful place."

"We have a great deal of work to do, more than we can get through
before the rainy season; which is a pity, but it can't helped; by this
time next year we shall be more comfortable."

"Why, what have we to do besides putting up the tents and shifting over
here?"

"In the first place we have to build a house, and that will take a long
while. Then we ought to make a little garden, and sow the seeds which
your father brought from England with him."

"0h! that will be nice; where shall we make it, Ready?"

"We must put a fence across that point of land, and dig up all the
brushwood; the mould is very good."

"Then what next?"

"Then we shall want a storehouse for all the things we have got, and
all that are in the wood and on the beach: and consider what a many
trips we shall have to make with the little boat to bring them all
round."

"Yes, that is very true, Ready. Have we anything more to do?"

"Plenty; we have to build a turtle-pond and a fish-pond, and a
bathing-place for Juno to wash the children in. But first we must make
a proper well at the spring, so as to have plenty of fresh water: now
there's enough for a year's hard work at least."

"Well, let us once get mamma and the children here, and we will work
hard."

"I should wish very much to see it all done, William," said Ready. "I
hope my life will be spared till it is done, at all events."

"But why do you say that, Ready? you are an old man, but you are strong
and healthy."

"I am so now; but what does the Book say? - `In the midst of life we
are in death'. You are young and healthy, and promise a long life; but
who knows but you may be summoned away tomorrow. Can I, then, an old
man, worn out with hardships, expect to live long? No - no, William!
Still I should like to remain here as long as I can be useful, and then
I trust I may depart in peace. I never wish to leave this island; and I
have a kind of feeling that my bones will remain on it. God's will be
done!"

For some time after Ready had finished, neither of them said a word,
but continued their employment, stretching out the canvas of the tent,
and fastening it down to the ground with pegs. At last William broke
the silence.

"Ready, did you not say your Christian name was Masterman?"

"So it is, William."

"It is a very odd Christian name! You were called after some other
person?"

"Yes, I was, William; he was a very rich man."

"Do you know, Ready, I should like very much if you will one day tell
me your history - I mean your whole life, from the time you were a
boy."

"Well, perhaps I may, William; for there are many parts of my life
which would prove a lesson to others: but that must be after we have
got through our work."

"How old are you, Ready?"

"I am turned of sixty-four; a very old age for a seaman. I could not
obtain employment on board of a vessel if it were not that I am well
known to several captains."

"But why do you say `old for a seaman'?"

"Because sailors live faster than other people, partly from the
hardships which they undergo, and partly from their own fault in
drinking so much spirits; and then they are too often reckless and care
nothing for their healths."

"But you never drink spirits now?"

"No, never, William; but in my early days I was as foolish as others.
Now, Juno, you may bring in the bedding. We have two or three hours
yet, William; what shall we do next?"

"Had we not better make the fireplace all ready for cooking?"

"It was what I was going to propose, if you had not. I shall be here
to-morrow long before any of you, and I will take care that supper is
ready on your arrival."

"I brought a bottle of water in my knapsack," replied William, "not so
much for the water, as because I want to milk the goats and take back
the milk for baby."

"You proved yourself not only thoughtful but kind, William: now while
you and Juno fetch the stones for the fireplace, I will stow away under
the trees the things I have brought in the boat."

"Shall we let the goats and sheep loose, Ready?"

"Oh, yes, - there is no fear of their straying; the herbage here is
better than on the other side, and there is plenty of it."

"Well, I will let Nanny go as soon as Juno has milked her. Now, Juno,
let us see how many stones we can carry at once."

In an hour the fireplace was made, Ready had done all that he could,
the goats were milked and let loose, and then William and Juno set off
on their journey back.

Ready went down to the beach. On his arrival there, he observed a small
turtle: creeping up softly he got between it and the water, and
succeeded in turning it over. "That will do for to-morrow," said he, as
he stepped into the boat; and laying hold of the oars, he pulled out of
the bay to return to the cove.



