Chapter XXIV

The next morning, as soon as breakfast was over, Mr. Seagrave observed:
"Now that we have so many things to do, I think, Ready, we ought to lay
down a plan of operations; method is everything when work is to be
done: now tell me what you propose shall be our several occupations for
the next week, for to-morrow is Sunday; and although we have not yet
been able to honour the day as we should, I think that now we must and
ought to keep it holy."

"Yes, sir," replied Ready. "To-morrow we will rest from our labour, and
ask God's blessing upon our endeavours during the six days of the week;
and now, as to your proposition, Mr. Seagrave, shall we begin first
with the lady?"

"You must not consider that you have ladies with you now, Ready," said
Mrs. Seagrave, "at least, not fine ladies. My health and strength are
recovering fast, and I mean to be very useful. I propose to assist Juno
in all the domestic duties, such as the cookery and washing, to look
after and teach the children, mend all the clothes, and make all that
is required, to the best of my ability. If I can do more I will."

"I think we may be satisfied with that, Mr. Seagrave," replied Ready.
"Now, sir, the two most pressing points, with the exception of building
the house, are to dig up a piece of ground, and plant our potatoes and
seeds; and to make a turtle-pond, so as to catch the turtle and put
them in before the season is over."

"You are right," replied Mr. Seagrave; "but which ought to be done
first?"

"I should say the turtle-pond, as it will be only a few days' work for
you, Juno, and William. I shall not want your assistance for this next
week. I shall fix upon some spot, not far from here, where the trees
are thickest in the grove, and cut them down so as to clear out a space
in which we will, by and by, build our storerooms; and, as soon as the
rainy season has gone by, we can remove all our stores from the other
side of the island. It will occupy me the whole of the week, cutting
down the trees and sawing them into proper lengths, ready for building
the house, and then we must all join our strength and get it up without
delay."

"Can you really manage to get it up in time? How soon do you expect the
rains will come on?"

"In three or four weeks. After next week, I shall probably have the
assistance of two of you, if not of all. Now I think of it, I must
return to the cove."

"What for?"

"Don't you recollect, sir, your two-wheeled carriage, packed up in
matting, which was thrown on shore in the gale? You laughed when you
saw it, and said it would be of little use now; but the wheels and axle
will he very useful, as we can make a wide path to the place when I cut
down the trees, and wheel out the logs much more easily than we can
drag or carry them."

"That is an excellent idea. It will save a great deal of labour."

"I expect that it will, sir. William and I will go away early on Monday
morning, and be back before breakfast. To-day we will fix upon the
spots where our garden is to be, our turtle-pond to be made, and the
trees to be cut down. That shall be our business, Mr. Seagrave; and
William and Juno may put things a little more to rights here."

Mr. Seagrave and Ready then walked down to the beach, and, after
surveying the reefs for some time, Ready said, "You see, Mr. Seagrave,
we do not want too much water for a turtle-pond, as, if it is too deep,
there is a difficulty in catching them when we want them: what we want
is a space of water surrounded by a low wall of stones, so that the
animals cannot escape, for they cannot climb up, although they can walk
on the shelving sand with their flippers. Now the reef here is high out
of the water, and the space within the reef and the beach is deep
enough, and the rocks on the beach nearly fill up that side and prevent
them crawling away by the shore. We have, therefore, little more to do
than to fill up the two other sides, and then our pond will be
complete."

"I see it will not be a long job either, if we can find loose rocks
enough," replied Mr. Seagrave.

"Almost all those which are on the beach are loose," replied Ready,
"and there are plenty close to us: some of them will be too heavy to
carry, but they can be brought here by the aid of handspikes and
crowbars. Suppose we make a signal for William and Juno, and set them
to work."

Mr. Seagrave called and waved his hat, and Juno and William came down
to them. Juno was ordered to go back for two handspikes, while Ready
explained to William what was to be done. Having stayed with them and
assisted them for some time after Juno had returned with the
implements, Mr. Seagrave and Ready proceeded to the point, to fix upon
a spot for a garden, leaving William and Juno to continue their labour.



Chapter XXV

Mr. Seagrave and Ready then continued their way along the beach, until
they arrived at the point which the latter had considered as a
convenient place to make the garden. They found a sufficiency of mould;
and as the point was narrow at its joining on to the mainland, no great
length of enclosure would be required.

"You see, sir," said Ready, "we can wait till after the rainy season is
over before we put up the fence, and we can prepare it in the meantime,
when the weather will permit us to work. The seeds and potatoes will
not come up until after the rains are finished; so all we have to do is
to dig up the ground, and put them in as fast as we can. We cannot make
a large garden this year; but our potatoes we must contrive to get in,
if we cannot manage anything else."

"If we have no fence to make," replied Mr. Seagrave, "I think we shall
be able to clear away quite enough ground in a week to put in all that
we require."

"The first job will be to pull up the small brushwood," said Ready,
"and turn up the ground; the larger plants we must leave, if we have
not time. Tommy might be of some use here in taking away the shrubs as
you pull them up; but we had better now go on to the grove, and choose
the spot for cutting down the trees. I have made my mark."

Ready and Mr. Seagrave proceeded in the direction which the former had
pointed out, until they arrived at a spot on a rising ground, where the
trees were so thick that it was not very easy to pass through them.

"There is the place," said Ready. "I propose to cut all the timber we
want for the houses out of this part of the grove, and to leave an open
square place, in the centre of which we will build our storerooms. You
see, sir, if necessary, with a very little trouble we might turn it
into a place of protection and defence, as a few palisades here and
there between the trees would make it, what they call in the East
Indies, a stockade."

"Very true, but I trust we shall not require it for such a purpose."

"I hope so too, but there is nothing like being prepared; however, we
have plenty to do before we can think of that. Now, sir, as dinner is
ready, suppose we return, and after dinner we will both commence our
tasks."

Juno and William returned to the dinner which Mrs. Seagrave had
prepared. They were both very warm with their work, which was very
hard, but very eager to finish their task. After dinner was over, Mrs.
Seagrave requested her husband, as he was about to go down to the
point, with the spade and a small hatchet in his hand, to take Tommy
with him, as she had a great deal to do, and could not watch him as
well as the baby and Caroline. So Mr. Seagrave took Tommy by the hand,
and led him to the point, and made him sit down close to him while he
cleared away the brushwood.

Mr. Seagrave worked very hard, and when he had cut down and cleared a
portion of the ground, he made Tommy carry away to a little distance,
and pile in a heap, the bushes which he had cleared away. When Mr.
Seagrave had cleared away a large piece of ground with his hatchet, he
then took his spade to dig at the roots and turn up the mould, leaving
Tommy to amuse himself. What Tommy did for about an hour, during which
Mr. Seagrave worked very diligently, his father did not observe; but
all of a sudden he began to cry; and when his father asked him the
reason, he did not answer, but only cried the more, until at last he
put his hands to his stomach, and roared most lustily. As he appeared
to be in very great pain, his father left off work, and led him up to
the tent, when Mrs. Seagrave came out, alarmed at his cries. Ready, who
had heard Tommy screaming for so long a while, thought that there might
be something serious, and left his work to ascertain the cause. When he
heard what had passed, he said:

"Depend upon it, the child has eaten something which has made him ill.
Tell me, Tommy, what did you eat when you were down there?"

"Berries," roared Tommy.

"I thought as much, ma'am," said Ready. "I must go and see what the
berries were." And the old man hastened down to the place where Mr.
Seagrave had been at work. In the meantime Mrs. Seagrave was much
alarmed lest the child should have poisoned himself, and Mr. Seagrave
went to search among the medicines for some castor-oil.

Ready returned just as he came back to the tent with the bottle of
castor-oil, and he told Ready that he was about to give Tommy a dose.

"Well, sir," replied Ready, who had a plant in his hand, "I don't think
you should give him any, for it appears to me that he has taken too
much already. This is, if I recollect right, the castor-oil plant, and
here are some of the castor-oil beans which Master Tommy has been
eating. Tell me, Tommy, did you eat them?"

"Yes," cried Tommy.

"I thought so: give him a little warm drink, ma'am, and he'll soon be
better: it will teach him not to eat berries or beans again."

What Ready said was true; nevertheless Master Tommy was very ill for
the whole of the day, and was put early to bed.



