Chapter XXIX

Ready had cut out and prepared the door-posts and window-frames from
timber which he had towed round from the cove. He now fixed four poles
in the earth upright at each corner, and then, with the assistance of
Mr. Seagrave, notched every log of cocoa-nut wood on both sides, where
it was to meet with the one crossing it, so that, by laying log upon
log alternately, they fitted pretty close, and had only to have the
chinks between them filled in with cocoa-nut leaves twisted very tight,
and forced between them: this was the work of William and Juno when no
more logs were ready for carrying; and, by degrees, the house rose up
from its foundation. The fireplace could not be made at once, as they
had either to find clay, or to burn shells into lime and build it up
with rocks and mortar; but a space was left for it. For three weeks
they worked very hard: as soon as the sides were up, they got on the
whole of the roof and rafters; and then, with the broad leaves of the
cocoa-nut trees which had been cut down, Ready thatched it very strong
and securely. At the end of the three weeks the house was secure from
the weather; and it was quite time, for the weather had begun to
change, the clouds now gathered thick, and the rainy season was
commencing.

"We have no time to lose, sir," said Ready to Mr. Seagrave. "We have
worked hard, but we must for a few days work harder still. We must fit
up the inside of the house, so as to enable Madam to get into it as
soon as possible."

The earth in the inside of the house was then beaten down hard, so as
to make a floor; and a sort of bedstead, about two feet from the
ground, running the whole length of the house, was raised on each side
of the interior: these were fitted with canvas screens to let down by
night. And then Ready and William took the last trip in the boat to
fetch the chairs and tables, which they did just before the coming on
of the first storm of the season. The bedding and all the utensils were
now taken into the house; and a little outhouse was built up to cook
in, until the fireplace could be made.

It was late on the Saturday night that the family shifted into the new
house; and fortunate it was that they had no further occasion for
delay, for on the Sunday the first storm burst upon them; the wind blew
with great force; and, although they were shielded from it, still the
cocoa-nut trees ground and sawed each other's stems as they bent their
heads to its force. The lightning was vivid, and the thunder appalling,
while the rain descended in a continual torrent. The animals left the
pastures, and sheltered themselves in the grove; and, although noonday,
it was so dark that they could not see to read.

"This, then, is the rainy season which you talked about, Ready," said
Mrs. Seagrave. "Is it always like this? If so, what shall we do?"

"No, madam; the sun will shine sometimes, but not for long at a time.
We shall be able to get out and do something every now and then almost
every day, but still we shall have rain, perhaps, for many days without
intermission, and we must work indoors."

"How thankful we ought to be that we have a house over our heads; we
should have been drowned in the tents."

"That I knew, madam, and therefore I was anxious to get a house over
your head; let us thank God for it."

"Indeed we ought," observed Mr. Seagrave; "and it is, indeed, time for
us to read the service."

The morning service was then performed in the new house. Violent as the
rain was, it did not penetrate through the thatch which had been put
on. Ready and William went out to secure the boat, which they were
afraid would be injured, and returned wet to the skin. The storm
continued without intermission the whole of the night, but they slept
dry and safe; and, when awakened by the noise of the thunder and the
pelting of the rain, they thanked God that they had found a dwelling in
the wilderness upon which they had been cast.



Chapter XXX

When they all rose up the next morning, the clouds had cleared off, and
the sun was shining bright. Ready and Juno were the first out of the
house - Ready with the telescope under his arm, which he always took
with him when he went his rounds, as he termed it, in the morning.

"Well, Juno," said Ready, "this is a fine morning after the rain."

"Yes, Massa Ready, very fine morning; but how I get fire light, and
make kittle boil for breakfast, I really don't know - stick and
cocoa-nut trash all so wet."

"Before I went to bed last night, Juno, I covered up the embers with
ashes, put some stones over them, and then some cocoa-nut branches, so
I think you will find some fire there yet. I was going my morning's
round, but I will stay a little and help you."

"Tank you, Massa Ready; plenty rain fell last night."

"Yes, not a little, Juno; you must not expect to find the water at the
well very clear this morning; indeed, I doubt if you will see the well
at all. Here's some stuff which is not very wet."

"I got plenty of fire, too," replied Juno, who had removed the branches
and stones, and was now on her knees blowing up the embers.

"You'll do very well now, Juno," said Ready; "besides, William will be
out directly - so I'll leave you."

Ready whistled to the dogs, who came bounding out, and then set off on
his round of inspection. He first directed his steps to the well in the
ravine; but, instead of the gushing spring and the limpid clear water,
with which the cask sunk for a well had been filled, there was now a
muddy torrent, rushing down the ravine, and the well was covered with
it, and not to be distinguished.

"I thought as much," said Ready, musing over the impetuous stream;
"well, better too much water than too little." Ready waded through, as
he wished to examine the turtle-pond, which was on the other side of
the stream. Finding all right, he again crossed the water, where it was
now spread wide over the sandy beach, until he came to the other point
where he had moored his boat, both by the head and stern, with a rope,
and a heavy stone made fast to it, as an anchor.

From this point, as usual, he surveyed the horizon with his telescope;
not that he thought that there was a chance of a vessel arriving among
these islands; but, still, as it was possible, he took the trouble; but
never except when he went out in the morning alone, as he was aware
that the very circumstance of his so doing would make Mr. Seagrave
melancholy and unsettled. As usual, he dropped the telescope on his
arm, after his survey, saying to himself, "Little use doing that."

The gale having blown offshore, the boat had dragged her moorings, and
was so far out that Ready could not get at her.

"Here's a puzzle," said the old man; "how foolish of me not to have
made a line fast to the shore! I'll not trust myself to John Shark by
swimming to the boat."

"Let me see." Ready took the halyards and sheets belonging to the
boat's sails, which be had left on the beach, and bent one on to the
other until he had sufficient length of rope. He then made a piece of
wood, about two feet long, fast by the middle to the end of the rope,
and, after one or two attempts, contrived to throw it into the boat.
The piece of wood caught under one of the thwarts, and this enabled him
to draw the boat to the shore.

Having baled out the water which had fallen into her during the storm,
he then landed again and examined the garden.

"Now to find the sheep and goats," said Ready, "and then my morning's
walk is over. Now, Romulus, now, Remus, boys, find them out," continued
he; and the dogs, who appeared to know what he was in search of, went
away in pursuit, and soon found the sheep and two of the goats, but the
third goat was not with them.

"Why, where can Black Nanny be?" muttered Ready, stopping a little
while; at last he heard a bleat, in a small copse of brush wood, to
which he directed his steps, followed by the dogs. "I thought as much,"
said he, as be perceived Nanny lying down in the copse with two
new-born kids at her side. "Come, my little fellows, we must find some
shelter for you," said he, taking one up under each arm. "Come, Nanny."

Ready walked back to the house, and brought in the kids, followed by
Nanny. He found Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave and the children all dressed.
Caroline and Tommy gave a scream of delight when they saw the little
kids, and even little Albert clapped his hands. As soon as Ready put
them down on the ground, Tommy and Caroline had each their arms round
one.

"I've brought an addition to our family, Mrs. Seagrave," said Ready:
"we must allow them to remain in the house until I can knock up a
little shelter for them. This is only a beginning; I expect we shall
soon have more."

As soon as the children could be persuaded to part with the kids, Nanny
was tied up in a corner, and was very content with fondling and nursing
her progeny. Juno and William brought in the breakfast, and as soon as
it was over, Mr. Seagrave said, "Now, Ready, I think we must hold a
council, and make arrangements as to our allotted duties and
employments during the rainy season. We have a great deal to do, and
must not be idle."

"Yes, sir, we have a great deal to do, and, to get through our work, we
must have order and method in our doings. I've lived long enough to
know how much can be done by regularity and discipline. Why, sir, there
is more work got out of men in a well-conducted man-of-war than there
can in the merchant service in double the time. And why so? Because
everything is in its place, and there is a place for everything."

"I agree with you," said Mrs. Seagrave; "method is everything. While
one careless little girl is looking for her thimble, another will have
finished her work."

"I assure you I never should have known what can be done by order and
arrangement, if I had not been pressed on board of a man-of-war. I
found that everything was done in silence. Every man was to his post;
everyone had a rope to haul upon, or a rope to let go; the boatswain
piped, and in a few seconds every sail was set or taken in as was
required. It seemed to me at first like magic. And you observe, Mr.
Seagrave, that when there is order and discipline, every man becomes of
individual importance. If I learnt nothing else on board of a
man-of-war, I learnt to make the most of time, and the most of the
strength which you could command."

"You are very right, Ready; you must teach us to do the same," replied
Mr. Seagrave.

"We have so much to do, that I hardly know where to begin; yet, sir, we
must work at present how we can, and when we can, until we have got
things into a little better order. We have done well up to the
present."

"What do you think we ought to do first?"

"Well, sir, our first job will be to haul up the boat and secure her
from harm; we will half-dock her in the sand, and cover her over, for I
do not think it will be safe to go in her now to the other side of the
island, where the sea will always be rough."

"There I perfectly agree with you. Now what is the next?"

"Why, sir, we must not leave the tents where they are, but take them
down, and as soon as they are dry, stow them away, for we may want them
by and by; then, sir, we must build a large outhouse for our stores and
provisions, with a thatched roof, and a floor raised about four feet
from the ground; and then, under the floor, the sheep and goats will
have a protection from the weather. Then there is the fish-pond to
make, and also a salt-pan to cut out of the rock. Then we have two more
long jobs. One is, to go through the woods and examine the stores we
have left on the other side of the island, sort and arrange them all
ready for bringing here after the rains are over; and we must also
explore the island a little, and find out what it produces; for at
present we know nothing of it: we may find a great many things useful
to us, a great many trees and fruits, and I hope and trust we may be
able to find some more grass for our live stock."

"I agree with you in all you say, Ready," replied Mr. Seagrave; "now
how shall we divide our strength?"

"We will not divide at present, sir, if you please. Juno has plenty to
do indoors with Mrs. Seagrave; William, and you, and I, will first
secure the boat and stow away the tents and gear; after that, we will
set about the outbuilding, and work at it when we can. If Juno has any
time to spare, she had better collect the cocoa-nut leaves, and pile
them up for fuel; and Tommy will, I dare say, go with her, and show her
how to draw them along."

"Yes, I'll show her," said Tommy, getting on his feet.

"Not just now, Tommy," said Ready, "but as soon as your mamma can spare
her to go with you. Come, sir, a few hours of weather like this is not
to be lost," continued Ready; "we shall have more rain before the day
is over, I expect. I will first go to the tent for the shovels; then I
will haul the boat round to the beach and meet you there. You and
William can take some cord, tie up a large bundle of cocoa-nut boughs,
sling it to the wheels, and draw it down to the beach and meet me."



