Chapter XXVII

"Now, William," said Ready, "if you are not very sleepy, perhaps you
would like to come with me to-night, and see if we cannot turn some of
the turtle, for the season is going away fast, and they will leave the
island very soon."

As soon as the sun had disappeared, William and Ready went down to the
beach, and sat quietly on a rock. In a short time, Ready perceived a
turtle crawling on the sand, and, desiring William to follow him
without speaking, walked softly down by the water's edge, so as to get
between the animal and the sea.

As soon as the turtle perceived them, it made for the water, but they
met it; and Ready, seizing hold of one of its fore-flippers, turned it
over on its back.

"You see, William, that is the way to turn a turtle: take care that he
does not catch you with his mouth, for, if he did, he would bite the
piece out. Now the animal cannot get away, for he can't turn over
again, and we shall find him here to-morrow morning; so we will now
walk along the beach, and see if we cannot find some more."

Ready and William remained till past midnight, and turned sixteen
turtle.

"I think that will do, William, for once: we have made a good night's
work of it, for we have provided food for many days. Tomorrow we must
put them all into the pond."

"How shall we carry such large animals?"

"We need not carry them; we must put some old canvas under them, and
haul them along by that means; we can easily do that on the smooth
sand."

"Why don't we catch some fish, Ready? We might put them into the
turtle-pond."

"They would not stay there long, William, nor could we easily get them
out if they did. I have often thought of getting some lines ready, and
yet the time has never come, for I feel sleepy after our day's work;
but as soon as the house is built, we will have them, and you shall be
fisherman-in-chief."

"But the fish will bite at night, will they not?"

"Oh yes, and better than they do in the daytime."

"Well, then, if you will get me a line and show me how, I will fish for
an hour or so after the work is done; I know mamma is getting tired of
salt meat, and does not think it good for Caroline."

"Well, then, I will get a bit of candle to-morrow night, and fit up two
fishing-lines. But I must go with you, William. We don't use much
candle, at all events."

"No, we are too glad to go to bed: but there are two or three boxes of
one sort or another up in the cove."

The next morning before breakfast all hands were employed in getting
the turtle into the pond. After breakfast, William and Juno finished
the pond where the walls had not been raised high enough; and, when
they returned to dinner, reported that their task was completed. Mr.
Seagrave also said that he had, he thought, cleared quite ground enough
for the present; and as Mrs. Seagrave wanted Juno to help her to wash
the linen that afternoon, it was agreed that William, Ready, and Mr.
Seagrave should all go down to the garden, and put in the potatoes.

Ready worked with the spade, while Mr. Seagrave and William cut the
potatoes in pieces, so as to have an eye in each piece. When they had
finished this work, Mr. Seagrave said - "Now that we have finished
cutting the potatoes, let us go and assist Ready in planting them and
the seeds which we have brought down with us."



Chapter XXVIII

That night Ready sat up for two or three hours working by candle-light
(William keeping him company), very busily engaged fitting up the
fishing-lines with leads and hooks. At last two were complete.

"What bait must we use, Ready?"

"I should think that the best would be one of the fish out of the
shells which are in the sand; but a piece of pork fat will, I dare say,
do as well."

"And whereabouts would you fish, Ready?"

"The best place, I should think, would be at the farthermost end of the
point, where I got the boat through the reef - the water is deep there
close to the rocks."

"I was thinking, Ready, if those gannets and men-of-war birds would be
good eating."

"Not very, William; they are very tough and very fishy: we must try for
those when we can get nothing better. Now that we have got in the seeds
and potatoes, we must all set to to-morrow morning to fell and carry
the timber. I think Mr. Seagrave had better use the axe with me; and
you and Juno can, when I have shown you how, hang the timber to the
axle, and wheel it out to the place where we have decided upon building
the house. And now we had better go to bed."

William, however, had made up his mind to do otherwise: he knew that
his mother would be very glad to have some fish, and he determined, as
the moon shone bright, to try if he could not catch some before he went
to bed; so he waited very quietly till he thought Ready was asleep as
well as the others, and then went out with the lines, and went down to
the beach, where he picked up three or four shells, and, breaking them
between two pieces of rock, took out the fish and baited his hooks. He
then walked to the point. It was a beautiful night; the water was very
smooth, and the moonbeams pierced deep below the surface. William threw
in his line, and as soon as the lead touched the bottom he pulled it up
about a foot, as Ready had instructed him; and he had not held his line
more than half a minute, when it was jerked so forcibly, that not
expecting it he was nearly hauled into the water; as it was, the fish
was so strong that the line slipped through his hand and scored his
fingers; but after a time he was able to pull it in, and he landed on
the beach a large silver-scaled fish, weighing nine or ten pounds. As
soon as he had dragged it so far away from the edge of the rocks as to
prevent its flapping into the water again, William took out the hook
and determined to try for another. His line was down as short a time as
before, when it was again jerked with violence; but William was this
time prepared, and he let out the line and played the fish till it was
tired, and then pulled it up, and found that the second fish was even
larger than the first. Satisfied with his success, he wound up his
lines, and, running a piece of string through the gills of the fish,
dragged them back to the tents, and hanged them to the pole, for fear
of the dogs eating them; he then went in, and was soon fast asleep. The
next morning William was the first up, and showed his prizes with much
glee; but Ready was very much displeased with him.

"You did very wrong, William, to run the risk which you did. If you
were resolved to catch fish, why did you not tell me, and I would have
gone with you? You say, yourself, that the fish nearly hauled you into
the water; suppose it had done so, or suppose a small shark instead of
one of these gropers (as we call them) had taken the bait, you must
have been jerked in; and the rocks are so steep there, that you would
not have been able to get out again before a shark had hold of you.
Think a moment what would have been the distress of your father and the
agony and despair of your poor mother, when this news should have
arrived."

"I was very wrong, Ready," replied William, "now that I think of it;
but I wanted to surprise and please my mother."

"That reason is almost sufficient to plead your pardon, my dear boy,"
replied Ready; "but don't do so again. And now let us say no more about
it; nobody will know that you have been in danger, and there's no harm
done; and you mustn't mind an old man scolding you a little."

"No, indeed, Ready, I do not, for I was very thoughtless; but I had no
idea that there was danger."

"There's your mother coming out of her tent," replied Ready.
"Good-morning, madam. Do you know what William has done for you last
night? Look, here are two beautiful fish, and very excellent eating
they are, I can tell you."

"I am quite delighted," replied Mrs. Seagrave.

Tommy clapped his hands and danced about, crying, "Fried fish for
dinner;" and Juno said, "Have very fine dinner to-day, Missy Caroline."

After breakfast they all set out for the grove, where Ready had been
cutting down the trees, taking with them the wheels and axle, and a
couple of stout ropes. Mr. Seagrave and Ready cut down the trees and
slung them to the axle, and Juno and William dragged them to the spot
where the house was to be built.

They were not sorry when dinner was ready, for it was very hard work.

That night, tired as they were, Ready and William went out, and turned
eight more turtle. They continued felling the cocoa-nut trees and
dragging the timber for the remainder of the week, when they considered
that they had nearly enough, and on Tuesday morning they commenced
building the house.



