CHAPTER 47.

    _Jesus with Elihu and Salome in Egypt. Tells the story of his
      journeys. Elihu and Salome praise God. Jesus goes to the
      temple in Heliopolis and is received as a pupil._

And Jesus came to Egypt land, and all was well. He tarried not upon
the coast; he went at once to Zoan, home of Elihu and Salome, who five
and twenty years before had taught his mother in their sacred school.

2  And there was joy when met these three. When last the son of Mary
saw these sacred groves he was a babe;

3  And now a man grown strong by buffetings of every kind; a teacher
who had stirred the multitudes in many lands.

4  And Jesus told the aged teachers all about his life; about his
journeyings in foreign lands; about the meetings with the masters and
about his kind receptions by the multitudes.

5  Elihu and Salome heard his story with delight; they lifted up their
eyes to heaven and said,

6  Our Father-God, let now thy servants go in peace, for we have seen
the glory of the Lord;

7  And we have talked with him, the messenger of love, and of the
covenant of peace on earth, good will to men.

8  Through him shall all the nations of the earth be blest; through
him, Immanuel.

9  And Jesus staid in Zoan many days; and then went forth unto the city
of the sun, that men call Heliopolis, and sought admission to the
temple of the sacred brotherhood.

10  The council of the brotherhood convened, and Jesus stood before
the hierophant; he answered all the questions that were asked with
clearness and with power.

11  The hierophant exclaimed, Rabboni of the rabbinate, why come you
here? Your wisdom is the wisdom of the gods; why seek for wisdom in
the halls of men?

12  And Jesus said, In every way of earth-life I would walk; in every
hall of learning I would sit; the heights that any man has gained,
these I would gain;

13  What any man has suffered I would meet, that I may know the
griefs, the disappointments and the sore temptations of my brother
man; that I may know just how to succor those in need.

14  I pray you, brothers, let me go into your dismal crypts; and I
would pass the hardest of your tests.

15  The master said, Take then the vow of secret brotherhood. And Jesus
took the vow of secret brotherhood.

16  Again the master spoke; he said, The greatest heights are gained by
those who reach the greatest depths; and you shall reach the greatest
depths.

17  The guide then led the way and in the fountain Jesus bathed; and
when he had been clothed in proper garb he stood again before the
hierophant.


CHAPTER 48.

    _Jesus receives from the hierophant his mystic name and number.
      Passes the first brotherhood test, and receives his first
      degree, SINCERITY._

The master took down from the wall a scroll on which was written down
the number and the name of every attribute and character. He said,

2  The circle is the symbol of the perfect man, and seven is the number
of the perfect man;

3  The Logos is the perfect word; that which creates; that which
destroys, and that which saves.

4  This Hebrew master is the Logos of the Holy One, the Circle of the
human race, the Seven of time.

5  And in the record book the scribe wrote down, The
Logos-Circle-Seven; and thus was Jesus known.

6  The master said, The Logos will give heed to what I say: No man can
enter into light till he has found himself. Go forth and search till
you have found your soul and then return.

7  The guide led Jesus to a room in which the light was faint and
mellow, like the light of early dawn.

8  The chamber walls were marked with mystic signs, with hieroglyphs
and sacred texts; and in this chamber Jesus found himself alone where
he remained for many days.

9  He read the sacred texts; thought out the meanings of the
hieroglyphs and sought the import of the master’s charge to find
himself.

10  A revelation came; he got acquainted with his soul; he found
himself; then he was not alone.

11  One night he slept and at the midnight hour, a door that he had not
observed, was opened, and a priest in somber garb came in and said,

12  My brother, pardon me for coming in at this unseemly hour; but I
have come to save your life.

13  You are the victim of a cruel plot. The priests of Heliopolis are
jealous of your fame, and they have said that you shall never leave
these gloomy crypts alive.

14  The higher priests do not go forth to teach the world, and you are
doomed to temple servitude.

15  Now, if you would be free, you must deceive these priests; must
tell them you are here to stay for life;

16  And then, when you have gained all that you wish to gain, I will
return, and by a secret way will lead you forth that you may go in
peace.

17  And Jesus said, My brother, man, would you come here to teach
deceit? Am I within these holy walls to learn the wiles of vile
hypocrisy?

18  Nay, man, my Father scorns deceit, and I am here to do his will.

19  Deceive these priests! Not while the sun shall shine. What I have
said, that I have said; I will be true to them, to God, and to myself.

20  And then the tempter left, and Jesus was again alone; but in a
little time a white-robed priest appeared and said,

21  Well done! the Logos has prevailed. This is the trial chamber
of hypocrisy. And then he led the way, and Jesus stood before the
judgment seat.

22  And all the brothers stood; the hierophant came forth and laid his
hand on Jesus’ head, and placed within his hands a scroll, on which
was written just one word, SINCERITY; and not a word was said.

23  The guide again appeared, and led the way, and in a spacious room
replete with everything a student craves was Jesus bade to rest and
wait.


