CHAPTER 35.

    _Jesus and Vidyapati consider the needs of the incoming age of
      the world._

The Indian sage and Jesus often met and talked about the needs of
nations and of men; about the sacred doctrines, forms and rites best
suited to the coming age.

2  One day they sat together in a mountain pass, and Jesus said, The
coming age will surely not require priests, and shrines, and sacrifice
of life.

3  There is no power in sacrifice of beast, or bird, to help a man to
holy life.

4  And Vidyapati said, All forms and rites are symbols of the things
that men must do within the temple of the soul.

5  The Holy One requires man to give his life in willing sacrifice for
men, and all the so-called offerings on altars and on shrines that
have been made since time began, were made to teach man how to give
himself to save his brother man; for man can never save himself except
he lose his life in saving other men.

6  The perfect age will not require forms and rites and carnal
sacrifice. The coming age is not the perfect age, and men will call
for object lessons and symbolic rites.

7  And in the great religion you shall introduce to men, some simple
rites of washings and remembrances will be required; but cruel
sacrifice of animals, and birds the gods require not.

8  And Jesus said, Our God must loathe the tinseled show of priests and
priestly things.

9  When men array themselves in showy garbs to indicate that they are
servants of the gods, and strut about like gaudy birds to be admired
by men, because of piety or any other thing, the Holy One must surely
turn away in sheer disgust.

10  All people are alike the servants of our Father-God, are kings and
priests.

11  Will not the coming age demand complete destruction of the priestly
caste, as well as every other caste and inequality among the sons of
men?

12  And Vidyapati said, The coming age is not the age of spirit life
and men will pride themselves in wearing priestly robes, and chanting
pious chants to advertise themselves as saints.

13  The simple rites that you will introduce will be extolled by those
who follow you, until the sacred service of the age will far outshine
in gorgeousness the priestly service of the Brahmic age.

14  This is a problem men must solve.

15  The perfect age will come when every man will be a priest and men
will not array themselves in special garb to advertise their piety.




SECTION VII.

ZAIN.

_Life and Works of Jesus in Tibet and Western India._


CHAPTER 36.

    _Jesus in Lassa. He meets Meng-ste who aids him in reading the
      ancient manuscripts. He goes to Ladak. Heals a child. Relates
      the parable of the king’s son._

In Lassa of Tibet there was a master’s temple, rich in manuscripts of
ancient lore.

2  The Indian sage had read these manuscripts, and he revealed to Jesus
many of the secret lessons they contained; but Jesus wished to read
them for himself.

3  Now, Meng-ste, greatest sage of all the farther East, was in this
temple of Tibet.

4  The path across Emodus heights was difficult; but Jesus started on
his way, and Vidyapati sent with him a trusted guide.

5  And Vidyapati sent a message to Meng-ste, in which he told about the
Hebrew sage, and spoke for him a welcome by the temple priests.

6  Now, after many days, and perils great, the guide and Jesus reached
the Lassa temple in Tibet.

7  And Meng-ste opened wide the temple doors, and all the priests and
masters gave a welcome to the Hebrew sage.

8  And Jesus had access to all the sacred manuscripts, and, with the
help of Meng-ste, read them all.

9  And Meng-ste often talked with Jesus of the coming age, and of the
sacred service best adapted to the people of the age.

10  In Lassa Jesus did not teach. When he had finished all his studies
in the temple schools he journeyed toward the West. In many villages
he tarried for a time and taught.

11  At last he reached the pass, and in the Ladak city, Leh, he was
received with favor by the monks, the merchants, and the men of low
estate.

12  And in the monastery he abode, and taught; and then he sought the
common people in the marts of trade; and there he taught.

13  Not far away a woman lived, whose infant son was sick nigh unto
death. The doctors had declared, There is no hope; the child must die.

14  The woman heard that Jesus was a teacher sent from God, and she
believed that he had power to heal her son.

15  And so she clasped the dying infant in her arms and ran with haste
and asked to see the man of God.

16  When Jesus saw her faith he lifted up his eyes to heaven and said,

17  My Father-God, let power divine o’ershadow me, and let the Holy
Breath fill full this child that it may live.

18  And in the presence of the multitude he laid his hand upon the
child and said,

19  Good woman you are blest; your faith has saved your son. And then
the child was well.

20  The people were astonished and they said, This surely is the Holy
One made flesh, for man alone cannot rebuke a fever thus and save a
child from death.

21  Then many of the people brought their sick, and Jesus spoke the
Word, and they were healed.

22  Among the Ladaks Jesus tarried many days; he taught them how to
heal; how sins are blotted out, and how to make on earth a heaven of
joy.

23  The people loved him for his words and works, and when he must
depart they grieved as children grieve when mother goes away.

24  And on the morning when he started on his way the multitudes were
there to press his hand.

25  To them he spoke a parable; he said, A certain king so loved the
people of his land that he sent forth his only son with precious gifts
for all.

26  The son went everywhere and scattered forth the gifts with lavish
hand.

27  But there were priests who ministered at shrines of foreign gods,
who were not pleased because the king did not through them bestow the
gifts.

28  And so they sought to cause the people all to hate the son. They
said, These gifts are not of any worth; they are but counterfeits.

29  And so the people threw the precious gems, and gold and silver in
the streets. They caught the son and beat him, spit upon him, drove
him from their midst.

30  The son resented not their insults and their cruelties; but thus he
prayed, My Father-God, forgive these creatures of thy hand; they are
but slaves; they know not what they do.

31  And while they yet were beating him he gave them food, and blest
them with a boundless love.

32  In certain cities was the son received with joy, and he would
gladly have remained to bless the homes; but he could tarry not, for
he must carry gifts to every one in all the king’s domain.

33  And Jesus said, My Father-God is king of all mankind, and he
has sent me forth with all the bounties of his matchless love and
boundless wealth.

34  To all the people of all lands, lo, I must bear these gifts--this
water and this bread of life.

35  I go my way, but we will meet again; for in my Fatherland is room
for all; I will prepare a place for you.

36  And Jesus raised his hand in silent benediction; then he went his
way.


