CHAPTER 77.

    _Jesus in Hebron. Goes to Bethany. Advises Ruth regarding
      certain family troubles._

With three disciples Jesus went to Hebron where he tarried seven days
and taught.

2  And then he went to Bethany and in the home of Lazarus he taught.

3  The evening came; the multitudes were gone, and Jesus, Lazarus, and
his sisters, Martha, Ruth and Mary, were alone.

4  And Ruth was sore distressed. Her home was down in Jericho; her
husband was the keeper of an inn; his name was Asher-ben.

5  Now, Asher was a Pharisee of strictest mien and thought, and he
regarded Jesus with disdain.

6  And when his wife confessed her faith in Christ, he drove her from
his home.

7  But Ruth resisted not; she said, If Jesus is the Christ he knows the
way, and I am sure he is the Christ,

8  My husband may become enraged and slay my human form; he cannot
kill the soul, and in the many mansions of my Fatherland I have a
dwelling-place.

9  And Ruth told Jesus all; and then she said, What shall I do?

10  And Jesus said, Your husband is not willingly at fault; he is
devout; he prays to God, our Father-God.

11  His zeal for his religion is intense; in this he is sincere; but
it has driven him insane, and he believes it right to keep his home
unsullied by the heresy of Christ.

12  He feels assured that he has done the will of God in driving you
away.

13  Intolerance is ignorance matured.

14  The light will come to him some day, and then he will repay for all
your heartaches, griefs and tears.

15  And Ruth, you must not think that you are free from blame.

16  If you had walked in wisdom’s ways, and been content to hold your
peace, this grief would not have come to you.

17  It takes a long, long time for light to break into the shell of
prejudice, and patience is the lesson you have need to learn.

18  The constant dropping of the water wears away the hardest stone.

19  The sweet and holy incense of a godly life will melt intolerance
much quicker than the hottest flame, or hardest blow.

20  Just wait a little time, and then go home with sympathy and love.
Talk not of Christ, nor of the kingdom of the Holy One.

21  Just live a godly life; refrain from harshness in your speech, and
you will lead your husband to the light.

22  And it was so.


CHAPTER 78.

    _Jesus in Jericho. Heals a servant of Asher. Goes to the Jordan
      and speaks to the people. Establishes baptism as a pledge of
      discipleship. Baptizes six disciples, who in turn baptize
      many people._

And Jesus went to Jericho, and at the inn of Asher he abode.

2  A servant at the inn was sick, nigh unto death; the healers could
not cure.

3  And Jesus came and touched the dying girl, and said, Malone, arise!
and in a moment pain was gone; the fever ceased; the maid was well.

4  And then the people brought their sick, and they were healed.

5  But Jesus did not tarry long in Jericho; he went down to the Jordan
ford where John was wont to teach.

6  The multitudes were there and Jesus said to them, Behold, the time
has come; the kingdom is at hand.

7  None but the pure in heart can come into the kingdom of the Holy
One; but every son and daughter of the human race is called upon to
turn from evil and become the pure in heart.

8  The resolution to attain and enter through the Christine gate into
the kingdom of the Holy One will constitute discipleship, and every
one must make a public pledge of his discipleship.

9  John washed your bodies in the stream, symbolic of the cleansing of
the soul, in preparation for the coming of the king, the opening of
the Christine gate into the kingdom of the Holy One.

10  John did a mighty work; but now the Christine gate is opened up,
and washing is established as the pledge of your discipleship.

11  Until this age shall close this pledge shall be a rite, and shall
be called, Baptism rite; and it shall be a sign to men, and seal to
God of men’s discipleship.

12  You men of every nation, hear! Come unto me; the Christine gate is
opened up; turn from your sins and be baptized, and you shall enter
through the gate and see the king.

13  The six disciples who had followed Jesus stood a-near, and Jesus
led them forth and in the Jordan he baptized them in the name of
Christ; and then he said to them,

14  My friends, you are the first to enter through the Christine gate
into the kingdom of the Holy One.

15  As I baptized you in the name of Christ, so you shall, in that
sacred name, baptize all men and women who will confess their faith in
Christ, and shall renounce their sins.

16  And, lo, the multitudes came down, renounced their sins, confessed
their faith in Christ, and were baptized.


