CHAPTER 64.

    _Jesus comes from Galilee, and is baptized by John. The Holy
      Breath testifies of his messiahship._

The news reached Galilee, and Jesus with the multitude went down to
where the harbinger was preaching at the ford.

2  When Jesus saw the harbinger he said, Behold the man of God! Behold
the greatest of the seers! Behold, Elijah has returned!

3  Behold the messenger whom God has sent to open up the way! The
kingdom is at hand.

4  When John saw Jesus standing with the throng he said, Behold the
king who cometh in the name of God!

5  And Jesus said to John, I would be washed in water as a symbol of
the cleansing of the soul.

6  And John replied, You do not need to wash, for you are pure in
thought, and word, and deed. And if you need to wash I am not worthy
to perform the rite.

7  And Jesus said, I come to be a pattern for the sons of men, and what
I bid them do, that I must do; and all men must be washed, symbolic of
the cleansing of the soul.

8  This washing we establish as a rite--baptism rite we call it now,
and so it shall be called.

9  Your work, prophetic harbinger, is to prepare the way, and to reveal
the hidden things.

10  The multitudes are ready for the words of life, and I have come to
be made known by you to all the world, as prophet of the Triune God,
and as the chosen one to manifest the Christ to men.

11  Then John led Jesus down into the river at the ford and he baptized
him in the sacred name of him who sent him forth to manifest the
Christ to men.

12  And as they came out of the stream, the Holy Breath, in form of
dove, came down and sat on Jesus’ head.

13  A voice from heaven said, This is the well-beloved son of God, the
Christ, the love of God made manifest.

14  John heard the voice, and understood the message of the voice.

15  Now Jesus went his way, and John preached to the multitude.

16  As many as confessed their sins, and turned from evil ways to ways
of right, the harbinger baptized, symbolic of the blotting out of sins
by righteousness.




SECTION XIV.

NUN.

_The Christine Ministry of Jesus--Introductory Epoch._


CHAPTER 65.

    _Jesus goes to the wilderness for self-examination, where he
      remains forty days. Is subjected to three temptations. He
      overcomes. Returns to the camps of John and begins teaching._

The harbinger had paved the way; the Logos had been introduced to men
as love made manifest, and he must now begin his Christine ministry.

2  And he went forth into the wilderness to be alone with God that he
might look into his inner heart, and note its strength and worthiness.

3  And with himself he talked; he said, My lower self is strong; by
many ties I am bound down to carnal life.

4  Have I the strength to overcome and give my life a willing sacrifice
for men?

5  When I shall stand before the face of men, and they demand a proof
of my messiahship, what will I say?

6  And then the tempter came and said, If you be son of God, command
these stones to turn to bread.

7  And Jesus said, Who is it that demands a test? It is no sign that
one is son of God because he does a miracle; the devils can do mighty
things.

8  Did not the black magicians do great things before the Pharaohs?

9  My words and deeds in all the walks of life shall be the proof of my
messiahship.

10  And then the tempter said, If you will go into Jerusalem, and from
the temple pinnacle cast down yourself to earth, the people will
believe that you are the Messiah sent from God.

11  This you can surely do; for did not David say, He gives his angels
charge concerning you, and with their hands will they uphold lest you
should fall?

12  And Jesus said, I may not tempt the Lord, my God.

13  And then the tempter said, Look forth upon the world; behold its
honors and its fame! Behold its pleasures and its wealth!

14  If you will give your life for these they shall be yours.

15  But Jesus said, Away from me all tempting thoughts. My heart is
fixed; I spurn this carnal self with all its vain ambition and its
pride.

16  For forty days did Jesus wrestle with his carnal self; his higher
self prevailed. He then was hungry, but his friends had found him and
they ministered to him.

17  Then Jesus left the wilderness, and in the consciousness of Holy
Breath, he came unto the camps of John and taught.


