CHAPTER 169.

    _Judas is filled with remorse. Hurries to the temple and throws
      the thirty pieces of silver at the feet of the priests who
      take it and buy a potter’s field. Judas hangs himself. His
      body is buried in the potter’s field._

Now, Judas who betrayed his Lord, was with the mob; but all the time
he thought that Jesus would assert his power and demonstrate the
strength of God that he possessed, and strike to earth the fiendish
multitudes and free himself;

2  But when he saw his master on the ground and bleeding from a score
of wounds, he said,

3  O God, what have I done? I have betrayed the son of God; the curse
of God will rest upon my soul.

4  And then he turned and ran with haste until he reached the temple
door; he found the priests, who gave to him the thirty silver pieces
to betray the Lord, and said,

5  Take back your bribe; it is the cost price of my soul; I have
betrayed the son of God.

6  The priests replied, That matters not to us.

7  Then Judas threw the silver on the floor, and, bowed with grief, he
went away, and on a ledge beyond the city’s walls he hanged himself
and died.

8  In time the fastenings gave way, his body fell into the Hinnon vale
and after many days they found it there a shapeless mass.

9  The rulers could not put the price of blood into the treasury,
and so they took the thirty silver pieces with which they bought a
potter’s field,

10  Where they might bury those who had no rights to lie within their
sacred burial grounds.

11  And there they put the body of the man who sold his Lord.


CHAPTER 170.

    _The crucifixion. Jesus prays for his murderers. Pilate puts
      an inscription above the cross. Jesus speaks words of
      encouragement to the penitent thief. Commits to John the care
      of his mother and Miriam. The soldiers divide his garments
      among themselves._

The Jewish mob pushed on toward Calvary and as they went the Marys,
Miriam, and other women not a few, were close beside the Lord.

2  They wept aloud. When Jesus saw them weeping and lamenting thus he
said,

3  Weep not for me, for though I go away, go through the gateway of the
cross, yet on the next day of the sun, lift up your hearts, for I will
meet you at the sepulchre.

4  The great procession came to Calvary. The Roman soldiers had already
bound the two state prisoners to the cross.

5  (They were not nailed, but simply bound.)

6  Four soldiers of the Roman guard that Herod brought from Galilee
were called to execute the orders of the court.

7  These were the men who had been set apart to torture Jesus and
secure from him confession of his guilt.

8  These were the men who scourged him, put a crown of thorns upon his
head, a broken reed into his hands, and wrapped him in a royal robe,
and bowed in mockery, before him as a king.

9  These soldiers took the Lord and stripped him, laid him on the cross
and would have bound him there with cords; but this would not suffice.

10  The cruel Jews were near with hammer and with nails; they cried,
not cords, but nails; drive fast the nails and hold him to the cross.

11  And then the soldiers took the nails and drove them through his
feet and hands.

12  They offered him a sedative to drink, a draught of vinegar and
myrrh; but he refused to drink the draught.

13  The soldiers had prepared a place in which to plant Barabbas’ cross
between the other criminals; and here they raised the cross of Jesus,
who was called the Christ;

14  And then the soldiers and the mob sat down to watch him die.

15  And Jesus said, My Father-God, forgive these men; they know not
what they do.

16  Now, Pilate had prepared a tablet to be placed upon the cross on
which was written in the tongues of Hebrew, Latin and the Greek these
words of truth: JESUS THE CHRIST, KING OF THE JEWS.

17  And this was placed upon the cross. The priests were angered when
they read these words upon the tablet of the cross.

18  And then they prayed that Pilate would not say, He is the Christ,
king of the Jews; but say, He claims to be the Christ, king of the
Jews.

19  But Pilate said, What I have written, I have written; let it stand.

20  The Jewish multitudes who saw the Lord upon the cross were wild
with joy; they said, All hail, fake king!

21  You who would tear the temple down and in three days would build it
up again, why don’t you save yourself?

22  If you are Christ, the son of God, come from the cross; then all
men will believe.

23  The priests and scribes and Pharisees looked on the scene and
scoffed; they said, He rescued others from the grave; why don’t he
save himself?

24  The Jewish soldiers and the Roman guards who came from Galilee were
loud in mocking and deriding him.

25  One of the other men upon the cross joined in the mockery; he said,
If you are Christ, you have the power; just speak the Word, and save
yourself and me.

26  The other man upon the cross rebuked the man; he said, You wretch!
have you no fear of God?

27  This man is innocent of any crime while you and I are guilty and
are paying up the debts we owe.

28  And then he said to Jesus, Lord, I know thy kingdom comes, the
kingdom that the world can never comprehend;

29  And when thou comest on the clouds of heaven, remember me.

30  And Jesus said, Behold, for I will meet you in the realm of souls
this day.

31  Now, standing near unto the cross were many women from Judea and
from Galilee. Among them were the mother of the Lord and Miriam,

32  And Mary, mother of the two apostles, James and John, and Mary
Magdalene, and Martha, Ruth and Mary, and Salome.

33  When Jesus saw his mother and the singer Miriam standing close
beside the cross and John a-near, he said to John,

34  In your most tender care I leave my mother and my sister Miriam.

35  And John replied, While they shall live my home shall be the home
of your thrice blessed mother and your sister Miriam.

36  According to a custom of the Jews, to those who were the
executioners of law and took the lives of criminals, belonged the
garments of the criminals.

37  So when the Lord was crucified, the Roman guards divided up among
themselves the garments of the Lord.

38  But when they found his coat it was a seamless coat and highly
prized.

39  For it the guards cast lots, and thus determined who should have
the prize.

40  And thus the scripture was fulfilled, which said, And they divided
all my robes among themselves, and for my vesture they cast lots.


