CHAPTER 2.

    _Zacharias and Elizabeth. Prophetic messages of Gabriel to
      Zacharias, Elizabeth and Mary. Birth of John. Prophecy of
      Zacharias._

Near Hebron in the hills of Judah, Zacharias and Elizabeth abode.

2  They were devout and just, and every day they read the Law, the
Prophets and the Psalms which told of one to come, strong to redeem;
and they were waiting for the king.

3  Now, Zacharias was a priest, and in his turn he led the temple
service in Jerusalem.

4  It came to pass as Zacharias stood before the Lord and burned the
incense in the Holy Place, that Gabriel came and stood before his face.

5  And Zacharias was afraid; he thought that some great evil was about
to come upon the Jews.

6  But Gabriel said, O man of God, fear not; I bring to you, and all
the world, a message of good will, and peace on earth.

7  Behold, the Prince of Peace, the king you seek, will quickly come.

8  Your wife will bear to you a son, a holy son, of whom the prophet
wrote,

9  Behold, I send Elijah unto you again before the coming of the Lord;
and he will level down the hills and fill the valleys up, and pave the
way for him who shall redeem.

10  From the beginning of the age your son has borne the name of John,
the mercy of the Lord; his name is John.

11  He will be honored in the sight of God, and he will drink no wine,
and from his birth he will be filled with Holy Breath.

12  And Gabriel stood before Elizabeth as she was in the silence in
her home, and told her all the words that he had said to Zacharias in
Jerusalem.

13  When he had done the service of his course, the priest went home,
and with Elizabeth rejoiced.

14  Five months passed by and Gabriel came to Mary in her home in
Nazareth and said,

15  Hail Mary, hail! Once blessed in the name of God; twice blessed in
the name of Holy Breath; thrice blessed in the name of Christ; for you
are worthy, and will bear a son who shall be called Immanuel.

16  His name is Jesus, for he saves his people from their sins.

17  When Joseph’s daily task was done he came, and Mary told him all
the words that Gabriel spoke to her, and they rejoiced; for they
believed that he, the man of God, had spoken words of truth.

18  And Mary went with haste to tell Elizabeth about the promises of
Gabriel; together they rejoiced.

19  And in the home of Zacharias and Elizabeth did Mary tarry ninety
days; then she returned to Nazareth.

20  To Zacharias and Elizabeth a son was born, and Zacharias said,

21  Most blessed be the name of God, for he has opened up the fount of
blessings for his people, Israel.

22  His promises are verified; for he has brought to pass the words
which holy prophets spoke in olden times.

23  And Zacharias looked upon the infant John, and said,

24  You will be called the prophet of the Holy One; and you will go
before his face, and will prepare his way.

25  And you will give a knowledge of salvation unto Israel; and you
will preach the gospel of repentance and the blotting out of sins.

26  Behold, for soon the Day Star from on high will visit us, to light
the way for those who sit within the darkness of the shadowland, and
guide our feet unto the ways of peace.


CHAPTER 3.

    _Birth of Jesus. Masters honor the child. The shepherds
      rejoice. Zacharias and Elizabeth visit Mary. Jesus is
      circumcised._

The time was nearly due for Jesus to be born, and Mary longed to see
Elizabeth, and she and Joseph turned their faces toward the Judean
hills.

2  And when upon their way they came to Bethlehem the day was done, and
they must tarry for the night.

3  But Bethlehem was thronged with people going to Jerusalem; the inns
and homes were filled with guests, and Joseph and his wife could find
no place to rest but in a cave where animals were kept; and there they
slept.

4  At midnight came a cry, A child is born in yonder cave among the
beasts. And lo, the promised son of man was born.

5  And strangers took the little one and wrapped him in the dainty
robes that Mary had prepared and laid him in a trough from which the
beasts of burden fed.

6  Three persons clad in snow-white robes came in and stood before the
child and said,

7  All strength, all wisdom and all love be yours, Immanuel.

8  Now, on the hills of Bethlehem were many flocks of sheep with
shepherds guarding them.

9  The shepherds were devout, were men of prayer, and they were waiting
for a strong deliverer to come.

10  And when the child of promise came a man in snow-white robe
appeared to them, and they fell back in fear. The man stood forth and
said,

11  Fear not! behold I bring you joyful news. At midnight in a cave in
Bethlehem was born the prophet and the king that you have long been
waiting for.

12  And then the shepherds all were glad; they felt that all the hills
were filled with messengers of light, who said,

13  All glory be to God on high; peace, peace on earth, good will to
men.

14  And then the shepherds came with haste to Bethlehem and to the
cave, that they might see and honor him whom men had called Immanuel.

15  Now, when the morning came, a shepherdess whose home was near,
prepared a room for Mary, Joseph and the child; and here they tarried
many days.

16  And Joseph sent a messenger in haste to Zacharias and Elizabeth to
say, The child is born in Bethlehem.

17  And Zacharias and Elizabeth took John and came to Bethlehem with
words of cheer.

18  And Mary and Elizabeth recounted all the wondrous things that had
transpired. The people joined with them in praising God.

19  According to the custom of the Jews, the child was circumcised; and
when they asked, What will you call the child? the mother said, His
name is Jesus, as the man of God declared.


