CHAPTER 68.

    _Jesus speaks to the people in Bethany. Tells them how to
      become pure in heart. Goes to Jerusalem and in the temple
      reads from a prophetic book. Goes to Nazareth._

The news soon spread abroad that Jesus, king of Israel, had come to
Bethany, and all the people of the town came forth to greet the king.

2  And Jesus, standing in the midst of them exclaimed, Behold, indeed,
the king has come, but Jesus is not king.

3  The kingdom truly is at hand; but men can see it not with carnal
eyes; they cannot see the king upon the throne.

4  This is the kingdom of the soul; its throne is not an earthly
throne; its king is not a man.

5  When human kings found kingdoms here, they conquer other kings by
force of arms; one kingdom rises on the ruins of another one.

6  But when our Father-God sets up the kingdom of the soul, he pours
his blessings forth, like rain, upon the thrones of earthly kings who
rule in righteousness.

7  It is not rule that God would overthrow; his sword is raised against
injustice, wantonness and crime.

8  Now, while the kings of Rome do justice, and love mercy and walk
humbly with their God, the benediction of the Triune God will rest
upon them all.

9  They need not fear a messenger whom God sends forth to earth.

10  I am not sent to sit upon a throne to rule as Cæsar rules; and you
may tell the ruler of the Jews that I am not a claimant for his throne.

11  Men call me Christ, and God has recognized the name; but Christ is
not a man. The Christ is universal love, and Love is king.

12  This Jesus is but man who has been fitted by temptations overcome,
by trials multiform, to be the temple through which Christ can
manifest to men.

13  Then hear, you men of Israel, hear! Look not upon the flesh; it is
not king. Look to the Christ within, who shall be formed in every one
of you, as he is formed in me.

14  When you have purified your hearts by faith, the king will enter
in, and you will see his face.

15  And then the people asked, What must we do that we may make our
bodies fit abiding places for the king?

16  And Jesus said, Whatever tends to purity in thought, and word, and
deed will cleanse the temple of the flesh.

17  There are no rules that can apply to all, for men are specialists
in sin; each has his own besetting sin,

18  And each must study for himself how he can best transmute his
tendency to evil things to that of righteousness and love.

19  Until men reach the higher plane, and get away from selfishness,
this rule will give the best results:

20  Do unto other men what you would have them do to you.

21  And many of the people said, We know that Jesus is the Christ, the
king who was to come, and blessed be his name.

22  Now, Jesus and his six disciples turned their faces toward
Jerusalem, and many people followed them.

23  But Mathew, son of Alpheus, ran on before, and when he reached
Jerusalem, he said, Behold the Christines come! The multitudes came
forth to see the king.

24  But Jesus did not speak to any one until he reached the temple
court, and then he opened up a book and read:

25  Behold, I send my messenger, and he will pave the way, and Christ,
for whom you wait, will come unto his temple unannounced. Behold, for
he will come, says God, the Lord of hosts.

26  And then he closed the book; he said no more; he left the temple
halls, and with his six disciples, went his way to Nazareth,

27  And they abode with Mary, Jesus’ mother, and her sister, Miriam.


CHAPTER 69.

    _Jesus and the ruler of the synagogue of Nazareth. Jesus
      teaches not in public, and the people are amazed._

Next day as Peter walked about in Nazareth, he met the ruler of the
synagogue who asked, Who is this Jesus lately come to Nazareth?

2  And Peter said, This Jesus is the Christ of whom our prophets wrote;
he is the king of Israel. His mother, Mary, lives on Marmion Way.

3  The ruler said, Tell him to come up to the synagogue, for I would
hear his plea.

4  And Peter ran and told to Jesus what the ruler said; but Jesus
answered not; he went not to the synagogue.

5  Then in the evening time the ruler came up Marmion Way, and in the
home of Mary found he Jesus and his mother all alone.

6  And when the ruler asked for proof of his messiahship, and why he
went not to the synagogue when he was bidden, Jesus said,

7  I am not slave to any man; I am not called unto this ministry by
priest. It is not mine to answer when men call. I come the Christ of
God; I answer unto God alone.

8  Who gave you right to ask for proof of my messiahship? My proof lies
in my words and works, and so if you will follow me you will not lack
for proof.

9  And then the ruler went his way; he asked himself, What manner of a
man is this to disregard the ruler of the synagogue?

10  The people of the town came out in throngs to see the Christ, and
hear him speak; but Jesus said,

11  A prophet has no honor in his native town, among his kin.

12  I will not speak in Nazareth until the words I speak, and works I
do in other towns have won the faith of men,

13  Until men know that God has christed me to manifest eternal love.

14  Good will to you, my kin; I bless you with a boundless love, and I
bespeak for you abundant joy and happiness.

15  He said no more, and all the people marveled much because he would
not speak in Nazareth.


