CHAPTER 96.

    _The Sermon on the Mount, continued. Jesus considers the Ten
      Commandments. The philosophy of Christ the spirit of the
      Commandments. Jesus unfolds the spiritual aspects of the
      first four Commandments._

God gave the Ten Commandments unto men; upon the mountain Moses saw
the words of God; he wrote them down on solid rock; they cannot be
destroyed.

2  These Ten Commandments show the justice side of God; but now the
love of God made manifest brings mercy on the wings of Holy Breath.

3  Upon the unity of God the law was built. In all the world there is
one force; Jehovah is Almighty God.

4  Jehovah wrote upon the heavens and Moses read,

5  I am Almighty God and you shall have no God but me.

6  There is one force, but many phases of that force; these phases men
call powers.

7  All powers are of God; and they are manifests of God; they are the
Spirits of the God.

8  If men could seem to find another force and worship at its shrine,
they would but court illusion, vain,

9  A shadow of the One, Jehovah, God, and they who worship shadows are
but shadows on the wall; for men are what they court.

10  And God would have all men to be the substance, and in mercy he
commanded, You shall seek no God but me.

11  And finite man can never comprehend infinite things. Man cannot
make an image of the Infinite in force.

12  And when men make a God of stone or wood or clay they make an image
of a shade; and they who worship at the shrine of shades are shades.

13  So God in mercy said, You shall not carve out images of wood, or
clay, or stone.

14  Such idols are ideals, abased ideals, and men can gain no higher
plane than their ideals.

15  The God is Spirit, and in spirit men must worship if they would
attain a consciousness of God.

16  But man can never make a picture or an image of the Holy Breath.

17  The name of God man may not speak with carnal lips; with Holy
Breath alone can man pronounce the name.

18  In vanity men think they know the name of God; they speak it
lightly and irreverently, and thus they are accursed.

19  If men did know the sacred name and spoke it with unholy lips, they
would not live to speak it once again.

20  But God in mercy has not yet unveiled his name to those who cannot
speak with Holy Breath.

21  But they who speak the substitute in idle way are guilty in the
sight of God, who said,

22  You shall not take the name of God in vain.

23  The number of the Holy Breath is seven, and God holds in his hands
the sevens of time.

24  In forming worlds he rested on the seventh day, and every seventh
day is set apart as Sabbath day for men. God said,

25  The seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; remember it and
keep it wholly set apart for works of holiness; that is, for works not
for the selfish self, but for the universal self.

26  Men may do work for self upon the six days of the week; but on the
Sabbath of the Lord they must do naught for self.

27  This day is consecrated unto God; but man serves God by serving man.


CHAPTER 97.

    _The Sermon on the Mount, continued. Jesus unfolds to the
      twelve the spiritual aspects of the fifth and sixth
      Commandments._

God is not force alone; for wisdom is his counterpart.

2  When cherubim instructed man in wisdom’s ways they said that wisdom
is the Mother of the race, as force is Father of the race.

3  The man who honors the almighty and omniscient God is blessed, and
in the tables of the law we read,

4  Pay homage to your Father and your Mother of the race, that your
days may be prolonged upon the land that they have given you.

5  The letter of the law commands; You shall not kill; and he who kills
must stand before the judgment seat,

6  A person may desire to kill, yet if he does not kill he is not
judged by law.

7  The spirit of the law avers that he who shall desire to kill, or
seeks revenge, is angry with a man without sufficient cause, must
answer to the judge;

8  And he who calls his brother soulless vagabond shall answer to the
council of the just;

9  And he who calls his brother a degenerate, a dog, fans into life the
burning fires of hell within himself.

10  Now, in the higher law we read that if your brother is aggrieved
by something you have done, before you offer unto God your gifts, go
forth and find your brother and be reconciled to him.

11  It is not well to let the sun go down upon your wrath.

12  If he will not be reconciled when you have laid aside all selfish
pleas, have waived all selfish rights, you will be guiltless in the
sight of God; then go and offer unto God your gifts.

13  If you owe aught to any man and cannot pay; or if a man shall claim
a greater sum than is his due, it is not well that you dispute his
claims.

14  Resistance is the sire of anger; there is no mercy and no reason in
a wrathful man.

15  I tell you it is better far to suffer loss than go to law, or call
upon the courts of men to judge of right and wrong.

16  The law of carnal man would say, Eye for eye and tooth for tooth;
resist encroachment on your rights.

17  But this is not the law of God. The Holy Breath would say, Resist
not him who would deprive you of your goods.

18  He who would take your coat by force is still a brother man and you
should gain his heart, which by resistance cannot be done;

19  Give him your coat and offer him still more and more; in time the
man will rise above the brute; you will have saved him from himself.

20  Refuse not him who calls for help and give to him who asks to
borrow aught.

21  And if a man shall strike you in a fitful, or an angry way, it is
not well to smite him in return.

22  Men call him coward who will not fight and thus defend his rights;
but he is much the greater man who is assailed, is smitten and does
not smite;

23  Who is maligned and answers not, than he who smites the smiter and
reviles the one who slanders him.

24  It has been said in olden times that man shall love his friend and
hate his foe; but, lo, I say,

25  Be merciful unto your foes; bless those who slander you; do good to
those who do you harm and pray for those who trample on your rights.

26  Remember, you are children of the God who makes his sun to rise
alike upon the evil and the good, who sends his rain upon the unjust
and the just.

27  If you do unto other men as they do unto you, you are but slaves,
but followers in the way to death.

28  But you, as children of the light, must lead the way.

29  Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.

30  When you do good to those who have done good to you, you do no more
than other men; the publicans do that.

31  If you salute your friends and not your foes, you are like other
men; the publicans have set the pace.

32  Be perfect as your Father-God in heaven is.


