CHAPTER 75.

    _Nicodemus visits Jesus in the night. Jesus reveals to him the
      meaning of the new birth and the kingdom of heaven._

Nicodemus was a ruler of the Jews, and he was earnest, learned and
devout.

2  He saw the master’s signet in the face of Jesus as he talked, but
was not brave enough to publicly confess his faith in him;

3  So in the night he went to talk with Jesus at the home of Jude.

4  When Jesus saw him come he said, Full blessed are the pure in heart;

5  Twice blessed are the fearless, pure in heart;

6  Thrice blessed are the fearless, pure in heart who dare to make
confession of their faith before the highest courts.

7  And Nicodemus said, Hail, master, hail! I know you are a teacher
come from God, for man alone could never teach as you have taught;
could never do the works that you have done.

8  And Jesus said, Except a man be born again he cannot see the king;
he cannot comprehend the words I speak.

9  And Nicodemus said, How can a man be born again? Can he go back into
the womb and come again to life?

10  And Jesus said, The birth of which I speak is not the birth of
flesh.

11  Except a man be born of water and the Holy Breath, he cannot come
into the kingdom of the Holy One.

12  That which is born of flesh is child of man; that which is born of
Holy Breath is child of God.

13  The winds blow where they please; men hear their voices, and may
note results; but they know not from whence they come, nor where they
go; and so is every one that is born of Holy Breath.

14  The ruler said, I do not understand; pray tell me plainly what you
mean.

15  And Jesus said, The kingdom of the Holy One is in the soul; men
cannot see it with their carnal eyes; with all their reasoning powers
they comprehend it not.

16  It is a life deep hid in God; its recognition is the work of inner
consciousness.

17  The kingdoms of the world are kingdoms of the sight; the kingdom of
the Holy One is that of faith; its king is love.

18  Men cannot see the love of God unmanifest, and so our Father-God
has clothed this love with flesh--flesh of a son of man.

19  And that the world may see and know this love made manifest, the
son of man must needs be lifted up.

20  As Moses in the wilderness raised up the serpent for the healing of
the flesh, the son of man must be raised up.

21  That all men bitten by the serpent of the dust, the serpent of this
carnal life, may live.

22  He who believes in him shall have eternal life.

23  For God so loved the world that he sent forth his only son to be
raised up that men may see the love of God.

24  God did not send his son to judge the world; he sent him forth to
save the world; to bring men to the light.

25  But men love not the light, for light reveals their wickedness; men
love the dark.

26  Now, every one who loves the truth comes to the light; he does not
fear to have his works made manifest.

27  The light had come, and Nicodemus went his way; he knew the meaning
of the birth of Holy Breath; he felt the presence of the Spirit in his
soul.

28  And Jesus tarried in Jerusalem for many days and taught and healed
the sick.

29  The common people gladly listened to his words, and many left their
all of carnal things and followed him.


CHAPTER 76.

    _Jesus in Bethlehem. Explains the Empire of Peace to the
      shepherds. An unusual light appears. The shepherds recognize
      Jesus as the Christ._

The Logos went to Bethlehem, and many people followed him.

2  He found the shepherd’s home where he was cradled when a babe; here
he abode.

3  He went up to the hills where more than thirty years before the
shepherds watch their flocks and heard the messenger of peace exclaim:

4  At midnight in a cave in Bethlehem the Prince of Peace is born.

5  And shepherds still were there, and sheep still fed upon the hills.

6  And in the valley near great flocks of snow-white doves were flying
to and fro.

7  And when the shepherds knew that Jesus, whom the people called the
king, had come, they came from near and far to speak to him.

8  And Jesus said to them, Behold the life of innocence and peace!

9  White is the symbol of the virtuous and pure! the lamb of innocence;
the dove of peace;

10  And it was meet that love should come in human form amid such
scenes as these.

11  Our father Abraham walked through these vales, and on these very
hills he watched his flocks and herds.

12  And here it was that one, the Prince of Peace, the king of Salim,
came; the Christ in human form; a greater far than Abraham was he.

13  And here it was that Abraham gave to this king of Salim, tithes of
all he had.

14  This Prince of Peace went forth in battle everywhere. He had no
sword; no armor of defence; no weapons of offence;

15  And yet he conquered men, and nations trembled at his feet.

16  The hosts of Egypt quailed before this sturdy king of right; the
kings of Egypt placed their crowns upon his head,

17  And gave into his hands the scepter of all Egypt land, and not a
drop of blood was shed, and not a captive placed in chains;

18  But everywhere the conqueror threw wide the prison doors and set
the captives free.

19  And, once again, the Prince of Peace has come, and from these
blessed hills he goes again to fight.

20  And he is clothed in white; his sword is truth; his shield is
faith; his helmet innocence; his breath is love; his watchword peace.

21  But this is not a carnal war; it is not man at war with man; but it
is right against the wrong.

22  And love is captain, love is warrior, love is armor, love is all,
and love shall win.

23  And then again the hills of Bethlehem were clothed with light;
again the messenger exclaimed,

24  Peace, peace on earth, good will to men.

25  And Jesus taught the people; healed the sick; revealed the
mysteries of the kingdom of the Holy One.

26  And many said, He is the Christ; the king who was to come has come;
Praise God.


