CHAPTER 26.

    _Jesus at Katak. The car of Jagannath. Jesus reveals to the
      people the emptiness of Brahmic rites, and how to see God in
      man. Teaches them the divine law of sacrifice._

In all the cities of Orissa Jesus taught. At Katak, by the river side,
he taught, and thousands of the people followed him.

2  One day a car of Jagannath was hauled along by scores of frenzied
men, and Jesus said,

3  Behold, a form without a spirit passes by; a body with no soul; a
temple with no altar fires.

4  This car of Krishna is an empty thing, for Krishna is not there.

5  This car is but an idol of a people drunk on wine of carnal things.

6  God lives not in the noise of tongues; there is no way to him from
any idol shrine.

7  God’s meeting place with man is in the heart, and in a still small
voice he speaks; and he who hears is still.

8  And all the people said, Teach us to know the Holy One who speaks
within the heart, God of the still small voice.

9  And Jesus said, The Holy Breath cannot be seen with mortal eyes; nor
can men see the Spirits of the Holy One;

10  But in their image man was made, and he who looks into the face of
man, looks at the image of the God who speaks within.

11  And when man honors man he honors God, and what man does for man,
he does for God.

12  And you must bear in mind that when man harms in thought, or word
or deed another man, he does a wrong to God.

13  If you would serve the God who speaks within the heart, just serve
your near of kin, and those that are no kin, the stranger at your
gates, the foe who seeks to do you harm;

14  Assist the poor, and help the weak; do harm to none, and covet not
what is not yours;

15  Then, with your tongue the Holy One will speak; and he will smile
behind your tears, will light your countenance with joy, and fill your
hearts with peace.

16  And then the people asked, To whom shall we bring gifts? Where
shall we offer sacrifice?

17  And Jesus said, Our Father-God asks not for needless waste of
plant, of grain, of dove, of lamb.

18  That which you burn on any shrine you throw away. No blessings can
attend the one who takes the food from hungry mouths to be destroyed
by fire.

19  When you would offer sacrifice unto our God, just take your gift of
grain, or meat and lay it on the table of the poor.

20  From it an incense will arise to heaven, which will return to you
with blessedness.

21  Tear down your idols; they can hear you not; turn all your
sacrificial altars into fuel for the flames.

22  Make human hearts your altars, and burn your sacrifices with the
fire of love.

23  And all the people were entranced, and would have worshipped Jesus
as a God; but Jesus said,

24  I am your brother man just come to show the way to God; you shall
not worship man; praise God, the Holy One.


CHAPTER 27.

    _Jesus attends a feast in Behar. Preaches a revolutionary
      sermon on human equality. Relates the parable of the broken
      blades._

The fame of Jesus as a teacher spread through all the land, and people
came from near and far to hear his words of truth.

2  At Behar, on the sacred river of the Brahms, he taught for many days.

3  And Ach, a wealthy man of Behar, made a feast in honor of his guest,
and he invited every one to come.

4  And many came; among them thieves, extortioners, and courtesans. And
Jesus sat with them and taught; but they who followed him were much
aggrieved because he sat with thieves and courtesans.

5  And they upbraided him; they said, Rabboni, master of the wise, this
day will be an evil day for you.

6  The news will spread that you consort with courtesans and thieves,
and men will shun you as they shun an asp.

7  And Jesus answered them and said, A master never screens himself
for sake of reputation or of fame.

8  These are but worthless baubles of the day; they rise and sink, like
empty bottles on a stream; they are illusions and will pass away;

9  They are the indices to what the thoughtless think; they are the
noise that people make; and shallow men judge merit by the noise.

10  God and all master men judge men by what they are and not by what
they seem to be; not by their reputation and their fame.

11  These courtesans and thieves are children of my Father-God; their
souls are just as precious in his sight as yours, or of the Brahmic
priests.

12  And they are working out the same life sums that you, who pride
yourselves on your respectability and moral worth, are working out.

13  And some of them have solved much harder sums than you have solved,
you men who look at them with scorn.

14  Yes, they are sinners, and confess their guilt, while you are
guilty, but are shrewd enough to have a polished coat to cover up your
guilt.

15  Suppose you men who scorn these courtesans, these drunkards and
these thieves, who know that you are pure in heart and life, that you
are better far than they, stand forth that men may know just who you
are.

16  The sin lies in the wish, in the desire, not in the act.

17  You covet other people’s wealth; you look at charming forms, and
deep within your hearts you lust for them.

18  Deceit you practice every day, and wish for gold, for honor and for
fame, just for your selfish selves.

19  The man who covets is a thief, and she who lusts is courtesan. You
who are none of these speak out.

20  Nobody spoke; the accusers held their peace.

21  And Jesus said, The proof this day is all against those who have
accused.

22  The pure in heart do not accuse. The vile in heart who want to
cover up their guilt with holy smoke of piety are ever loathing
drunkard, thief and courtesan.

23  This loathing and this scorn is mockery, for if the tinseled coat
of reputation could be torn away, the loud professor would be found to
revel in his lust, deceit, and many forms of secret sin.

24  The man who spends his time in pulling other people’s weeds can
have no time to pull his own, and all the choicest flowers of life
will soon be choked and die, and nothing will remain but darnel,
thistles, burs.

25  And Jesus spoke a parable: he said, Behold, a farmer had great
fields of ripened grain, and when he looked he saw that blades of many
stalks of wheat were bent and broken down.

26  And when he sent his reapers forth he said, We will not save the
stalks of wheat that have the broken blades.

27  Go forth and cut and burn the stalks with broken blades.

28  And after many days he went to measure up his grain, but not a
kernel could he find.

29  And then he called the harvesters and said to them, Where is my
grain?

30  They answered him and said, We did according to your word; we
gathered up and burned the stalks with broken blades, and not a stalk
was left to carry to the barn.

31  And Jesus said, If God saves only those who have no broken blades,
who have been perfect in his sight, who will be saved?

32  And the accusers hung their heads in shame; and Jesus went his way.


