CHAPTER 134.

    _Jesus teaches in the temple. His words enrage the rulers.
      Nicodemus defends him. He spends the night in prayer on Mount
      Olives. Next day he again teaches in the temple. An adultress
      is brought before him for judgment._

Now, on the last day of the feast when multitudes were in the
courtways, Jesus said,

2  Whoever is athirst may come to me and drink.

3  He who believes in me and in the Christ whom God has sent, may drink
the cup of life, and from his inner parts shall streams of living
waters flow.

4  The Holy Breath will overshadow him, and he will breathe the Breath,
and speak the words, and live the life.

5  The people were divided in their views concerning him. Some said,
This man is prophet of the living God.

6  And others said, He is Messiah whom our prophets said would come.

7  And others said, He cannot be the Christ, for he came down from
Galilee; the Christ must come from Bethlehem where David lived.

8  Again the priests and Pharisees sent officers to bring him into
court to answer for his life; but when the officers returned and
brought him not,

9  The rulers were enraged and said, Why did you not arrest this man
and hale him into court?

10  The officers replied, We never heard a man speak like this man
speaks.

11  In rage the Pharisees stood forth and said, Have you gone mad? Have
you been led astray? Are you disciples of this man?

12  Have any of the rulers, or the Pharisees believed on him? The
common people! yes, they may believe; they are accursed; they know not
anything.

13  But Nicodemus came before the rulers and he said, Can Jewish judges
judge a man and sentence him until they hear his plea? Let Jesus stand
before this bar and testify himself.

14  The rulers said, This Jesus is a wily man, and if we suffer him to
speak, he will rebuke us face to face, and then the multitudes will
laugh and stand in his defense.

15  And then you know, as well as we, that prophets do not come from
Galilee.

16  The rulers felt the force of what the officers and Nicodemus said,
and they said nothing more.

17  And then the people went their way, each to his home; but Jesus
went unto Mount Olives where he spent the night in prayer.

18  But in the morning when the sun had scarcely risen, Jesus came
again, and many people came to see him in the temple courts, and he
sat down and taught the multitudes.

19  The Pharisees and scribes were still alert to find a cause whereby
they might condemn him by the words he spoke.

20  The officers had taken in the very act of crime, a courtesan. As
Jesus taught, they brought this woman in and set her in the midst and
said,

21  Rabboni, this vile woman has been taken in adultery. The law of
Moses says that such as she shall die, be stoned to death; what do you
say should be her punishment?

22  And Jesus stooped and made a figure on the ground and in it placed
the number of a soul, and then he sat in silent thought.

23  And when the priests demanded that he speak, he said, Let him who
has no sin stand forth and be the first to cast a stone at her.

24  And then he closed his eyes, and not a word was said. When he arose
and saw the woman all alone he said,

25  Where are the men who brought you here? they who accused?

26  The woman said, They all are gone; no one was here who could
condemn.

27  And Jesus said, And I condemn you not; go on your way in peace, and
sin no more.


CHAPTER 135.

    _Jesus teaches in the temple. He reveals some of the deeper
      meanings of the Christine ministry. The rulers are greatly
      enraged and attempt to stone him, but he disappears._

The feast was done and Jesus, Peter, James and John were sitting in
the temple treasury.

2  The nine had gone back to Capernaum.

3  The people thronged the temple courts and Jesus said,

4  I am the lamp; Christ is the oil of life; the Holy Breath the fire.
Behold the light! and he who follows me shall not walk in the dark,
but he shall have the light of life.

5  A lawyer said, You witness for yourself, your witness is not true.

6  And Jesus said, If I do witness for myself I speak that which is
true, for I know whence I came and where I go.

7  And no one else in flesh can testify for me, for none know whence I
came, nor where I go.

8  My works bear witness to the truth I speak. As man I could not speak
the words I speak; they are the words of Holy Breath; and then my
Father testifies for me.

9  The lawyer said, Where does your father live?

10  And Jesus said, You know me not or you would know my Father, and if
you knew the Father you would know the son, because the Father and
the son are one.

11  I go my way and you shall find me not; for where I go you cannot
come, because you do not know the way.

12  You cannot find the way because your hearts are gross, your ears
are dull, your eyes are closed.

13  The light of life cannot shine through the murky veil that you have
drawn about your hearts.

14  You do not know the Christ and if the Christ be not within the
heart there is no light.

15  I come to manifest the Christ to men and you receive me not, and
you will dwell in darkness and in the shadow of the grave till you
believe the words I speak.

16  But you will vilify the son of man, and lift him up and laugh to
see him die.

17  But then a little light will come and you will know that I am what
I am.

18  The people did not comprehend the meaning of the words he spoke.

19  And then he spoke unto the people who believed in him and said, If
you abide in Christ, and Christ abide in you, and if you keep my words
within your heart,

20  You are the way, you are disciples in the way, and you shall know
what is the truth, and truth shall make you free.

21  And still the people did not understand; they said, We are the seed
of Abraham and are already free; we never were the slaves of any man;
why do you say, We shall be free?

22  And Jesus said, Do you not know that every one committing sin is
slave of sin? abides in bondage unto sin?

23  If you sin not then you are free; but if you sin in thought, or
word, or deed, then you are slaves, and naught but truth can set you
free; if you are free through Christ, then you are free indeed.

24  You are the seed of Abraham, and yet you seek to kill me just
because I speak the truth of Abraham.

25  You are the children of the flesh of Abraham; but, lo, I say, There
is a spiritual Abraham whom you know not.

26  In spirit you are children of your father, and your father is
Diabolus; you hang upon his words and do his will.

27  He was a murderer from the first; he cannot tell the truth, and
when he tells a lie he speaks his own; he is himself a lie, and he is
father of himself.

28  If you were children of my Father-God, then you could hear the
words of God; I speak the words of God, but you can hear them not.

29  A Pharisee stood forth and said, This fellow is not one of us; he
is a curst Samaritan and is obsessed.

30  But Jesus heeded not the words of Pharisee or scribe; he knew that
all the people knew he was a Jew.

31  And then he said, Whoever keeps my words shall never die.

32  A lawyer said, And now we know he is obsessed. Our father Abraham
is dead; the prophets all are dead, and yet this fellow says, Whoever
keeps my words shall never die.

33  Is this man greater than our father Abraham? Is he above the
prophets? and all of them are dead.

34  And Jesus said, Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; he saw
it and was glad.

35  The lawyer said, You simple man; you are not fifty years of age;
have you seen Abraham?

36  And Jesus said, Before the days of Abraham I am.

37  Again the scribes and Pharisees were in a rage; they took up stones
to cast at him, but, like a phantom of the night, he disappeared; the
people knew not where he went.


