CHAPTER 57.

    _Meeting of the sages, continued. Opening addresses. Jesus with
      the sages. Seven days’ silence._

Ashbina said, Assyria is the land of doubt; the chariot of my people,
that in which they mostly ride, is labeled Doubt.

2  Once Faith walked forth in Babylon; and she was bright and fair; but
she was clothed in such white robes that men became afraid of her.

3  And every wheel began to turn, and Doubt made war on her, and drove
her from the land; and she came back no more.

4  In form men worship God, the One; in heart they are not sure that
God exists.

5  Faith worships at the shrine of one not seen; but Doubt must see her
God.

6  The greatest need of all Assyria is faith--a faith that seasons
every thing that is, with certainty.

7  And then Apollo said, The greatest needs of Greece are true concepts
of God.

8  Theogony in Greece is rudderless, for every thought may be a god,
and worshipped as a god.

9  The plane of thought is broad, and full of sharp antagonists; and
so the circle of the gods is filled with enmity, with wars and base
intrigues.

10  Greece needs a master mind to stand above the gods; to raise the
thoughts of men away from many gods to God the One.

11  We know that light is coming o’er the hills. God speed the light.

12  Matheno said, Behold this land of mystery! this Egypt of the dead!

13  Our temples long have been the tombs of all the hidden things of
time; our temples, crypts and caves are dark.

14  In light there are no secret things. The sun reveals all hidden
truth. There are no mysteries in God.

15  Behold the rising sun! His beams are entering every door; yea,
every crevice of the mystic crypts of Mizraim.

16  We hail the light! All Egypt craves the light.

17  And Philo said, The need of Hebrew thought and life is liberty.

18  The Hebrew prophets, seers, and givers of the law, were men of
power, men of holy thought, and they bequeathed to us a system of
philosophy that was ideal; one strong enough and good enough to lead
our people to the goal of perfectness.

19  But carnal minds repudiated holiness; a priesthood filled with
selfishness arose, and purity in heart became a myth; the people were
enslaved.

20  The priesthood is the curse of Israel; but when he comes, who is to
come, he will proclaim emancipation for the slaves; my people will be
free.

21  Behold, for God has made incarnate wisdom, love and light, which he
has called Immanuel.

22  To him is given the keys to open up the dawn; and here, as man, he
walks with us.

23  And then the council chamber door was opened and the Logos stood
among the sages of the world.

24  Again the sages sat in silence seven days.


CHAPTER 58.

    _Meeting of the sages, continued. Presentation of the seven
      universal postulates._

Now, when the sages were refreshed they opened up the Book of Life and
read.

2  They read the story of the life of man; of all his struggles,
losses, gains; and in the light of past events and needs, they saw
what would be best for him in coming years.

3  They knew the kind of laws and precepts suited best to his estate;
they saw the highest God-ideal that the race could comprehend.

4  Upon the seven postulates these sages were to formulate, the great
philosophy of life and worship of the coming age must rest.

5  Now Meng-ste was the oldest sage; he took the chair of chief, and
said,

6  Man is not far enough advanced to live by faith; he cannot
comprehend the things his eyes see not,

7  He yet is child, and during all the coming age he must be taught by
pictures, symbols, rites, and forms.

8  His God must be a human God; he cannot see a God by faith.

9  And then he cannot rule himself; the king must rule; the man must
serve.

10  The age that follows this will be the age of man, the age of faith.

11  In that blest age the human race will see without the aid of carnal
eyes; will hear the soundless sound; will know the Spirit-God.

12  The age we enter is the Preparation age, and all the schools, and
governments and worship rites must be designed in simple way that men
may comprehend.

13  And man cannot originate; he builds by patterns that he sees; so in
this council we must carve out pattern for the coming age.

14  And we must formulate the gnosis of the Empire of the soul, which
rests on seven postulates.

15  Each sage in turn shall form a postulate; and these shall be the
basis of the creeds of men until the perfect age shall come.

16  Then Meng-ste wrote the first:

17  All things are thought; all life is thought activity. The multitude
of beings are but phases of the one great thought made manifest. Lo,
God is Thought, and Thought is God.

18  Then Vidyapati wrote the second postulate:

19  Eternal Thought is one; in essence it is two--Intelligence and
Force; and when they breathe a child is born; this child is Love.

20  And thus the Triune God stands forth, whom men call
Father-Mother-Child.

21  This Triune God is one; but like the one of light, in essence he is
seven.

22  And when the Triune God breathes forth, lo, seven Spirits stand
before his face; these are creative attributes.

23  Men call them lesser gods, and in their image they made man.

24  And Kaspar wrote the third:

25  Man was a thought of God, formed in the image of the Septonate,
clothed in the substances of soul.

26  And his desires were strong; he sought to manifest on every plane
of life, and for himself he made a body of the ethers of the earthy
forms, and so descended to the plane of earth.

27  In this descent he lost his birthright; lost his harmony with God,
and made discordant all the notes of life.

28  Inharmony and evil are the same; so evil is the handiwork of man.

29  Ashbina wrote the fourth:

30  Seeds do not germinate in light; they do not grow until they find
the soil, and hide themselves away from light.

31  Man was evolved a seed of everlasting life; but in the ethers of
the Triune God the light was far too great for seeds to grow;

32  And so man sought the soil of carnal life, and in the darksomeness
of earth he found a place where he could germinate and grow.

33  The seed has taken root and grown full well.

34  The tree of human life is rising from the soil of earthy things,
and, under natural law, is reaching up to perfect form.

35  There are no supernatural acts of God to lift a man from carnal
life to spirit blessedness; he grows as grows the plant, and in due
time is perfected.

36  The quality of soul that makes it possible for man to rise to
spirit life is purity.


