CHAPTER 59.

    _Meeting of the sages, continued. The remaining postulates. The
      sages bless Jesus. Seven days’ silence._

Apollo wrote the fifth:

2  The soul is drawn to perfect light by four white steeds, and these
are Will, and Faith, and Helpfulness and Love.

3  That which one wills to do, he has the power to do.

4  A knowledge of that power is faith; and when faith moves, the soul
begins its flight.

5  A selfish faith leads not to light. There is no lonely pilgrim on
the way to light. Men only gain the heights by helping others gain the
heights.

6  The steed that leads the way to spirit life is Love; is pure
unselfish Love.

7  Matheno wrote the sixth:

8  The universal Love of which Apollo speaks is child of Wisdom and of
Will divine, and God has sent it forth to earth in flesh that man may
know.

9  The universal Love of which the sages speak, is Christ.

10  The greatest mystery of all times lies in the way that Christ lives
in the heart.

11  Christ cannot live in clammy dens of carnal things. The seven
battles must be fought, the seven victories won before the carnal
things, like fear, and self, emotions and desire, are put away.

12  When this is done the Christ will take possession of the soul; the
work is done, and man and God are one.

13  And Philo wrote the seventh:

14  A perfect man! To bring before the Triune God a being such as this
was nature made.

15  This consummation is the highest revelation of the mystery of life.

16  When all the essences of carnal things have been transmuted into
soul, and all the essences of soul have been returned to Holy Breath,
and man is made a perfect God, the drama of Creation will conclude.
And this is all.

17  And all the sages said, Amen.

18  Then Meng-ste said, The Holy One has sent to us a man illumined by
the efforts of unnumbered years, to lead the thoughts of men.

19  This man, approved by all the master minds of heaven and earth,
this man from Galilee, this Jesus, chief of all the sages of the
world, we gladly recognize.

20  In recognition of this wisdom that he brings to men, we crown him
with the Lotus wreath.

21  We send him forth with all the blessing of the seven sages of the
world.

22  Then all the sages laid their hands on Jesus’ head, and said with
one accord, Praise God!

23  For wisdom, honor, glory, power, riches, blessing, strength, are
yours, O Christ, forever more.

24  And every living creature said, Amen.

25  And then the sages sat in silence seven days.


CHAPTER 60.

    _Jesus addresses the seven sages. The address. Jesus goes to
      Galilee._

The seven days of silence passed and Jesus, sitting with the sages
said:

2  The history of life is well condensed in these immortal postulates.
These are the seven hills on which the holy city shall be built.

3  These are the seven sure foundation stones on which the Universal
Church shall stand.

4  In taking up the work assigned for me to do I am full conscious of
the perils of the way; the cup will be a bitter one to drink and human
nature well might shrink.

5  But I have lost my will in that of Holy Breath, and so I go my way
to speak and act as I am moved to speak and act by Holy Breath.

6  The words I speak are not my own; they are the words of him whose
will I do.

7  Man is not far enough advanced in sacred thought to comprehend the
Universal Church, and so the work that God has given me to do is not
the building of that Church.

8  I am a model maker, sent to make a pattern of the Church that is to
be--a pattern that the age may comprehend.

9  My task as model builder lies within my native land, and there, upon
the postulate that Love is son of God, that I am come to manifest that
Love, the Model Church will stand.

10  And from the men of low estate I will select twelve men, who
represent the twelve immortal thoughts; and these will be the Model
Church.

11  The house of Judah, my own kindred in the flesh, will comprehend
but little of my mission to the world.

12  And they will spurn me, scorn my work, accuse me falsely, bind me,
take me to the judgment seat of carnal men who will convict and slay
me on the cross.

13  But men can never slay the truth; though banished it will come
again in greater power; for truth will subjugate the world.

14  The Model Church will live. Though carnal man will prostitute its
sacred laws, symbolic rites and forms, for selfish ends, and make it
but an outward show, the few will find through it the kingdom of the
soul.

15  And when the better age shall come the Universal Church will stand
upon the seven postulates, and will be built according to the pattern
given.

16  The time has come; I go my way unto Jerusalem, and by the power of
living faith, and by the strength that you have given,

17  And in the name of God, our Father-God, the kingdom of the soul
shall be established on the seven hills,

18  And all the peoples, tribes and tongues of earth shall enter in.

19  The Prince of Peace will take his seat upon the throne of power;
the Triune God will then be All in All.

20  And all the sages said, Amen.

21  And Jesus went his way, and after many days, he reached Jerusalem;
and then he sought his home in Galilee.




SECTION XIII.

MEM.

_The Ministry of John, the Harbinger._


