CHAPTER 130.

    _Jesus and the three disciples return to Cæsarea-Philippi. The
      nine had failed to cure an epileptic child. Jesus heals it
      and rebukes his disciples for their lack of trust in God. The
      Christines return to Capernaum._

When Jesus, Peter, James and John were come unto the city’s gates a
multitude of people thronged the way.

2  The nine apostles who went not with Jesus to the mount, had tried
to heal an epileptic child who was obsessed, and they had failed; the
people waited for the coming of the Lord.

3  When Jesus came the father of the child knelt down before him and
implored his help.

4  He said, My master, I beseech that you will look in pity on my son,
my only child; he is an epileptic child and suffers grievously.

5  Sometimes he falls into the fire and is burned; again he falls into
the water and is like to drown; and many times a day he falls, he
grinds his teeth, the foam pours from his mouth.

6  I took my child to your disciples, and they failed to give relief.

7  And as he spoke a servant brought the child before the Lord (the
child spoke not, for he was dumb), and instantly he fell upon the
ground, he foamed, he writhed in agony.

8  And Jesus said, How long has he been troubled thus?

9  The father said, From infancy; and we have sought in many lands for
help, but found it not; but I believe that you can speak the Word and
heal my son.

10  And Jesus said, Faith is the power of God. All things are possible
for him who in his heart believes.

11  The father cried, in tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine
unbelief.

12  And Jesus spoke the Word of power; the epileptic child lay in a
swoon; he did not breathe, and all the people said, The child is dead.

13  But Jesus took him by the hand and said: Arise; and he arose and
spoke.

14  The people were amazed, and many said, This surely is a man of God,
for no such power was ever given to man.

15  Then Jesus and the twelve went to the house, and after they had
taken food and been refreshed, the nine disciples said,

16  Lord, why could we not heal this child? We spoke the Word; but even
that was powerless.

17  And Jesus said, Your great success in all your former work has made
you careless, and you forgot to recognize the power of God.

18  Without the spirit of the Word, the Word is like an idle tale; and
you forgot to pray.

19  There is no faith without the prayer of faith. Faith is the wings
of prayer; but wings alone fly not.

20  By prayer and faith you can bring down the mountain peaks, and cast
them in the sea; the little hills will skip about like lambs at your
command.

21  This failure may be well for you. The greatest lessons that are
learned in life come through the failures that are made.

22  As the disciples sat in thoughtful meditation Jesus said, Let these
words sink into your hearts:

23  The time has nearly come when you must bear your load alone; that
is, without my presence in the flesh.

24  For I will fall into the hands of wicked men, and they will slay me
on a mount beyond Bezetha wall.

25  And men will lay my body in a tomb where, by the sacred Word, it
will be guarded and preserved three days; then I will rise again.

26  The twelve were sad; they did not understand, and yet they feared
to ask him to reveal the meaning of his word.

27  Next day the Christine master and the twelve began their journey of
return, and soon were in Capernaum.


CHAPTER 131.

    _Jesus and Peter pay the half-shekel tax. The disciples contend
      for the supremacy. Jesus rebukes them. Teaches them many
      practical lessons. The parable of the good shepherd._

As Jesus and the twelve were resting in the house, the tax collector
came to Peter saying, Man, do Jesus and yourself pay this half-shekel
tax?

2  And Peter said, We pay whatever is assessed.

3  And Jesus said, From whom do publicans collect this special tax?
from strangers or from native sons?

4  And Peter said, The strangers only are supposed to pay this tax.

5  Then Jesus said, We all are native sons and we are free; but lest
we cause contention we will pay the tax; but neither had the shekel
wherewithal to pay.

6  And Jesus said, Go to the sea; cast in a hook and catch a fish and
you will find within its inner parts a shekel, which take up and pay
the tax for you and me.

7  And Peter did as Jesus said; he found the shekel and he paid the tax.

8  Now Jesus heard the twelve dispute among themselves. The spirit of
the carnal self was moving in their hearts, and they were questioning
among themselves who was the greatest in the sight of God and man.

9  And Jesus said, You men, for shame! the greatest is the servant of
the rest. And then he called to him a little child; he took it in his
arms and said,

10  The greatest is the little child, and if you would be great at all
you must become as is this child in innocence, in truth, in purity in
life.

11  Great men scorn not the little things of earth; he who regards and
honors such a child, regards and honors me, and he who scorns a child,
scorn me.

12  If you would enter through the kingdom gate you must be humble as
this little child.

13  Hear me, you men, This child, as every other child, has one to
plead its cause before the throne of God.

14  You scorn it at your peril, men, for lo, I say, its counterpart
beholds the face of God at every moment, every day.

15  And hear me once again, He who shall cause a little one to stumble
and to fall is marked, accursed; and it were better far if he had
drowned himself.

16  Behold, offenses everywhere! Men find occasions for to sin and
fall, and they grow strong by rising when they fall;

17  But woe to him who causes other men to stumble and to fall.

18  Be on your guard, you men of God, lest you constrain another man to
fall; beware lest you fall into sinful ways yourselves.

19  Now, if your hands cause you to sin, you better cut them off; for
it is better far to have no hands and not be guilty in the sight of
God and men, than to be perfect in your form and lose your soul.

20  And if your feet should cause offense, you better cut them off;
for it is better far to enter into life without your feet than fall
beneath the curse.

21  And if your eyes, or ears, cause you to sin, you better lose them
all than lose your soul.

22  Your thoughts and words and deeds will all be tried by fire.

23  Remember that you are the salt of earth; but if you lose the
virtues of the salt, you are but refuse in the sight of God.

24  Retain the virtues of the salt of life and be at peace among
yourselves.

25  The world is full of men who have not in themselves the salt of
life, and they are lost. I come to seek and save the lost.

26  How think you? if a shepherd has a hundred sheep, and one of them
has gone astray, will he not leave the ninety and the nine,

27  And go out in the desert ways and mountain tops to seek the one
that went astray?

28  Yes, this you know; and if he finds the one that went astray, lo,
he is glad, and he rejoices over it far more than over all the ninety
and the nine that did not go astray.

29  And so there is rejoicing in the courts of heaven when one of human
birth who has gone forth into the ways of sin is found and brought
back to the fold;

30  Yea, there is joy, more joy than over all the righteous men who
never went astray.

31  And John said, Master, who may seek and save the lost? and who may
heal the sick, and cast the demons out of those obsessed?

32  When we were on the way we saw a man who was not one of us, cast
demons out and heal the sick.

33  He did it by the sacred Word and in the name of Christ; but we
forbade him, for he did not walk with us.

34  And Jesus said, You sons of men, do you imagine that you own the
powers of God?

35  And do you think that all the world must wait for you to do the
works of God?

36  God is not man that he should have a special care for any man, and
give him special gifts.

37  Forbid not any man to do the works of God.

38  There is no man who can pronounce the sacred Word, and in the name
of Christ restore the sick, and cast the unclean spirits out, who is
not child of God.

39  The man of whom you speak is one with us. Whoever gathers in the
grain of heaven is one with us.

40  Whoever gives a cup of water in the name of Christ is one with us;
so God shall judge.


