CHAPTER 79.

    _John, the harbinger, at Salim. A lawyer inquires about Jesus.
      John explains to the multitude the mission of Jesus._

Now, John the harbinger, was at the Salim Springs where water was
abundant, and there he preached and washed the bodies of the people
who confessed their sins.

2  A Jewish lawyer went to John and said, Has not this man from
Galilee, he whom you washed and called the Christ, become your foe?

3  They say that he is at the Jordan ford; that he is building up a
church, or something else, and that he washes people, just as you have
done.

4  And John replied, This Jesus is indeed the Christ whose way I came
to pave. He is not foe of mine.

5  The bridegroom hath the bride; his friends are near, and when they
hear his voice they all rejoice.

6  The kingdom of the Holy One is bride, and Christ the groom; and I,
the harbinger, am full of joy because they prosper so abundantly.

7  I have performed the work that I was sent to do; the work of Jesus
just begins.

8  Then turning to the multitudes he said, Christ is the king of
righteousness; Christ is the love of God; yea, he is God; one of the
holy persons of the Triune God.

9  Christ lives in every heart of purity.

10  Now, Jesus who is preaching at the Jordan ford, has been subjected
to the hardest tests of human life, and he has conquered all the
appetites and passions of the carnal man.

11  And by the highest court of heaven, has been declared a man of such
superior purity and holiness that he can demonstrate the presence of
the Christ on earth.

12  Lo, love divine, which is the Christ, abides in him, and he is
pattern for the race.

13  And every man can see in him what every man will be when he has
conquered all the passions of the selfish self.

14  In water I have washed the bodies of the people who have turned
from sin, symbolic of the cleansing of the soul;

15  But Jesus bathes forever in the living waters of the Holy Breath.

16  And Jesus comes to bring the savior of the world to men; Love is
the savior of the world.

17  And all who put their trust in Christ, and follow Jesus as a
pattern and a guide, have everlasting life.

18  But they who do not trust the Christ, and will not purify their
hearts so that the Christ can dwell within, can never enter life.


CHAPTER 80.

    _Lamaas comes from India to see Jesus. He listens to the
      teachings of John at Salim. John tells him of the divine
      mission of Jesus. Lamaas finds Jesus at the Jordan. The
      masters recognize each other._

Lamaas, priest of Brahm, who was a friend of Jesus when he was in the
temple Jagannath, had heard of Jesus and his mighty works in many
lands; and he had left his home and come to Palestine in search of him.

2  And as he journeyed towards Jerusalem he heard of John, the
harbinger, who was esteemed a prophet of the living God.

3  Lamaas found the harbinger at Salim Springs; for many days he was a
silent listener to the pungent truths he taught.

4  And he was present when the Pharisee told John of Jesus and his
mighty works.

5  He heard the answer of the harbinger; he heard him bless the name of
Jesus, whom he called the Christ.

6  And then he spoke to John; he said, Pray, tell me more about this
Jesus whom you call the Christ.

7  And John replied, this Jesus is the love of God made manifest.

8  Lo, men are living on the lower planes--the planes of greed and
selfishness; for self they fight; they conquer with the sword.

9  In every land the strong enslave and kill the weak. All kingdoms
rise by force of arms; for force is king.

10  This Jesus comes to overthrow this iron rule of force, and seat
Love on the throne of power.

11  And Jesus fears no man. He preaches boldly in the courts of kings,
and everywhere, that victories won by force of arms are crimes;

12  That every worthy end may be attained by gentleness and love, just
as the Prince of Peace, Melchisedec, the priest of God, won gallant
victories in war without the shedding of a drop of blood.

13  You ask where are the temples of the Christ? He ministers at
shrines not made with hands; his temples are the hearts of holy men
who are prepared to see the king.

14  The groves of nature are his synagogues; his forum is the world.

15  He has no priests dressed up in puppet style to be admired by men;
for every son of man is priest of Love.

16  When man has purified his heart by faith, he needs no middle man to
intercede.

17  He is on friendly terms with God; is not afraid of him, and he is
able, and is bold enough, to lay his body on the altar of the Lord.

18  Thus every man is priest, and is himself a living sacrifice.

19  You need not seek the Christ, for when your heart is purified the
Christ will come, and will abide with you forevermore.

20  And then Lamaas journeyed on; he came to Jesus as he taught beside
the ford.

21  And Jesus said, Behold the Star of India!

22  Lamaas said, Behold the Sun of Righteousness! And he confessed his
faith in Christ, and followed him.


