CHAPTER 83.

    _Jesus teaches the people of Sychar. Casts a wicked spirit out
      of one obsessed. Sends the spirit to its own place. Heals
      many people. The priests are disturbed by the presence of
      Jesus in Sychar, but he speaks to them and wins their favor._

In Sychar Jesus taught the people in the market place.

2  A man obsessed was brought to him. The wicked spirit that possessed
the man was full of violence and lust, and often threw his victim to
the ground.

3  And Jesus spoke aloud and said, Base spirit, loose your hold upon
the vitals of this man, and go back to your own.

4  And then the spirit begged that he might go into the body of a dog
that stood near by.

5  But Jesus said, Why harm the helpless dog? Its life is just as dear
to it as mine to me.

6  It is not yours to throw the burden of your sin on any living thing.

7  By your own deeds and evil thoughts you have brought all these
perils on yourself. You have hard problems to be solved; but you must
solve them for yourself.

8  By thus obsessing man you make your own conditions doubly sad. Go
back into your own domain; refrain from harming anything, and, by and
by, you will, yourself, be free.

9  The wicked spirit left the man and went unto his own. The man
looked up in thankfulness and said, Praise God.

10  And many of the people brought their sick, and Jesus spoke the
Word, and they were healed.

11  The ruler of the synagogue, and all the priests were much disturbed
when told that Jesus from Jerusalem was preaching in the town.

12  They thought that he had come to proselyte and stir up strife among
Samaritans.

13  And so they sent an officer to bring him to the synagogue that he
might give a reason for his presence in the town.

14  But Jesus said to him who came, Go back and tell the priests and
ruler of the synagogue that I am not engaged in crime.

15  I come to bind up broken hearts, to heal the sick, and cast the
evil spirits out of those obsessed.

16  Tell them, their prophets spoke of me; that I am come to break no
law, but to fulfil the highest law.

17  The man returned and told the priests and ruler of the synagogue
what Jesus said,

18  The ruler was amazed, and with the priests went to the market place
where Jesus was.

19  And when he saw them, Jesus said, Behold the honored men of all
Samaria! the men ordained to lead the people in the way of right.

20  And I am come to help, and not to hinder in their work.

21  There are two classes of the sons of men; they who would build the
human race upon the sure foundation stones of justice, truth, equality
and right,

22  And they who would destroy the holy temple where the Spirit dwells
and bring their fellows down to beggary and crime.

23  The holy brotherhood of right must stand united in the stirring
conflicts of the hour.

24  No matter whether they be Jews, Samaritans, Assyrians or Greeks,
they must tramp down beneath their feet all strife, all discord,
jealousy and hate, and demonstrate the brotherhood of man.

25  Then to the ruler of the synagogue he spoke: he said, United in the
cause of right we stand; divided we will fall.

26  And then he took the ruler by the hand; a love light filled their
souls; and all the people were amazed.


CHAPTER 84.

    _The Christines resume their journey. They tarry a while in the
      city of Samaria. Jesus speaks in the synagogue. Heals a woman
      by mental power. He disappears, but later joins his disciples
      as they journey toward Nazareth._

The Christines turned their faces toward the land of Galilee; but when
they reached the city of Samaria, the multitudes pressed hard about
them, begging them to tarry in their city for a while.

2  And then they went up to the synagogue, and Jesus opened up the book
of Moses, and he read:

3  In thee and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blest.

4  And then he closed the book and said, These words were spoken by the
Lord of hosts unto our father Abraham, and Israel has been blessedness
to all the world.

5  We are his seed; but not a tithe of the great work that we were
called to do has yet been done.

6  The Lord of hosts has set apart the Israelites to teach the unity
of God and man; but one can never teach that which he does not
demonstrate in life.

7  Our God is Spirit, and in him all wisdom, love and strength abide.

8  In every man these sacred attributes are budding forth, and in due
time they will unfold; the demonstration will completed be, and man
will comprehend the fact of unity.

9  And you, the ruler of the synagogue, and you, these priests, are
honored servants of the Lord of hosts.

10  All men are looking unto you for guidance in the ways of life;
example is another name for priest; so what you would that people be,
that you must be.

11  A simple godly life may win ten thousand souls to purity and right.

12  And all the people said, Amen.

13  Then Jesus left the synagogue, and at the hour of evening prayer
he went up to the sacred grove, and all the people turned their faces
toward their holy mount and prayed.

14  And Jesus prayed.

15  And as he sat in silent mood a voice of soul spoke to his soul
imploring help.

16  And Jesus saw a woman on a couch in sore distress; for she was sick
nigh unto death.

17  She could not speak, but she had heard that Jesus was a man of God,
and in her heart she called on him for help.

18  And Jesus helped; he did not speak; but like a flash of light, a
mighty virtue from his soul filled full the body of the dying one, and
she arose, and joined her kindred while they prayed.

19  Her kindred were astonished and they said to her, How were you
healed? And she replied,

20  I do not know; I simply asked the man of God in thought for healing
power, and in a moment I was well.

21  The people said, The gods have surely come to earth; for man has
not the power to heal by thought.

22  But Jesus said, The greatest power in heaven and earth is thought.

23  God made the universe by thought; he paints the lily and the rose
with thought.

24  Why think it strange that I should send a healing thought and
change the ethers of disease and death to those of health and life?

25  Lo, you shall see far greater things than this, for by the power
of holy thought, my body will be changed from carnal flesh to spirit
form; and so will yours.

26  When Jesus had thus said he disappeared, and no one saw him go.

27  His own disciples did not comprehend the change; they knew not
where their master went, and they went on their way.

28  But as they walked and talked about the strange event, lo, Jesus
came and walked with them to Nazareth of Galilee.


