CHAPTER 13.

    _Elizabeth in Engedi. Teaches her son. John becomes the pupil
      of Matheno, who reveals to him the meaning of sin and the law
      of forgiveness._

Elizabeth was blest; she spent her time with John, and gave to him the
lessons that Elihu and Salome had given her.

2  And John delighted in the wildness of his home and in the lessons
that he learned.

3  Now in the hills were many caves. The cave of David was a-near in
which the Hermit of Engedi lived.

4  This hermit was Matheno, priest of Egypt, master from the temple of
Sakara.

5  When John was seven years of age Matheno took him to the wilderness
and in the cave of David they abode.

6  Matheno taught, and John was thrilled with what the master said, and
day by day Matheno opened up to him the mysteries of life.

7  John loved the wilderness; he loved his master and his simple fare.
Their food was fruits, and nuts, wild honey and the carob bread.

8  Matheno was an Israelite, and he attended all the Jewish feasts.

9  When John was nine years old Matheno took him to a great feast in
Jerusalem.

10  The wicked Archelaus had been deposed and exiled to a distant land
because of selfishness and cruelty, and John was not afraid.

11  John was delighted with his visit to Jerusalem. Matheno told him
all about the service of the Jews; the meaning of their sacrifices and
their rites.

12  John could not understand how sin could be forgiven by killing
animals and birds and burning them before the Lord.

13  Matheno said, The God of heaven and earth does not require
sacrifice. This custom with its cruel rites was borrowed from the idol
worshippers of other lands.

14  No sin was ever blotted out by sacrifice of animal, of bird, or man.

15  Sin is the rushing forth of man into the fens of wickedness. If one
would get away from sin he must retrace his steps, and find his way
out of the fens of wickedness.

16  Return and purify your hearts by love and righteousness and you
shall be forgiven.

17  This is the burden of the message that the harbinger shall bring to
men.

18  What is forgiveness? John inquired.

19  Matheno said, It is the paying up of debts. A man who wrongs
another man can never be forgiven until he rights the wrong.

20  The Vedas says that none can right the wrong but him who does the
wrong.

21  John said, If this be true where is the power to forgive except the
power that rests in man himself? Can man forgive himself?

22  Matheno said, The door is wide ajar; you see the way of man’s
return to right, and the forgiveness of his sins.


CHAPTER 14.

    _Matheno’s lessons. The doctrine of universal law. The power
      of man to choose and to attain. The benefits of antagonisms.
      Ancient sacred books. The place of John and Jesus in the
      world’s history._

Matheno and his pupil, John, were talking of the sacred books of olden
times, and of the golden precepts they contained, and John exclaimed,

2  These golden precepts are sublime; what need have we of other sacred
books?

3  Matheno said, The Spirits of the Holy One cause every thing to come
and go in proper time.

4  The sun has his own time to set, the moon to rise, to wax and wane,
the stars to come and go, the rain to fall, the winds to blow;

5  The seed times and the harvest times to come; man to be born and man
to die.

6  These mighty Spirits cause the nations to be born; they rock them in
their cradles, nurture them to greatest power, and when their tasks
are done they wrap them in their winding sheets and lay them in their
tombs.

7  Events are many in a nation’s life, and in the life of man, that are
not pleasant for the time; but in the end the truth appears: whatever
comes is for the best.

8  Man was created for a noble part; but he could not be made a free
man filled with wisdom, truth and might.

9  If he were hedged about, confined in straits from which he could not
pass, then he would be a toy, a mere machine.

10  Creative spirits gave to man a will; and so he has the power to
choose.

11  He may attain the greatest heights, or sink to deepest depths; for
what he wills to gain he has the power to gain.

12  If he desires strength he has the power to gain that strength; but
he must overcome resistances to reach the goal; no strength is ever
gained in idleness.

13  So, in the whirl of many-sided conflicts man is placed where he
must strive to extricate himself.

14  In every conflict man gains strength; with every conquest he
attains to greater heights. With every day he finds new duties and new
cares.

15  Man is not carried over dangerous pits, nor helped to overcome his
foes. He is himself his army, and his sword and shield; and he is
captain of his hosts.

16  The Holy Ones just light his way. Man never has been left without a
beacon light to guide.

17  And he has ever had a lighted lamp in hand that he may see the
dangerous rocks, the turbid streams and treacherous pits.

18  And so the Holy Ones have judged; when men have needed added light
a master soul has come to earth to give that light.

19  Before the Vedic days the world had many sacred books to light the
way; and when man needed greater light the Vedas, the Avesta and the
books of Tao Great appeared to show the way to greater heights.

20  And in the proper place the Hebrew Bible, with its Law, its
Prophets and its Psalms, appeared for man’s enlightenment.

21  But years have passed and men have need of greater light.

22  And now the Day Star from on high begins to shine; and Jesus is the
flesh-made messenger to show that light to men.

23  And you, my pupil, you have been ordained to harbinger the coming
day.

24  But you must keep that purity of heart you now possess; and you
must light your lamp directly from the coals that burn upon the altar
of the Holy Ones.

25  And then your lamp will be transmuted to a boundless flame, and you
will be a living torch whose light will shine wherever man abides.

26  But in the ages yet to come, man will attain to greater heights,
and lights still more intense will come.

27  And then, at last, a mighty master soul will come to earth to light
the way up to the throne of perfect man.


