CHAPTER 51.

    _Jesus passes the fourth brotherhood test, and receives the
      fourth degree, PHILANTHROPY._

When other certain days had passed, the guide led Jesus to the Hall of
Mirth, a hall most richly furnished, and replete with every thing a
carnal heart could wish.

2  The choicest viands and the most delicious wines were on the boards;
and maids, in gay attire, served all with grace and cheerfulness.

3  And men and women, richly clad, were there; and they were wild with
joy; they sipped from every cup of mirth.

4  And Jesus watched the happy throng in silence for a time, and then a
man in garb of sage came up and said, Most happy is the man who, like
the bee, can gather sweets from every flower.

5  The wise man is the one who seeks for pleasure, and can find it
everywhere,

6  At best man’s span of life on earth is short, and then he dies and
goes, he knows not where.

7  Then let us eat, and drink, and dance, and sing, and get the joys of
life, for death comes on apace.

8  It is but foolishness to spend a life for other men. Behold, all die
and lie together in the grave, where none can know and none can show
forth gratitude.

9  But Jesus answered not; upon the tinseled guests in all their rounds
of mirth he gazed in silent thought.

10  And then among the guests he saw a man whose clothes were coarse;
who showed in face and hands the lines of toil and want.

11 The giddy throng found pleasure in abusing him; they jostled him
against the wall, and laughed at his discomfiture.

12  And then a poor, frail woman came, who carried in her face and form
the marks of sin and shame; and without mercy she was spit upon, and
jeered, and driven from the hall.

13  And then a little child, with timid ways and hungry mien, came in
and asked for just a morsel of their food.

14  But she was driven out uncared for and unloved; and still the merry
dance went on.

15  And when the pleasure seekers urged that Jesus join them in their
mirth, he said,

16  How could I seek for pleasure for myself while others are in want?
How can you think that while the children cry for bread, while those
in haunts of sin call out for sympathy and love that I can fill myself
to full with the good things of life?

17  I tell you, nay; we all are kin, each one a part of the great human
heart.

18  I cannot see myself apart from that poor man that you so scorned,
and crowded to the wall;

19  Nor from the one in female garb who came up from the haunts of vice
to ask for sympathy and love, who was by you so ruthlessly pushed back
into her den of sin;

20  Nor from that little child that you drove from your midst to suffer
in the cold, bleak winds of night.

21  I tell you, men, what you have done to these, my kindred, you have
done to me.

22  You have insulted me in your own home; I cannot stay. I will go
forth and find that child, that woman and that man, and give them help
until my life’s blood all has ebbed away.

23  I call it pleasure when I help the helpless, feed the hungry,
clothe the naked, heal the sick, and speak good words of cheer to
those unloved, discouraged and depressed.

24  And this that you call mirth is but a phantom of the night; but
flashes of the fire of passion, painting pictures on the walls of time.

25  And while the Logos spoke the white-robed priest came in and said
to him, The council waits for you.

26  Then Jesus stood again before the bar; again no word was said;
the hierophant placed in his hands a scroll, on which was writ,
PHILANTHROPY.

27  And Jesus was a victor over selfish self.


CHAPTER 52.

    _Jesus spends forty days in the temple groves. Passes the fifth
      brotherhood test and receives the fifth degree, HEROISM._

The sacred temple groves were rich in statues, monuments and shrines;
here Jesus loved to walk and meditate.

2  And after he had conquered self he talked with nature in these
groves for forty days.

3  And then the guide took chains and bound him hand and foot; and then
cast him into a den of hungry beasts, of unclean birds, and creeping
things.

4  The den was dark as night; the wild beasts howled; the birds in fury
screamed; the reptiles hissed.

5  And Jesus said, Who was it that did bind me thus? Why did I meekly
sit to be bound down with chains?

6  I tell you, none has power to bind a human soul. Of what are fetters
made?

7  And in his might he rose, and what he thought were chains were only
worthless cords that parted at his touch.

8  And then he laughed and said, The chains that bind men to the
carcasses of earth are forged in fancy’s shop; are made of air, and
welded in illusion’s fires.

9  If man will stand erect, and use the power of will, his chains will
fall, like worthless rags; for will and faith are stronger than the
stoutest chains that men have ever made.

10  And Jesus stood erect among the hungry beasts, and birds, and said,
What is this darkness that envelops me?

11  ’Tis but the absence of the light. And what is light? ’Tis but the
breath of God vibrating in the rythm of rapid thought.

12  And then he said, Let there be light; and with a mighty will he
stirred the ethers up, and their vibrations reached the plane of
light; and there was light.

13  The darkness of that den of night became the brightness of a
newborn day.

14  And then he looked to see the beasts, and birds, and creeping
things; lo, they were not.

15  And Jesus said, Of what are souls afraid? Fear is the chariot in
which man rides to death;

16  And when he finds himself within the chamber of the dead, he learns
that he has been deceived; his chariot was a myth, and death a fancy
child.

17  But some day all man’s lessons will be learned, and from the den of
unclean, beasts and birds, and creeping things he will arise to walk
in light.

18  And Jesus saw a ladder made of gold, on which he climbed, and at
the top the white-robed priest awaited him.

19  Again he stood before the council bar; again no word was said;
again the hierophant reached forth his hand to bless.

20  He placed in Jesus’ hand another scroll, and on this one was
written, HEROISM.

21  The Logos had encountered fear and all his phantom host, and in the
conflict he achieved the victory.


