CHAPTER 73.

    _Jesus again visits the temple, and is favorably received by
      the people. Tells the parable of a king and his sons. Defines
      messiahship._

Next day the multitudes were surging through the temple courts, intent
on hearing Jesus speak.

2  And when he came the people said, All hail! behold the king!

3  And Jesus spoke a parable; he said, A king had vast domains; his
people all were kin, and lived in peace.

4  Now, after many years the king said to his people, Take these lands
and all I have; enhance their values; rule yourselves, and live in
peace.

5  And then the people formed their states; selected governors and
petty kings.

6  But pride, ambition, selfish greed, and base ingratitude grew fast,
and kings began to war.

7  They wrote in all their statute books that might is right; and then
the strong destroyed the weak, and chaos reigned through all the vast
domain.

8  A long time passed, and then the king looked out on his domain.
He saw his people in their cruel wars; he saw them sick and sore
distressed; he saw the strong enslave the weak,

9  And then he said, What shall I do? Shall I send forth a scourge?
shall I destroy my people all?

10  And then his heart was stirred with pity and he said, I will not
send a scourge; I will send forth my only son, heir to the throne, to
teach the people love, and peace, and righteousness.

11  He sent his son; the people scorned him and maltreated him, and
nailed him to a cross.

12  He was entombed; but death was far too weak to hold the prince, and
he arose.

13  He took a form man could not kill; and then he went again to teach
the people love, and peace and righteousness.

14  And thus God deals with men.

15  A lawyer came and asked, What does messiah mean? and who has right
to make messiah of a man?

16  And Jesus said, Messiah is one sent from God to seek and save the
lost. Messiahs are not made by men.

17  In first of every age Messiah comes to light the way; to heal up
broken hearts; to set the prisoners free. Messiah and the Christ are
one.

18  Because a man claims to be Christ is not a sign that he is Christ.

19  A man may cause the streams to flow from flinty rocks; may bring
on storms at will; may stay tempestuous winds; may heal the sick and
raise the dead, and not be sent from God.

20  All nature is subservient to the will of man, and evil men, as well
as good, have all the powers of mind, and may control the elements.

21  The head gives not the proof of true messiahship, for man by means
of intellect, can never know of God, nor bring himself to walk in
light.

22  Messiah lives not in the head, but in the heart, the seat of mercy
and of love.

23  Messiah never works for selfish gains; he stands above the carnal
self; his words and deeds are for the universal good.

24  Messiah never tries to be a king, to wear a crown and sit upon an
earthly throne.

25  The king is earthy, of the earth; Messiah is the man from heaven.

26  And then the lawyer asked, Why do you pose as king?

27  And Jesus said, No man has ever heard me say that I am king. I
could not sit in Cæsar’s place and be the Christ.

28  Give unto Cæsar what belongs to him; give unto God the treasures of
your heart.


CHAPTER 74.

    _Jesus heals on the Sabbath, and is censured by the Pharisees.
      Restores a drowned child. Rescues a wounded dog. Cares for a
      homeless child. Speaks on the law of kindness._

It was the Sabbath day, and Jesus stood among the surging masses of
the people in the temple courts and sacred halls.

2  The blind, the deaf, the dumb, and those obsessed were there, and
Jesus spoke the Word, and they were healed.

3  On some he laid his hands, and they were healed; to others he just
spoke the Word, and they were full restored to health; but others had
to go and wash in certain pools; and others he anointed with a holy
oil.

4  A doctor asked him why he healed in divers ways, and he replied,

5  Disease is discord in the human form, and discords are produced in
many ways.

6  The body is a harpsichord; sometimes the strings are too relaxed,
and then inharmony results.

7  Sometimes we find the strings too tense, and then another form of
discord is induced.

8  Disease is many-formed, and there are many ways to cure, to tune
anew the mystic harpsichord.

9  Now when the Pharisees were told that Jesus healed the people on
the Sabbath day they were enraged, and they commanded him to quit the
place.

10  But Jesus said, Was man designed to fit the Sabbath day, or was
the Sabbath day designed to fit the man?

11  If you had fallen in a pit and, lo, the Sabbath day had come, and I
should pass your way, would you cry out,

12  Let me alone; it is a sin to help me on the Sabbath day; I’ll
swelter in this filth until another day?

13  You Pharisees, you hypocrites! you know you would be glad to have
my help upon the Sabbath day, or any other day.

14  These people all have fallen into pits, and they are calling loud
for me to help them out, and man and God would curse me should I pass
along and heed them not.

15  And then the Pharisees returned to say their prayers, and curse the
man of God because he heeded not their words.

16  Now, in the evening Jesus stood beside a pool; a playful child had
fallen in, and it was drowned, and friends were bearing it away.

17  But Jesus called the carriers to stop; and then he stretched
himself upon the lifeless form, and breathed into its mouth the breath
of life.

18  And then he called aloud unto the soul that had gone out, and it
returned; the child revived and lived.

19  And Jesus saw a wounded dog; it could not move; it lay beside the
way and groaned with pain. He took it in his arms and bore it to the
home where he abode.

20  He poured the healing oil into the wounds; he cared for it as
though it were a child till it was strong and well.

21  And Jesus saw a little boy who had no home, and he was hungry; when
he called for bread the people turned away.

22  And Jesus took the child and gave him bread; he wrapped him in his
own warm coat, and found for him a home.

23  To those who followed him the master said, If man would gain again
his lost estate he must respect the brotherhood of life.

24  Whoever is not kind to every form of life--to man, to beast, to
bird, and creeping thing--cannot expect the blessings of the Holy One;
for as we give, so God will give to us.


