CHAPTER 104.

    _Jesus teaches the multitudes. Attends a feast in Simon’s
      house. A wealthy courtesan anoints him with precious
      balm. Simon rebukes him and he preaches a sermon on false
      respectability._

And Jesus looked upon the multitudes who pressed about for selfish
gain.

2  The men of learning and of wealth, of reputation and of power, were
there; but they knew not the Christ.

3  Their eyes were blinded by the tinseled glitter of their selfish
selves; they could not see the king.

4  And though they walked within the light, they groped about in
dark--a darkness like the night of death.

5  And Jesus cast his eyes to heaven and said,

6  I thank thee, Holy One of heaven and earth, that while the light is
hidden from the wise and great, it is revealed to babes.

7  Then turning to the multitudes he said, I come to you not in the
name of man, nor in a strength my own;

8  The wisdom and the virtue that I bring to you are from above; they
are the wisdom and the virtue of the God whom we adore.

9  The words I speak are not my words; I give to you what I receive.

10  Come unto me all you who labor and pull heavy loads and I will give
you aid.

11  Put on the yoke of Christ with me; it does not chafe; it is an
easy yoke.

12  Together we will pull the load of life with ease; and so rejoice.

13  A Pharisee, whose name was Simon, made a feast, and Jesus was the
honored guest.

14  And as they sat about the board, a courtesan who had been cured
of her desire to sin by what she had received and seen in Jesus’
ministry, came uninvited to the feast.

15  She brought an alabaster box of costly balm and as the guests
reclined she came to Jesus in her joy, because she had been freed from
sin,

16  Her tears fell fast, she kissed his feet, and dried them with her
hair, and she anointed them with balm.

17  And Simon thought, he did not speak aloud, This man is not a
prophet or he would know the kind of woman that approaches him, and
would drive her away.

18  But Jesus knew his thoughts, and said to him, My host, I have a
word to say to you.

19  And Simon said, Say on.

20  And Jesus said, Sin is a monster of iniquity; it may be small;
it may be large; it may be something done; it may be something left
undone.

21  Behold, one person leads a life of sin and is at last redeemed;
another, in a careless mood, forgets to do the things he ought to do;
but he reforms and is forgiven. Now, which of these has merited the
higher praise?

22  And Simon said, The one who overcame the errors of a life.

23  And Jesus said, You speak the truth.

24  Behold, this woman who has bathed my feet with tears and dried them
with her hair and covered them with balm!

25  For years she led a life of sin, but when she heard the words of
life she sought forgiveness and she found.

26  But when I came into your house as guest you gave me not a bowl of
water that I might wash my hands and feet, which every loyal Jew must
do before he feasts.

27  Now, tell me, Simon, which of these, this woman or yourself, is
worthy of most praise?

28  But Simon answered not.

29  Then to the woman Jesus said, Your sins are all forgiven; your
faith has saved you; go in peace.

30  And then the guests who sat around the board, began to say within
themselves, What manner of a man is this who says, Thy sins are all
forgiven?


CHAPTER 105.

    _Under the patronage of a number of wealthy women, the
      Christines make a grand missionary tour. In his teaching
      Jesus lauds sincerity and rebukes hypocrisy. He speaks
      concerning the sin against the Holy Breath._

Now, many women who possessed much wealth, and who abode in other
towns of Galilee, implored that Jesus and the twelve, together with
the masters from the foreign lands, would thither go and preach and
heal.

2  Among these anxious ones were Mary Magdalene, who was obsessed by
seven homeless spirits of the air, which had been driven out by the
Omnific Word which Jesus spoke;

3  Susanna, who owned vast estates at Cæsarea-Philippi;

4  Johanna, wife of Chuza, one of Herod’s court;

5  And Rachel from the coast of Tyre;

6  And others from beyond the Jordan and the sea of Galilee.

7  And they provided ample means and three times seven men went forth.

8  They preached the gospel of the Christ, and they baptized the
multitudes who made confession of their faith; they healed the sick
and raised the dead.

9  And Jesus wrought and taught from early morn until the day had gone,
and then into the night; he did not stop to eat.

10  His friends became alarmed lest he should fail from loss of
strength, and they laid hold of him and would, by force, have taken
him away to place of rest.

11  But he rebuked them not; he said, Have you not read that God will
give his angels charge concerning me?

12  That they would hold me fast and suffer not that I should come to
want?

13  I tell you, men, while I am giving out my strength unto these
anxious, waiting throngs I find myself at rest within the arms of God,

14  Whose blessed messengers bring down to me the bread of life.

15  There is a tide just once in human life.

16  These people now are willing to receive the truth; their
opportunity is now: our opportunity is now.

17  And if we do not teach them while we may, the tide will ebb;

18  They may not care again to hear the truth; then tell me, Who will
bear the guilt?

19  And so he taught and healed.

20  Among the multitudes were men of every shade of thought. They were
divided in their views concerning everything that Jesus said.

21  Some saw in him a God, and would have worshipped him; and others
saw in him a devil of the nether world and would have cast him in a
pit.

22  And some were trying hard to lead a double life; like little lions
of the ground that take upon themselves the color of the thing they
rest upon.

23  These people without anchorage of any sort, are friends or foes as
seemed to serve them best.

24  And Jesus said, No man can serve two masters at a time. No man can
be a friend and foe at once.

25  All men are rising up, or sinking down; are building up, or tearing
down.

26  If you are gathering not the precious grain, then you are throwing
it away.

27  He is a coward who would feign to be a friend, or foe, to please
another man.

28  You men, do not deceive yourselves in thought; your hearts are
known;

29  Hypocrisy will blight a soul as surely as the breath of Beelzebul.
An honest evil man is more esteemed by guardians of the soul than a
dishonest pious man.

30  If you would curse the son of man, just curse him out aloud.

31  A curse is poison to the inner man, and if you hold and swallow
down a curse it never will digest; lo, it will poison every atom of
your soul.

32  And if you sin against a son of man, you may be pardoned and your
guilt be cleansed by acts of kindness and of love;

33  But if you sin against the Holy Breath by disregarding her when
she would open up the doors of life for you;

34  By closing up the windows of the soul when she would pour the light
of love into your hearts, and cleanse them with the fires of God;

35  Your guilt shall not be blotted out in this, nor in the life to
come.

36  An opportunity has gone to come no more, and you must wait until
the ages roll again.

37  Then will the Holy Breath again breathe on your fires of life, and
fan them to a living flame.

38  Then she will open up the doors again, and you may let her in to
sup with you forevermore, or you may slight her once again, and then
again.

39  You men of Israel, your opportunity is now.

40  Your tree of life is an illusive tree; it has a generous crop of
leaves; its boughs hang low with fruit.

41  Behold, your words are leaves; your deeds the fruit.

42  Behold, for men have plucked the apples of your tree of life, and
found them full of bitterness; and worms have eaten to the core.

43  Behold that fig tree by the way so full of leaves and worthless
fruit!

44  Then Jesus spoke a word that nature spirits know, and lo, the fig
tree stood a mass of withered leaves.

45  And then he spoke again, Behold, for God will speak the Word, and
you will stand a withered fig tree in the setting sun.

46  You men of Galilee, send forth and call the pruner in before it is
too late, and let him prune away your worthless branches and illusive
leaves, and let the sunshine in.

47  The sun is life, and it can change your worthlessness to worth.

48  Your tree of life is good; but you have nurtured it so long with
dews of self, and mists of carnal things that you have shut the
sunshine out.

49  I tell you, men, that you must give account to God for every idle
word you speak and every evil deed you do.


