CHAPTER 18.

    _Jesus at a feast in Jerusalem. Is grieved by the cruelties of
      the sacrificers. Appeals to Hillel, who sympathizes with him.
      He remains in the temple a year._

The great feast of the Jews was on, and Joseph, Mary and their son,
and many of their kin, went to Jerusalem. The child was ten years old.

2  And Jesus watched the butchers kill the lambs and birds and burn
them on the altar in the name of God.

3  His tender heart was shocked at this display of cruelty; he asked
the serving priest, What is the purpose of this slaughter of the
beasts and birds? Why do you burn their flesh before the Lord?

4  The priest replied, This is our sacrifice for sin. God has commanded
us to do these things, and said that in these sacrifices all our sins
are blotted out.

5  And Jesus said, Will you be kind enough to tell when God proclaimed
that sins are blotted out by sacrifice of any kind?

6  Did not David say that God requires not a sacrifice for sin? that it
is sin itself to bring before his face burnt offerings, as offerings
for sin? Did not Isaiah say the same?

7  The priest replied, My child, you are beside yourself. Do you know
more about the laws of God than all the priests of Israel? This is no
place for boys to show their wit.

8  But Jesus heeded not his taunts; he went to Hillel, chief of the
Sanhedrim, and he said to him,

9  Rabboni, I would like to talk with you; I am disturbed about this
service of the pascal feast. I thought the temple was the house of God
where love and kindness dwell.

10  Do you not hear the bleating of those lambs, the pleading of those
doves that men are killing over there? Do you not smell that awful
stench that comes from burning flesh?

11  Can man be kind and just, and still be filled with cruelty?

12  A God that takes delight in sacrifice, in blood and burning flesh,
is not my Father-God.

13  I want to find a God of love, and you, my master, you are wise, and
surely you can tell me where to find the God of love.

14  But Hillel could not give an answer to the child. His heart was
stirred with sympathy. He called the child to him; he laid his hand
upon his head and wept.

15  He said, There is a God of love, and you shall come with me; and
hand in hand we will go forth and find the God of love.

16  And Jesus said, Why need we go? I thought that God is everywhere.
Can we not purify our hearts and drive out cruelty, and every wicked
thought, and make within, a temple where the God of love can dwell?

17  The master of the great Sanhedrim felt as though he was himself the
child, and that before him stood Rabboni, master of the higher law.

18  He said within himself, This child is surely prophet sent from God.

19  Then Hillel sought the parents of the child, and asked that Jesus
might abide with him, and learn the precepts of the law, and all the
lessons of the temple priests.

20  His parents gave consent, and Jesus did abide within the holy
temple in Jerusalem, and Hillel taught him every day.

21  And every day the master learned from Jesus many lessons of the
higher life.

22  The child remained with Hillel in the temple for a year, and then
returned unto his home in Nazareth; and there he wrought with Joseph
as a carpenter.


CHAPTER 19.

    _Jesus at the age of twelve in the temple. Disputes with the
      doctors of the law. Reads from a book of prophecy. By request
      of Hillel he interprets the prophecies._

Again the great feast in Jerusalem was on, and Joseph, Mary and their
son were there. The child was twelve years old.

2  And there were Jews and proselytes from many countries in Jerusalem.

3  And Jesus sat among the priests and doctors in the temple hall.

4  And Jesus opened up a book of prophecy and read:

5  Woe, woe, to Ariel, the town where David dwelt! I will dismantle
Ariel, and she shall groan and weep:

6  And I will camp against her round about with hostile posts;

7  And I will bring her low and she shall speak out of the earth; with
muffled voice like a familiar spirit shall she speak; yea, she shall
only whisper forth her speech;

8  And foes unnumbered, like the grains of dust, shall come upon her
suddenly.

9  The Lord of hosts will visit her with thunder and with tempest, and
with storm; with earthquake, and with devouring flames.

10  Lo, all these people have deserted me. They draw to me with speech,
and with their lips they honor me; their hearts are far removed from
me; their fear for me is that inspired by man.

11  And I will breathe an adverse breath upon my people, Israel; the
wisdom of their wise men shall be lost; the understanding of their
prudent men shall not be found.

12  My people seek to hide their counsel from the Lord, so that their
works may not be seen. They fain would cover up their works with
darkness of the night, and say, Who sees us now? Who knows us now?

13  Poor, foolish men! shall that which has been made say of its maker,
He is naught, I made myself?

14  Or shall the pot speak out and say to him, who made the pot, You
have no skill; you do not know?

15  But this will not forever be; the time will come when Lebanon will
be a fruitful field, and fruitful fields will be transformed to groves.

16  And on that day the deaf will hear the words of God; the blind will
read the Book of God’s Remembrance.

17  And suffering ones will be relieved, and they will have abundant
joy; and every one that needs will be supplied; and it will come to
pass that all the foolish will be wise.

18  The people will return and sanctify the Holy One, and in their
heart of hearts, lo, they will reverence him.

19  When Jesus had thus read he put aside the book and said, You
masters of the law, will you make plain for us the prophet’s words?

20  Now, Hillel sat among the masters of the law, and he stood forth
and said, Perhaps our young rabboni who has read the word will be
interpreter.

21  And Jesus said, The Ariel of the prophet is our own Jerusalem.

22  By selfishness and cruelty this people has become a stench unto the
Elohim.

23  The prophet saw these days from far, and of these times he wrote.

24  Our doctors, lawyers, priests and scribes oppress the poor, while
they themselves in luxury live.

25  The sacrifices and the offerings of Israel are but abomination unto
God. The only sacrifice that God requires is self.

26  Because of this injustice and this cruelty of man to man, the Holy
One has spoken of this commonwealth:

27  Lo, I will overturn, yes, I will overturn, it shall be overturned,
and it shall be no more until he comes whose right it is and I will
give it unto him.

28  In all the world there is one law of right, and he who breaks that
law will suffer grief; for God is just.

29  And Israel has gone far astray; has not regarded justice, nor the
rights of man, and God demands that Israel shall reform, and turn
again to ways of holiness.

30  And if our people will not hear the voice of God, lo, nations from
afar will come and sack Jerusalem, and tear our temple down, and take
our people captive into foreign lands.

31  But this will not forever be; though they be scattered far and
wide, and wander here and there among the nations of the earth, like
sheep that have no shepherd guide,

32  The time will come when God will bring again the captive hosts; for
Israel shall return and dwell in peace.

33  And after many years our temple shall be built again, and one whom
God will honor, one in whom the pure in heart delights will come and
glorify the house of God, and reign in righteousness.

34  When Jesus had thus said, he stepped aside, and all the people were
amazed and said, This surely is the Christ.


