CHAPTER 87.

    _The Christines go to Cana. Jesus heals a nobleman’s child. The
      Christines go to Capernaum. Jesus provides a spacious home
      for his mother. He announces his intention to choose twelve
      apostles._

In Nazareth Jesus taught no more; he went with his disciples up to
Cana, where, at a marriage feast, he once turned water into wine.

2  And here he met a man of noble birth whose home was in Capernaum,
whose son was sick.

3  The man had faith in Jesus’ power to heal, and when he learned that
he had come to Galilee he went in haste to meet him on the way.

4  The man met Jesus at the seventh hour, and he entreated him to
hasten to Capernaum to save his son.

5  But Jesus did not go; he stood aside in silence for a time, and then
he said, Your faith has proved a healing balm; your son is well.

6  The man believed and went his way toward Capernaum and as he went he
met a servant from his home who said,

7  My lord, You need not haste; your son is well.

8  The father asked, When did my son begin to mend?

9  The servant said, On yesterday about the seventh hour the fever left.

10  And then the father knew it was the healing balm that Jesus sent
that saved his son.

11  In Cana Jesus tarried not; he went his way with his disciples to
Capernaum, where he secured a spacious house where, with his mother,
he could live; where his disciples might repair to hear the Word.

12  He called the men who had confessed their faith in him to meet him
in his home, which his disciples called, The school of Christ; and
when they came he said to them,

13  This gospel of the Christ must be proclaimed in all the world.

14  This Christine vine will be a mighty vine whose branches will
comprise the peoples, tribes and tongues of all the earth.

15  I am the vine; twelve men shall be the branches of the stock, and
these shall send forth branches everywhere;

16  And from among the people who have followed me, the Holy Breath
will call the twelve.

17  Go now and do your work as you have done your work; but listen for
the call.

18  Then the disciples went unto their daily tasks, to do their work as
they had done, and Jesus went alone into the Hammoth hills to pray.

19  Three days and nights he spent communing with the Silent
Brotherhood; then, in the power of Holy Breath he came to call the
twelve.


CHAPTER 88.

    _Jesus walks by the sea. Stands in a fishing boat and speaks to
      the people. Under his direction the fishermen secure a great
      catch of fish. He selects and calls his twelve apostles._

Beside the sea of Galilee the Christine master walked, and multitudes
of people followed him.

2  The fishing boats had just come in, and Peter and his brother waited
in their boats; their helpers were ashore repairing broken nets.

3  And Jesus went into a boat and Peter pushed it out a little ways
from shore; and Jesus standing in the boat spoke to the multitude. He
said,

4  Isaiah, prophet of the Lord of hosts, looked forward and he saw this
day; he saw the people standing by the sea, and he exclaimed,

5  The land of Zebulon and Napthali, land beyond the Jordan and toward
the sea, the Gentile Galilee,

6  The people were in darkness, knowing not the way; but, lo, they saw
the Day Star rise; a light streamed forth; they saw the way of life;
they walked therein.

7  And you are blest beyond all people of the earth today, because you
first may see the light, and may become the children of the light.

8  Then Jesus said to Peter, Bring your nets aboard, and put out in the
deep,

9  And Peter did as Jesus bade him do; but in a faithless way he said,
This is a useless trip; there are no fish upon this shore of Galilee
today; with Andrew I have toiled all night, and taken naught.

10  But Jesus saw beneath the surface of the sea; he saw a multitude of
fish. He said to Peter,

11  Cast out your net upon the right side of the boat.

12  And Peter did as Jesus said, and, lo, the net was filled; it scarce
was strong enough to hold the multitude of fish.

13  And Peter called to John and James, who were near by, for help; and
when the net was hauled to boat, both boats were well nigh filled
with fish.

14  When Peter saw the heavy catch, he was ashamed of what he said;
ashamed because he had no faith, and he fell down at Jesus’ feet and
said, Lord, I believe!

15  And Jesus said, Behold the catch! from henceforth you shall fish no
more for fish;

16  You shall cast forth the Christine net into the sea of human life,
upon the right side of the boat; you shall ensnare the multitudes to
holiness and blessedness and peace.

17  Now, when they reached the shore the Christine master called to
Peter, Andrew, James and John and said,

18  You fishermen of Galilee, the masters have a mighty work for us to
do; I go, and you may follow me. And they left all and followed him.

19  And Jesus walked along the shore, and seeing Philip and Nathaniel
walking on the beach he said to them,

20  You teachers of Bethsaida, who long have taught the people Greek
philosophy, the masters have a higher work for you and me to do; I go
and you may follow me; and then they followed him.

21  A little farther on there stood a Roman tribute house, and Jesus
saw the officer in charge; his name was Matthew, who once abode in
Jericho;

22  The youth who once ran on before the Lord into Jerusalem and said,
Behold the Christines come.

23  And Matthew was a man of wealth, and learned in wisdom of the Jews,
the Syrians and the Greeks.

24  And Jesus said to him, Hail, Matthew, trusted servant of the
Cæsars, hail! the masters call us to the tribute house of souls; I go
and you may follow me. And Matthew followed him.

25  Ischariot and his son, whose name was Judas, were employed by
Matthew and were at the tribute house.

26  And Jesus said to Judas, Stay your work; the masters call us to a
duty in the savings bank of souls; I go and you may follow me. And
Judas followed him.

27  And Jesus met a lawyer who had heard about the Christine master and
had come from Antioch to study in the school of Christ.

28  This man was Thomas, man of doubt, and yet a Greek philosopher of
culture and of power.

29  But Jesus saw in him the lines of faith, and said to him, The
masters have a need of men who can interpret law; I go, and you may
follow me. And Thomas followed him.

30  And when the evening came and Jesus was at home, behold, there came
his kindred, James and Jude, the sons of Alpheus and Miriam.

31  And these were men of faith, and they were carpenters of Nazareth.

32  And Jesus said to them, Behold, for you have toiled with me, and
with my father Joseph, building houses for the homes of men. The
masters call us now to aid in building homes for souls; homes built
without the sound of hammer, ax, or saw;

33  I go, and you may follow me. And James and Jude exclaimed, Lord, we
will follow you.

34  And on the morrow Jesus sent a message unto Simon, leader of the
Zelotes, a strict exponent of the Jewish law.

35  And in the message Jesus said, The masters call for men to
demonstrate the faith of Abraham; I go, and you may follow me. And
Simon followed him.


