CHAPTER 20.

    _After the feast. The homeward journey. The missing Jesus. The
      search for him. His parents find him in the temple. He goes
      with them to Nazareth. Symbolic meaning of carpenter’s tools._

The great feast of the pasch was ended and the Nazarenes were
journeying toward their homes.

2  And they were in Samaria, and Mary said, Where is my son? No one had
seen the boy.

3  And Joseph sought among their kindred who were on their way to
Galilee; but they had seen him not.

4  Then Joseph, Mary, and a son of Zebedee, returned and sought through
all Jerusalem, but they could find him not.

5  And then they went up to the temple courts and asked the guards,
Have you seen Jesus, a fair-haired boy, with deep blue eyes, twelve
years of age, about these courts?

6  The guards replied, Yes, he is in the temple now disputing with the
doctors of the law.

7  And they went in, and found him as the guards had said.

8  And Mary said, Why Jesus, why do you treat your parents thus? Lo,
we have sought two days for you. We feared that some great harm had
overtaken you.

9  And Jesus said, Do you not know that I must be about my Father’s
work?

10  But he went round and pressed the hand of every doctor of the law
and said, I trust that we may meet again.

11  And then he went forth with his parents on their way to Nazareth;
and when they reached their home he wrought with Joseph as a carpenter.

12  One day as he was bringing forth the tools for work he said,

13  These tools remind me of the ones we handle in the workshop of the
mind where things are made of thought and where we build up character.

14  We use the square to measure all our lines, to straighten out the
crooked places of the way, and make the corners of our conduct square.

15  We use the compass to draw circles round our passions and desires
to keep them in the bounds of righteousness.

16  We use the ax to cut away the knotty, useless and ungainly parts
and make the character symmetrical.

17  We use the hammer to drive home the truth, and pound it in until it
is a part of every part.

18  We use the plane to smooth the rough, uneven surfaces of joint, and
block, and board that go to build the temple for the truth.

19  The chisel, line, the plummet and the saw all have their uses in
the workshop of the mind.

20  And then this ladder with its trinity of steps, faith, hope and
love; on it we climb up to the dome of purity in life.

21  And on the twelve-step ladder we ascend until we reach the pinnacle
of that which life is spent to build--the Temple of Perfected Man.




SECTION VI.

VAU.

_Life and Works of Jesus in India._


CHAPTER 21.

    _Ravanna sees Jesus in the temple and is captivated. Hillel
      tells him about the boy. Ravanna finds Jesus in Nazareth and
      gives a feast in his honor. Ravanna becomes patron of Jesus,
      and takes him to India to study the Brahmic religion._

A royal prince of India, Ravanna of Orissa in the south, was at the
Jewish feast.

2  Ravanna was a man of wealth; and he was just, and with a band of
Brahmic priests sought wisdom in the West.

3  When Jesus stood among the Jewish priests and read and spoke,
Ravanna heard and was amazed.

4  And when he asked who Jesus was, from whence he came and what he
was, chief Hillel said,

5  We call this child the Day Star from on high, for he has come to
bring to men a light, the light of life; to lighten up the way of men
and to redeem his people, Israel.

6  And Hillel told Ravanna all about the child; about the prophecies
concerning him; about the wonders of the night when he was born; about
the visit of the magian priests;

7  About the way in which he was protected from the wrath of evil men;
about his flight to Egypt-land, and how he then was serving with his
father as a carpenter in Nazareth.

8  Ravanna was entranced, and asked to know the way to Nazareth, that
he might go and honor such a one as son of God.

9  And with his gorgeous train he journeyed on the way and came to
Nazareth of Galilee.

10  He found the object of his search engaged in building dwellings for
the sons of men.

11  And when he first saw Jesus he was climbing up a twelve-step
ladder, and he carried in his hands a compass, square and ax.

12  Ravanna said, All hail, most favored son of heaven!

13  And at the inn Ravanna made a feast for all the people of the town;
and Jesus and his parents were the honored guests.

14  For certain days Ravanna was a guest in Joseph’s home on Marmion
Way; he sought to learn the secret of the wisdom of the son; but it
was all too great for him.

15  And then he asked that he might be the patron of the child; might
take him to the East where he could learn the wisdom of the Brahms.

16  And Jesus longed to go that he might learn: and after many days his
parents gave consent.

17  Then, with proud heart, Ravanna with his train, began the journey
toward the rising sun; and after many days they crossed the Sind, and
reached the province of Orissa, and the palace of the prince.

18  The Brahmic priests were glad to welcome home the prince; with
favor they received the Jewish boy.

19  And Jesus was accepted as a pupil in the temple Jagannath; and here
he learned the Vedas and the Manic laws.

20  The Brahmic masters wondered at the clear conceptions of the child,
and often were amazed when he explained to them the meaning of the
laws.


