CHAPTER 89.

    _The twelve apostles are at Jesus’ home and are consecrated to
      their work. Jesus instructs them. He goes to the synagogue on
      the Sabbath and teaches. He casts an unclean spirit out of
      one obsessed. He heals Peter’s mother-in-law._

Now, on the day before the Sabbath day, the twelve disciples who had
received the call were met with one accord in Jesus’ home.

2  And Jesus said to them, This is the day to consecrate yourselves
unto the work of God; so let us pray.

3  Turn from the outer to the inner self; close all the doors of carnal
self and wait.

4  The Holy Breath will fill this place, and you will be baptized in
Holy Breath.

5  And then they prayed; a light more brilliant than the noonday sun
filled all the room, and tongues of flame from every head rose high in
air.

6  The atmosphere of Galilee was set astir; a sound like distant
thunder rolled above Capernaum, and men heard songs, as though ten
thousand angels joined in full accord.

7  And then the twelve disciples heard a voice, a still, small voice,
and just one word was said, a word they dared not speak; it was the
sacred name of God.

8  And Jesus said to them, By this omnific Word you may control the
elements, and all the powers of air.

9  And when within your souls you speak this Word, you have the keys
of life and death; of things that are; of things that were; of things
that are to be.

10  Behold you are the twelve great branches of the Christine vine; the
twelve foundation stones; the twelve apostles of the Christ.

11  As lambs I send you forth among wild beasts; but the omnific Word
will be your buckler and your shield.

12  And then again the air was filled with song, and every living
creature seemed to say, Praise God! Amen!

13  The next day was the Sabbath day; and Jesus went with his disciples
to the synagogue, and there he taught.

14  The people said, He teaches not as do the scribes and Pharisees;
but as a man who knows, and has authority to speak.

15  As Jesus spoke, a man obsessed came in; the evil spirits that
obsessed the man were of the baser sort; they often threw their victim
to the ground, or in the fire.

16  And when the spirits saw the Christine master in the synagogue they
knew him, and they said,

17  You son of God, why are you here? would you destroy us by the Word
before our time? we would have naught to do with you; let us alone.

18  But Jesus said to them, By the omnific Word I speak; Come out;
torment this man no more; go to your place.

19  And then the unclean spirits threw the man upon the floor, and,
with a fiendish cry, they went away.

20  And Jesus lifted up the man and said to him, If you will keep your
mind full occupied with good, the evil spirits cannot find a place to
stay;

21  They only come to empty heads and hearts. Go on your way and sin no
more.

22  The people were astonished at the words that Jesus spoke, the work
he did. They asked among themselves,

23  Who is this man? From whence comes all this power that even unclean
spirits fear, and flee away?

24  The Christine master left the synagogue; with Peter, Andrew, James
and John, he went to Peter’s house where one, a near of kin, was sick.

25  And Peter’s wife came in; it was her mother who was sick.

26  And Jesus touched the woman as she lay upon her couch; he spoke the
Word; the fever ceased and she arose and ministered to them.

27  The neighbors heard what had occurred, and then they brought their
sick, and those obsessed, and Jesus laid his hands on them, and they
were healed.


CHAPTER 90.

    _Jesus goes alone to a mountain to pray. His disciples find
      him. He calls the twelve and they journey through Galilee
      teaching and healing. At Tiberius Jesus heals a leper. The
      Christines return to Capernaum. In his own home Jesus heals a
      palsied man and makes known the philosophy of healing and the
      forgiveness of sins._

The Christine master disappeared; no one saw him go, and Peter,
James and John set forth to search for him; they found him at his
trysting-place out on the Hammoth hills.

2  And Peter said, The city of Capernaum is wild; the people crowd the
streets and every public place is filled.

3  The men, the women and the children everywhere are asking for the
man who heals by will.

4  Your home and our homes are filled with people who are sick; they
call for Jesus who is called the Christ. What will we say to them?

5  And Jesus said, A score of other cities call, and we must take the
bread of life to them. Go call the other men and let us go.

6  And Jesus and the twelve went to Bethsaida where Philip and
Nathaniel dwelt; and there they taught.

7  The multitudes believed on Christ, confessed their sins and were
baptized, and came into the kingdom of the Holy One.

8  The Christine master and the twelve went everywhere through all the
towns of Galilee, and taught, baptizing all who came in faith, and who
confessed their sins.

9  They opened blinded eyes, unstopped deaf ears, drove forth the evil
ones from those obsessed, and healed disease of every kind.

10  And they were in Tiberius by the sea, and as they taught a leper
came a-near and said, Lord, I believe, and if you will but speak the
Word I will be clean.

11  And Jesus said to him, I will; be clean. And soon the leprosy was
gone; the man was clean.

12  And Jesus charged the man, Say naught to any one, but go and show
yourself unto the priests and offer for your cleansing what the law
demands.

13  The man was wild with joy; but then he went not to the priests, but
in the marts of trade, and everywhere he told what had been done.

14  And then the sick in throngs pressed hard upon the healer and the
twelve, imploring to be healed.

15  And they were so importunate that little could be done, and so the
Christines left the crowded thoroughfares, and went to desert places
where they taught the multitudes that followed them.

16  Now, after many days the Christines came back to Capernaum. When it
was noised around that Jesus was at home, the people came; they filled
the house till there was no more room, not even at the door.

17  And there were present scribes and Pharisees and doctors of the law
from every part of Galilee, and from Jerusalem, and Jesus opened up
for them the way of life.

18  Four men brought one, a palsied man upon a cot, and when they could
not pass the door they took the sick man to the roof, and opened up a
way, then let him down before the healer’s face.

19  When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the palsied man, My son,
be of good cheer; your sins are all forgiven.

20  And when the scribes and Pharisees heard what he said, they said,
Why does this man speak thus? who can forgive the sins of men but God?

21  And Jesus caught their thought; he knew they questioned thus among
themselves; he said to them,

22  Why reason thus among yourselves? What matters it if I should say,
Your sins are blotted out; or say, Arise, take up your bed and walk?

23  But just to prove that men may here forgive the sins of men, I say,
(and then he spoke unto the palsied man),

24  Arise, take up your bed, and go your way.

25  And in the presence of them all the man arose, took up his bed, and
went his way.

26  The people could not comprehend the things they heard and saw. They
said among themselves, This is a day we never can forget; we have seen
wondrous things today.

27  And when the multitudes had gone the twelve remained, and Jesus
said to them,

28  The Jewish festival draws near; next week we will go to Jerusalem,
that we may meet our brethren from afar, and open up to them the way
that they may see the king.

29  The Christines sought the quiet of their homes, where they remained
in prayer for certain days.




SECTION XVI.

AIN.

_The Second Annual Epoch of the Christine Ministry of Jesus._


