CHAPTER 100.

    _The Sermon on the Mount, continued. Jesus formulates and
      presents to the twelve a practical code of spiritual ethics._

There is a rule that carnal man has made, and which he rigidly
observes:

2  Do unto other men as they do unto you. As others judge, they judge;
as others give, they give.

3  Now, while you walk with men as men, judge not, and you shall not be
judged.

4  For as you judge you shall be judged, and as you give it shall be
given to you. If you condemn, you are condemned.

5  When you show mercy, men are merciful to you, and if you love in
such a way that carnal man can comprehend your love, you will be well
beloved.

6  And so the wise man of this world does unto other men as he would
have them do to him.

7  The carnal man does good to other men for selfish gain, for he
expects to have his blessings multiplied and then returned; he does
not stop to note the end.

8  Man is himself the field; his deeds are seeds, and what he does to
others grows apace; the harvest time is sure.

9  Behold the yield! If he has sown the wind, he reaps the wind; if he
has sown the noxious seeds of scandal, theft and hate; of sensuality
and crime,

10  The harvest is assured and he must reap what he has sown; yea,
more; the seeds produce an hundred fold.

11  The fruit of righteousness and peace and love and joy can never
spring from noxious seeds; the fruit is like the seed.

12  And when you sow, sow seeds of right, because it is the right, and
not in way of trade, expecting rich rewards.

13  The carnal man abhors the spirit law, because it takes away his
liberty to live in sin; beneath its light he cannot satisfy his
passions and desires.

14  He is at enmity with him who walks in Holy Breath. The carnal man
has killed the holy men of old, the prophets and the seers.

15  And he will buffet you; will charge you falsely, scourge you and
imprison you, and think he does the will of God to slay you in the
streets.

16  But you may not prejudge nor censure him who does you wrong.

17  Each one has problems to be solved, and he must solve them for
himself.

18  The man who scourges you may have a load of sin to bear; but how
about your own?

19  A little sin in one who walks in Holy Breath is greater in the
sight of God than monster sins in him who never knew the way.

20  How can you see the splinter in your brother’s eye while you have
chunks within your own?

21  First take the chunks from out your eye and then you may behold the
splinter in your brother’s eye and help him take it out,

22  And while your eyes are full of foreign things you cannot see the
way, for you are blind,

23  And when the blind lead forth the blind, both lose the way and fall
into the slough.

24  If you would lead the way to God you must be clear in sight, as
well as pure in heart.


CHAPTER 101.

    _The Sermon on the Mount, concluded. The concluding part of the
      code of ethics. The Christines return to Capernaum._

The fruitage of the tree of life is all too fine to feed the carnal
mind.

2  If you would throw a diamond to a hungry dog, lo, he would turn
away, or else attack you in a rage.

3  The incense that is sweet to God is quite offensive unto Beelzebul;
the bread of heaven is but chaff to men who cannot comprehend the
spirit life.

4  The master must be wise and feed the soul with what it can digest.

5  If you have not the food for every man, just ask and you shall have;
seek earnestly and you shall find.

6  Just speak the Word and knock; the door will fly ajar.

7  No one has ever asked in faith and did not have; none ever sought in
vain; no one who ever knocked aright has failed to find an open door.

8  When men shall ask you for the bread of heaven, turn not away, nor
give to them the fruit of carnal trees.

9  If one, a son, would ask you for a loaf, would you give him a stone?
If he would ask you for a fish, would you give him a serpent of the
dust?

10  What you would have your God give unto you, give unto men. The
measure of your worth lies in your service unto men.

11  There is a way that leads unto the perfect life; few find it at a
time.

12  It is a narrow way; it lies among the rocks and pitfalls of the
carnal life; but in the way there are no pitfalls and no rocks.

13  There is a way that leads to wretchedness and want. It is a
spacious way and many walk therein. It lies among the pleasure groves
of carnal life.

14  Beware, for many claim to walk the way of life who walk the way of
death.

15  But they are false in word and deed; false prophets they. They
clothe themselves in skins of sheep, while they are vicious wolves.

16  They cannot long conceal themselves; men know them by their fruits;

17  You cannot gather grapes from thorns, nor from the thistles, figs.

18  The fruit is daughter of the tree and, like the parent, so the
child; and every tree that bears not wholesome fruit is plucked up by
the roots and cast away,

19  Because a man prays long and loud is not a sign that he is saint.
The praying men are not all in the kingdom of the soul.

20  The man who lives the holy life, who does the will of God, abides
within the kingdom of the soul.

21  The good man from the treasures of his heart sends blessedness and
peace to all the world.

22  The evil man sends thoughts that blight and wither hope and joy and
fill the world with wretchedness and woe.

23  Men think and act and speak out of the abundance of the heart.

24  And when the judgment hour shall come a host of men will enter
pleadings for themselves and think to buy the favor of the judge with
words.

25  And they will say, Lo, we have wrought a multitude of works in the
Omnific name,

26  Have we not prophesied? Have we not cured all manner of disease?
Have we not cast the evil spirits out of those obsessed?

27  And then the judge will say, I know you not. You rendered service
unto God in words when in your heart you worshipped Beelzebul.

28  The evil one may use the powers of life, and do a multitude of
mighty works. Depart from me, you workers of iniquity.

29  The man who hears the words of life and does them not is like the
man who builds his house upon the sand, which when the floods come on,
is washed away and all is lost.

30  But he who hears the words of life and in an honest, sincere heart
receives and treasures them and lives the holy life,

31  Is like the man who builds his house upon the rock; the floods may
come, the winds may blow, the storms may beat upon his house; it is
not moved.

32  Go forth and build your life upon the solid rock of truth, and all
the powers of the evil one will shake it not.

33  And Jesus finished all his sayings on the mount and then he, with
the twelve, returned unto Capernaum.


