CHAPTER 11.

    _Elihu’s lessons. Buddhism and the precepts of Buddha. The
      mysteries of Egypt._

Again Elihu taught; he said, The Indian priests became corrupt; Brahm
was forgotten in the streets; the rights of men were trampled in the
dust.

2  And then a mighty master came, a Buddha of enlightenment, who turned
away from wealth and all the honors of the world, and found the
Silence in the quiet groves and caves; and he was blest.

3  He preached a gospel of a higher life, and taught man how to honor
man.

4  He had no doctrine of the gods to teach; he just knew man, and so
his creed was justice, love and righteousness.

5  I quote for you a few of many of the helpful words which Buddha
spoke:

6  Hate is a cruel word. If men hate you, regard it not; and you can
turn the hate of men to love and mercy and good will, and mercy is as
large as all the heavens.

7  And there is good enough for all. With good destroy the bad; with
generous deeds make avarice ashamed; with truth make straight the
crooked lines that error draws, for error is but truth distorted, gone
astray.

8  And pain will follow him who speaks or acts with evil thoughts, as
does the wheel the foot of him who draws the cart.

9  He is a greater man who conquers self than he who kills a thousand
men in war.

10  He is the noble man who is himself what he believes that other men
should be.

11  Return to him who does you wrong your purest love, and he will
cease from doing wrong; for love will purify the heart of him who is
beloved as truly as it purifies the heart of him who loves.

12  The words of Buddha are recorded in the Indian sacred books; attend
to them, for they are part of the instructions of the Holy Breath.

13  The land of Egypt is the land of secret things.

14  The mysteries of the ages lie lock-bound in our temples and our
shrines.

15  The masters of all times and climes come here to learn; and when
your sons have grown to manhood they will finish all their studies in
Egyptian schools.

16  But I have said enough. Tomorrow at the rising of the sun we meet
again.


CHAPTER 12.

    _Salome’s lessons. Prayer. Elihu’s concluding lessons. Sums up
      the three years’ course of study. The pupils return to their
      homes._

Now, when the morning sun arose the masters and their pupils all were
in the sacred grove.

2  Salome was the first to speak; she said, Behold the sun! It
manifests the power of God who speaks to us through sun and moon and
stars;

3  Through mountain, hill and vale; through flower, and plant and tree.

4  God sings for us through bird, and harpsichord, and human voice; he
speaks to us through wind and rain and thunder roll; why should we not
bow down and worship at his feet?

5  God speaks to hearts apart; and hearts apart must speak to him; and
this is prayer.

6  It is not prayer to shout at God, to stand, or sit, or kneel and
tell him all about the sins of men.

7  It is not prayer to tell the Holy One how great he is, how good he
is, how strong and how compassionate.

8  God is not man to be bought up by praise of man.

9  Prayer is the ardent wish that every way of life be light; that
every act be crowned with good; that every living thing be prospered
by our ministry.

10  A noble deed, a helpful word is prayer; a fervent, an effectual
prayer.

11  The fount of prayer is in the heart; by thought, not words, the
heart is carried up to God, where it is blest. Then let us pray.

12  They prayed, but not a word was said; but in that holy Silence
every heart was blest.

13  And then Elihu spoke. He said to Mary and Elizabeth, Our words are
said; you need not tarry longer here; the call has come; the way is
clear, you may return unto your native land.

14  A mighty work is given you to do; you shall direct the minds that
will direct the world.

15  Your sons are set apart to lead men up to righteous thoughts, and
words, and deeds;

16  To make men know the sinfulness of sin; to lead them from the
adoration of the lower self, and all illusive things, and make them
conscious of the self that lives with Christ in God.

17  In preparation for their work your sons must walk in many thorny
paths.

18  Fierce trials and temptations they will meet, like other men; their
loads will not be light, and they will weary be, and faint.

19  And they will know the pangs of hunger and of thirst; and without
cause they will be mocked, imprisoned, scourged.

20  To many countries they will go, and at the feet of many masters
they will sit, for they must learn like other men.

21  But we have said enough. The blessings of the Three and of the
Seven, who stand before the throne, will surely rest upon you evermore.

22  Thus closed the lessons of Elihu and Salome. Three years they
taught their pupils in the sacred grove, and if their lessons all were
written in a book, lo, it would be a mighty book; of what they said we
have the sum.

23  Now, Mary, Joseph and Elizabeth with Jesus and his harbinger,
set forth upon their homeward way. They went not by Jerusalem, for
Archelaus reigned.

24  They journeyed by the Bitter Sea, and when they reached Engedi
hills they rested in the home of Joshua, a near of kin; and here
Elizabeth and John abode.

25  But Joseph, Mary and their son went by the Jordan way, and after
certain days they reached their home in Nazareth.




SECTION IV.

DALETH.

_Childhood and Early Education of John the Harbinger._


