CHAPTER 116.

    _The Christines are in Philip’s home. Jesus interprets the
      parable of the wheat and tares. He explains the unfoldment
      of the kingdom by parables: the good seed; the growth of the
      tree; the leaven; the hidden treasure. He goes to a mountain
      to pray._

The Christines were in Philip’s home and Peter said to Jesus, Lord,
will you explain to us the meaning of the parables you spoke today?
The one about the wheat and tares, especially?

2  And Jesus said, God’s kingdom is a dualty; it has an outer and an
inner form.

3  As seen by man it is composed of men, of those who make confession
of the name of Christ.

4  For various reasons various people crowd this outer kingdom of our
God.

5  The inner kingdom is the kingdom of the soul, the kingdom of the
pure in heart.

6  The outer kingdom I may well explain in parables. Behold, for I have
seen you cast a great net out into the sea,

7  And when you hauled it in, lo, it was full of every kind of fish,
some good, some bad, some great, some small; and I have seen you save
the good and throw the bad away.

8  This outer kingdom is the net, and every kind of man is caught; but
in the sorting day the bad will all be cast away, the good reserved.

9  Hear, then, the meaning of the parable of wheat and tares:

10  The sower is the son of man; the field, the world; the good seed
are the children of the light; the tares, the children of the dark;
the enemy, the carnal self; the harvest day, the closing of the age;
the reapers are the messengers of God.

11  The reckoning day will come to every man; then will the tares be
gathered up, and cast into the fire and be burned.

12  Then will the good shine forth as suns in the kingdom of the soul.

13  And Philip said, Must men and women suffer in the flames because
they have not found the way of life?

14  And Jesus said, The fire purifies. The chemist throws into the fire
the ores that hold all kinds of dross.

15  The useless metal seems to be consumed; but not a grain of gold is
lost.

16  There is no man that has not in him gold that cannot be destroyed.
The evil things of men are all consumed in fire; the gold survives.

17  The inner kingdom of the soul I may explain in parables:

18  The son of man goes forth and scatters seeds of truth; God waters
well the soil; the seeds show life and grow; first comes the blade,
and then the stalk, and then the ear, and then the full wheat in the
ear.

19  The harvest comes and, lo, the reapers bear the ripened sheaves
into the garner of the Lord.

20  Again, this kingdom of the soul is like a little seed that men may
plant in fertile soil.

21  (A thousand of these seeds would scarcely be a shekel’s weight.)

22  The tiny seed begins to grow; it pushes through the earth, and
after years of growth it is a mighty tree and birds rest in its leafy
bowers and men find refuge ’neath its sheltering boughs from sun and
storm.

23  Again, the truth, the spirit of the kingdom of the soul, is like a
ball of leaven that a woman hid in measures, three, of flour and in a
little time the whole was leavened.

24  Again, the kingdom of the soul is like a treasure hidden in a field
which one has found, and straitway goes his way and sells all that he
has and buys the field.

25  When Jesus had thus said he went alone into a mountain pass near by
to pray.


CHAPTER 117.

    _A royal feast is held in Machaerus. John, the harbinger, is
      beheaded. His body is buried in Hebron. His disciples mourn.
      The Christines cross the sea in the night. Jesus calms a
      raging storm._

A royal feast was held in honor of the birthday of the tetrarch in
fortified Machaerus, east of the Bitter Sea.

2  The tetrarch, Herod, and his wife, Herodias, together with Salome
were there; and all the men and women of the royal court were there.

3  And when the feast was done, lo, all the guests and courtiers were
drunk with wine; they danced and leaped about like children in their
play.

4  Salome, daughter of Herodias, came in and danced before the king.
The beauty of her form, her grace and winning ways entranced the silly
Herod, then half drunk with wine.

5  He called the maiden to his side and said, Salome, you have won my
heart, and you may ask and I will give you anything you wish.

6  The maiden ran in childish glee and told her mother what the ruler
said.

7  Her mother said, Go back and say, Give me the head of John, the
harbinger.

8  The maiden ran and told the ruler what she wished.

9  And Herod called his trusty executioner and said to him, Go to the
tower and tell the keeper that by my authority you come to execute the
prisoner known as John.

10  The man went forth and in a little while returned and on a platter
bore the lifeless head of John, and Herod offered it unto the maiden
in the presence of the guests.

11  The maiden stood aloof; her innocence was outraged when she saw the
bloody gift, and she would touch it not.

12  Her mother, steeped and hardened well in crime, came up and took
the head and held it up before the guests and said,

13  This is the fate of every man who dares to scorn, or criticize, the
acts of him who reigns.

14  The drunken rabble gazed upon the grewsome sight with fiendish joy.

15  The head was taken back unto the tower. The body had been given
unto holy men who had been friends of John; they placed it in a burial
case and carried it away.

16  They bore it to the Jordan, which they crossed just at the ford
where John first preached the word;

17  And through the passes of the Judean hills they carried it.

18  They reached the sacred grounds near Hebron, where the bodies of
the parents of the harbinger lay in their tombs;

19  And there they buried it; and then they went their way.

20  Now, when the news reached Galilee that John was dead the people
met to sing the sonnets of the dead.

21  And Jesus and the foreign masters and the twelve took ship to cross
the sea of Galilee.

22  A scribe, a faithful friend of John, stood by the sea; he called to
Jesus and he said, Rabboni, let me follow where you go.

23  And Jesus said, You seek a safe retreat from evil men. There is no
safety for your life with me;

24  For evil men will take my life as they have taken John’s.

25  The foxes of the earth have safe retreats; the birds have nests
secure among the hidden rocks, but I have not a place where I may lay
my head and rest secure.

26  Then an apostle said, Lord, suffer me to tarry here a while, that I
may take my father, who is dead, and lay him in the tomb.

27  But Jesus said, The dead can care for those who die; the living
wait for those who live; come, follow me.

28  The evening came; three boats put out to sea and Jesus rested in
the foremost boat; he slept.

29  A storm came on; the boats were tossed about like toys upon the sea.

30  The waters swept the decks; the hardy boatmen were afraid lest all
be lost.

31  And Thomas found the master fast asleep; he called, and Jesus woke.

32  And Thomas said, Behold the storm! have you no care for us? The
boats are going down.

33  And Jesus stood; he raised his hand; he talked unto the spirits of
the winds and waves as men would talk with men.

34  And, lo, the winds blew not; the waves came tremblingly and kissed
his feet; the sea was calm.

35  And then he said, You men of faith, where is your faith? for you
can speak and winds and waves will hear and will obey.

36  And the disciples were amazed. They said, Who is this man that even
winds and waves obey his voice?


