CHAPTER 126.

    _Scribes and Pharisees visit Jesus. They censure him for eating
      with unwashed hands. He defends his acts and teaches a lesson
      on hypocrisy. Privately explains to the twelve his public
      teachings._

A company of scribes and Pharisees came from Jerusalem to learn
wherein the power of Jesus lay.

2  But when they learned that he and his disciples heeded not the
custom of the Jews, regarding washing of the hands before they ate,
they were amazed.

3  And Jesus said, Hypocrisy is queen among you scribes and Pharisees.
Of you Isaiah wrote:

4  This people honor me with lips; their hearts are far away. In vain
they worship me; their doctrines are the dogmas and the creeds of men.

5  You men who pose as men of God, and still reject the laws of God and
teach the laws of men,

6  Stand forth and tell when God gave unto men the ceremonial laws that
you observe; and tell these people how the spirit life is sullied if
one washes not before he eats.

7  His critics answered not, and then he said,

8  Hear me, you men of Israel! Defilement is a creature of the heart.
The carnal mind lays hold of thought, and makes a monstrous bride;
this bride is sin; sin is a creature of the mind.

9  That which defiles a man is not the food he eats.

10  The bread and fish and other things we eat, are simply cups to
carry to the cells of flesh material for the building of the human
house, and when their work is done as refuse they are cast away.

11  The life of plant and flesh that goes to build the human house is
never food for soul. The spirit does not feed upon the carcasses of
animal, or plant.

12  God feeds the soul direct from heaven; the bread of life comes from
above.

13  The air we breathe is charged with Holy Breath, and he who wills
may take this Holy Breath.

14  The soul discriminates, and he who wants the life of Christ may
breathe it in. According to your faith so let it be.

15  Man is not a part of his abiding place; the house is not the man.

16  The lower world builds up the house of flesh, and keeps it in
repair; the higher world provides the bread of spirit life.

17  The loveliest lilies grow from stagnant ponds and filthiest muck.

18  The law of flesh demands that one should keep the body clean.

19  The law of spirit calls for purity in thought and word and deed.

20  Now, when the evening came and they were in the house, the twelve
had many things to say, and many questions to propound.

21  Nathaniel asked, Was what you said about the house of flesh a
parable? If so, what does it mean?

22  And Jesus said, Can you not yet discriminate? Do you not yet
perceive that what a man takes in his mouth defiles him not?

23  His food goes not into his soul; it is material for flesh and bone
and brawn.

24  To spirit everything is clean.

25  That which defiles a man wells up from carnal thoughts; and carnal
thoughts spring from the heart, and generate a host of evil things.

26  From out the heart comes murders, thefts and foolishness. All
selfish acts and sensual deeds spring from the heart.

27  To eat with unwashed hands does not defile the man.

28  And Peter said, Lord, What you said today has grievously offended
scribe and Pharisee.

29  And Jesus said, These scribes and Pharisees are not the scions of
the tree of life; they are not plants of God; they are the plants of
men, and every foreign plant shall be plucked up.

30  Let all these men alone; they are blind guides; they lead a
multitude of people who are blind.

31  The leaders and the led together walk; together they will fall into
the yawning pits.


CHAPTER 127.

    _The Christines cross the sea to Decapolis. Jesus finds a
      retired place where he privately teaches the twelve. They
      remain three days, then go into a village by the sea._

Now, Jesus took the twelve and with them crossed the sea at night and
came unto the borders of Decapolis,

2  That he might find a secret place where, all alone, he could reveal
to them the things to come.

3  They went into a mountain pass and spent three days in prayer.

4  Then Jesus said, Behold, the time is near when I will walk with you
in flesh no more.

5  Lo, I have taught that he who counts his life of so much worth that
he would give it not in willing sacrifice to save his brother man, is
worthy not to enter into life.

6  Lo, I am come as pattern for the sons of men, and I have not
refrained from helpfulness.

7  When I had passed the seven tests in Heliopolis, I consecrated life
and all I had, to save the world.

8  In the Judean wilderness I fought the strongest foes of men, and
there I reaffirmed my consecration to the service of my fellow man.

9  In troubles and in trials I have wavered not; when false accusers
came, I answered not.

10  God gave the saving Word to me, and I have often spoken it and
healed the sick, drove unclean spirits out, and raised the dead.

11  And I have shown you how to speak the Word; and I have given you
the Word;

12  In just a little while we turn our faces toward Jerusalem, and one
of you who hear me now will then betray me into wicked hands.

13  The scribes and Pharisees will bring false charges up and hale me
into court, and, by consent of Rome, I will be crucified.

14  Then Peter said, My Lord, it shall not be. The Roman soldiers will
tread on twelve dead men before they reach our Lord.

15  But Jesus said, A savior of the world cannot resist.

16  I came to save the world and I have taken up your names before the
highest courts of heaven, and you have been confirmed as saviors of
the world.

17  And not a name, excepting that of him who shall betray, will ever
be disgraced.

18  I go my way, and though my flesh shall pass, my soul will stand
beside you all the way to guide and bless.

19  And wicked men will seize you in the streets, and as you kneel in
prayer; will charge you with some legal crime, and think they serve
their God by putting you to death.

20  But falter not; the load will heavy be, but with the consciousness
of duty done, the peace of God will lift the load, dispel the pain and
light the way.

21  And we will meet where carnal executioners come not; there we will
serve the cruel men, who in their ignorance had tortured us to death.

22  Can we prevent this outrage and this slaughter of our lives? If not
we are but creatures of the ebb and flow of carnal things. It would
not be a sacrifice of life.

23  But we are masters of the things of time. Lo, we can speak, and
all the spirits of the fire, water, earth and air will stand in our
defense.

24  We can command and many legions of the angel world would come and
strike our enemies to earth.

25  But it is best that not a power of heaven or earth should come to
our relief. And it is best that even God should veil his face and seem
to hear us not.

26  As I am pattern unto you, so you are patterns for the human race.
We show by non-resistance that we give our lives in willing sacrifice
for man.

27  But my example will not end with death. My body will be laid within
a tomb in which no flesh has lain, symbolic of the purity of life in
death.

28  And in the tomb I will remain three days in sweet communion with
the Christ, and with my Father-God, and Mother-God.

29  And then, symbolic of the ascent of the soul to higher life, my
flesh within the tomb will disappear;

30  Will be transmuted into higher form, and, in the presence of you
all, I will ascend to God.

31  Then Jesus and the twelve went to a village by the sea.


