CHAPTER 22.

    _The friendship of Jesus and Lamaas. Jesus explains to Lamaas
      the meaning of truth, man, power, understanding, wisdom,
      salvation and faith._

Among the priests of Jagannath was one who loved the Jewish boy.
Lamaas Bramas was the name by which the priest was known.

2  One day as Jesus and Lamaas walked alone in plaza Jagannath, Lamaas
said, My Jewish master, what is truth?

3  And Jesus said, Truth is the only thing that changes not.

4  In all the world there are two things; the one is truth; the other
falsehood is; and truth is that which is, and falsehood that which
seems to be.

5  Now truth is aught, and has no cause, and yet it is the cause of
everything.

6  Falsehood is naught, and yet it is the manifest of aught.

7  Whatever has been made will be unmade; that which begins must end.

8  All things that can be seen by human eyes are manifests of aught,
are naught, and so must pass away.

9  The things we see are but reflexes just appearing, while the ethers
vibrate so and so, and when conditions change they disappear.

10  The Holy Breath is truth; is that which was, and is, and evermore
shall be; it cannot change nor pass away.

11  Lamaas said, You answer well; now, what is man?

12  And Jesus said, Man is the truth and falsehood strangely mixed.

13  Man is the Breath made flesh; so truth and falsehood are conjoined
in him; and then they strive, and naught goes down and man as truth
abides.

14  Again Lamaas asked, What do you say of power?

15  And Jesus said, It is a manifest; is the result of force; it is but
naught; it is illusion, nothing more. Force changes not, but power
changes as the ethers change.

16  Force is the will of God and is omnipotent, and power is that will
in manifest, directed by the Breath.

17  There is a power in the winds, a power in the waves, a power in the
lightning’s stroke, a power in the human arm, a power in the eye.

18  The ethers cause these powers to be, and thought of Elohim, of
angel, man, or other thinking thing, directs the force; when it has
done its work the power is no more.

19  Again Lamaas asked, Of understanding what have you to say?

20  And Jesus said, It is the rock on which man builds himself; it is
the gnosis of the aught and of the naught, of falsehood and of truth.

21  It is the knowledge of the lower self; the sensing of the powers of
man himself.

22  Again Lamaas asked, Of wisdom what have you to say?

23  And Jesus said, It is the consciousness that man is aught; that God
and man are one;

24  That naught is naught; that power is but illusion; that heaven and
earth and hell are not above, around, below, but in; which in the
light of aught becomes the naught, and God is all.

25  Lamaas asked, Pray, what is faith?

26  And Jesus said, Faith is the surety of the omnipotence of God and
man; the certainty that man will reach deific life.

27  Salvation is a ladder reaching from the heart of man to heart of
God.

28  It has three steps; Belief is first, and this is what man thinks,
perhaps, is truth.

29  And faith is next, and this is what man knows is truth.

30  Fruition is the last, and this is man himself, the truth.

31  Belief is lost in faith; and in fruition faith is lost; and man is
saved when he has reached deific life; when he and God are one.


CHAPTER 23.

    _Jesus and Lamaas among the sudras and visyas. In Benares.
      Jesus becomes a pupil of Udraka. The lessons of Udraka._

Now, Jesus with his friend Lamaas went through all the regions of
Orissa, and the valley of the Ganges, seeking wisdom from the sudras
and the visyas and the masters.

2  Benares of the Ganges was a city rich in culture and in learning;
here the two rabbonis tarried many days.

3  And Jesus sought to learn the Hindu art of healing, and became the
pupil of Udraka, greatest of the Hindu healers.

4  Udraka taught the uses of the waters, plants and earths; of heat and
cold; sunshine and shade; of light and dark.

5  He said, The laws of nature are the laws of health, and he who lives
according to these laws is never sick.

6  Transgression of these laws is sin, and he who sins is sick.

7  He who obeys the laws, maintains an equilibrium in all his parts,
and thus insures true harmony; and harmony is health, while discord is
disease.

8  That which produces harmony in all the parts of man is medicine,
insuring health.

9  The body is a harpsichord, and when its strings are too relaxed, or
are too tense, the instrument is out of tune, the man is sick.

10  Now, everything in nature has been made to meet the wants of man;
so everything is found in medical arcanes.

11  And when the harpsichord of man is out of tune the vast expanse of
nature may be searched for remedy; there is a cure for every ailment
of the flesh.

12  Of course the will of man is remedy supreme; and by the vigorous
exercise of will, man may make tense a chord that is relaxed, or may
relax one that is too tense, and thus may heal himself.

13  When man has reached the place where he has faith in God, in nature
and himself, he knows the Word of power; his word is balm for every
wound, is cure for all the ills of life.

14  The healer is the man who can inspire faith. The tongue may speak
to human ears, but souls are reached by souls that speak to souls.

15  He is the forceful man whose soul is large, and who can enter into
souls, inspiring hope in those who have no hope, and faith in those
who have no faith in God, in nature, nor in man.

16  There is no universal balm for those who tread the common walks of
life.

17  A thousand things produce inharmony and make men sick; a thousand
things may tune the harpsichord, and make men well.

18  That which is medicine for one is poison for another one; so one is
healed by what would kill another one.

19  An herb may heal the one; a drink of water may restore another one;
a mountain breeze may bring to life one seeming past all help;

20  A coal of fire, or bit of earth, may cure another one; and one may
wash in certain streams, or pools, and be made whole.

21  The virtue from the hand or breath may heal a thousand more; but
love is queen. Thought, reinforced by love, is God’s great sovereign
balm.

22  But many of the broken chords in life, and discords that so vex the
soul, are caused by evil spirits of the air that men see not; that
lead men on through ignorance to break the laws of nature and of God.

23  These powers act like demons, and they speak; they rend the man;
they drive him to despair.

24  But he who is a healer, true, is master of the soul, and can, by
force of will, control these evil ones.

25  Some spirits of the air are master spirits and are strong, too
strong for human power alone; but man has helpers in the higher realms
that may be importuned, and they will help to drive the demons out.

26  Of what this great physician said, this is the sum. And Jesus bowed
his head in recognition of the wisdom of this master soul, and went
his way.


