CHAPTER 62.

    _John, the harbinger, again visits Jerusalem. Speaks to the
      people. Promises to meet them at Gilgal in seven days. Goes
      to Bethany and attends a feast._

Next day John went again into the temple courts and said,

2  Prepare, O Israel, prepare to meet your king.

3  The chief priests and the scribes would know the meaning of his
words; they said,

4  Bold man, what is the purport of this message that you bring to
Israel? If you be seer and prophet, tell us plainly who has sent you
here?

5  And John replied, I am the voice of one who cries out in the
wilderness, Prepare the way, make straight the paths, for, lo, the
Prince of Peace will come to rule in love.

6  Your prophet Malachi wrote down the words of God:

7  And I will send Elijah unto you before the retribution day shall
come, to turn again the hearts of men to God and if they will not
turn, lo, I will smite them with a curse.

8  You men of Israel; you know your sins. As I passed by I saw a
wounded bird prone in your streets, and men of every class were
beating it with clubs; and then I saw that Justice was its name.

9  I looked again and saw that its companion had been killed; the pure
white wings of Righteousness were trampled in the dust.

10  I tell you men, your awfulness of guilt has made a cesspool of
iniquity that sends a fearful stench to heaven.

11  Reform, O Israel, reform; prepare to meet your king.

12  And then John turned away and as he went he said,

13  In seven days, lo, I will stand at Gilgal, by the Jordan ford,
where Israel first crossed into the promised land.

14  And then he left the temple court to enter it no more; but many
people followed him as far as Bethany, and there he tarried at the
home of Lazarus, his kin.

15  The anxious people gathered all about the home and would not go;
then John came forth and said,

16  Reform, O Israel, reform; prepare to meet your king.

17  The sins of Israel do not all lie at the door of priest and scribe.
O think you not that all the sinners of Judea are found among the
rulers and the men of wealth.

18  It is no sign that man is good and pure because he lives in want.

19  The listless, shiftless vagabonds of earth are mostly poor and have
to beg for bread.

20  I saw the very men that cheered because I told the priests and
scribes of their injustice unto man, throw stones and beat poor
Justice in the streets.

21  I saw them trample on the poor dead bird of Righteousness;

22  And you who follow after me, you commoners, are not one whit behind
the scribes and priests in crime.

23  Reform, you men of Israel; the king has come; prepare to meet your
king.

24  With Lazarus and his sisters, John remained for certain days.

25  In honor of the Nazarite a feast was spread, and all the people
stood about the board.

26  And when the chief men of the town poured out the sparkling wine
and offered John a cup, he took it, held it high in air, and said,

27  Wine makes glad the carnal heart, and it makes sad the human soul;
it plunges deep in bitterness and gall the deathless spirit of the man.

28  I took the vow of Nazar when a child, and not a drop has ever
passed my lips.

29  And if you would make glad the coming king, then shun the cup as
you would shun a deadly thing.

30  And then he threw the sparkling wine out in the street.


CHAPTER 63.

    _John, the harbinger, visits Jericho. Meets the people at
      Gilgal. Announces his mission. Introduces the rite of
      baptism. Baptizes many people. Returns to Bethany and
      teaches. Returns to the Jordan._

And John went down to Jericho; there he abode with Alpheus.

2  And when the people heard that he was there they came in throngs to
hear him speak.

3  He spoke to none; but when the time was due he went down to the
Jordan ford, and to the multitudes he said,

4  Reform and in the fount of purity wash all your sins away; the
kingdom is at hand.

5  Come unto me and in the waters of this stream be washed, symbolic of
the inner cleansing of the soul.

6  And, lo, the multitudes came down and in the Jordan they were
washed, and every man confessed his sins.

7  For many months, in all the regions round about, John plead for
purity and righteousness; and after many days he went again to
Bethany; and there he taught.

8  At first few but the honest seekers came; but, by and by, the
selfish and the vicious came with no contrition; came because the many
came.

9  And when John saw the unrepentant Pharisees and Sadducees come unto
him, he said,

10  You children of the vipers, stay; are you disturbed by news of
coming wrath?

11  Go to, and do the things that prove repentance genuine.

12  Is it enough for you to say that you are heirs of Abraham? I tell
you, no.

13  The heirs of Abraham are just as wicked in the sight of God when
they do wrong as any heathen man.

14  Behold the ax! and every tree that bears not wholesome fruit is cut
down at the roots and cast into the fire.

15  And then the people asked, What must we do?

16  And John replied, Accept the ministry of helpfulness for all
mankind; spend not upon your selfish selves all that you have.

17  Let him who has two coats give one to him who has no coat; give
part of all the food you have to those in need.

18  And when the publicans came up and asked, What must we do? John
answered them,

19  Be honest in your work; do not increase for selfish gain the
tribute you collect; take nothing more than what your king demands.

20  And when the soldiers came and asked, What must we do? The
harbinger replied,

21  Do violence to none; exact no wrongful thing, and be contented with
the wages you receive.

22  Among the Jews were many who had been waiting for the Christ to
come, and they regarded John as Christ.

23  But to their questions John replied, In water I do cleanse,
symbolic of the cleansing of the soul; but when he comes who is to
come, lo, he will cleanse in Holy Breath and purify in fire.

24  His fan is in his hand, and he will separate the wheat and chaff;
will throw the chaff away, but garner every grain of wheat. This is
the Christ.

25  Behold he comes! and he will walk with you, and you will know him
not.

26  He is the king; the latchet of his shoes I am not worthy to unloose.

27  And John left Bethany and went again unto the Jordan ford.


