CHAPTER 136.

    _Jesus teaches in the temple. Relates the parable of the good
      Samaritan. Goes to Bethany. Teaches in Lazarus’ home. Rebukes
      Martha for her anxiety about the things of this life._

And Jesus stood again within the temple courts and taught.

2  A master of the law was sent to question him that he might find a
cause to censure and accuse him of a crime.

3  He said, Lord, tell me what to do that I may have eternal life?

4  And Jesus said, You know the law; what does it say?

5  The lawyer answered, You shall love the Lord your God with all your
heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, with all your mind,
and you shall love your neighbor as yourself.

6  And Jesus said, Lo, you have answered well; this do and you shall
live.

7  The lawyer said, My neighbor, who is he?

8  And Jesus said, A man was going from Jerusalem to Jericho, and lo,
he met with robbers on the way, who beat him, robbed him of his goods,
and left him bleeding by the way.

9  A Pharisee was going down that way; he saw the wounded man; but then
he had no time to lose; he passed by on the other side.

10  A Levite came and saw the man; but he was loath to soil his
sacerdotal robes, and he passed by.

11  A lawyer on his way to Jericho observed the dying man, and then
he said, If I could make a shekel I might help the man; but he has
nothing left to give, I have no time for charity; and he passed on.

12  And then a stranger from Samaria came that way; he saw the wounded
man; his heart was touched with pity and he stopped, dismounted from
his horse,

13  Revived the man, and placed him on his horse and took him to an inn
and charged the keeper of the inn to nurse him back to strength.

14  He gave the keeper all the money that he had and said, Your charges
may be more than this, but care for this unfortunate, and when I come
again I will pay all; and then he went his way.

15  Now, master of the law, which of these four was neighbor unto him
who fell among the thieves?

16  The lawyer said, The man who showed him mercy; he who cared for him.

17  And Jesus said, Go on your way and likewise do, and you shall live.

18  Now, Jesus, Peter, James and John went out to Bethany where Lazarus
lived.

19  And Mary sat at Jesus’ feet and heard him speak the words of life
while Martha served.

20  And Martha called, but Mary would not leave the Lord to help her
serve.

21  And Martha said to Jesus, Do you not care that Mary makes me bear
the burdens of the serving all the day? I beg that you will bid her
help.

22  And Jesus said, You are too anxious, Martha, for your guests; you
need not trouble so about the things of life.

23  You grow a-weary by your care for little things and slight the one
thing needed most of all.

24  Your sister here has chosen far the better part, a part that none
can take away.


CHAPTER 137.

    _Jesus and his disciples go into a retired place to pray. Jesus
      teaches Lazarus how to pray. The model prayer. The value of
      importunate prayer. Parable of the importunate housewife._

Now, in the evening Jesus, Peter, James and John, with Lazarus, went
out beyond the village gates to pray. And Lazarus said, Teach me to
pray.

2  And Jesus said, The prayer I taught the twelve to pray while we were
up in Galilee is one acceptable to God; and when you pray just say,

3  Our Father-God who art in heaven; holy is thy name; thy kingdom
come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven;

4  Give us this day our needed bread;

5  Help us forget the debts that other people owe to us, that all our
debts may be discharged;

6  And shield us from the tempter’s snares that are too great for us to
bear;

7  And when they come give us the strength to overcome.

8  And Jesus said, The answer to your prayer may not appear in fulness
in a little time.

9  Be not discouraged; pray again and then again, for God will hear.

10  And then he spoke a parable; he said, A housewife was alone at
night and, lo, some guests arrived, and they were hungry, having had
no food for all the day.

11  The housewife had no bread, and so at midnight she went forth and
called a friend and said, Loan me three loaves of bread, for guests
have come, and I have naught for them to eat.

12  The friend replied, Why do you trouble me at midnight hour? My door
is shut; my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise to give you
bread; tomorrow you can be supplied.

13  The housewife asked again, and then again, and then because she
plead, and would not be refused, the friend arose and gave her bread.

14  Behold, I say to you, Ask firmly and you shall receive; seek
trustingly and you shall find; knock earnestly, the door will open up.

15  All things are yours, and when you ask, not as a begging man would
ask, but as a child, you shall be satisfied.

16  A son may ask his father for a loaf of bread; the father will not
give to him a stone;

17  Or he may ask him for a fish; he will not give a crab; or he may
ask him for an egg; the father will not give a pebble from the brook.

18  Behold, if men of flesh know how to give abundantly to children of
the flesh, will not your heavenly Father give abundantly to you when
you shall pray?


