CHAPTER 33.

    _Jesus teaches the common people at a spring. Tells them how to
      attain unto happiness. Relates the parable of the rocky field
      and the hidden treasure._

In silent meditation Jesus sat beside a flowing spring. It was a holy
day, and many people of the servant caste were near the place.

2  And Jesus saw the hard drawn lines of toil on every brow, in every
hand. There was no look of joy in any face. Not one of all the group
could think of anything but toil.

3  And Jesus spoke to one and said, Why are you all so sad? Have you
no happiness in life?

4  The man replied, We scarcely know the meaning of that word. We toil
to live, and hope for nothing else but toil, and bless the day when
we can cease our toil and lay us down to rest in Buddha’s city of the
dead.

5  And Jesus’ heart was stirred with pity and with love for these poor
toilers, and he said,

6  Toil should not make a person sad; men should be happiest when they
toil. When hope and love are back of toil, then all of life is filled
with joy and peace, and this is heaven. Do you not know that such a
heaven is for you?

7  The man replied, Of heaven we have heard; but then it is so far
away, and we must live so many lives before we reach that place!

8  And Jesus said, My brother, man, your thoughts are wrong; your
heaven is not far away; and it is not a place of metes and bounds, is
not a country to be reached; it is a state of mind.

9  God never made a heaven for man; he never made a hell; we are
creators and we make our own.

10  Now, cease to seek for heaven in the sky; just open up the windows
of your hearts, and, like a flood of light, a heaven will come and
bring a boundless joy; then toil will be no cruel task.

11  The people were amazed, and gathered close to hear this strange
young master speak,

12  Imploring him to tell them more about the Father-God; about the
heaven that men can make on earth; about the boundless joy.

13  And Jesus spoke a parable; he said, A certain man possessed a
field; the soil was hard and poor.

14  By constant toil he scarcely could provide enough of food to keep
his family from want.

15  One day a miner who could see beneath the soil, in passing on his
way, saw this poor man and his unfruitful field.

16  He called the weary toiler and he said, My brother, know you not
that just below the surface of your barren field rich treasures lie
concealed?

17  You plow and sow and reap in scanty way, and day by day you tread
upon a mine of gold and precious stones.

18  This wealth lies not upon the surface of the ground; but if you
will but dig away the rocky soil, and delve down deep into the earth,
you need no longer till the soil for naught.

19  The man believed. The miner surely knows; he said, and I will find
the treasures hidden in my field.

20  And then he dug away the rocky soil, and deep down in the earth he
found a mine of gold.

21  And Jesus said, The sons of men are toiling hard on desert plains,
and burning sands and rocky soils; are doing what their fathers did,
not dreaming they can do aught else.

22  Behold, a master comes, and tells them of a hidden wealth; that
underneath the rocky soil of carnal things are treasures that no man
can count;

23  That in the heart the richest gems abound; that he who wills may
open up the door and find them all.

24  And then the people said, Make known to us the way that we may find
the wealth that lies within the heart.

25  And Jesus opened up the way; the toilers saw another side of life,
and toil became a joy.


CHAPTER 34.

    _The Jubilee in Kapavistu. Jesus teaches in the plaza and the
      people are astonished. He relates the parable of the unkept
      vineyard and the vine dresser. The priests are angered by his
      words._

It was a gala day in sacred Kapavistu; a throng of Buddhist
worshippers had met to celebrate a Jubilee.

2  And priests and masters from all parts of India were there; they
taught; but they embellished little truth with many words.

3  And Jesus went into an ancient plaza and he taught; he spoke of
Father-Mother-God; he told about the brotherhood of life.

4  The priests and all the people were astounded at his words and said,
Is this not Buddha come again in flesh? No other one could speak with
such simplicity and power.

5  And Jesus spoke a parable; he said, There was a vineyard all unkept;
the vines were high, the growth of leaves and branches great.

6  The leaves were broad and shut the sunlight from the vines; the
grapes were sour, and few, and small.

7  The pruner came; with his sharp knife he cut off every branch, and
not a leaf remained; just root and stalk, and nothing more.

8  The busy neighbors came with one accord and were amazed, and said to
him who pruned, You foolish man! the vineyard is despoiled.

9  Such desolation! There is no beauty left, and when the harvest time
shall come the gatherers will find no fruit.

10  The pruner said, Content yourselves with what you think, and come
again at harvest time and see.

11  And when the harvest time came on the busy neighbors came again;
they were surprised.

12  The naked stalks had put forth branch and leaf, and heavy clusters
of delicious grapes weighed every branch to earth.

13  The gatherers rejoiced as, day by day, they carried the rich
fruitage to the press.

14  Behold, the vineyard of the Lord! the earth is spread with human
vines.

15  The gorgeous forms and rites of men are branches, and their words
are leaves; and these have grown so great that sunlight can no longer
reach the heart; there is no fruit.

16  Behold, the pruner comes, and with a two-edged knife he cuts away
the branches and the leaves of words,

17  And naught is left but unclothed stalks of human life.

18  The priests and they of pompous show, rebuke the pruner, and would
stay him in his work.

19  They see no beauty in the stalks of human life; no promises of
fruit.

20  The harvest time will come and they who scorned the pruner will
look on again and be amazed, for they will see the human stalks that
seemed so lifeless, bending low with precious fruit.

21  And they will hear the harvesters rejoice, because the harvest is
so great.

22  The priests were not well pleased with Jesus’ words; but they
rebuked him not; they feared the multitude.


