CHAPTER 8.

    _Elihu’s lessons. The unity of life. The two selfs. The devil.
      Love the savior of men. The David of the light. Goliath of
      the dark._

Again Elihu met his pupils in the sacred grove and said,

2  No man lives unto himself; for every living thing is bound by cords
to every other living thing.

3  Blest are the pure in heart; for they will love and not demand love
in return.

4  They will not do to other men what they would not have other men do
unto them.

5  There are two selfs; the higher and the lower self.

6  The higher self is human spirit clothed with soul, made in the form
of God.

7  The lower self, the carnal self, the body of desires, is a reflexion
of the higher self, distorted by the murky ethers of the flesh.

8  The lower self is an illusion, and will pass away; the higher self
is God in man, and will not pass away.

9  The higher self is the embodiment of truth; the lower self is truth
reversed, and so is falsehood manifest.

10  The higher self is justice, mercy, love and right; the lower self
is what the higher self is not.

11  The lower self breeds hatred, slander, lewdness, murders, theft,
and everything that harms; the higher self is mother of the virtues
and the harmonies of life.

12  The lower self is rich in promises, but poor in blessedness and
peace; it offers pleasure, joy and satisfying gains; but gives unrest
and misery and death.

13  It gives men apples that are lovely to the eye and pleasant to the
smell; their cores are full of bitterness and gall.

14  If you would ask me what to study I would say, yourselfs; and when
you well had studied them, and then would ask me what to study next, I
would reply, yourselfs.

15  He who knows well his lower self, knows the illusions of the world,
knows of the things that pass away; and he who knows his higher self,
knows God; knows well the things that cannot pass away.

16  Thrice blessed is the man who has made purity and love his very
own; he has been ransomed from the perils of the lower self and is
himself his higher self.

17  Men seek salvation from an evil that they deem a living monster of
the nether world; and they have gods that are but demons in disguise;
all powerful, yet full of jealousy and hate and lust;

18  Whose favors must be bought with costly sacrifice of fruits, and of
the lives of birds, and animals, and human kind.

19  And yet these gods possess no ears to hear, no eyes to see, no
heart to sympathize, no power to save.

20  This evil is a myth; these gods are made of air, and clothed with
shadows of a thought.

21  The only devil from which men must be redeemed is self, the lower
self. If man would find his devil he must look within; his name is
self.

22  If man would find his savior he must look within; and when the
demon self has been dethroned the savior, Love, will be exalted to the
throne of power.

23  The David of the light is Purity, who slays the strong Goliath of
the dark, and seats the savior, Love, upon the throne.


CHAPTER 9.

    _Salome’s lessons. The man and the woman. Philosophy of human
      moods. The triune God. The Septonate. The God Tao._

Salome taught the lesson of the day. She said, All times are not
alike. Today the words of man may have the greatest power; tomorrow
women teaches best.

2  In all the ways of life the man and woman should walk hand in hand;
the one without the other is but half; each has a work to do.

3  But all things teach; each has a time and season for its own. The
sun, the moon have lessons of their own for men; but each one teaches
at the appointed time.

4  The lessons of the sun fall down on human hearts like withered
leaves upon a stream, if given in the season of the moon; and so with
lessons of the moon and all the stars.

5  Today one walks in gloom, downhearted and oppressed; tomorrow that
same one is filled with joy.

6  Today the heavens seem full of blessedness and hope; tomorrow hope
has fled, and every plan and purpose comes to naught.

7  Today one wants to curse the very ground on which he treads;
tomorrow he is full of love and praise.

8  Today one hates and scorns and envies and is jealous of the child he
loves; tomorrow he has risen above his carnal self, and breathes forth
gladness and good will.

9  A thousand times men wonder why these heights and depths, these
light hearts and these sad, are found in every life.

10  They do not know that there are teachers everywhere, each busy with
a God-appointed task, and driving home to human hearts the truth.

11  But this is true, and every one receives the lessons that he needs.

12  And Mary said, Today I am in exaltation great; my thoughts and all
my life seem lifted up; why am I thus inspired?

13  Salome replied, This is a day of exaltation; day of worship and of
praise; a day when, in a measure, we may comprehend our Father-God.

14  Then let us study God, the One, the Three, the Seven.

15  Before the worlds were formed all things were One; just Spirit,
Universal Breath.

16  And Spirit breathed, and that which was not manifest became the
Fire and Thought of heaven, the Father-God, the Mother-God.

17  And when the Fire and Thought of heaven in union breathed, their
son, their only son, was born. This son is Love whom men have called
the Christ.

18  Men call the Thought of heaven the Holy Breath.

19  And when the Triune God breathed forth, lo, seven Spirits stood
before the throne. These are the Elohim, creative spirits of the
universe.

20  And these are they who said, Let us make man; and in their image
man was made.

21  In early ages of the world the dwellers in the farther East said,
Tao is the name of Universal Breath; and in the ancient books we read,

22  No manifesting form has Tao Great, and yet he made and keeps the
heavens and earth.

23  No passion has our Tao Great, and yet he causes sun and moon and
all the stars to rise and set.

24  No name has Tao Great, and yet he makes all things to grow; he
brings in season both the seed time and the harvest time.

25  And Tao Great was One; the One became the Two; the Two became the
Three, the Three evolved the Seven, which filled the universe with
manifests.

26  And Tao Great gives unto all, the evil and the good, the rain, the
dew, the sunshine and the flowers; from his rich stores he feeds them
all.

27  And in the same old book we read of man: He has a spirit knit to
Tao Great; a soul which lives within the seven Breaths of Tao Great; a
body of desires that springs up from the soil of flesh.

28  Now spirit loves the pure, the good, the true; the body of desires
extols the selfish self; the soul becomes the battle ground between
the two.

29  And blessed is the man whose spirit is triumphant and whose lower
self is purified; whose soul is cleansed, becoming fit to be the
council chamber of the manifests of Tao Great.

30  Thus closed the lesson of Salome.


