CHAPTER 41.

    _Jesus stands by a healing fountain. Reveals the fact that
      faith is the potent factor in healing and many are healed by
      faith. A little child teaches a great lesson of faith._

A flowing spring that people called the Healing Fount, was near
Persepolis.

2  And all the people thought that at a certain time of year their
deity came down and gave a virtue to the waters of the fount, and that
the sick who then would plunge into the fount and wash would be made
whole.

3  About the fount a multitude of people were in waiting for the Holy
One to come and potentize the waters of the fount.

4  The blind, the lame, the deaf, the dumb, and those obsessed were
there.

5  And Jesus, standing in the midst of them, exclaimed, Behold the
spring of life! These waters that will fail are honored as the special
blessing of your God.

6  From whence do healing virtues come? Why is your God so partial with
his gifts? Why does he bless this spring today, and then tomorrow take
his blessings all away?

7  A deity of power could fill these waters full of healing virtue
every day.

8  Hear me, you sick, disconsolate: The virtue of this fount is not a
special gift of God.

9  Faith is the healing power of every drop of all the waters of this
spring.

10  He who believes with all his heart that he will be made whole by
washing in this fount will be made whole when he has washed; and he
may wash at any time.

11  Let every one who has this faith in God and in himself plunge in
these waters now and wash.

12  And many of the people plunged into the crystal fount; and they
were healed.

13  And then there was a rush, for all the people were inspired with
faith, and each one strove to be among the first to wash, lest all the
virtue be absorbed.

14  And Jesus saw a little child, weak, faint and helpless, sitting all
alone beyond the surging crowd; and there was none to help her to the
fount.

15  And Jesus said, My little one, why do you sit and wait? Why not
arise and hasten to the fount and wash, and be made well?

16  The child replied, I need not haste; the blessings of my Father in
the sky are measured not in tiny cups; they never fail; their virtues
are the same forevermore.

17  When these whose faith is weak must haste to wash for fear their
faith will fail, have all been cured, these waters will be just as
powerful for me.

18  Then I can go and stay a long, long time within the blessed waters
of the spring.

19  And Jesus said, Behold a master soul! She came to earth to teach to
men the power of faith.

20  And then he lifted up the child and said, Why wait for anything?
The very air we breathe is filled with balm of life. Breathe in this
balm of life in faith and be made whole.

21  The child breathed in the balm of life in faith, and she was well.

22  The people marveled much at what they heard and saw; they said,
This man must surely be the god of health made flesh.

23  And Jesus said, The fount of life is not a little pool; it is as
wide as are the spaces of the heavens.

24  The waters of the fount are love; the potency is faith, and he who
plunges deep into the living springs, in living faith, may wash away
his guilt and be made whole, and freed from sin.




SECTION IX.

TETH.

_Life and Works of Jesus in Assyria._


CHAPTER 42.

    _Jesus bids the magians farewell. Goes to Assyria. Teaches the
      people in Ur of Chaldea. Meets Ashbina, with whom he visits
      many towns and cities, teaching and healing the sick._

In Persia Jesus’ work was done and he resumed his journey towards his
native land.

2  The Persian sage went with him to the Euphrates; then with a pledge
that they would meet again in Egypt land the masters said, Farewell.

3  And Kaspar went his way unto his home beside the Caspian Sea; and
Jesus soon was in Chaldea, cradle land of Israel.

4  In Ur, where Abraham was born, he tarried for a time; and when he
told the people who he was, and why he came, they came from near and
far to speak to him.

5  He said to them, We all are kin. Two thousand years and more ago,
our Father Abraham lived here in Ur, and then he worshipped God the
One, and taught the people in these sacred groves.

6  And he was greatly blessed; becoming father of the mighty hosts of
Israel.

7  Although so many years have passed since Abraham and Sarah walked
these ways, a remnant of their kindred still abide in Ur.

8  And in their hearts the God of Abraham is still adored, and faith
and justice are the rocks on which they build.

9  Behold this land! It is no more the fruitful land that Abraham loved
so well; the rains come not as in the former times; the vine is not
productive now, and withered are the figs.

10  But this shall not forever be; the time will come when all your
deserts will rejoice; when flowers will bloom; when all your vines
will bend their heads with luscious fruit; your shepherds will again
be glad.

11  And Jesus preached to them the gospel of good will, and peace on
earth. He told them of the brotherhood of life, and of the inborn
powers of man, and of the kingdom of the soul.

12  And as he spoke, Ashbina, greatest sage of all Assyria, stood
before his face.

13  The people knew the sage, for he had often taught them in their
sacred halls and groves, and they rejoiced to see his face.

14  Ashbina said, My children of Chaldea, hear! Behold, for you are
greatly blest today, because a prophet of the living God has come to
you.

15  Take heed to what this master says, for he gives forth the words
that God has given him.

16  And Jesus and the sage went through the towns and cities of Chaldea
and of the lands between the Tigris and the Euphrates;

17  And Jesus healed a multitude of people who were sick.


