CHAPTER 6.

    _Herod learns of the supposed mission of John. The infants of
      Bethlehem are massacred by Herod’s order. Elizabeth escapes
      with John. Because Zacharias cannot tell where his son is
      hidden, he is murdered. Herod dies._

Now, when the magian priests did not return to tell him of the child
that had been born a king, King Herod was enraged.

2  And then his courtiers told him of another child in Bethlehem, one
born to go before and to prepare the people to receive the king.

3  This angered more and more the king; he called his guards and bid
them go to Bethlehem and slay the infant John, as well as Jesus who
was born to be a king.

4  He said, Let no mistake be made, and that you may be sure to slay
these claimants to my throne, slay all male children in the town not
yet two years of age.

5  The guards went forth and did as Herod bade them do.

6  Elizabeth knew not that Herod sought to slay her son, and she and
John were yet in Bethlehem; but when she knew, she took the infant
John and hastened to the hills.

7  The murderous guards were near; they pressed upon her hard; but then
she knew the secret caves in all the hills, and into one she ran and
hid herself and John until the guards were gone.

8  Their cruel task was done; the guards returned and told the story to
the king.

9  They said, We know that we have slain the infant king; but John, his
harbinger, we could not find.

10  The king was angry with his guards because they failed to slay the
infant John; he sent them to the tower in chains.

11  And other guards were sent to Zacharias, father of the harbinger,
while he was serving in the Holy Place, to say, The king demands that
you shall tell where is your son.

12  But Zacharias did not know, and he replied, I am a minister of God,
a servant in the Holy Place; how could I know where they have taken
him?

13  And when the guards returned and told the king what Zacharias said,
he was enraged and said,

14  My guards, go back and tell that wily priest that he is in my
hands; that if he does not tell the truth, does not reveal the hiding
place of John, his son, then he shall die.

15  The guards went back and told the priest just what the king had
said.

16  And Zacharias said, I can but give my life for truth; and if the
king does shed my blood the Lord will save my soul.

17  The guards again returned and told the king what Zacharias said.

18  Now, Zacharias stood before the altar in the Holy Place engaged in
prayer.

19  A guard approached and with a dagger thrust him through; he fell
and died before the curtain of the sanctuary of the Lord.

20  And when the hour of salutation came, for Zacharias daily blessed
the priests, he did not come.

21  And after waiting long the priests went to the Holy Place and found
the body of the dead.

22  And there was grief, deep grief, in all the land.

23  Now Herod sat upon his throne; he did not seem to move; his
courtiers came; the king was dead. His sons reigned in his stead.




SECTION III.

GIMEL.

_Education of Mary and Elizabeth in Zoan._


CHAPTER 7.

    _Archelaus reigns. Mary and Elizabeth with their sons are in
      Zoan and are taught by Elihu and Salome. Elihu’s introductory
      lesson. Tells of an interpreter._

The son of Herod, Archelaus, reigned in Jerusalem. He was a selfish,
cruel king; he put to death all those who did not honor him.

2  He called in council all the wisest men and asked about the infant
claimant to his throne.

3  The council said that John and Jesus both were dead; then he was
satisfied.

4  Now Joseph, Mary and their son were down in Egypt in Zoan, and John
was with his mother in the Judean hills.

5  Elihu and Salome sent messengers in haste to find Elizabeth and
John. They found them and they brought them to Zoan.

6  Now, Mary and Elizabeth were marveling much because of their
deliverance.

7  Elihu said, It is not strange; there are no happenings; law governs
all events.

8  From olden times it was ordained that you should be with us, and in
this sacred school be taught.

9  Elihu and Salome took Mary and Elizabeth out to the sacred grove
near by where they were wont to teach.

10  Elihu said to Mary and Elizabeth, You may esteem yourselves thrice
blest, for you are chosen mothers of long promised sons,

11  Who are ordained to lay in solid rock a sure foundation stone on
which the temple of the perfect man shall rest--a temple that shall
never be destroyed.

12  We measure time by cycle ages, and the gate to every age we deem a
mile stone in the journey of the race.

13  An age has passed; the gate unto another age flies open at the
touch of time. This is the preparation age of soul, the kingdom of
Immanuel, of God in man;

14  And these, your sons, will be the first to tell the news, and
preach the gospel of good will to men, and peace on earth.

15  A mighty work is theirs; for carnal men want not the light; they
love the dark, and when the light shines in the dark they comprehend
it not.

16  We call these sons, Revealers of the Light; but they must have the
light before they can reveal the light.

17  And you must teach your sons, and set their souls on fire with love
and holy zeal, and make them conscious of their missions to the sons
of men.

18  Teach them that God and man were one; but that through carnal
thoughts and words and deeds, man tore himself away from God; debased
himself.

19  Teach that the Holy Breath would make them one again, restoring
harmony and peace;

20  That naught can make them one but love; that God so loved the world
that he has clothed his son in flesh that man may comprehend.

21  The only Savior of the world is love, and Jesus, son of Mary,
comes to manifest that love to men.

22  Now, love cannot be manifest until its way has been prepared, and
naught can rend the rocks and bring down lofty hills and fill the
valleys up, and thus prepare the way, but purity.

23  But purity in life men do not comprehend; and so, it, too, must
come in flesh.

24  And you, Elizabeth, are blest because your son is purity made
flesh, and he shall pave the way for love.

25  This age will comprehend but little of the works of Purity and
Love; but not a word is lost, for in the Book of God’s Remembrance a
registry is made of every thought, and word, and deed;

26  And when the world is ready to receive, lo, God will send a
messenger to open up the book and copy from its sacred pages all the
messages of Purity and Love.

27  Then every man of earth will read the words of life in language of
his native land, and men will see the light, walk in the light and be
the light.

28  And man again will be at one with God.


