CHAPTER 24.

    _The Brahmic doctrine of castes. Jesus repudiates it and
      teaches human equality. The priests are offended and drive
      him from the temple. He abides with the sudras and teaches
      them._

Four years the Jewish boy abode in temple Jagannath.

2  One day he sat among the priests and said to them, Pray, tell me all
about your views of castes; why do you say that all men are not equal
in the sight of God?

3  A master of their laws stood forth and said, The Holy One whom we
call Brahm, made men to suit himself, and men should not complain.

4  In the beginning days of human life Brahm spoke, and four men stood
before his face.

5  Now, from the mouth of Parabrahm the first man came; and he was
white, was like the Brahm himself; a brahman he was called.

6  And he was high and lifted up; above all want he stood; he had no
need of toil.

7  And he was called the priest of Brahm, the holy one to act for Brahm
in all affairs of earth.

8  The second man was red, and from the hand of Parabrahm he came; and
he was called shatriya.

9  And he was made to be the king, the ruler and the warrior, whose
highest ordained duty was, protection of the priest.

10  And from the inner parts of Parabrahm the third man came; and he
was called a visya.

11  He was a yellow man, and his it was to till the soil, and keep the
flocks and herds.

12  And from the feet of Parabrahm the fourth man came; and he was
black; and he was called the sudras, one of low estate.

13  The sudras is the servant of the race of men; he has no rights that
others need respect; he may not hear the Vedas read, and it means
death to him to look into the face of priest, or king, and naught but
death can free him from his state of servitude.

14  And Jesus said, Then Parabrahm is not a God of justice and of
right; for with his own strong hand he has exalted one and brought
another low.

15  And Jesus said no more to them, but looking up to heaven he said,

16  My Father-God, who was, and is, and ever more shall be; who holds
within thy hands the scales of justice and of right;

17  Who in the boundlessness of love has made all men to equal be. The
white, the black, the yellow and the red can look up in thy face and
say, Our Father-God.

18  Thou Father of the human race, I praise thy name.

19  And all the priests were angered by the words which Jesus spoke;
they rushed upon him, seized him, and would have done him harm.

20  But then Lamaas raised his hand and said, You priests of Brahm,
beware! you know not what you do; wait till you know the God this
youth adores.

21  I have beheld this boy at prayer when light above the light of sun
surrounded him, Beware! his God may be more powerful than Brahm.

22  If Jesus speaks the truth, if he is right, you cannot force him
to desist; if he is wrong and you are right, his words will come to
naught, for right is might, and in the end it will prevail.

23  And then the priests refrained from doing Jesus harm; but one spoke
out and said,

24  Within this holy place has not this reckless youth done violence to
Parabrahm? The law is plain; it says, He who reviles the name of Brahm
shall die.

25  Lamaas plead for Jesus’ life; and then the priests just seized a
scourge of cords and drove him from the place.

26  And Jesus went his way and found a shelter with the black and
yellow men, the servants and the tillers of the soil.

27  To them he first made known the gospel of equality; he told them of
the Brotherhood of Man, the Fatherhood of God.

28  The common people heard him with delight, and learned to pray, Our
Father-God who art in heaven.


CHAPTER 25.

    _Jesus teaches the sudras and farmers. Relates a parable of a
      nobleman and his unjust sons. Makes known the possibilities
      of all men._

When Jesus saw the sudras and the farmers in such multitudes draw near
to hear his words, he spoke a parable to them; he said:

2  A nobleman possessed a great estate; he had four sons, and he would
have them all grow strong by standing forth and making use of all the
talents they possessed.

3  And so he gave to each a share of his great wealth, and bade them go
their way.

4  The eldest son was full of self; he was ambitious, shrewd and quick
of thought.

5  He said within himself, I am the oldest son, and these, my brothers,
must be servants at my feet,

6  And then he called his brothers forth; and one he made a puppet
king; gave him a sword and charged him to defend the whole estate.

7  To one he gave the use of lands and flowing wells, and flocks and
herds, and bade him till the soil, and tend the flocks and herds and
bring to him the choicest of his gains.

8  And to the other one he said, You are the youngest son; the broad
estate has been assigned; you have no part nor lot in anything that is.

9  And then he took a chain and bound his brother to a naked rock upon
a desert plain, and said to him,

10  You have been born a slave; you have no rights, and you must be
contented with your lot, for there is no release for you until you die
and go from hence.

11  Now, after certain years the day of reckoning came; the nobleman
called up his sons to render their accounts.

12  And when he knew that one, his eldest son, had seized the whole
estate and made his brothers slaves,

13  He seized him, tore his priestly robes away and put him in a prison
cell, where he was forced to stay until he had atoned for all the
wrongs that he had done.

14  And then, as though they were but toys, he threw in air the throne
and armor of the puppet king; he broke his sword, and put him in a
prison cell.

15  And then he called his farmer son and asked him why he had not
rescued from his galling chains his brother on the desert sands.

16  And when the son made answer not, the father took unto himself the
flocks and herds, the fields and flowing wells,

17  And sent his farmer son to live out on the desert sands, until he
had atoned for all the wrongs that he had done.

18  And then the father went and found his youngest son in cruel
chains; with his own hands he broke the chains and bade his son to go
in peace.

19  Now, when the sons had all paid up their debts they came again and
stood before the bar of right.

20  They all had learned their lessons, learned them well; and then the
father once again divided the estate.

21  He gave to each an equal share, and bade them recognize the law of
equity and right, and live in peace.

22  And one, a sudras, spoke and said, May we who are but slaves, who
are cut down like beasts to satisfy the whims of priests--may we have
hope that one will come to break our chains and set us free?

23  And Jesus said, The Holy One has said, that all his children shall
be free; and every soul is child of God.

24  The sudras shall be free as priest; the farmer shall walk hand in
hand with king; for all the world will own the brotherhood of man.

25  O men, arise! be conscious of your powers, for he who wills need
not remain a slave.

26  Just live as you would have your brother live; unfold each day as
does the flower; for earth is yours, and heaven is yours, and God will
bring you to your own.

27  And all the people cried, Show us the way that like the flower we
may unfold and come unto our own.


