CHAPTER 37.

    _Jesus is presented with a camel. He goes to Lahore where he
      abides with Ajainin, whom he teaches. Lesson of the wandering
      musicians. Jesus resumes his journey._

A caravan of merchantmen were journeying through the Kashmar vale as
Jesus passed that way, and they were going to Lahore, a city of the
Hand, the five-stream land.

2  The merchantmen had heard the prophet speak, had seen his mighty
works in Leh, and they were glad to see him once again.

3  And when they knew that he was going to Lahore and then across the
Sind, through Persia and the farther West, and that he had no beast on
which to ride,

4  They freely gave to him a noble bactrian beast, well saddled and
equipped, and Jesus journeyed with the caravan.

5  And when he reached Lahore, Ajainin and some other Brahmic priests,
received him with delight.

6  Ajainin was the priest who came to Jesus in the night time in
Benares many months before, and heard his words of truth.

7  And Jesus was Ajainin’s guest; he taught Ajainin many things;
revealed to him the secrets of the healing art.

8  He taught him how he could control the spirits of the air, the fire,
the water and the earth; and he explained to him the secret doctrine
of forgiveness, and the blotting out of sins.

9  One day Ajainin sat with Jesus in the temple porch; a band of
wandering singers and musicians paused before the court to sing and
play.

10  Their music was most rich and delicate, and Jesus said, Among the
high-bred people of the land we hear no sweeter music than that these
uncouth children of the wilderness bring here to us.

11  From whence this talent and this power? In one short life they
surely could not gain such grace of voice, such knowledge of the laws
of harmony and tone.

12  Men call them prodigies. There are no prodigies. All things result
from natural law.

13  These people are not young. A thousand years would not suffice to
give them such divine expressiveness, and such purity of voice and
touch.

14  Ten thousand years ago these people mastered harmony. In days of
old they trod the busy thoroughfares of life, and caught the melody of
birds, and played on harps of perfect form.

15  And they have come again to learn still other lessons from the
varied notes of manifests.

16  These wandering people form a part of heaven’s orchestra, and in
the land of perfect things the very angels will delight to hear them
play and sing.

17  And Jesus taught the common people of Lahore; he healed their sick,
and showed to them the way to rise to better things by helpfulness.

18  He said, We are not rich by what we get and hold; the only things
we keep are those we give away.

19  If you would live the perfect life, give forth your life in service
for your kind, and for the forms of life that men esteem the lower
forms of life.

20  But Jesus could not tarry longer in Lahore; he bade the priests and
other friends farewell; and then he took his camel and he went his way
toward the Sind.




SECTION VIII.

CHETH.

_Life and Works of Jesus in Persia._


CHAPTER 38.

    _Jesus crosses Persia. Teaches and heals in many places. Three
      magian priests meet him as he nears Persepolis. Kaspar, and
      two other Persian masters, meet him in Persepolis. The seven
      masters sit in silence seven days._

Four-and-twenty years of age was Jesus when he entered Persia on his
homeward way.

2  In many a hamlet, town and neighborhood he paused a while and taught
and healed.

3  The priests and ruling classes did not welcome him, because he
censured them for cruelty to those of low estate.

4  The common people followed him in throngs.

5  At times the chiefs made bold to try to hinder him, forbidding him
to teach or heal the sick. But he regarded not their angry threats; he
taught, and healed the sick.

6  In time he reached Persepolis, the city where the kings of Persia
were entombed; the city of the learned magi, Hor, and Lun, and Mer,
the three wise men,

7  Who, two-and-twenty years before, had seen the star of promise
rise above Jerusalem, and who had journeyed to the West to find the
new-born king;

8  And were the first to honor Jesus as the master of the age, and gave
him gifts of gold, gum-thus and myrrh.

9  These magi knew, by ways that masters always know, when Jesus
neared Persepolis; and then they girt themselves, and went to meet him
on the way.

10  And when they met, a light much brighter than the light of day,
surrounded them, and men who saw the four stand in the way declared
they were transfigured; seeming more like gods than men.

11  Now, Hor and Lun were aged men, and Jesus placed them on his beast
to ride into Persepolis; while he and Mer led on the way.

12  And when they reached the magi’s home they all rejoiced. And Jesus
told the thrilling story of his life, and Hor and Lun and Mer spoke
not; they only looked to heaven, and in their hearts praised God.

13  Three wise men from the North were in Persepolis; and they were
Kaspar, Zara and Melzone; and Kaspar was the wisest master of the
magian land. These three were at the home of Hor and Lun and Mer when
Jesus came.

14  For seven days these seven men spoke not; they sat in silence in
the council hall in close communion with the Silent Brotherhood.

15  They sought for light, for revelation and for power. The laws and
precepts of the coming age required all the wisdom of the masters of
the world.


