CHAPTER 174.

    _Jesus appears, fully materialized, to Zachus and Cleophas as
      they journey to Emmaus, but they know him not. He tells them
      many things about Christ. He eats the evening meal with them,
      and reveals himself to them. They go to Jerusalem and tell
      the news._

Towards the evening of the resurrection day, two friends of Jesus,
Zachus and Cleophas of Emmaus, seven miles away, were going to their
home.

2  And as they walked and talked about the things that had occurred a
stranger joined their company.

3  He said, My friends, you seem discouraged and are sad. Has some
great grief upon you come?

4  Cleophas said, Are you a stranger in Judea, and know not of the
thrilling things that have transpired here?

5  The stranger said, What things? To what do you refer?

6  Cleophas said, Have you not heard about the man from Galilee who was
a prophet mighty in both word and deed?

7  A man whom many thought had come to found again the kingdom of the
Jews, and drive the Romans from the city of Jerusalem and be himself
the king?

8  The stranger said, Tell me about this man.

9  Cleophas said, His name was Jesus; he was born in Bethlehem; his
home was up in Galilee. He loved the people as he loved himself.

10  He was, in truth, a master sent from God, for he had matchless
power. He healed the sick and made the deaf to hear, the blind to see,
the lame to walk, and even raised the dead.

11  The Jewish scribes and Pharisees were jealous of his fame and
power, and they arrested him; by perjured witnesses they proved him
guilty of a score of crimes,

12  And on last Friday he was taken to the place of skulls and
crucified.

13  He died and he was buried in a rich man’s tomb, out in the garden
of Siloam.

14  This very morning when his friends went to the tomb they found it
empty; the body of the Lord was gone.

15  And now the news has spread abroad that he has risen from the dead.

16  The stranger said, Yes, I have heard about this man; but it seems
strange that after all the things that Jewish prophets long ago
foretold concerning him that when he came men knew him not.

17  This man was born to demonstrate the Christ to men, and it is just
to say that Jesus is the Christ.

18  According to the Word, this Jesus came to suffer at the hands of
men, to give his life as pattern for the sons of men;

19  To rise from death that men might know the way to rise from death.

20  And then the stranger told the two disciples all about the Law, the
Prophets and the Psalms, and read to them a multitude of things that
had been written of this man from Galilee.

21  And now the men had reached their home and as the night was near
they importuned the stranger to abide with them.

22  And he went in with them and as they sat about the table at the
evening meal, he took a piece of bread, and blessed it in the name of
Christ.

23  And instantly their eyes were opened up, and they perceived that
he, the stranger, was the Lord, the man from Galilee; that he had
risen from the dead; and then the form of Jesus disappeared.

24  When he had gone, the two disciples were amazed. They said, Did not
our hearts burn with delight while he was talking to us by the way and
opening up the testimonies of the Law, the Prophets and the Psalms?

25  Then Zachus and Cleopas went back to Jerusalem, and everywhere they
went they said, Lo, we have seen the Lord;

26  He walked with us to Emmaus; he ate with us the evening meal, and
broke for us the bread of life.


CHAPTER 175.

    _Jesus appears, fully materialized, to the ten apostles in
      Simon’s house, and to Lazarus and his sisters._

The evening of the resurrection day had come; the ten apostles were in
Simon’s house in Bethany. The lawyer, Thomas, was not there.

2  The doors were closed and barred, because the Jews had said that
they would drive the Galileans from the land.

3  And as they talked, lo, Jesus came and stood forth in their midst,
and said, Peace! peace!

4  And the disciples shrank in fear; they thought it was a phantom that
they saw.

5  And Jesus said, Why are you troubled thus? why do you fear? I am no
phantom form. I am your Lord, and I have risen from the dead.

6  I often said, I will arise; but you believed me not; and now come
here and see. A phantom has not flesh and bones and brawn, like I
possess.

7  Come now, and clasp my hands, and touch my feet, and lay your hands
upon my head.

8  And every one came up and clasped his hands, and touched his feet,
and laid his hands upon his head.

9  And Jesus said, Have you here anything to eat?

10  And they brought out a fragment of a fish; he ate it in the
presence of them all, and then the ten believed.

11  Nathaniel said, And now we know that he has risen from the dead; he
stands a surety of the resurrection of the dead. And Jesus disappeared.

12  Now, Mary, Martha, Ruth and Lazarus were in their home, and they
had heard the rumor that their Lord had risen from the dead, and
Martha said,

13  It cannot be, for such a thing has never happened since the world
began.

14  But Mary said, Did not the Lord bring back our brother from the
dead? and he could surely bring himself to life again.

15  And as they talked, the Lord stood in their midst and said,

16  All hail! for I am risen from the dead, first fruitage of the grave!

17  And Martha ran and brought the chair in which the Lord had ever
loved to sit, and Jesus sat down on the chair.

18  And for a long, long time they talked about the trial, and the
scenes of Calvary and of the garden of Siloam.

19  Then Jesus said, Fear not, for I will be your boon companion all
the way; and then he disappeared.


