CHAPTER 43.

    _Jesus and Ashbina visit Babylon and remark its desolation. The
      two masters remain in company seven days; then Jesus resumes
      his homeward journey. Arrives in Nazareth. His mother gives a
      feast in his honor. His brothers are displeased. Jesus tells
      his mother and aunt the story of his journeys._

The ruined Babylon was near, and Jesus and the sage went through her
gates and walked among her fallen palaces.

2  They trod the streets where Israel once was held in base captivity.

3  They saw where Judah’s sons and daughters hung their harps upon the
willows, and refused to sing.

4  They saw where Daniel and the Hebrew children stood as living
witnesses of faith.

5  And Jesus lifted up his hands and said, Behold the grandeur of the
works of man!

6  The king of Babylon destroyed the temple of the Lord in old
Jerusalem; he burned the holy city, bound in chains my people and my
kin, and brought them here as slaves.

7  But retribution comes; for whatsoever men shall do to other men the
righteous Judge will do to them.

8  The sun of Babylon has gone down; the songs of pleasure will be
heard no more within her walls.

9  And every kind of creeping thing and unclean bird will, in these
ruins, find their homes.

10  And in the temple Belus, Jesus and Ashbina stood in silent thought.

11  Then Jesus spoke and said, Behold this monument of folly and of
shame.

12  Man tried to shake the very throne of God, and he assayed to build
a tower to reach to heaven, when, lo, his very speech was snatched
away, because in lofty words he boasted of his power.

13  And on these heights the heathen Baal stood--the god wrought out by
hands of man.

14  Upon yon altar, birds, and beasts, and men, yea children have been
burned in awful sacrifice to Baal.

15  But now the gory priests are dead; the very rocks have shuddered
and have fallen down; the place is desolate.

16  Now, in the plains of Shinar Jesus tarried yet for seven days, and,
with Ashbina, meditated long upon the needs of men, and how the sages
could best serve the coming age.

17  Then Jesus went his way, and after many days he crossed the Jordan
to his native land. At once he sought his home in Nazareth.

18  His mother’s heart was filled with joy; she made a feast for him,
inviting all her kindred and her friends.

19  But Jesus’ brothers were not pleased that such attention should be
paid to one they deemed a sheer adventurer, and they went not in to
the feast.

20  They laughed their brother’s claims to scorn; they called him
indolent, ambitious, vain; a worthless fortune hunter; searcher of the
world for fame, who, after many years returns to mother’s home with
neither gold, nor any other wealth.

21  And Jesus called aside his mother and her sister, Miriam, and told
them of his journey to the East.

22  He told them of the lessons he had learned, and of the works that
he had done. To others he told not the story of his life.




SECTION X.

JOD.

_Life and Works of Jesus in Greece._


CHAPTER 44.

    _Jesus visits Greece and is welcomed by the Athenians. Meets
      Apollo. Addresses the Grecian masters in the Amphitheater.
      The address._

The Greek philosophy was full of pungent truth, and Jesus longed to
study with the masters in the schools of Greece.

2  And so he left his home in Nazareth and crossed the Carmel hills,
and at the port took ship, and soon was in the Grecian capital.

3  Now, the Athenians had heard of him as teacher and philosopher, and
they were glad to have him come to them that they might hear his words
of truth.

4  Among the masters of the Greeks was one, Apollo, who was called,
Defender of the Oracle, and recognized in many lands as Grecian sage.

5  Apollo opened up for Jesus all the doors of Grecian lore, and in the
Areopagus he heard the wisest masters speak.

6  But Jesus brought to them a wisdom greater far than theirs; and so
he taught.

7  Once in the Amphitheater he stood, and when Apollo bade him speak he
said,

8  Athenian masters, hear! In ages long ago, men, wise in nature’s
laws, sought out and found the place on which your city stands.

9  Full well you know that there are parts of earth where its great
beating heart throws heavenward etheric waves that meet the ethers
from above;

10  Where spirit-light and understanding, like the stars of night,
shine forth.

11  Of all the parts of earth there is no place more sensitized, more
truly spirit-blest, than that where Athens stands.

12  Yea, all of Greece is blest. No other land has been the homeland of
such mighty men of thought as grace your scrolls of fame.

13  A host of sturdy giants of philosophy, of poetry, of science, and
of art, were born upon the soil of Greece, and rocked to manhood in
your cradle of pure thought.

14  I come not here to speak of science, of philosophy, or art; of
these you are the world’s best masters now.

15  But all your high accomplishments are but stepping stones to worlds
beyond the realm of sense; are but illusive shadows flitting on the
walls of time.

16  But I would tell you of a life beyond, within; a real life that can
not pass away.

17  In science and philosophy there is no power strong enough to fit a
soul to recognize itself, or to commune with God.

18  I would not stay the flow of your great streams of thought; but I
would turn them to the channels of the soul.

19  Unaided by the Spirit-breath, the work of intellection tends to
solve the problems of the things we see, and nothing more.

20  The senses were ordained to bring into the mind mere pictures of
the things that pass away; they do not deal with real things; they do
not comprehend eternal law.

21  But man has something in his soul, a something that will tear the
veil apart that he may see the world of real things.

22  We call this something, spirit consciousness; it sleeps in every
soul, and cannot be awakened till the Holy Breath becomes a welcome
guest.

23  This Holy Breath knocks at the door of every soul, but cannot enter
in until the will of man throws wide the door.

24  There is no power in intellect to turn the key; philosophy and
science both have toiled to get a glimpse behind the veil; but they
have failed.

25  The secret spring that throws ajar the door of soul is touched by
nothing else than purity in life, by prayer and holy thought.

26  Return, O mystic stream of Grecian thought, and mingle your
clear waters with the flood of Spirit-life; and then the spirit
consciousness will sleep no more, and man will know, and God will
bless.

27  When Jesus had thus said he stepped aside. The Grecian masters were
astonished at the wisdom of his words; they answered not.


