CHAPTER 30.

    _Jesus receives news of the death of his father. He writes a
      letter to his mother. The letter. He sends it on its way by a
      merchant._

One day as Jesus stood beside the Ganges busy with his work, a
caravan, returning from the West, drew near.

2  And one, approaching Jesus, said, We come to you just from your
native land and bring unwelcome news.

3  Your father is no more on earth; your mother grieves; and none can
comfort her. She wonders whether you are still alive or not; she longs
to see you once again.

4  And Jesus bowed his head in silent thought; and then he wrote. Of
what he wrote this is the sum:

5  My mother, noblest of woman kind; A man just from my native land has
brought me word that father is no more in flesh, and that you grieve,
and are disconsolate.

6  My mother, all is well; is well for father and is well for you.

7  His work in this earth-round is done, and it is nobly done.

8  In all the walks of life men cannot charge him with deceit,
dishonesty, nor wrong intent.

9  Here in this round he finished many heavy tasks, and he has gone
from hence prepared to solve the problems of the round of soul.

10  Our Father-God is with him there, as he was with him here; and
there his angel guards his footsteps lest he goes astray.

11  Why should you weep? Tears cannot conquer grief. There is no power
in grief to mend a broken heart.

12  The plane of grief is idleness; the busy soul can never grieve; it
has no time for grief.

13  When grief comes trooping through the heart, just lose yourself;
plunge deep into the ministry of love, and grief is not.

14  Yours is a ministry of love, and all the world is calling out for
love.

15  Then let the past go with the past; rise from the cares of carnal
things and give your life for those who live.

16  And if you lose your life in serving life you will be sure to find
in it the morning sun, the evening dews, in song of bird, in flowers,
and in the stars of night.

17  In just a little while your problems of this earth-round will be
solved; and when your sums are all worked out it will be pleasure
unalloyed for you to enter wider fields of usefulness, to solve the
greater problems of the soul.

18  Strive, then, to be content, and I will come to you some day and
bring you richer gifts than gold or precious stones.

19  I’m sure that John will care for you, supplying all your needs; and
I am with you all the way, Jehoshua.

20  And by the hand of one, a merchant, going to Jerusalem, he sent
this letter on its way.


CHAPTER 31.

    _Brahmic priests are enraged because of Jesus’ teaching and
      resolve to drive him from India. Lamaas pleads for him.
      Priests employ a murderer to kill him. Lamaas warns him and
      he flees to Nepel._

The words and works of Jesus caused unrest through all the land.

2  The common people were his friends, believed in him, and followed
him in throngs.

3  The priests and rulers were afraid of him; his very name sent terror
to their hearts.

4  He preached the brotherhood of life, the righteousness of equal
rights, and taught the uselessness of priests, and sacrificial rites.

5  He shook the very sand on which the Brahmic system stood; he made
the Brahmic idols seem so small, and sacrifice so fraught with sin,
that shrines and wheels of prayer were all forgot.

6  The priests declared that if this Hebrew boy should tarry longer in
the land a revolution would occur; the common people would arise and
kill the priests, and tear the temples down.

7  And so they sent a call abroad, and priests from every province
came. Benares was on fire with Brahmic zeal.

8  Lamaas from the temple Jagannath, who knew the inner life of Jesus
well, was in their midst, and heard the rantings of the priests,

9  And he stood forth and said, My brother priests, take heed, be
careful what you do; this is a record-making day.

10  The world is looking on; the very life of Brahmic thought is now on
trial.

11  If we are reason-blind; if prejudice be king today; if we resort to
beastly force, and dye our hands in blood that may, in sight of Brahm,
be innocent and pure,

12  His vengeance may fall down on us; the very rock on which we stand
may burst beneath our feet; and our beloved priesthood, and our laws
and shrines will go into decay.

13  But they would let him speak no more. The wrathful priests rushed
up and beat him, spit upon him, called him traitor, threw him,
bleeding, to the street.

14  And then confusion reigned; the priests became a mob; the sight of
human blood led on to fiendish acts, and called for more.

15  The rulers, fearing war, sought Jesus, and they found him calmly
teaching in the market-place.

16  They urged him to depart, that he might save his life; but he
refused to go.

17  And then the priests sought cause for his arrest; but he had done
no crime.

18  And then false charges were preferred; but when the soldiers went
to bring him to the judgment hall they were afraid, because the people
stood in his defense.

19  The priests were baffled, and they resolved to take his life by
stealth.

20  They found a man who was a murderer by trade, and sent him out by
night to slay the object of their wrath.

21  Lamaas heard about their plotting and their plans, and sent a
messenger to warn his friend; and Jesus hastened to depart.

22  By night he left Benares, and with haste he journeyed to the north;
and everywhere, the farmers, merchants and the sudras helped him on
his way.

23  And after many days he reached the mighty Himalayas, and in the
city Kapivastu he abode.

24  The priests of Buddha opened wide their temple doors for him.


