CHAPTER 118.

    _The Christines are in Gadara. Jesus casts a legion of unclean
      spirits out of a man. The spirits go into vicious animals
      which run into the sea, and are drowned. The people are
      in fear and request Jesus to leave their coast. With his
      disciples, he returns to Capernaum._

The morning came; the Christines landed in the country of the
Geracenes.

2  They went to Gadara, chief city of the Peracans, and here for
certain days they tarried and they taught.

3  Now, legends hold that Gadara is sacred to the dead, and all the
hills about are known as holy ground.

4  These are the burial grounds of all the regions round about; the
hills are full of tombs; and many dead from Galilee are here entombed.

5  Now, spirits of the lately dead that cannot rise to higher planes,
remain about the tombs that hold the flesh and bones of what was once
their mortal homes.

6  They sometimes take possession of the living, whom they torture in a
hundred ways.

7  And all through Gadara were men obsessed, and there was no one
strong enough to bring relief.

8  That they might meet these hidden foes and learn the way to
dispossess the evil ones the master took the foreign masters and the
twelve into the tombs.

9  And as they neared the gates they met a man obsessed. A legion of
the unclean ones were in this man, and they had made him strong;

10  And none could bind him down, no, not with chains; for he could
break the stoutest chains, and go his way.

11  Now, unclean spirits cannot live in light; they revel in the dark.

12  When Jesus came he brought the light of life, and all the evil
spirits were disturbed.

13  The leader of the legion in the man called out, Thou Jesus, thou
Immanuel, we beg that thou wilt not consign it to the depths. Torment
us not before our time.

14  And Jesus said, What is your number and your name?

15  The evil spirit said, Our name is legion, and our number is the
number of the beast.

16  And Jesus spoke; and with a voice that shook the very hills, he
said, Come forth; possess this man no more.

17  Now, all the hills were filled with unclean animals that fed, and
carried forth and spread the plague among the people of the land.

18  And when the evil spirits begged that they might not be driven
forth without a home, the master said,

19  Go forth and take possession of the unclean quadrupeds.

20  And they, and all the evil spirits of the tombs went forth and took
possession of the breeders of the plague,

21  Which, wild with rage, ran down the steeps into the sea, and all
were drowned.

22  And all the land was freed of the contagion, and the unclean
spirits came no more.

23  But when the people saw the mighty works that Jesus did they were
alarmed. They said,

24  If he can free the country of the plague, and drive the unclean
spirits out, he is a man of such transcendent power that he can
devastate our land at will.

25  And then they came and prayed that he would not remain in Gadara.

26  And Jesus did not tarry longer there, and with the other masters
and the twelve, he went aboard the boats to go away.

27  The man who had been rescued from the unclean legion stood upon the
shore and said, Lord, let me go with you.

28  But Jesus said, It is not well; go forth unto your home and tell
the news that men may know what man can do when he is tuned with God.

29  And then the man went forth through all Decapolis and told the news.

30  The Christines sailed away, re-crossed the sea and came again into
Capernaum.


CHAPTER 119.

    _The people of Capernaum welcome Jesus. Matthew gives a feast.
      The Pharisees rebuke Jesus for eating with sinners. He tells
      them that he is sent to save sinners. He gives lessons on
      fasting and on the philosophy of good and evil._

The news soon spread through all the land that Jesus was at home and
then the people came in throngs to welcome him.

2  And Matthew, one of the twelve, a man of wealth, whose home was in
Capernaum, spread forth a sumptuous feast, and Jesus and the foreign
masters and the twelve, and people of all shades of thought, were
guests.

3  And when the Pharisees observed that Jesus sat and ate with
publicans and those of ill repute they said,

4  For shame! This man who claims to be a man of God, consorts with
publicans and courtesans and with the common herd of men, For shame!

5  When Jesus knew their thoughts he said, They who are well cannot be
healed; the pure need not be saved.

6  They who are well are whole; they who are pure are saved.

7  They who love justice and do right need not repent; I came not unto
them, but to the sinner I am come.

8  A band of John’s disciples who had heard that John was dead were
wearing badges for their dead;

9  Were fasting and were praying in their hearts, which when the
Pharisees observed they came to Jesus and they said,

10  Why fast the followers of John and your disciples do not fast?

11  And Jesus said, Lo, you are masters of the law; you ought to know;
perhaps you will make known your knowledge to these men.

12  What are the benefits derived from fasts? The Pharisees were mute;
they answered not.

13  Then Jesus said, The vital force of men depends on what they eat
and drink.

14  Is spirit-life the stronger when the vital force is weak? Is
sainthood reached by starving, self imposed?

15  A glutton is a sinner in the sight of God, and he is not a saint
who makes himself a weakling and unfitted for the heavy tasks of life
by scorning to make use of God’s own means of strength.

16  Lo, John is dead, and his devoted followers are fasting in their
grief.

17  Their love for him impels them on to show respect, for they have
thought, and have been taught that it is sin to lightly treat the
memory of the dead.

18  To them it is a sin, and it is well that they should fast.

19  When men defy their consciences and listen not to what they say,
the heart is grieved and they become unfitted for the work of life;
and thus they sin.

20  The conscience may be taught. One man may do in conscience what
another cannot do.

21  What is a sin for me to do may not be sin for you to do. The place
you occupy upon the way of life determines what is sin.

22  There is no changeless law of good; for good and evil both are
judged by other things.

23  One man may fast and in his deep sincerity of heart is blest.

24  Another man may fast and in the faithlessness of such a task
imposed is cursed.

25  You cannot make a bed to fit the form of every man. If you can make
a bed to fit yourself you have done well.

26  Why should these men who follow me resort to fasting, or to
anything that would impair their strength? They need it all to serve
the race.

27  The time will come when God will let you have your way, and you
will do to me what Herod did to John;

28  And in the awfulness of that sad hour these men will fast.

29  They who have ears to hear may hear; they who have hearts to feel
may understand.


