CHAPTER 110.

    _Miriam sings a song of victory. The song. Jesus reveals the
      symbolic character of the journey of Israel from Egypt to
      Canaan._

And Miriam stood before the surging crowd, and casting up her eyes to
heaven she sung anew the song of victory:

2  Bring forth the harp, the vina and the lyre; bring forth the highest
sounding cymbal, all ye choirs of heaven. Join in the song, the new,
new song.

3  The Lord of hosts has stooped to hear the cries of men, and lo, the
citadel of Beelzebul is shaking as a leaf before the wind.

4  The sword of Gideon is again unsheathed.

5  The Lord, with his own hand has pulled far back the curtains of the
night; the sun of truth is flooding heaven and earth;

6  The demons of the dark, of ignorance and death, are fleeing fast;
are disappearing as the dew beneath the morning sun.

7  God is our strength and song; is our salvation and our hope, and we
will build anew a house for him;

8  Will cleanse our hearts, and purify their chambers, every one. We
are the temple of the Holy Breath.

9  We need no more a tent within the wilderness; no more a temple built
with hands.

10  We do not seek the Holy Land, nor yet Jerusalem.

11  We are the tent of God; we are his temple built without the sound
of edged tools.

12  We are the Holy Land; we are the New Jerusalem; Allelujah, praise
the Lord!

13  And when the song was done the multitudes exclaimed, Praise God.

14  And Jesus said, Behold the way!

15  The sons of men have groped for ages in the darkness of Egyptian
night.

16  The Pharaohs of sense have bound them with their chains.

17  But God has whispered through the mists of time and told them of a
land of liberty and love.

18  And he has sent his Logos forth to light the way.

19  The Red Sea rolls between the promised land and Egypt’s sands.

20  The Red Sea is the carnal mind.

21  Behold, the Logos reaches out his hand; the sea divides; the carnal
mind is reft in twain; the sons of men walk through dry shod.

22  The Pharaohs of sense would stay them in their flight; the waters
of the sea return; the Pharaohs of sense are lost and men are free.

23  For just a little while men tread the wilderness of Sin; the Logos
leads the way;

24  And when at last men stand upon the Jordan’s brink, these waters
stay, and men step forth into their own.


CHAPTER 111.

    _Jesus teaches. A man requests him to compel his brother to
      deal justly. Jesus reveals the divine law, the power of truth
      and the universality of possessions. Relates the parable of
      the rich man and his abundant harvest._

And Jesus taught the multitudes; and while he spoke a man stood forth
and said,

2  Rabboni, hear my plea: My father died and left a large estate; my
brother seized it all, and now refuses me my share.

3  I pray that you will bid him do the right, and give me what is mine.

4  And Jesus said, I am not come to be a judge in such affairs; I am no
henchman of the court.

5  God sent me not to force a man to do the right.

6  In every man there is a sense of right; but many men regard it not.

7  The fumes that rise from selfishness have formed a crust about their
sense of right that veils their inner light, so that they cannot
comprehend nor recognize the rights of other men.

8  This veil you cannot tear away by force of arms, and there is naught
that can dissolve this crust but knowledge and the love of God.

9  While men are in the mire, the skies seem far away; when men are on
the mountain top, the skies are near, and they can almost touch the
stars.

10  Then Jesus turned and to the twelve he said, Behold the many in the
mire of carnal life!

11  The leaven of truth will change the miry clay to solid rock, and
men can walk and find the path that leads up to the mountain top.

12  You cannot haste; but you can scatter forth this leaven with a
generous hand.

13  When men have learned the truth that bears upon its face the law of
right, then they will haste to give to every man his dues.

14  Then to the people Jesus said, Take heed, and covet not. The wealth
of men does not consist in what they seem to have--in lands, in silver
and in gold.

15  These things are only borrowed wealth. No man can corner up the
gifts of God.

16  The things of nature are the things of God, and what is God’s
belongs to every man alike.

17  The wealth of soul lies in the purity of life, and in the wisdom
that descends from heaven.

18  Behold, a rich man’s ground brought forth abundantly; his barns
were far too small to hold his grain, and to himself he said,

19  What shall I do? I must not give my grain away; I must not let it
go to waste; and then he said,

20  This will I do; I will tear down these little barns and build up
larger ones; there I will store away my grain and I will say,

21  My soul take now your ease; you have enough for many years; eat,
drink and fill yourself and be content.

22  But God looked down and saw the man; he saw his selfish heart and
said,

23  You foolish man, this night your soul will quit its house of flesh;
then who will have your garnered wealth?

24  You men of Galilee, lay not up treasures in the vaults of earth;
accumulated wealth will blight your soul.

25  God does not give men wealth to hoard away in secret vaults. Men
are but stewards of God’s wealth, and they must use it for the common
good.

26  To every steward who is true to self, to other men, to every thing
that is, the Lord will say, Well done.


