CHAPTER 98.

    _The Sermon on the Mount, continued. Jesus reveals to the
      twelve the spiritual aspects of the seventh, eighth and tenth
      Commandments._

The law forbids adultery; but in the eyes of law adultery is an overt
act, the satisfaction of the sensuous self outside the marriage bonds.

2  Now, marriage in the sight of law is but a promise made by man and
woman, by the sanction of a priest, to live for aye in harmony and
love.

3  No priest nor officer has power from God to bind two souls in wedded
love.

4  What is the marriage tie? Is it comprised in what a priest or
officer may say?

5  Is it the scroll on which the officer or priest has written the
permission for the two to live in marriage bonds?

6  Is it the promise of the two that they will love each other until
death?

7  Is love a passion that is subject to the will of man?

8  Can man pick up his love, as he would pick up precious gems, and lay
it down, or give it out to any one?

9  Can love be bought and sold like sheep?

10  Love is the power of God that binds two souls and makes them one;
there is no power on earth that can dissolve the bond.

11  The bodies may be forced apart by man or death for just a little
time; but they will meet again.

12  Now, in this bond of God we find the marriage tie; all other unions
are but bonds of straw, and they who live in them commit adultery,

13  The same as they who satisfy their lust without the sanction of an
officer or priest.

14  But more than this; the man or woman who indulges lustful thoughts
commits adultery.

15  Whom God has joined together man cannot part; whom man has joined
together live in sin.

16  Upon a table of the law, the great lawgiver wrote, Thou shalt not
steal.

17  Before the eyes of law a man to steal must take a thing that can be
seen with eyes of flesh, without the knowledge or consent of him to
whom the thing belongs.

18  But, lo, I say that he who in his heart desires to possess that
which is not his own, and would deprive the owner of the thing without
his knowledge or consent, is in the sight of God, a thief.

19  The things that men see not with eyes of flesh are of more worth
than are the things that man can see.

20  A man’s good name is worth a thousand mines of gold, and he who
says a word or does a deed that injures or defames that name has taken
what is not his own, and is a thief.

21  Upon a table of the law we also read; Thou shalt not covet anything.

22  To covet is an all-consuming wish to have what is not right for one
to have.

23  And such a wish, within the spirit of the law, is theft.


CHAPTER 99.

    _The Sermon on the Mount, continued. Jesus unfolds to the
      twelve the spiritual aspects of the ninth Commandment._

The law has said: Thou shalt not lie; but in the eyes of law a man to
lie must tell in words what is not true.

2  Now, in the light of spirit law, deceit in any form is nothing but a
lie.

3  A man may lie by look or act; yea, even by his silence may deceive,
and thus be guilty in the eyes of Holy Breath.

4  It has been said in olden times: Thou shalt not swear by thine own
life.

5  But, lo, I say, Swear not at all; not by the head, the heart, the
eye, nor hand; not by the sun, the moon, nor stars;

6  Not by the name of God, nor by the name of any spirit, good or bad.

7  You shall not swear by anything; for in an oath there is no gain.

8  A man whose word must be propped up by oath of any kind is not
trustworthy in the sight of God or man.

9  By oath you cannot make a leaf to fall, nor turn the color of a hair.

10  The man of worth just speaks, and men know that he speaks the truth.

11  The man who pours out many words to make men think he speaks the
truth, is simply making smoke to hide a lie.

12  And there are many men with seeming double hearts; men who would
serve two masters at a time--two masters quite adverse.

13  Men feign to worship God upon the Sabbath day and then pay court to
Beelzebul on every other day.

14  No man can serve two masters at a time no more than he can ride two
asses at a time that go in different ways.

15  The man who feigns to worship God and Beelzebul is foe of God, a
pious devil and a curse of men.

16  And men cannot lay treasures up in heaven and earth at once.

17  Then, lo, I say, Lift up your eyes and see the safety vaults of
heaven, and there deposit every gem,

18  Where moth and rust cannot corrupt; where thieves cannot break in
and steal.

19  There are no safety vaults on earth; no place secure from moth, and
rust and thieves.

20  The treasures of the earth are but illusive things that pass away.

21  Be not deceived; your treasures are the anchor of the soul, and
where your treasures are your heart will be.

22  Fix not your heart upon the things of earth; be anxious not about
the things to eat, or drink, or wear.

23  God cares for those who trust in him and serve the race.

24  Behold the birds! They praise God in their songs; the earth is made
more glorious by their ministry of joy; God keeps them in the hollow
of his hand,

25  And not a sparrow falls to earth without his care; and every one
that falls shall rise again.

26  Behold the flowers of earth! they trust in God and grow; they make
the earth resplendent with their beauty and perfume.

27  Look at the lilies of the field, the messengers of holy love. No
son of man, not even Solomon in all his excellence, was ever clothed
like one of these.

28  And yet they simply trust in God; they feed from out his hand; they
lay their heads to rest upon his breast.

29  If God so clothes and feeds the flowers and birds that do his will,
will he not feed and clothe his children when they trust in him?

30  Seek first the kingdom of the soul, the righteousness of God, the
good of men, and murmur not; God will protect, and feed, and clothe.


