CHAPTER 70.

    _Jesus and his disciples at a marriage feast in Cana. Jesus
      speaks on marriage. He turns water into wine. The people are
      amazed._

In Cana, Galilee, there was a marriage feast, and Mary and her sister
Miriam, and Jesus and his six disciples were among the guests.

2  The ruler of the feast had heard that Jesus was a master sent from
God, and he requested him to speak.

3  And Jesus said, There is no tie more sacred than the marriage tie.

4  The chain that binds two souls in love is made in heaven, and man
can never sever it in twain,

5  The lower passions of the twain may cause a union of the twain, a
union as when oil and water meet.

6  And then a priest may forge a chain, and bind the twain. This is not
marriage genuine; it is a counterfeit.

7  The twain are guilty of adultery; the priest is party to the crime.
And that was all that Jesus said.

8  As Jesus stood apart in silent thought his mother came and said to
him, The wine has failed; what shall we do?

9  And Jesus said, Pray what is wine? It is but water with the
flavoring of grapes.

10  And what are grapes? They are but certain kinds of thought made
manifest, and I can manifest that thought, and water will be wine.

11  He called the servants, and he said to them, Bring in six water
pots of stone, a pot for each of these, my followers, and fill them up
with water to the brims,

12  The servants brought the water pots, and filled them to their brims.

13  And Jesus with a mighty thought stirred up the ethers till they
reached the manifest, and, lo, the water blushed, and turned to wine.

14  The servants took the wine and gave it to the ruler of the feast
who called the bridegroom in and said to him,

15  This wine is best of all; most people when they give a feast bring
in the best wine at the first; but, lo, you have reserved the best
until the last.

16  And when the ruler and the guests were told that Jesus, by the
power of thought, had turned the water into wine, they were amazed;

17  They said, This man is more than man; he surely is the christed one
who prophets of the olden times declared would come.

18  And many of the guests believed on him, and gladly would have
followed him.


CHAPTER 71.

    _Jesus, his six disciples and his mother, go to Capernaum.
      Jesus teaches the people, revealing the difference between
      the kings of earth and the kings of heaven._

The city of Capernaum was by the sea of Galilee, and Peter’s home was
there. The homes of Andrew, John and James were near,

2  These men were fishermen, and must return to tend their nets, and
they prevailed on Jesus and his mother to accompany them, and soon
with Philip and Nathaniel they were resting by the sea in Peter’s home.

3  The news spread through the city and along the shore that Judah’s
king had come, and multitudes drew near to press his hand.

4  And Jesus said, I cannot show the king, unless you see with eyes of
soul, because the kingdom of the king is in the soul.

5  And every soul a kingdom is. There is a king for every man.

6  This king is love, and when this love becomes the greatest power in
life, it is the Christ; so Christ is king.

7  And every one may have this Christ dwell in his soul, as Christ
dwells in my soul.

8  The body is the temple of the king, and men may call a holy man a
king.

9  He who will cleanse his mortal form and make it pure, so pure that
love and righteousness may dwell unsullied side by side within its
walls, is king.

10  The kings of earth are clothed in royal robes, and sit in state
that men may stand in awe of them.

11  A king of heaven may wear a fisher’s garb; may sit in mart of
trade; may till the soil, or be a gleaner in the field; may be a slave
in mortal chains;

12  May be adjudged a criminal by men; may languish in a prison cell;
may die upon a cross.

13  Men seldom see what others truly are. The human senses sense what
seems to be, and that which seems to be and that which is, may be
diverse in every way.

14  The carnal man beholds the outer man, which is the temple of the
king, and worships at his shrine.

15  The man of God is pure in heart; he sees the king; he sees with
eyes of soul;

16  And when he rises to the plane of Christine consciousness, he knows
that he himself is king, is love, is Christ, and so is son of God.

17  You men of Galilee, prepare to meet your king.

18  And Jesus taught the people many lessons as he walked with them
beside the sea.




SECTION XV.

SAMECH.

_The First Annual Epoch of the Christine Ministry of Jesus._


