CHAPTER 55.

    _Jesus passes the seventh brotherhood test, and in the purple
      room of the temple receives the seventh, the highest degree,
      THE CHRIST. He leaves the temple a conqueror._

The work of Jesus in the Chamber of the Dead was done, and in the
temple purple room he stood before the hierophant.

2  And he was clothed in purple robes; and all the brothers stood. The
hierophant arose and said,

3  This is a royal day for all the hosts of Israel. In honor of their
chosen son we celebrate the great Passover Feast.

4  And then he said to Jesus, Brother, man, most excellent of men, in
all the temple tests you have won out.

5  Six times before the bar of right you have been judged; six times
you have received the highest honors man can give; and now you stand
prepared to take the last degree.

6  Upon your brow I place this diadem, and in the Great Lodge of the
heavens and earth you are THE CHRIST.

7  This is your great Passover rite. You are a neophyte no more; but
now a master mind.

8  Now, man can do no more; but God himself will speak, and will
confirm your title and degree.

9  Go on your way, for you must preach the gospel of good will to men
and peace on earth; must open up the prison doors and set the captives
free.

10  And while the hierophant yet spoke the temple bells rang out; a
pure white dove descended from above and sat on Jesus’ head.

11  And then a voice that shook the very temple said, THIS IS THE
CHRIST; and every living creature said, AMEN.

12  The great doors of the temple swung ajar; the Logos journeyed on
his way a conqueror.




SECTION XII.

LAMED.

_The Council of the Seven Sages of the World._


CHAPTER 56.

    _The seven sages of the world meet in Alexandria. The purposes
      of the meeting. The opening addresses._

In every age since time began have seven sages lived.

2  At first of every age these sages meet to note the course of
nations, peoples, tribes and tongues;

3  To note how far toward justice, love and righteousness the race has
gone;

4  To formulate the code of laws, religious postulates and plans of
rule best suited to the coming age.

5  An age had passed, and, lo, another age had come; the sages must
convene.

6  Now, Alexandria was the center of the world’s best thought, and here
in Philo’s home the sages met.

7  From China came Meng-ste; from India Vidyapati came; from Persia
Kaspar came; and from Assyria Ashbina came; from Greece Apollo came;
Matheno was the Egyptian sage, and Philo was the chief of Hebrew
thought.

8  The time was due; the council met and sat in silence seven days.

9  And then Meng-ste arose and said, The wheel of time has turned once
more; the race is on a higher plane of thought.

10  The garments that our fathers wove have given out; the cherubim
have woven a celestial cloth; have placed it in our hands and we must
make for men new garbs.

11  The sons of men are looking up for greater light. No longer do they
care for gods hewn out of wood, or made of clay. They seek a God not
made with hands.

12  They see the beams of coming day, and yet they comprehend them not.

13  The time is ripe, and we must fashion well these garments for the
race.

14  And let us make for men new garbs of justice, mercy, righteousness
and love, that they may hide their nakedness when shines the light of
coming day.

15  And Vidyapati said, Our priests have all gone mad; they saw a demon
in the wilds and at him cast their lamps and they are broken up, and
not a gleam of light has any priest for men.

16  The night is dark; the heart of India calls for light.

17  The priesthood cannot be reformed; it is already dead; its greatest
needs are graves and funeral chants.

18  The new age calls for liberty; the kind that makes each man a
priest, enables him to go alone, and lay his offerings on the shrine
of God.

19  And Kaspar said, In Persia people walk in fear; they do the good
for fear to do the wrong.

20  The devil is the greatest power in our land, and though a myth, he
dandles on his knee both youth and age.

21  Our land is dark, and evil prospers in the dark.

22  Fear rides on every passing breeze, and lurks in every form of life.

23  The fear of evil is a myth, is an illusion and a snare; but it
will live until some mighty power shall come to raise the ethers to
the plane of light.

24  When this shall come to pass the magian land will glory in the
light. The soul of Persia calls for light.


