CHAPTER 16.

    _The home of Joseph. Mary teaches her son. Jesus’ grandparents
      give a feast in his honor. Jesus has a dream. His
      grandmother’s interpretation. His birthday gift._

The home of Joseph was on Marmion Way in Nazareth; here Mary taught
her son the lessons of Elihu and Salome.

2  And Jesus greatly loved the Vedic hymns and the Avesta; but more
than all he loved to read the Psalms of David and the pungent words of
Solomon.

3  The Jewish books of prophecy were his delight; and when he reached
his seventh year he needed not the books to read, for he had fixed in
memory every word.

4  Joachim and his wife, grandparents of child Jesus, made a feast in
honor of the child, and all their near of kin were guests.

5  And Jesus stood before the guests and said, I had a dream, and in my
dream I stood before a sea, upon a sandy beach.

6  The waves upon the sea were high; a storm was raging on the deep.

7  Some one above gave me a wand. I took the wand and touched the sand,
and every grain of sand became a living thing; the beach was all a
mass of beauty and of song.

8  I touched the waters at my feet, and they were changed to trees, and
flowers, and singing birds, and every thing was praising God.

9  And some one spoke, I did not see the one who spoke, I heard the
voice, which said, There is no death.

10  Grandmother Anna loved the child; she laid her hand on Jesus’ head
and said, I saw you stand beside the sea; I saw you touch the sand and
waves; I saw them turn to living things and then I knew the meaning of
the dream.

11  The sea of life rolls high; the storms are great. The multitude of
men are idle, listless, waiting, like dead sand upon the beach.

12  Your wand is truth. With this you touch the multitudes, and every
man becomes a messenger of holy light and life.

13  You touch the waves upon the sea of life; their turmoils cease; the
very winds become a song of praise.

14  There is no death, because the wand of truth can change the dryest
bones to living things, and bring the lovliest flowers from stagnant
ponds, and turn the most discordant notes to harmony and praise.

15  Joachim said, My son, today you pass the seventh milestone of your
way of life, for you are seven years of age, and we will give to you,
as a remembrance of this day, whatever you desire; choose that which
will afford you most delight.

16  And Jesus said, I do not want a gift, for I am satisfied. If I
could make a multitude of children glad upon this day I would be
greatly pleased.

17  Now, there are many hungry boys and girls in Nazareth who would be
pleased to eat with us this feast and share with us the pleasures of
this day.

18  The richest gift that you can give to me is your permission to go
out and find these needy ones and bring them here that they may feast
with us.

19  Joachim said, ’Tis well; go out and find the needy boys and girls
and bring them here; we will prepare enough for all.

20  And Jesus did not wait; he ran; he entered every dingy hut and
cabin of the town; he did not waste his words; he told his mission
everywhere.

21  And in a little time one hundred and three-score of happy, ragged
boys and girls were following him up Marmion Way.

22  The guests made way; the banquet hall was filled with Jesus’
guests, and Jesus and his mother helped to serve.

23  And there was food enough for all, and all were glad; and so the
birthday gift of Jesus was a crown of righteousness.


CHAPTER 17.

    _Jesus talks with the rabbi of the synagogue of Nazareth. He
      criticises the narrowness of Jewish thought._

Now, Rabbi Barachia of the synagogue of Nazareth, was aid to Mary in
the teaching of her son.

2  One morning after service in the synagogue the rabbi said to Jesus
as he sat in silent thought, Which is the greatest of the Ten Commands?

3  And Jesus said, I do not see a greatest of the Ten Commands. I see
a golden cord that runs through all the Ten Commands that binds them
fast and makes them one.

4  This cord is love, and it belongs to every word of all the Ten
Commands.

5  If one is full of love he can do nothing else than worship God; for
God is love.

6  If one is full of love, he cannot kill; he cannot falsely testify;
he cannot covet; can do naught but honor God and man.

7  If one is full of love he does not need commands of any kind.

8  And Rabbi Barachia said, Your words are seasoned with the salt of
wisdom that is from above. Who is the teacher who has opened up this
truth to you?

9  And Jesus said, I do not know that any teacher opens up this truth
for me. It seems to me that truth was never shut; that it was always
opened up, for truth is one and it is everywhere.

10  And if we open up the windows of our minds the truth will enter
in and make herself at home; for truth can find her way through any
crevice, any window, any open door.

11  The rabbi said, What hand is strong enough to open up the windows
and the doors of mind so truth can enter in?

12  And Jesus said, It seems to me that love, the golden cord that
binds the Ten Commands in one, is strong enough to open any human door
so that the truth can enter in and cause the heart to understand.

13  Now, in the evening Jesus and his mother sat alone, and Jesus said,

14  The rabbi seems to think that God is partial in his treatment of
the sons of men; that Jews are favored and are blest above all other
men.

15  I do not see how God can have his favorites and be just.

16  Are not Samaritans and Greeks and Romans just as much the children
of the Holy One as are the Jews?

17  I think the Jews have built a wall about themselves, and they see
nothing on the other side of it.

18  They do not know that flowers are blooming over there; that sowing
times and reaping times belong to anybody but the Jews.

19  It surely would be well if we could break these barriers down so
that the Jews might see that God has other children that are just as
greatly blest.

20  I want to go from Jewry land and meet my kin in other countries of
my Fatherland.


