CHAPTER 45.

    _Jesus teaches the Greek masters. Goes with Apollo to Delphi
      and hears the Oracle speak. It testifies for him. He abides
      with Apollo, and is recognized as the Living Oracle of God.
      Explains to Apollo the phenomenon of oracular speech._

For many days the Grecian masters listened to the clear incisive words
that Jesus spoke, and while they could not fully comprehend the things
he said, they were delighted and accepted his philosophy.

2 One day as Jesus and Apollo walked beside the sea, a Delphic courier
came in haste and said, Apollo, master, come; the Oracle would speak
with you.

3  Apollo said to Jesus, Sir, if you would see the Delphic Oracle, and
hear it speak, you may accompany me. And Jesus did accompany him.

4  The masters went in haste; and when they came to Delphi, great
excitement reigned.

5  And when Apollo stood before the Oracle it spoke and said:

6  Apollo, sage of Greece, the bell strikes twelve; the midnight of the
ages now has come.

7  Within the womb of nature ages are conceived; they gestate and are
born in glory with the rising sun, and when the agic sun goes down the
age disintegrates and dies.

8  The Delphic age has been an age of glory and renown; the gods have
spoken to the sons of men through oracles of wood, and gold, and
precious stone.

9  The Delphic sun has set; the Oracle will go into decline; the time
is near when men will hear its voice no more.

10  The gods will speak to man by man. The Living Oracle now stands
within these sacred groves; the Logos from on high has come.

11  From henceforth will decrease my wisdom and my power; from
henceforth will increase the wisdom and the power of him, Immanuel.

12  Let all the masters stay; let every creature hear and honor him,
Immanuel.

13  And then the Oracle spoke not again for forty days, and priests and
people were amazed. They came from near and far to hear the Living
Oracle speak forth the wisdom of the gods.

14  And Jesus and the Grecian sage returned; and in Apollo’s home the
Living Oracle spoke forth for forty days.

15  One day Apollo said to Jesus as they sat alone, This sacred Delphic
Oracle has spoken many a helpful word for Greece.

16  Pray tell me what it is that speaks. Is it an angel, man, or living
god?

17  And Jesus said, It is not angel, man, nor god that speaks. It is
the matchless wisdom of the master minds of Greece, united in a master
mind.

18  This giant mind has taken to itself the substances of soul, and
thinks, and hears, and speaks.

19  It will remain a living soul while master minds feed it with
thought, with wisdom and with faith and hope.

20  But when the master minds of Greece shall perish from the land,
this giant master mind will cease to be, and then the Delphic Oracle
will speak no more.


CHAPTER 46.

    _A storm on the sea. Jesus rescues many drowning men. The
      Athenians pray to idols. Jesus rebukes their idolatry and
      tells how God helps. His last meeting with the Greeks. Sails
      on the vessel Mars._

It was a holy day and Jesus walked upon the Athens’ beach.

2  A storm was on and ships were being tossed about like toys upon the
bosom of the sea.

3  The sailors and the fishermen were going down to watery graves; the
shores were strewn with bodies of the dead.

4  And Jesus halted not, but with a mighty power he rescued many a
helpless one, oft bringing back to life the seeming dead.

5  Now, on these shores were altars sacred to the gods supposed to rule
the seas.

6  And men and women, heedless of the cries of drowning men, were
crowding all about these altars, calling on their gods for help.

7  At length the storm was done, and all the sea was calm, and men
could think again; and Jesus said,

8  You worshippers of wooden gods, how has the fury of this storm been
lessened by your frantic prayers?

9  Where is the strength of these poor, weather-beaten gods with
painted swords and crowns?

10  A god that could abide in such a little house could hardly hold a
frantic fly, and who could hope that he could hold at bay the Lords of
winds and waves?

11  The mighty powers of worlds unseen do not give forth their help
till men have done their best; they only help when man can do no more.

12  And you have agonized and prayed around these shrines, and let men
sink to death who might have been, by your assistance, saved.

13  The God that saves dwells in your souls, and manifests by making
use of your own feet, and legs, and arms, and hands.

14  Strength never comes through idleness; nor through a waiting for
another one to bear your loads, or do the work that you are called to
do.

15  But when you do your best to bear your loads, and do your work, you
offer unto God a sacrifice well-pleasing in his sight.

16  And then the Holy One breathes deep upon your glowing sacrificial
coals, and makes them blaze aloft to fill your souls with light, and
strength and helpfulness.

17  The most efficient prayer that men can offer to a god of any kind
is helpfulness to those in need of help; for what you do for other men
the Holy One will do for you.

18  And thus God helps.

19  His work in Greece was done, and Jesus must go on his way to Egypt
in the South. Apollo, with the highest masters of the land and many
people from the varied walks of life, stood on the shore to see the
Hebrew sage depart; and Jesus said,

20  The son of man has been in many lands; has stood in temples of a
multitude of foreign gods; has preached the gospel of good will and
peace on earth to many people, tribes and tongues;

21  Has been received with favor in a multitude of homes; but Greece
is, of them all, the royal host.

22  The breadth of Grecian thought; the depth of her philosophy; the
height of her unselfish aspirations have well fitted her to be the
champion of the cause of human liberty and right.

23  The fates of war have subjugated Greece, because she trusted in
the strength of flesh, and bone and intellect, forgetful of the
spirit-life that binds a nation to its source of power,

24  But Greece will not forever sit within the darkness of the
shadowland as vassal of a foreign king.

25  Lift up your heads, you men of Greece; the time will come when
Greece will breathe the ethers of the Holy Breath, and be a main
spring of the spirit power of earth.

26  But God must be your shield, your buckler, and your tower of
strength.

27  And then he said, Farewell. Apollo raised his hand in silent
benediction, and the people wept.

28  Upon the Cretan vessel, Mars, the Hebrew sage sailed from the
Grecian port.




SECTION XI.

CAPH.

_Life and Works of Jesus in Egypt._


