CHAPTER 102.

    _The Christines at the home of Jesus. Jesus unfolds to them the
      secret doctrine. They go through all Galilee and teach and
      heal. Jesus brings to life the son of a widow at Nain. They
      return to Capernaum._

The twelve apostles went with Jesus to his home, and there abode for
certain days.

2  And Jesus told them many things about the inner life that may not
now be written in a book.

3  Now, in Capernaum there lived a man of wealth, a Roman captain of a
hundred men, who loved the Jews and who had built for them a synagogue.

4  A servant of this man was paralyzed, and he was sick nigh unto death.

5  The captain knew of Jesus and had heard that by the sacred Word he
healed the sick, and he had faith in him.

6  He sent a message by the elders of the Jews to Jesus, and he plead
for help.

7  And Jesus recognized the captain’s faith and went at once to heal
the sick; the captain met him on the way and said to him,

8  Lo, Lord, it is not well that you should come into my house; I am
not worthy of the presence of a man of God.

9  I am a man of war; my life is spent with those who ofttimes take the
lives of fellow men,

10  And surely he who comes to save would be dishonored if he came
beneath my roof.

11  If you will speak the Word I know my servant will be well.

12  And Jesus turned and said to those who followed him,

13  Behold the captain’s faith; I have not seen such faith, no, not in
Israel.

14  Behold, the feast is spread for you; but while you doubt and wait,
the alien comes in faith and takes the bread of life.

15  Then turning to the man he said, Go on your way; according to your
faith so shall it be; your servant lives.

16  It came to pass that at the time that Jesus spoke the Word the
palsied man arose, and he was well.

17  And then the Christines went abroad to teach. And as they came to
Nain, a city on the Hermon way, they saw a multitude about the gates.

18  It was a funeral train; a widow’s son was dead, and friends were
bearing out the body to the tomb.

19  It was the widow’s only son, and she was wild with grief. And Jesus
said to her, Weep not, I am the life; your son shall live.

20  And Jesus raised his hand; the bearers of the dead stood still.

21  And Jesus touched the bier and said, Young man, return.

22  The soul returned; the body of the dead was filled with life; the
man sat up and spoke.

23  The people were astonished at the scene, and every one exclaimed,
Praise God.

24  A Jewish priest stood forth and said, Behold, a mighty prophet has
appeared; and all the people said, Amen.

25  The Christines journeyed on; they taught, and healed the sick in
many towns of Galilee, and then they came again unto Capernaum.


CHAPTER 103.

    _The Christines in Jesus’ home. Jesus teaches the twelve
      and the foreign masters every morning. Jesus receives
      messengers from John, the harbinger, and sends him words of
      encouragement. He eulogizes the character of John._

The home of Jesus was a school where in the early morning hours the
twelve apostles and the foreign priests were taught the secret things
of God.

2  And there were present priests from China, India and from Babylon;
from Persia, Egypt and from Greece,

3  Who came to sit at Jesus’ feet to learn the wisdom that he brought
to men, that they might teach their people how to live the holy life.

4  And Jesus taught them how to teach; he told them of the trials of
the way, and how to make these trials serve the race.

5  He taught them how to live the holy life that they might conquer
death;

6  He taught them what the end of mortal life will be, when man has
reached the consciousness that he and God are one.

7  The after midday hours were given to the multitudes who came to
learn the way of life and to be healed; and many did believe and were
baptized.

8  Now, in his prison by the Bitter Sea the harbinger had heard of all
the mighty works that Jesus did.

9  His prison life was hard, and he was sore distressed, and he began
to doubt.

10  And to himself he said, I wonder if this Jesus is the Christ of
whom the prophets wrote!

11  Was I mistaken in my work? Was I, indeed, one sent from God to pave
the way for him who shall redeem our people, Israel?

12  And then he sent some of his friends, who came to see him in his
prison cell, up to Capernaum that they might learn about this man, and
bring him word.

13  The men found Jesus in his home, and said, Behold the harbinger
sent us to ask, Are you the Christ? or is he yet to come?

14  But Jesus answered not; he simply bade the men to tarry certain
days that they might see and hear.

15  They saw him heal the sick, and cause the lame to walk, the deaf to
hear, the blind to see;

16  They saw him cast the evil spirits out of those obsessed; they saw
him raise the dead.

17  They heard him preach the gospel to the poor.

18  Then Jesus said to them, Go on your way; return to John and tell
him all that you have seen and heard; then he will know. They went
their way.

19  The multitudes were there, and Jesus said to them, Once you were
crowding Jordan’s fords; you filled the wilderness.

20  What did you go to see? The trees of Juda, and the flowers of Heth?
Or did you go to see a man in kingly garb? Or did you go to see a
prophet and a seer?

21  I tell you, men, you know not whom you saw. A prophet? Yea, and
more; a messenger whom God had sent to pave the way for what you see
and hear this day.

22  Among the men of earth a greater man has never lived than John.

23  Behold I say, This man whom Herod bound in chains and cast into a
prison cell, is God’s Elijah come again to earth.

24  Elijah, who did not pass the gates of death, whose body of this
flesh was changed, and he awoke in Paradise.

25  When John came forth and preached the gospel of repentance for the
cleansing of the soul, the common folks believed and were baptized.

26  The lawyers and the Pharisees accepted not the teachings of this
man; were not baptized.

27  Behold, neglected opportunities will never come again.

28  Behold, the people are unstable as the waters of the sea; they seek
to be excused from righteousness.

29  John came and ate no bread, and drank no wine. He lived the
simplest life apart from men, and people said, He is obsessed.

30  Another comes who eats and drinks and lives in homes like other
men, and people say, He is a glutton, an inebriate, a friend of
publicans and those who sin.

31  Woe unto you, you cities of the vale of Galilee, where all the
mighty works of God are done! Woe to Chorazan and Bethsaida!

32  If half the mighty works that have been done in you were done in
Tyre and in Sidon they would have long ago repented of their sins, and
sought the way of right.

33  And when the judgment day shall come, lo, Tyre and Sidon will be
called more worthy than will you,

34  Because they slighted not their gifts, while you have thrown away
the pearl of greatest price.

35  Woe unto you Capernaum! Behold, you are exalted now, but you shall
be abased;

36  For if the mighty works that have been done in you had but been
done within the cities of the plain--of Sodom and Zeboim--they would
have heard and turned to God; would not have been destroyed.

37  They perished in their ignorance; they had no light; but you have
heard; you have the evidence.

38  The light of life has shown above your hills and all the shores of
Galilee have been ablaze with light;

39  The glory of the Lord has shown in every street and synagogue and
home; but you have spurned the light.

40  And, lo, I say, The judgment day will come and God will deal in
greater mercy with the cities of the plains than he will deal with you.


