CHAPTER 39.

    _Jesus attends a feast in Persepolis. Speaks to the people,
      reviewing the magian philosophy. Explains the origin of evil.
      Spends the night in prayer._

A feast in honor of the magian God was being held, and many men were
gathered in Persepolis.

2  And on the great day of the feast the ruling magian master said,
Within these sacred walls is liberty; whoever wills to speak may speak.

3  And Jesus standing in the midst of all the people, said, My
brothers, sisters, children of our Father-God:

4  Most blest are you among the sons of men today, because you have
such just conceptions of the Holy One and man.

5  Your purity in worship and in life is pleasing unto God; and to your
master, Zarathustra, praise is due.

6  Well say you all, There is one God from whose great being there came
forth the seven Spirits that created heaven and earth; and manifest
unto the sons of men are these great Spirits in the sun, and moon, and
stars.

7  But in your sacred books we read that two among these seven are of
superior strength; that one of these created all the good; the other
one created all that evil is.

8  I pray you, honored masters, tell me how that evil can be born of
that which is all good?

9  A magus rose and said, If you will answer me, your problem will be
solved.

10  We all do recognize the fact that evil is. Whatever is, must have a
cause. If God, the One, made not this evil, then, where is the God who
did?

11  And Jesus said, Whatever God, the One, has made is good, and like
the great first Cause, the seven Spirits all are good, and everything
that comes from their creative hands is good,

12  Now, all created things have colors, tones and forms their own; but
certain tones, though good and pure themselves, when mixed, produce
inharmonies, discordant tones.

13  And certain things, though good and pure, when mixed, produce
discordant things, yea, poisonous things, that men call evil things.

14  So evil is the inharmonious blending of the colors, tones, or forms
of good.

15  Now, man is not all-wise, and yet has will his own. He has the
power, and he uses it, to mix God’s good things in a multitude of
ways, and every day he makes discordant sounds, and evil things.

16  And every tone and form, be it of good, or ill, becomes a living
thing, a demon, sprite, or spirit of a good or vicious kind.

17  Man makes his devil thus; and then becomes afraid of him and flees;
his devil is emboldened, follows him away and casts him into torturing
fires.

18  The devil and the burning fires are both the works of man, and none
can put the fires out and dissipate the evil one, but man who made
them both.

19  Then Jesus stood aside, and not a magus answered him.

20  And he departed from the throng and went into a secret place to
pray.


CHAPTER 40.

    _Jesus teaches the magians. Explains the Silence and how to
      enter it. Kaspar extols the wisdom of Jesus. Jesus teaches in
      the groves of Cyrus._

Now, in the early morning Jesus came again to teach and heal. A
light not comprehended shown about, as though some mighty spirit
overshadowed him.

2  A magus noted this and asked him privately to tell from whence his
wisdom came, and what the meaning of the light.

3  And Jesus said, There is a Silence where the soul may meet its God,
and there the fount of wisdom is, and all who enter are immersed in
light, and filled with wisdom, love and power.

4  The magus said, Tell me about this Silence and this light, that I
may go and there abide.

5  And Jesus said, The Silence is not circumscribed; is not a place
closed in with wall, or rocky steeps, nor guarded by the sword of man.

6  Men carry with them all the time the secret place where they may
meet their God.

7  It matters not where men abide, on mountain top, in deepest vale, in
marts of trade, or in the quiet home; they may at once, at any time,
fling wide the door, and find the Silence, find the house of God; it
is within the soul.

8  One may not be so much disturbed by noise of business, and the
words and thoughts of men if he goes all alone into the valley or the
mountain pass.

9  And when life’s heavy load is pressing hard, it is far better to go
out and seek a quiet place to pray and meditate.

10  The Silence is the kingdom of the soul which is not seen by human
eyes.

11  When in the Silence, phantom forms may flit before the mind; but
they are all subservient to the will; the master soul may speak and
they are gone.

12  If you would find this Silence of the soul you must yourself
prepare the way. None but the pure in heart may enter here.

13  And you must lay aside all tenseness of the mind, all business
cares, all fears, all doubts and troubled thoughts.

14  Your human will must be absorbed by the divine; then you will come
into a consciousness of holiness.

15  You are within the Holy Place, and you will see upon a living
shrine the candle of the Lord aflame.

16  And when you see it burning there, look deep within the temple of
your brain, and you will see it all aglow.

17  In every part, from head to foot, are candles all in place, just
waiting to be lighted by the flaming torch of love.

18  And when you see the candles all aflame, just look, and you will
see, with eyes of soul, the waters of the fount of wisdom rushing on;
and you may drink, and there abide.

19  And then the curtains part, and you are in the Holiest of All,
where rests the Ark of God, whose covering is the Mercy Seat.

20  Fear not to lift the sacred board; the Tables of the Law are in the
Ark concealed.

21  Take them and read them well; for they contain all precepts and
commands that men will ever need.

22  And in the Ark, the magic wand of prophecy lies waiting for your
hand; it is the key to all the hidden meanings of the present, future,
past.

23  And then, behold, the manna there, the hidden bread of life; and he
who eats shall never die.

24  The cherubim have guarded well for every soul this treasure box,
and whosoever will may enter in and find his own.

25  Now Kaspar heard the Hebrew master speak and he exclaimed, Behold,
the wisdom of the gods has come to men!

26  And Jesus went his way, and in the sacred groves of Cyrus, where
the multitudes were met, he taught and healed the sick.


