
[Illustration: PALESTINE FROM THE RAISED MAP constructed from the
Surveys of the PALESTINE EXPLORATION FUND BY GEORGE ARMSTRONG ESQr
Secretary to the Fund]


  THE AQUARIAN GOSPEL
  _of_
  JESUS THE CHRIST

  _The Philosophic and Practical Basis of the Religion
  of the Aquarian Age of the World_

  AND OF

  THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL

  TRANSCRIBED FROM THE BOOK OF GOD’S REMEMBRANCES,
  KNOWN AS THE AKASHIC RECORDS,

  BY
  LEVI

  WITH
  INTRODUCTION
  BY
  EVA S. DOWLING, A. Ph. D.

  LONDON:
  L. N. FOWLER AND COMPANY

  E. S. DOWLING, PUBLISHER,
  Los Angeles, California
  1911

  FOR SALE BY
  E. S. DOWLING
  Los Angeles, California.

  Copyright 1911, by
  MRS. EVA S. DOWLING

  Copyright in England, 1911
  Entered at Stationers’ Hall, London

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
  including rights of translation

  M. A. DONOHUE & CO.
  PRINTERS AND BINDERS
  CHICAGO




CONTENTS


  SECTION I.--_Birth and Early Life of Mary, Mother of Jesus._--Chapter
    1.

  SECTION II.--_Birth and Infancy of John the Harbinger, and of
    Jesus._--Chapters 2-6.

  SECTION III.--_Education of Mary and Elizabeth in Zoan._--Chapters
    7-12.

  SECTION IV.--_Childhood and Early Education of John the
    Harbinger._--Chapters 13-15.

  SECTION V.--_Childhood and Early Education of Jesus._--Chapters 16-20.

  SECTION VI.--_Life and Works of Jesus in India._--Chapters 21-35.

  SECTION VII.--_Life and Works of Jesus in Tibet and Western
    India._--Chapters 36-37.

  SECTION VIII.--_Life and Works of Jesus in Persia._--Chapters 38-41.

  SECTION IX.--_Life and Works of Jesus in Assyria._--Chapters 42-43.

  SECTION X.--_Life and Works of Jesus in Greece._--Chapters 44-46.

  SECTION XI.--_Life and Works of Jesus in Egypt._--Chapters 47-55.

  SECTION XII.--_The Council of the Seven Sages of the
    World._--Chapters 56-60.

  SECTION XIII.--_The Ministry of John the Harbinger._--Chapters 61-64.

  SECTION XIV.--_The Christine Ministry of Jesus._--_Introductory
    Epoch._--Chapters 65-71.

  SECTION XV.--_The First Annual Epoch of the Christine Ministry of
    Jesus._--Chapters 72-90.

  SECTION XVI.--_The Second Annual Epoch of the Christine Ministry of
    Jesus._--Chapters 91-123.

  SECTION XVII.--_The Third Annual Epoch of the Christine Ministry of
    Jesus._--Chapters 124-158.

  SECTION XVIII.--_The Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus._--Chapters 159-164.

  SECTION XIX.--_The Trial and Execution of Jesus._--Chapters 165-171.

  SECTION XX.--_The Resurrection of Jesus._--Chapter 172.

  SECTION XXI.--_Materialization of the Spiritual Body of
    Jesus._--Chapters 173-180.

  SECTION XXII.--_Establishment of the Christine Church._--Chapters
    181-182.




INTRODUCTION

BY

EVA S. DOWLING, A. Ph.D.,

SCRIBE TO THE MESSENGER.


_THE BOOK._

The full title of this book is “The Aquarian Age Gospel of Jesus,
the Christ of the Piscean Age,” and the critical reader is apt to
ask a number of pertinent questions concerning it. Among the many
anticipated questions these are perhaps the most important:

  1  What is an Age?
  2  What is the Piscean Age?
  3  What is the Aquarian Age?
  4  What is meant by the Christ as the word is used in this book?
  5  What relationship existed between Jesus of Nazareth and the Christ?
  6  Who is Levi, the transcriber of this book?
  7  What are the Akashic Records?

1 _What is an Age?_ Astronomers tell us that our sun and his family
of planets revolve around a central sun, which is millions of miles
distant, and that it requires something less than 26,000 years to make
one revolution. His orbit is called the Zodiac, which is divided into
twelve signs, familiarly known as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.
It requires our Solar System a little more than 2100 years to pass
through one of these signs, and this time is the measurement of an Age
or Dispensation. Because of what Astronomers call “the precession of
the Equinoxes” the movement of the sun through the signs of the Zodiac
is in order reverse from that given above.

_Exact Time of the Beginning of an Age._ Regarding this matter there
is a disagreement among astronomers; but in this Introduction we are
not called upon to give the reasons of the various investigators for
their opinions; there are enough well authenticated facts for our
present purposes. It is conceded by all critical students that the sun
entered the zodiacal sign Taurus in the days of our historic Adam when
the Taurian Age began; that Abraham lived not far from the beginning
of the Arian Age, when the sun entered the sign Aries. About the time
of the rise of the Roman empire the sun entered the sign Pisces, the
Fishes, and the Piscean Age began, so that early in this Age Jesus of
Nazareth lived.

2 _What is the Piscean Age?_ This question requires further
consideration. The Piscean Age is identical with the Christian
Dispensation. The word Pisces means fish. The sign is known as a water
sign, and the Piscean Age has been distinctly the age of the fish and
its element, water.

In the establishment of their great institutions John the Harbinger
and Jesus both introduced the rite of water baptism, which has been
used in some form in all the so-called Christian Churches and cults,
even to the present time. Water is the true symbol of purification.
Jesus himself said to the Harbinger before he was baptized: “All men
must be washed, symbolic of the cleansing of the soul.” (Aquarian
Gospel 64:7.)

_Fish was a Christian Symbol._ In the earlier centuries of the
Christian Dispensation the fish was everywhere used as a symbol. In
his remarkable book, “Christian Iconography,” Didron says:

“The fish, in the opinion of antiquarians generally, is the symbol
of Jesus Christ. The fish is sculptured upon a number of Christian
monuments, and more particularly upon the ancient sarcophagi. It
is also upon medals, bearing the name of our Savior and also upon
engraved stones, cameos and intaglios. The fish is also to be remarked
upon the amulets worn suspended from the necks by children, and upon
ancient glasses and sculptured lamps.

“Baptismal fonts are more particularly ornamented with the fish. The
fish is constantly exhibited placed upon a dish in the middle of the
table, at the Last Supper, among the loaves, knives and cups used at
the banquet.”

In the writings of Tertullian we find this statement: “We are little
fishes in Christ our great fish.”

The last two thousand years, comprising the Piscean Age, has certainly
been one of water and the many uses of that element have been
emphasized, and sea and lake and river navigation has been brought to
a high degree of efficiency.

3 _What is the Aquarian Age?_ The human race is today standing upon
the cusp of the Piscean-Aquarian Ages. Aquarius is an air sign and the
New Age is already noted for remarkable inventions for the use of air,
electricity, magnetism, etc. Men navigate the air as fish do the sea,
and send their thoughts spinning around the world with the speed of
lightning.

The word Aquarius is derived from the Latin word aqua, meaning water.
Aquarius is, however, the _water bearer_, and the symbol of the sign,
which is the eleventh sign of the Zodiac, is a man carrying in his
right hand a pitcher of water. Jesus referred to the beginning of the
Aquarian Age in these words:

“And then the man who bears the pitcher will walk forth across an arc
of heaven; the sign and signet of the Son of Man will stand forth in
the eastern sky. The wise will then lift up their heads and know that
the redemption of the earth is near.” (Aquarian Gospel 157:29, 30.)

The Aquarian Age is pre-eminently a spiritual age, and the spiritual
side of the great lessons that Jesus gave to the world may now be
comprehended by multitudes of people for the many are now coming into
an advanced stage of spiritual consciousness; so with much propriety
this book is called “The Aquarian (or Spiritual) Gospel of Jesus, the
Christ.”

_An Important Event._ The transfer of dominion from one Age to another
is an important event in the world of Cherubim and Seraphim. Among the
manuscripts of Levi we have found a most remarkable paper describing
the transfer of dominion from the Piscean Age to the Aquarian Age, but
it is difficult to determine whether it is a recital of facts or a
prophetic statement. We reproduce the paper in full.

    THE CUSP OF THE AGES.

    “In Spirit I was caught away into the realms of Akasha; I stood
    alone within the circle of the sun.

    “And there I found the secret spring that opens up the door to
    Wisdom and an understanding heart.

    “I entered in and then I knew.

    “I saw the four and twenty Cherubim and Seraphim that guard
    the circle of the sun, the mighty ones who were proclaimed by
    masters long ago ‘the four and twenty ancient ones.’

    “I heard the names of every Cherubim and Seraphim, and learned
    that every sign in all the Zodiac is ruled by two--a Cherubim
    and Seraphim.

    “And then I stood upon the cusp where Ages meet. The Piscean
    Age had passed; the Aquarian Age had just begun.

    “I saw the guardian Spirits of the Piscean Age; Ramasa is the
    Cherubim; Vacabiel is Seraphim.

    “I saw the guardian Spirits of the Aquarian Age, and Archer is
    the Cherubim; Sakmaquil is the Seraphim.

    “These four great spirits of the Triune God stood close
    together on the cusp, and in the presence of the sacred
    Three--the God of Might, the God of Wisdom, and the God of
    Love--the scepter of Domain, of Might, of Wisdom and of Love
    was there transferred.

    “I heard the charges of the Triune God; but these I may not now
    reveal.

    “I heard the history of the Piscean Age from Piscean Cherubim
    and Seraphim, and when I took my pen to write Ramasa said:

    “Not now, my son, not now; but you may write it down for men
    when men have learned the sacred laws of Brotherhood, of Peace
    on earth, good-will to every living thing.

    “And then I heard the Aquarian Cherubim and Seraphim proclaim
    the Gospel of the coming Age, the age of Wisdom, of the Son of
    Man.

    “And when the crown was lifted from the head of Ramasa and
    placed upon the head of Archer of the Aquarian Age; and when
    the royal scepter was transferred from Seraphim Vacabiel to
    Seraphim Sakmaquil there was deep silence in the courts of
    heaven.

    “And then the goddess Wisdom spoke, and with her hands
    outstretched she poured the benedictions of the Holy Breath
    upon the rulers of Aquarius.

    “I may not write the words she spoke, but I may tell the Gospel
    of the coming age that Archer told when he received the crown.

    “And I may breathe to men the song of praise that Seraphim
    Sakmaquil sung when she received the royal scepter of the
    newborn age.

    “This Gospel I will tell, and I will sing this song in every
    land, to all the people, tribes and tongues of earth.”

4 _What is Meant by “the Christ,” as the Word is Used in This Book?_
The word Christ is derived from the Greek word Kristos and means
anointed. It is identical with the Hebrew word Messiah. The word
Christ, per se, does not refer to any particular person; every
anointed person is christed. When the definite article “the” is placed
before the word christ a definite personality is indicated, and this
personality is none other than a member of the Trinity, the Son who
had a glory with the Father-Mother before the worlds were formed.

According to the teachings of all ancient masters this Son is Love; so
the Christ is Love, and Love is God, since God is Love.

Another remarkable manuscript found in Levi’s Akashic portfolio
gives the clearest possible ideal of the Christ, or Love of God. It
is presumed that this manuscript is a direct transcription from the
Akashic Records and its importance demands its reproduction here in
full.

    THE CHRIST

    “Before creation was the Christ walked with the Father God and
    Mother God in Akasha.

    “The Christ is son, the only son begotten by Almighty God, the
    God of Force and God omniscient, God of thought; and Christ is
    God, the God of Love.

    “Without the Christ there was no light. Through Christ all life
    was manifest; and so through him all things were done, and
    naught was done in forming worlds or peopling worlds without
    the Christ.

    “Christ is the Logos of Infinities and through the word alone
    are Thought and Force made manifest.

    “The Son is called the Christ, because the Son, the Love, the
    universal Love, was set apart, ordained to be creator, Lord,
    preserver and redeemer of all things, of everything that is, or
    evermore will be.

    “Through Christ, the protoplast, the earth, the plant, the
    beast, the man, the angel and the cherubim took up their
    stations on their planes of life.

    “Through Christ they are preserved; and if they fall it is the
    Christ who lifts them up; and if they sell themselves to sin
    the Christ redeems.

    “Now Christ, the universal Love, pervades all spaces of
    infinity, and so there is no end to love.

    “From the great heart of Love unnumbered spirits were sent
    forth to demonstrate the height, the depth, the width, the
    boundlessness of Love.

    “To every world and star and moon and sun a master spirit of
    this Love divine was sent; and all were full anointed with the
    oil of helpfulness, and each became a Christ.

    “All glorious in his majesty is Christ, who spread the pure
    white robe of Love o’er all the planes of earth--The Christ of
    earth, its heaven, its graves.

    “In course of time the protoplast, the earth, the plant, the
    beast, the man sold out their birthrights unto sin; but Christ
    was present to redeem.

    “Hid in the holiest place in all infinities is locked the
    scroll that bears the record of the purposes of God, the Triune
    God, and there we read:

    “Perfection is the ultimate of life. A seed is perfect in its
    embryotic life, but it is destined to unfold, to grow.

    “Into the soil of every plane these seeds, which were the
    Thoughts of God, were cast--the seeds of protoplast, of earth,
    of plant, of beast, of man, of angel and of cherubim, and they
    who sowed the seeds, through Christ, ordained that they should
    grow, and should return at last, by effort of unnumbered years,
    to the great granary of thought, and each be a perfection of
    its kind.

    “And in the boundless blessedness of Love the man was made the
    Lord of protoplast, of earth, of plant, of beast; and Christ
    proclaimed: Man shall have full dominion over everything that
    is upon these planes of life; and it was so.

    “And he who gave the lordship unto man declared that he must
    rule by Love.

    “But men grew cruel and they lost their power to rule, and
    protoplast, and earth, and plant and beast became at enmity
    with man; he lost his heritage; but Christ was present to
    redeem.

    “But man had lost his consciousness of right; he could no
    longer comprehend the boundlessness of Love; he could see
    naught but self, and things of self; but Christ was there to
    seek the lost and save.

    “So that he might be close to man in all the ways of life, that
    man might comprehend the mighty spirit of the Love, the Christ
    of earth made manifest to human eyes and ears by taking his
    abode in some pure person, well prepared by many lives to be a
    fit abiding place of Love.

    “Thus Christ made manifest Love’s power to save; but men forgot
    so soon, and so Christ must manifest again, and then again.

    “And ever since man took his place in form of flesh the Christ
    has been manifest in flesh at first of every age.”

5 _What relationship existed between Jesus of Nazareth and the
Christ?_ Orthodox Christian ecclesiastics tell us that Jesus of
Nazareth and the Christ were one; that the true name of this
remarkable person was Jesus Christ. They tell us that this man of
Galilee was the very eternal God clothed in flesh of man that men
might see his glory. Of course this doctrine is wholly at variance
with the teachings of Jesus himself and of his apostles. The Aquarian
Masters in council have formulated an answer to this question that so
well covers all the information required that we give it in full:

    “Jesus was an ideal Jew, born in Bethlehem of Judea. His mother
    was a beautiful Jewish girl named Mary. As a child Jesus
    differed but little from other children only that in past lives
    he had overcome carnal propensities to such an extent that he
    could be tempted like others and not yield. Paul was right when
    to the Hebrews he said: ‘He was in all points tempted like as
    we are, yet without sin.’--Hebrews 4:15.

    “Jesus suffered as other men suffer, and was made perfect
    through suffering; for this is the only way to perfection. His
    life was an example of attainment by the way of crosses and
    cruel treatment. Paul was right again when he said: ‘It became
    him, for whom are all things and by whom are all things, in
    bringing many sons into glory to make the captain of their
    salvation perfect through suffering.’--Hebrews 2:10.

    “In many respects Jesus was a remarkable child, for by ages
    of strenuous preparation he was qualified to be an avatar, a
    savior of the world, and from childhood he was endowed with
    superior wisdom and was conscious of the fact that he was
    competent to lead the race into the higher ways of spiritual
    living. But he was conscious also of the fact that he must
    attain the mastery by trials, bufferings, temptations and
    sufferings. And all his life was spent in attaining. After his
    death, burial and resurrection he appeared in materialized form
    before the Silent Brothers in the temple of Heliopolis, in
    Egypt, and said:

    “‘My human life was wholly given to bring my will to tune with
    the deific will; when this was done my earth-tasks all were
    done.

    “‘You know that all my life was one great drama for the sons
    of men; a pattern for the sons of men. I lived to show the
    possibilities of man.

    “‘What I have done all men can do, and what I am all men shall
    be.’”--Aquarian Gospel 178:43, 46.

    “Jesus was the name of the man and it was the only appropriate
    name for this kind of a man. The word means Savior and Jesus
    was in more senses than one a savior.

    The word Christ means “the anointed one,” and then it is an
    official title. It means, The Master of Love. When we say
    “Jesus the Christ” we refer to the man and to his office;
    just as we do when we say Edward, the King, or Lincoln, the
    President. Edward was not always King, and Lincoln was not
    always President, and Jesus was not always Christ. Jesus won
    his Christship by a strenuous life, and in the Aquarian Gospel,
    chapter 55, we have a record of the events of his christing,
    or receiving the degree Christ. Here is where he was coronated
    by the highest earth authorities as the Christ-King; properly
    speaking, ‘The Master of Love’; and after this was done he
    entered at once upon his Judean and Galilean ministry.

    “We recognize the facts that Jesus was man and that Christ was
    God, so that in very truth Jesus the Christ was the God-man of
    the ages.”

    The Nazarene’s Testimony. Jesus himself made the matter clear.
    Once when he was speaking to a congregation in Bethany the
    people called him King and he stood forth and said:

    “‘I am not sent to sit upon a throne to rule as Caesar rules;
    and you may tell the ruler of the Jews that I am not a claimant
    for his throne.

    “‘Men call me Christ, and God has recognized the name; but
    Christ is not a man. The Christ is universal Love, and Love is
    King.

    “‘This Jesus is but man who has been fitted by temptations
    overcome, by trials multiform, to be the temple through which
    the Christ can manifest to men.

    “‘Then hear, you men of Israel, hear! Look not upon the flesh;
    it is not king. Look to the Christ within who shall be formed
    in every one of you, as he is formed in me.

    “‘When you have purified your hearts by faith, the king will
    enter in and you will see his face.’”--Aquarian Gospel 68:10-14.

Surely this question has been answered. Jesus was man; Christ was
Divine Love--the Love of God, and after thirty years of strenuous life
the man had made his body fit to be the temple of the holy breath and
Love took full possession, and John well said when he declared:

“‘And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us and we beheld the
glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.’”

6 _Who was Levi, the Transcriber of this Book?_ Regarding the
personality of Levi we are permitted to write but little. Suffice it
to say that he is an American citizen, and has been a close student
of the religions of the world from childhood. When but a boy he was
impressed with the sensitiveness of the finer ethers and believed
that in some manner they were sensitized plates on which sounds,
even thoughts, were recorded. With avidity he entered into the
deeper studies of etheric vibration, determined to solve the great
mysteries of the heavens for himself. Forty years he spent in study
and silent meditation, and then he found himself in that stage of
spiritual consciousness that permitted him to enter the domain of
these superfine ethers and become familiar with their mysteries. He
then learned that the imaginings of his boyhood days were founded upon
veritable facts, and that every thought of every living thing is there
recorded.

In his manuscript entitled “The Cusp of the Ages,” a part of which we
have already reproduced in this Introduction, we find the following
copy of the Commission, which Levi received from Visel, the Goddess of
Wisdom, or the Holy Breath.

    LEVI’S COMMISSION.

    “And then Visel the holy one stood forth and said:

    “O Levi, son of man, behold, for you are called to be the
    message bearer of the coming age--the age of spirit blessedness.

    “Give heed, O son of man, for men must know the Christ, the
    Love of God; for Love is sovereign balm for all the wounds of
    men, the remedy for every ill.

    “And man must be endowed with Wisdom and with Power and with an
    Understanding heart.

    “Behold the Akasha! Behold the Record Galleries of Visel where
    every thought and word and deed of every living thing is
    written down.

    “The needs of men are manifold, and men must know their needs.

    “Now, Levi, hearken to my words: go forth into these mystic
    Galleries and read. There you will find a message for the
    world; for every man; for every living thing.

    “I breathe upon you now the Holy Breath; you will discriminate,
    and you will know the lessons that these Record Books of God
    are keeping now for men of this new age.

    “This age will be an age of splendor and of light, because
    it is the home age of the Holy Breath; and Holy Breath will
    testify anew for Christ, the Logos of eternal Love.

    “At first of every age this Logos is made manifest in flesh so
    man can see and know and comprehend a Love that is not narrow,
    circumscribed.

    “Twelve times in every revolution of the sun this christed Love
    of God is made full manifest in flesh upon the planes of earth,
    and you may read in Akasha the wondrous lessons that these
    Christs have taught to men; but you shall publish not to men
    the lessons of the Christs of ancient times.

    “Now, Levi, message bearer of the Spirit Age, take up your pen
    and write.

    “Write full the story of The Christ who built upon the Solid
    Rock of yonder circle of the sun--the Christ who men have known
    as Enoch the Initiate.

    “Write of his works as prophet, priest and seer; write of his
    life of purity and love, and how he changed his carnal flesh to
    flesh divine without descending through the gates of death.

    “And you may write the story of Melchizedec, the Christ who
    lived when Abram lived, and pointed out to men the way to life
    through sacrifice; who gave his life a willing sacrifice for
    men.

    “And you may write the story of the Prince of Peace, The Christ
    who came as babe in Bethlehem, and traveled every way of life
    that man must tread.

    “He was despised, rejected and abused; was spit upon, was
    crucified, was buried in a tomb; but he revived and rose a
    conqueror over death that he might show the possibilities of
    man.

    “A thousand times he said to men; ‘I came to show the
    possibilities of man; what I have done all men may do, and what
    I am all men shall be.’

    “These stories of The Christ will be enough, for they contain
    the true philosophy of life, of death and of the resurrection
    of the dead.

    “They show the spiral journey of the soul until the man of
    earth and God are one forevermore.”

_Levi in Prophecy._ About two thousand years ago Elihu, who conducted
a school of the prophets in Zoan, Egypt, referred to Levi thus:

    “This age will comprehend but little of the works of Purity
    and Love; but not a word is lost, for in the Book of God’s
    Remembrance a registry is made of every thought and word and
    deed;

    “And when the world is ready to receive, lo, God will send a
    messenger to open up the book and copy from its sacred pages
    all the messages of Purity and Love.

    “Then every man of earth will read the words of life in the
    language of his native land, and men will see the light.

    “And man again will be at one with God.”--Aquarian Gospel
    7:25-28.

Further references to the personality of Levi are, seemingly,
unnecessary. It matters but little who he is; his work in the
transcription of the Aquarian Gospel of Jesus, the Christ, stands
unimpeachable. The lessons of this book all bear the stamp of the
Nazarene, for no man except the world’s greatest master could have
touched the high chords of divine Love and Wisdom which characterize
the pages of this marvelous book.

7 _What are the Akashic Records?_ Akasha is a Sanskrit word, and
means “Primary substance,” that out of which all things are formed.
According to Aquarian philosophy, it is the first stage of the
crystallization of spirit. This philosophy recognizes the fact that
all primordial substance is spirit; that matter is spirit moving at
a lower rate of vibration, becoming, as one master expressed it, a
coagulum.

This Akashic, or primary substance, is of exquisite fineness and is so
sensitive that the slightest vibrations of an ether any place in the
universe registers an indelible impression upon it.

This primal substance is not relegated to any particular part of the
universe, but is everywhere present. It is in very fact the “Universal
Mind” of which our metaphysicians speak.

When the mind of man is in exact accord with the Universal Mind man
enters into a conscious recognition of these Akashic impressions, and
may collect them and translate them into any language of earth with
which he is familiar.

In the infinite One manifest we note the attributes of Force,
Intelligence and Love, and a person may be in full accord with one of
these attributes and not with the others. One may enter fully into
the spirit of the God of Force and not be imbued with the spirit of
Intelligence; or one may be wholly absorbed with the spirit of Divine
Love and be far removed from both Intelligence and Force. Furthermore,
a person may enter fully into the consciousness of Holy Breath, or
Supreme Intelligence, and be not at all in rapport with either Love or
Force. Knowledge is not gained through the spirit of either Force or
Love. It is only from Universal Mind, which is Supreme Intelligence,
called by Oriental scholars the Akashic Records, and by Hebrew
masters, the Book of God’s Remembrance, that knowledge of any kind can
be obtained.

    _Consciousness_; we note three phases of it:

    1  Consciousness of the omnipotence of God and man.

    2  Christ consciousness, or consciousness of Divine Love.

    3  Consciousness of the Holy Breath, or of Supreme Intelligence.

We must bear in mind that one of these phases of consciousness does
not necessarily imply either of the others. People are frequently
found who are completely filled with the Love of God, are far advanced
in the science of Christ consciousness, who are absolutely ignorant;
have not the slightest conception of the laws of natural things or of
spiritual things; are not in rapport with the great Teacher which is
the Holy Spirit.

_The Akashic Records._ The imperishable records of life, known as the
Akashic Records, are wholly in the domain of Supreme Intelligence, or
Universal Mind, and the Akashic Record reader must be in such close
touch with the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Breath, as the ancient masters
call this spirit of Supreme Intelligence, that every thought vibration
is instantly felt in every fibre of his being.

_Differentiation._ Since all space is charged with the vibrations of
thoughts of all kinds how may the Akashic Record reader differentiate
and gather only the thoughts and life events of a particular person or
group of persons?

Every person has his own distinct vibration and when the reader fully
understands the law of discrimination his whole being is tuned for the
reception of the one particular tone and rhythm, and it is impossible
for any other tone or rhythm to make the slightest impression upon
him. This principle is demonstrated in wireless telegraphy.

It required many years for Levi to learn the Law of Differentiation,
and to come in rapport with the tones and rhythms of Jesus of
Nazareth, Enoch and Melchizedec and their co-laborers. But under the
direction of the Spirit of Supreme Intelligence, he has attained unto
this accomplishment, and now he instantly feels in all his being the
slightest vibrations that come from any of these great centers and, of
course, all of his transcriptions are true to the letter.


MAN.

“What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou
visiteth him?” This was the earnest question of David, the Hebrew
Psalmist, and the 8th Psalm is given wholly to the contemplation of
man, the crowning work of manifest creation. Among the many great
lessons that Levi has been permitted to gather from the Akashic
Records, or the Universal Mind, we find one on _Man_ in which his
descent into physical matter and his final ascent into an eternal
oneness with God is so graphically described that it certainly merits
a place in this Introduction, and we give it in full:

    “Time never was when man was not.

    “If life of man at any time began a time would come when it
    would end.

    “The thoughts of God cannot be circumscribed. No finite mind
    can comprehend things infinite.

    “All finite things are subject unto change. All finite things
    will cease to be, because there was a time when they were not.

    “The bodies and the soul of men are finite things, and they
    will change, yea, from the finite point of view the time will
    come when they will be no more.

    “But man himself is not the body, nor the soul; he is a spirit
    and is part of God.

    “Creative Fiat gave to man, to spirit man, a soul that he might
    function on the plane of soul; gave him a body of the flesh,
    that he might function on the plane of things made manifest.

    “Why did creative Fiat give to spirit man a soul that he might
    function on the plane of soul?

    “Why did creative Fiat give to soul a body of the flesh that it
    might function on the plane of things that are made manifest?

    “Hear, now, ye worlds, dominions, powers and thrones!

    “Hear, now, ye cherubim, ye seraphim, ye angels and ye men!

    “Hear, now, O protoplast, and earth, and plant and beast!

    “Hear, now, ye creeping things of earth, ye fish that swim, ye
    birds that fly!

    “Hear, now, ye winds that blow, ye thunders and ye lightnings
    of the sky!

    “Hear, now, ye spirits of the fire, of water, earth and air!

    “Hear, now, O everything that is, or was, or evermore will be,
    for Wisdom speaks from out the highest plane of spirit life:

    “Man is a thought of God; all thoughts of God are infinite;
    they are not measured up by time, for things that are concerned
    with time begin and end.

    “The thoughts of God are from the everlasting of the past unto
    the never ending days to come--And so is man, the Spirit-man.

    “But man, like every other thought of God, was but a seed, a
    seed that held within itself the potencies of God, just as
    the seed of any plant of earth holds deep within itself the
    attributes of every part of that especial plant.

    “So spirit-man, as seed of God, held deep within himself the
    attributes of every part of God.

    “Now, seeds are perfect, yea, as perfect as the source from
    which they come; but they are not unfolded into life made
    manifest.

    “The child in utero is perfect as the mother is.

    “So man, the seed, must be deep planted in a soil that he might
    grow, unfold, as does the bud unfold to show the flower.

    “The human seed that came forth from the heart of God was full
    ordained to be the lord of plane of soul, and of the plane of
    things made manifest.

    “So God, the husbandman of every thing that is, threw forth
    this human seed into the soil of soul; it grew apace, and man
    became a living soul; and he became the lord of all the kingdom
    of the soul.

    “Hark, now, let every creature hear, The plane of soul is but
    the ether of the spirit plane vibrating not so fast, and in the
    slower rhythm of this plane the essences of life are manifest;
    the perfumes and the odors, the true sensations and the all of
    love are manifest.

    “And these soul attributes become a body beautiful.

    “A multitude of lessons man must learn upon the plane of soul;
    and here he tarries many ages until his lessons are all learned.

    “Upon the boundary of the plane of soul the ether began to
    vibrate slower still, and then the essences took on a garb; the
    perfumes and the odors and the true sensations and the all of
    love were clothed in flesh; and man was clothed in flesh.

    “Perfected man must pass through all the ways of life, and so
    a carnal nature was full manifest, a nature that sprang forth
    from fleshly things.

    “Without a foe a soldier never knows his strength, and thought
    must be developed by the exercise of strength.

    “And so this carnal nature soon became a foe that man must
    fight, that he might be the strength of God made manifest.

    “Let every living thing stand still and hear!

    “Man is the lord of all the plane of manifests; of protoplast,
    of mineral, of plant, of beast; but he has given up his
    birthright, just to gratify his lower self, his carnal self.

    “But man will full regain his lost estate, his heritage; but he
    must do it in a conflict that cannot be told in words.

    “Yea, he must suffer trials and temptations manifold; but let
    him know that cherubim and seraphim that rule the stations
    of the sun, and spirits of the mighty God who rule the solar
    stars are his protectors and his guides, and they will lead to
    victory.

    “Man will be fully saved, redeemed, perfected by the things he
    suffers on the plane of flesh, and on the plane of soul.

    “When man has conquered carnal things his garb of flesh will
    then have served its purpose well and it will fall, will be no
    more.

    “Then he will stand untrammeled on the plane of soul where he
    must full complete his victories.”

    “Unnumbered foes will stand before the man upon the plane of
    soul; there he must overcome, yea, overcome them every one.

    “Thus hope will ever be his beacon light; there is no failure
    for the human soul, for God is leading on and victory is sure.

    “Man cannot die; the spirit man is one with God, and while God
    lives man cannot die.

    “When man has conquered every foe upon the plane of soul the
    seed will have full opened out, will have unfolded in the Holy
    Breath.

    “The garb of soul will then have served its purpose well, and
    man will need it never more, and it will pass and be no more.

    “And man will then attain unto the blessedness of perfectness
    and be at one with God.”




SUBJECT INDEX

A general outline of the incidents and topics of the book will be
found in the Contents which appears in the first part of the volume.


  A
                                                              CHAP.
  Abram, Sketch of life                                          10
  Account must be given                                         105
  Accusers are the greatest sinners                             132
  Address of Jesus at magian feast                               39
  Address of Jesus to Chaldeans                                  42
  Address of Jesus to Atheneans                                  44
  Address of Delphic Oracle                                      44
  Address of Jesus, final to Atheneans                           46
  Address of Jesus at Jordan ford                                64
  Address of Jesus in Bethany                                    68
  Address of Jesus concerning John                               67
  Address of Jesus in Bethlehem                                  76
  Address of John on Jesus and the Christ                        80
  Address of Jesus at Jacob’s well                               82
  Adultery defined by man                                        98
  Adultery lies in the desire                                    98
  Adulterer, the one who lusts                                  143
  Adon Mashich Cumi                                             172
  Afraid of Jesus’ power, priests                                31
  Afflictions partial payments on debts                         138
  Afflictions, lesson of Jesus                                  138
  Afflictions merited; the law (V. 5, 6)                        138
  Age, Messiah comes at first of every                           73
  Ajainin; Jesus his guest                                       37
  Ajainin in Benares to see Jesus                                29
  Ajainin visits Jesus                                           29
  Almsgiving, lesson of Jesus on                                 94
  Almighty God, the Father; Omniscient God, the Mother           97
  Alarmed at power of Jesus, Gadarines                          118
  Alone on mountain, Jesus prays                                128
  Alertness of Pharisees to apprehend Jesus                     150
  Altars of Grecian gods                                         46
  Amazed at resurrection of Lazarus                             148
  Amphitheater, Jesus and Apollo in                              44
  Angered at Jesus’ words about castes, priests                  24
  Anger a crime                                                  97
  Anxiety about earthly things                                   99
  Anxious Martha                                                136
  Anointed Jesus with perfumes, Mary                            159
  Ananias bribes Judas to betray Jesus                          159
  Ananias, leader of arresting party                            164
  Answering prayer: how God helps                                46
  Appeal of Jesus to the mob                                    164
  Apollo opens up door of Greek lore to Jesus                    44
  Apollo states needs of Greece                                  57
  Apostles are chosen                                            88
  Apostles, all at Jesus’ home                                   89
  Apostles and Jesus at Capernaum                               123
  Apostles confirmed as saviors                                 127
  Apostles flee to avoid arrest                                 164
  Apostolic charge of Jesus                                      89
  Archelaus, ruler in Jerusalem                                   7
  Ashamed of his cowardice, Peter                               164
  Ashbina recognizes Jesus                                       42
  Ashbina states needs of Assyria                                57
  Asher’s Inn, Jesus at                                          78
  Ask in faith; God answers                                     137
  Assassination of Zacharias                                      6
  Athens, Jesus meets the masters                                44
  Athens beach, storm on                                         46
  Attainment possible                                           101
  Augustus Caesar                                                 1
  Author of misfortune, is God?                                 114
  Avesta                                                         10
  Awaiting coming of Holy Breath                                181


  B

  Baal, Assyrian Idol                                            43
  Babylon, Jesus and Ashbina in                                  43
  Babylon, its wicked kings                                      43
  Balm of life, the air we breathe                               41
  Baptism instituted                                             15
  Baptism of Jesus by the Harbinger                              64
  Baptism of many people by the Harbinger                        64
  Baptism adopted by Jesus as disciples’ pledge                  78
  Baptism by Jesus of six disciples                              78
  Baptized, John the Harbinger                                   15
  Barachia, Rabi, teacher of Jesus                               17
  Barato Arabo, friend of Jesus                                  32
  Bartimeus, healed by Jesus                                    150
  Barren fig tree withered                                      152
  Barabbas appointed scapegoat                                  168
  Bar-Simon’s feast                                             159
  Beatitudes, formulated by Jesus                                95
  Belus, monument of folly                                       43
  Benediction of Jesus on his kindred                            69
  Benediction of Jesus on all                                   180
  Benediction of Jesus on the seventy                           140
  Benediction of Jesus on Ladak                                  36
  Benediction of Elihu and Salome                                47
  Best servant, the best ruler                                  146
  Bethlehem, Jesus born in                                        3
  Bethlehem, Jesus in                                            76
  Bethany, Jesus in                                              77
  Bethany, home of Lazarus                                       77
  Bethany, Jesus at Lazarus’ house                              137
  Bethany, Christines returned to                               148
  Bethesda, Jesus surrounded by the sick                         91
  Bethabara, Jesus in                                           147
  Betrayal by Judas                                             160
  Betrayal of Jesus by a kiss                                   164
  Birth, of Holy Breath                                          75
  Birth, of water                                                75
  Birthday feast of child Jesus                                  16
  Birthday feast of Herod                                       117
  Blessed is the Son of Man                                     156
  Blessedness of living the word of God                         108
  Blind leaders and their followers                             100
  Blind man healed by Jesus                                     138
  Blind man’s story of his healing                              138
  Blind guides                                                  126
  Book of God’s Remembrance                                  7, 158
  Book of Life                                         58, 109, 158
  Brahm, Elihu’s lesson on                                       10
  Brahmic priests seeking wisdom                                 21
  Brahmic philosophy, Elihu’s lesson                             10
  Bread from heaven                                              82
  Broad is the way of wickedness                                101
  Brotherhood of life                                            34
  Brotherhood of Right                                           83
  Buddha, Life and works of                                  11, 34
  Buddhist temple open for Jesus                                 31
  Building on sand cannot stand                                 101
  Building on rock stands forever                               101
  Burial of the Harbinger in Hebron                             117
  Burial of Jesus in Joseph’s tomb                              171
  Busybodies seek faults in others                              100


  C

  Caesarea--Philippi, Christines in                             128
  Caiaphas, Jesus in palace of                                  165
  Camel, a present to Jesus                                      37
  Capernaum, Christines in                                       71
  Car of Jagernath at Katak                                      26
  Carnal man’s rule of life                                     100
  Carnal thoughts defile the mind                               126
  Carnal self, Jesus’ temptation                                 65
  Care of God for every thing                                   109
  Caring for the helpless                                        74
  Carpenter, Jesus serves as                                     20
  Castes, Brahmic priest explains                                24
  Castes, Jesus reveals injustice of                             24
  Cause of afflictions                                          138
  Censures Jesus for healing, Priest                            140
  Ceremonial forms are symbols                                   35
  Comforter, Holy Breath, promised                              161
  Coming Age, its needs                                          35
  Coming trials of Apostles, Jesus foretold                     127
  Commits to John care of his Mother and Miriam, Jesus          170
  Common people, Jesus abides with                               24
  Common people become guests                                   153
  Common people receive Jesus                                    73
  Courtesans and thieves, Jesus sits with                        27
  Conclusion of Jesus’ Galilean ministry                        149
  Confession of faith, Andrew                                    66
  Confession of faith, Nathaniel                                 66
  Confession of faith, Philip                                    66
  Confession of faith, Peter                                     66
  Confession of faith, the people                                68
  Confession of faith, Lamaas                                    80
  Confession of faith, Bethlehemites                             77
  Confession of faith, Samaritan woman                           81
  Confession of faith, Samaritans                                82
  Confession of faith essential                                 109
  Confession of faith not to be bought                          107
  Confession of faith, the healed blind man                     139
  Confession of Peter: “Thou art the Christ”                    128
  Chaldea, Jesus in                                              42
  Charge to Mary and Elizabeth by Elihu                           7
  Charge, the final to Mary and Elizabeth by Elihu               12
  Charge to Jesus by Brotherhood Hierophant                      48
  Charge to the Apostles                                        122
  Charge to the foreign Masters                                 122
  Charge to the seventy                                         133
  Charges against Jesus read                                    165
  Child the symbol of greatness                                 131
  Children sing praises of Jesus                                151
  Christ; theme of sixth postulate, Matheno                      59
  Christ in Jesus eulogized                                      79
  Christ in Jesus explained by John                              79
  Christ in the heart essential                                  79
  Christ the Bread of Life                                      125
  Christ flesh and blood                                        125
  Christ the Rock                                               128
  Christ recognized by voice from heaven                        129
  Christ a name of power                                        182
  Christ the shepherd                                           136
  Christine consciousness                                        71
  Christines in Nazareth Synagogue                               86
  Christines in Cana                                             87
  Christines in Capernaum                                   93, 118
  Christines in Jesus’ house                                    102
  Christines in Mary’s home                                     112
  Christines in Philip’s house                                  116
  Christines in Nazareth                                        121
  Christine church opened                                       182
  Christines in Jericho                                         149
  Christines on Mount of Olives                                 157
  Chuzas and Jesus                                              123
  Conflicts precede peace                                       113
  Congratulates his disciples, Jesus                            140
  Conqueror of carnal self                                      142
  Consecration of Jesus                                           4
  Consecration, Jesus’ lesson to disciples on                   112
  Consecration of Apostles                                       89
  Conscience stricken Judas returns bribe money                 169
  Constant preparation                                          157
  Courtesan at feast in Simon’s house                           104
  Courtesan shows gratitude                                     104
  Courtesan’s sins forgiven                                     104
  Courtesan brought before Jesus                                134
  Courtesan and Publicans at feast of God                       153
  Covetousness is theft                                          98
  Coward, the man who fights                                     97
  Circle; its meaning                                            48
  Cross must be borne                                           129
  Cross, each must bear his own                                 142
  Cross the sea, Christines                                117, 124
  Crippled healed tells the news                                 91
  Crippled man sought healing waters                             91
  Crucifixion not permitted                                     168
  Crucifixion, Jesus’ secret lesson on                          127
  Cruelty of sacrifice                                           19
  Crumbs, twelve baskets full gathered                          124


  D

  Darkness intense on Calvary                                   171
  David’s cave home of the Harbinger                              1
  Dawn of Peace, Lamaas’ question                               113
  Day of the Lord                                               157
  Day Star                                                   14, 88
  Death of Jesus’ father                                         30
  Death and burial of Elizabeth                                  15
  Death, Matheno’s lesson on                                     15
  Death, Jesus defines it                                       120
  Dead should care for the dead                                 117
  Deeds are seeds that grow                                     100
  Defends Judas, Jesus                                          164
  Defends Mary’s act                                            159
  Defends a man for taking bread                                132
  Defends healing on the Sabbath                                141
  Defilement creature of the heart                              129
  Delphic Oracle speaks                                          45
  Demonstration an illusion                                     107
  Demonstration, Jesus promises one                             107
  Denies his Lord thrice, Peter                                 165
  Denial of Peter, Jesus’ prophecy                              161
  Departure of Jesus foretold                                   162
  Departs by night from Benares                                  31
  Departing glory of Jerusalem, lamentation                     151
  Destruction of Jerusalem foretold                             157
  Destruction of life on Athens beach                            46
  Descent of man, Third Postulate                                58
  Desire inspires words and deeds                               101
  Devil the lower self of man                                     8
  Devil, man the maker                                           39
  Diamond Rule (V. 10)                                          101
  Disappears suddenly, Jesus                                     84
  Disciples deserted their Lord                                 125
  Disease defined by Jesus                                       74
  Divided service, Jesus’ lesson                                105
  Divided house cannot stand                                    106
  Division of the prepared and the unprepared                   145
  Door to feast hall low                                        153
  Dog wounded, cared for by Jesus                                74
  Double-hearted man                                             99
  Doubt causes Peter to sink                                    124
  Dove symbol of peace                                           76
  Drunkard’s child calls on Jesus for help                       92
  Drunkard saved by Jesus                                        92
  Drowned child restored by Jesus                                74
  Duality of the one God                                         97
  Dues, give to Caesar his own                                   73


  E

  Earthquake shakes Calvary                                     171
  Eat grain on Sabbath, Christines                               93
  Eating flesh of Christ                                        125
  Education of John finished                                     61
  Effort, not result, receives credit                           143
  Egotism of Pharisees                                          155
  Egypt, Jesus goes to                                           46
  Elder brother of the prodigal son                             144
  Elihu and Salome entertain Joseph, Mary and Jesus               5
  Elijah reincarnates as the Harbinger                          129
  Embalmed body of Jesus                                        171
  Empty tomb found by woman                                     173
  Ensnare Jesus by his words, plan to                           108
  Ephraim hills, Christines in                                  148
  Epileptic obsessed child                                      130
  Epileptic obsessed child healed by Jesus                      123
  Escape from Herod, Elizabeth and John                           6
  Esoteric lesson from the carpenter’s tools                     20
  Eulogises the children                                        151
  Euphrates, Jesus crosses the                                   42
  Events all part of God’s plan                                  85
  Evil, its cause                                                31
  Evil a myth                                                     8
  Evil things transmuted by fire                                116
  Evolution explained by Jesus                                   32
  Evolution of sacred scriptures                                 14
  Exaltation, philosophy of                                       9
  Exaltation for those who live the life                        146
  Exaltation of her sons, request of Mary                       146
  Examination of Jesus before Pilate                            167
  Excuses of invited guests                                     141
  Extremity of Peter Jesus’ opportunity                         124


  F

  Failure of the apostles to heal due to carelessness           130
  Faith, its power demonstrated                                  41
  Faith saved child from death                                   36
  Faith defined                                                  22
  Faith the key to all good                                     101
  Faith, the healing balm                                       102
  Faith heals the nobleman’s son                                 87
  Faith the wings of prayer                                     130
  Faith the power of God                                        130
  Faith cannot be bought nor sold                               107
  Faithfulness of Apostles                                      147
  Fall of man explained                                          32
  False witnesses testify; Jesus adjudged guilty                165
  False Christs will deceive many                               157
  Farewell address to Pilate, Jesus’                            163
  Farmer, Jesus abides with one                                  28
  Fast, theme of Jesus’ address                             94, 119
  Fasting may do one good, another harm                         119
  Father gives his son to save                                   36
  Feast in Jerusalem                                       124, 133
  Feast of God, all people must be guests                       141
  Feast of Pharisee in Magdala                                  108
  Feast for Christines, Matthew’s                               119
  Feast for Christines, Lazarus’                                 92
  Feast at home of Simon, a Pharisee                            104
  Feast of God                                                  153
  Feast to Magian god                                            39
  Feast of Joachim and Anna                                      16
  Feast in Jerusalem, Jesus present at                       18, 19
  Feast, Mary makes for Jesus                                    43
  Feast of Ravanna in Nazareth                                   21
  Feast of Ach at Bahar                                          27
  Feast of Udraka                                                28
  Feast, Paschal at Jerusalem                                    72
  Fear and unbelief asses that bind man’s will                   92
  Festival at Jerusalem                                          90
  Final lessons of Jesus                                        163
  Fire, Bethany in flames                                        92
  Fire controlled by Jesus’ word                                 92
  Fish, a multitude caught                                       88
  Five thousand fed                                             124
  Flesh not immortal, may be dissolved                          109
  Flowing spring near Persepolis                                 41
  Fly across the sea, demand of Pharisees                       107
  Foe of John, is Jesus one?                                     79
  Followers of John become disciples                             66
  Food does not defile the mind                                 126
  Force, Intelligence and Love                                   58
  Foreign plants are Scribes and Pharisees                      126
  Forerunner of Jesus, John                                      63
  Forgiveness of sins is healing                                 90
  Forgiveness the paying of debts                                94
  Forgiveness, its meaning                                   13, 36
  Found in the Temple, Jesus                                     20
  Fountain of the temple, Jesus bathes in                        47
  Four thousand fed                                             128
  Freed, all Gadara was                                         118
  Freedom, theme of Jesus’ address                               86
  Friendship result of kindness                                  83
  Fruitless fig tree made to wither                             105
  Fulfilling the law                                             95


  G

  Gadara, Christines in                                         118
  Garden of Siloam, Jesus’ tomb                                 172
  Garments divided by soldiers                                  170
  Gethsemane, Jesus in                                          163
  Gennesaret, Christines in valley of                           128
  Geracines, Christines in                                      114
  Gift of anything, Herod’s offer to Salome                     117
  Give Caesar his own: give God his own                         155
  God; the One, the three, the seven                              9
  God’s remembrance day, Thursday                               160
  God is spirit                                                  81
  Golden Rule                                                68, 97
  Good and Evil                                                 119
  Greatest master yet to come                                    14
  Greatest in the sight of God                                  131
  Greatest commandment                                          155
  Greatness, Jesus’ lesson on                                   131
  Grecian masters, Jesus teaches                                 45
  Grecian Jews call on Jesus                                    156
  Greece, Jesus in                                               44
  Groves of Cyrus, Jesus in                                      40
  Growth of man in carnal soul                                   58
  Guards of Herod torture Jesus                                 167
  Guardian spirit for every child                               131
  Guests of child Jesus at feast                                 16
  Guest without a wedding robe                                  154


  H

  Hair, Mary wipes Jesus’ feet with her                         159
  Happiness is near for man of faith                             33
  Harbinger John, Matheno’s charge to                            15
  Harbinger paves the way                                        62
  Haughty guests would not kneel                                153
  Healing art; Jesus teaches Ajainin                             37
  Healing fount of Persepolis                                    41
  Healing art; Udraka’s lesson                                   23
  Healing not paying debts                                      138
  Healing on Sabbath defended                       74, 91, 93, 140
  Heals in Gennesaret                                           125
  Heals infant in Leh, Jesus                                     36
  Heals child by Persian fount                                   41
  Heals a woman                                                 140
  Heals in the temple                                       74, 152
  Heals withered hand                                            93
  Healing virtue of Bethesda                                     91
  Healing virtue is faith                                        91
  Healing on Sabbath resented                                74, 93
  Healing methods described                                      74
  Head of John given to Salome                                  117
  Hebron, Jesus in                                               77
  Heliopolis, Jesus in temple of                                 47
  Hell, here and now                                             33
  Herod Antipas                                               1, 85
  Herod and the wise men                                          5
  Herod hears charges                                           167
  Herod sends John to Pilate                                    167
  Herod orders Jesus crucified                                  168
  Herod’s death                                                   6
  Herodias, immoral woman                                        85
  Hero, man who answers not                                      97
  Heresy of John                                                 85
  Henchman of courts                                            111
  Helpfulness to others                                         100
  Help for storm-wrecked sailors                                114
  Hierophant receives Jesus                                      47
  History of Jesus told by Hillel                                21
  Historic address by Peter                                     182
  Holy Breath as a dove                                          64
  Holy Breath, thought of heaven                                  9
  Holy Breath, fill this child                                   36
  Holy Breath, mission to the world                             162
  Holy Breath fills the air                                     126
  Holy Breath, the teacher                                 109, 128
  Holy Breath will come again                                   105
  Holy Breath, Jesus bathes in                                   79
  Holy Breath consciousness                                      65
  Home life, Ruth’s lesson                                       77
  Homeless boy cared for by Jesus                                74
  Home of Jesus in Capernaum                                     87
  Honor to Father and Mother                                     97
  Hypocrisy, Jesus’ lesson on                                   126
  Hypocrisy will blight soul                                    105
  Hypocrisy of Pharisees                                        108
  Hungry in wilderness                                           65


  I

  Identity of Jesus considered                                  128
  Idolatry condemned                                             96
  Ignorant learned men                                          104
  Impartial God cares for all                                    99
  Impartiality of God                                            82
  Impartiality of God, child Jesus’ lesson                       17
  Imprisonment of the Harbinger                                  85
  Incessant work of Jesus                                       105
  Indignation of ten Apostles                                   146
  Infant saved from flames by Jesus                              92
  Inn at Mount Olives                                            91
  Inner light that cannot fail                                  128
  Inner life revealed to disciples                              144
  Inscription above the cross                                   170


  J

  Jaganath, Jesus in                                             22
  Jairus’ daughter dies                                         120
  Jealous brothers of Jesus                                      43
  Jealousy unknown in Brotherhood of Right                       83
  Jericho, John with Alpheus in                                  63
  Jerusalem, Jesus’ prophetic address                           157
  Jesus, birth of                                                 3
  Jesus meets the Harbinger                                      64
  Jesus a man, not a God                                         26
  Jewish mob demand Jesus’ death                                168
  Jewish soldiers guard Jesus’ tomb                             171
  John, birth and childhood                                       2
  John in the trial chamber                                     165
  John with Massalian                                           164
  Johavehe                                                      138
  Jonah and the fish                                            107
  Journey to Egypt                                                5
  Journey to their homes, Joseph, Mary, Jesus, Elizabeth, John   12
  Journey through Sidon and Lebanon hills                        12
  Journey of Jesus through Caesarea                             123
  Joseph stands in Jesus’ defense                               147
  Joseph and Nicodemus bury Jesus                               171
  Jubilee in Kapavista                                           34
  Judas censures Mary                                           159
  Judas treasurer of Christines                                 159
  Judas with mob that abused Jesus                              169
  Judas hangs himself on city walls                             169
  Jude, Jesus at home of in Jerusalem                            72


  K

  Kashmar, Jesus in vale of                                      37
  Kaspar, Persian Sage                                           38
  Kaspar states needs of Persia                                  56
  Kaspar’s home by Caspian Sea                                   42
  Kedron, Jesus and the twelve meet at                          163
  Keys of safety for men given to Peter                         128
  King, people believe that Jesus was born to be                 72
  Kingdom of the soul                                       71, 129
  Kingdom, Jesus’ address on                                    145
  Kingdom to a new people                                       154
  Kingdom, Jesus tells Ajainin about it                          29
  Kingdom; its gate is low                                       29
  Kingdom, subjects must be pure                                 29
  Kiss, sign of identity                                        159
  Knowledge measure of crime                                    100


  L

  Ladak, Jesus in Leh                                            36
  Lahore, Jesus in the city of                                   37
  Lamaas meets John at Salem                                     80
  Lamaas meets Jesus at Jordan ford                              80
  Lamaas friend of Jesus                                         22
  Lamb, symbol of innocence                                      76
  Lamps of God, the disciples                                    95
  Last passover of Jesus and the twelve                         160
  Law of God recognizes desires only                             95
  Law, its letter forbids killing                                97
  Law, its spirit recognizes the desire to kill, the sin         97
  Law, universal application                                     14
  Lawyers’ injustice exposed by Jesus                           108
  Lawyers for gain plead against innocence                      108
  Lawyers argue in Jesus’ trial                                 166
  Lazarus sick in Bethany                                       148
  Lazarus dead, Jesus tells Apostles                            148
  League with Beelzebul                                         106
  Leaven of Pharisees; Jesus’ lesson                            109
  Letter of Jesus to his mother                                  30
  Liberates birds and lambs                                 72, 152
  Light about Jesus not comprehended                             40
  Listening, Mary chose the better part                         136
  Living Oracle                                                  45
  Living people may help the dead                               128
  Logos as Love manifest                                         65
  Logos, the perfect word                                        48
  Logos in the council of the sages                              57
  Lost; Jesus not with kindred                                   20
  Love manifest by Jesus                                          7
  Love the savior of the world                                8, 75
  Love the balm of life                                          41
  Love, Jesus’ Paschal address on                               161
  Love defined by spiritual law                                  98
  Love fulfils the law                                          155
  Love banishes lustful thoughts                                143
  Lying defined by the laws of man                               99
  Lying defined by spiritual law                                 99
  Lying possible by look or act                                  99


  M

  Magdala, Christines in                                        106
  Malchus; Peter wounds him                                     164
  Man with a pitcher                                            160
  Man of faith breathes in Christ                               126
  Man has powers of God                                          92
  Man defined by Jesus                                           22
  Manuscripts of Lassa                                           36
  Many called; few chosen                                       153
  Marriage feast of Pharisee                                    141
  Marriage feast in Cana                                         70
  Marriage defined by man                                        98
  Marriage defined by God                                        98
  Marriage, man’s relation to                                   143
  Marriage, Jesus’ lesson on                                     70
  Marriage and lust                                             143
  Mars, a Cretan vessel                                          46
  Mart, the beggar                                              107
  Mary’s birth and childhood                                      1
  Mary and Miriam at tomb                                       173
  Massalian, Jesus with                                         139
  Massacre of young children                                      6
  Masters of old and Jesus                                      123
  Master at resurrection                                        172
  Master tells of Jesus’ return                                 180
  Master minds; Delphic Oracle                                   45
  Materialization of Jesus, appearances after death        173, 180
    To his mother and Miriam                                    173
    To the other women                                          173
    To Peter, James and John                                    173
    To disciples at Emmaus                                      174
    To ten apostles in Simon’s house                            175
    To Lazarus, Mary, Martha and Ruth                           175
    To Ravanna and other teachers in India                      176
    To the Magian priests in Persepolis                         176
    To the priests in the temple at Jerusalem                   177
    To Thomas and the other apostles at Simon’s house           177
    To Apollo and the Silent Brotherhood in Greece                7
    To Claudas and Juliet in Rome                               178
    To the priests in temple Heliopolis, Egypt                  178
    To the apostles at Sea of Galilee                           179
    To multitudes of people in Galilee                          179
    To Peter, James and John in Galilee                         179
    To the apostles in Jerusalem                                180
    To the Marys and others on Mount Olives                     180
  Matheno, John’s teacher                                        13
  Matheno states Egypt’s needs                                   57
  Mathias chosen an apostle                                     181
  Memorial, Mary’s act                                          159
  Memorial Supper                                               160
  Meng-ste with Jesus                                            36
  Meng-ste states China’s needs                                  56
  Men of faith control storm                                    117
  Melzone, Persian wise man                                      38
  Merchants driven out of temple                                152
  Merchants of Kashmar                                           37
  Merom, Christines at                                          128
  Message from John to Jesus                                    103
  Messages of John                                           61, 62
  Message of John at Bethany                                     62
  Messages of Silence land                                      158
  Messengers from John                                          108
  Messenger, prophecy of Elihu                                    7
  Messiah defined                                                73
  Mighty works of wicked men                                    101
  Mind, sin a creature of                                       126
  Mission of Jesus to save lost                                  66
  Mission of Jesus                                              135
  Mission of John                                               103
  Missionary tours                                90, 102, 105, 140
  Misfortune their causes                                       114
  Miriam calls on Jesus                                         106
  Miriam’s reincarnation                                        106
  Miriam’s song                             106, 110, 121, 140, 181
  Model prayer                                              94, 137
  Model feast                                                   141
  Mood, their philosophy                                          9
  Monks of Leh                                                   36
  Money changers driven out                                      72
  Mother and brothers of Jesus                                  106
  Mother-in-law of Peter healed                                  89
  Multitude seek Jesus                                          124
  Multitude defends Jesus                                       133
  Murder, Brahmic priests try                                    31
  Mystery of marriage                                           155


  N

  Name of God not revealed                                       96
  Name of Jesus in temple                                        48
  Narrow is the perfect way                                     101
  Narrow way to life                                            141
  Nazarite, John the Harbinger                                   15
  Nazareth, Jesus would not teach in                             69
  Nazareth, Jesus at home                                        43
  Necessity above law                                            93
  Neglected opportunities                                       103
  Neighbor the one who shows mercy                              136
  New Age creeds                                                 36
  New wine burst old bottles                                    120
  Nicodemus visits Jesus                                         75
  Nicodemus sees the light                                       75
  Nicodemus in Jesus’ defense                                   134
  Nicodemus’ home, supper to the Lord                           160
  Nicodemus pleads for Jesus in trial                           166
  Non-resistance, law of spiritual life                          97
  Non-resistance, evidence of willing sacrifice                 127
  Not guilty; Pilate’s verdict                                  167
  Number and name of an evil spirit                             118
  Number of a soul                                              134


  O

  Oaths change no conditions                                     99
  Obsessed man freed by Jesus                      83, 89, 106, 121
  Obsessed man met Christines                                   118
  Obsessed girl freed by Jesus                                  123
  Omnific word heard by apostles                                 89
  Omnipotence of faith                                          153
  One cleansed leper thankful                                   133
  One thing lacking                                             142
  Offence of causing people to fall                             131
  Opportunities; theme of Jesus’ address                        105
  Outer man seen by carnal man                                   71
  Overcoming; promise to disciples                              162


  P

  Palestine under Roman rule                                      1
  Paying debts by healing                                       138
  Parable, Gold mine                                            142
  Parable, Good Samaritan                                       136
  Parable, Good Seed and Tares                                  116
  Parable, Householder and Laborers                             143
  Parable, Householder and Servants                             158
  Parable, Importunate Housewife                                137
  Parable, Importunate Widow                                    145
  Parable, King and Vast Domain                                  73
  Parable, Laborer and Rich Field                                33
  Parable, Leaven                                               116
  Parable, Lost Sheep                                           131
  Parable, Marriage Feast                                       154
  Parable, Nobleman and Unjust Sons                              25
  Parable, Pharisee and Publican                                145
  Parable, Prodigal Son                                         144
  Parable, Rich man and Great Harvest                           111
  Parable, Rich Man’s Feast                                     153
  Parable, Rich Man and His Feast                               141
  Parable, Rich Man and Lazarus                                 142
  Parable, Righteous King and Sons                               36
  Parable, Seed and its Growth                             140, 116
  Parable, Sower                                                116
  Parable, Ten Servants and Pounds                              149
  Parable, Ten Virgins                                          158
  Parable, Treasures in Field                                   116
  Parable, Stalks with Broken Blades                             27
  Parable, Unkept Vineyard                                       34
  Parable, Wheat and Tares explained                            116
  Paschal Supper, preparation                                   160
  Password of man is character                                   95
  Patience and readiness                                        111
  Parting words of Jesus                                        161
  Patron of Jesus, Ravanna                                       21
  Peace, Jesus’ address on                                      113
  Pearl of greatest price                                       142
  Pentecost                                                     182
  Perfect man, Jesus                                             59
  Perfect age; no rites                                          35
  Perfect age; all people priests                                35
  Perfection of man, Seventh Postulate                           59
  Persia, Persepolis, Jesus in                                   38
  Peter afraid in outer court                                   165
  Peter walks on the water                                      124
  Pharisees censure Christines                                   93
  Phenomena hunters carnal                                      107
  Phenomena of Holy Breath                                      182
  Philo states Jewish needs                                      57
  Philo pleads for Jesus                                         72
  Physical body not the man                                     126
  Picture of Holy Breath                                         96
  Pilate protects Christines                                    181
  Pilate would save Jesus’ life                                 163
  Pilate, Jesus taken before                                    166
  Pillars of the Church                                          95
  Plea for help in home affairs                                 111
  Plea of Pilate for Jesus to flee                              163
  Plea of Jesus before Caiaphas                                 166
  Platform from which Jesus speaks                              154
  Potter’s field bought                                         169
  Porch of temple, great meeting in                             147
  Power of Jesus                                                 31
  Power defined by Jesus                                         22
  Power of faith                                                130
  Power of God not recognized                                   130
  Power of God casting evil spirits out                         106
  Pray, Christines go apart to                              94, 109
  Pray, Jesus teaches Lazarus to                                137
  Prayed in sacred grove, Jesus                                  84
  Prayer to idols for help                                       46
  Prayer no sign of saintship                                   101
  Prayer, effectual                                              46
  Prayer of the envious not heard                               153
  Prayer of Jesus for disciples                       140, 150, 162
  Prayer, power demonstrated                                     89
  Prayer of Jesus in Gethsemane                                 163
  Prayer of Jesus for his murderers                             170
  Prayer, importunate                                           137
  Prayer, unceasing                                             145
  Prayer, Jesus’ address on                                      94
  Prayer of consecration                                         89
  Prayer, Salome’s lesson on                                     12
  Prayer, the Samaritan’s                                        84
  Praying alone, Jesus                                           90
  Preaches at Jordan ford, Jesus                                 78
  Priesthood can not be reformed                                120
  Priests enraged at Jesus                                       91
  Prince of Peace will come                                     157
  Proof of Jesus’ messiahship                                    69
  Prophecy concerning Chaldea                                    42
  Prophecies of Gabriel                                           2
  Prophecy of aged widow                                          1
  Prophet without honor                                          69
  Protects, Jesus, Lamaas                                        24
  Pruner, blessed work                                           34
  Pupils at Zoan--Mary and Elizabeth                              7
  Purity essential                                               68
  Purity demanded                                               126
  Purity manifest by John                                         7
  Purifying fires                                               116


  Q

  Questions at Jesus’ trial                                     165


  R

  Raising the widow’s son                                       102
  Ravanna with Jesus in Nazareth                                 21
  Reads the scriptures in the temple                             68
  Readiness to meet the Lord                                    145
  Rebukes wealthy Pharisee                                      140
  Reception Robes                                               112
  Reconciliation                                                 97
  Reform the priesthood, Nicodemus’ plea                        120
  Reincarnation affirmed by Jesus                                37
  Rejected stone becomes capstone                               154
  Repudiates claim to carnal kingship                            72
  Reputation an illusion                                         27
  Request of Mary not granted                                   146
  Resentment strengthens wrath                                  113
  Resistance the sire of anger                                   97
  Responsible for use of thought                                109
  Restores Jairus’ child to life                                120
  Rested in desert place, Christines                            124
  Resurrection of Lazarus                                       148
  Resurrection of Lazarus perturbs priests                      148
  Resurrection of Jesus                                         172
  Responsibility of man                                          14
  Revealers of light--Jesus and John                              7
  Revolution feared by Brahmic priests                           31
  Rewards, God’s method of giving                               143
  Rich young man seeks Jesus                                    142
  Right is king and will at last reign                          113
  Righteousness the Judge                                       158
  Rock, Jesus calls Peter the                                    66
  Rolls of Graphael                                             158
  Roman seal on tomb of Jesus                                   172
  Roman captain’s servant healed                                102
  Ruth distressed                                                77
  Ruth and Asher at Lazarus’ feast                               92


  S

  Sacrifice, giving to the needy                                 28
  Sacrifice, serving everything                                  28
  Sacrifice of self                                              35
  Sacrifice, Jesus’ address on                                  121
  Sad toilers in India                                           33
  Safe retreat, Jesus had none                                  117
  Sages at Philo’s home                                          56
  Sakara, Egyptian school                                        15
  Salim, John preaching at                                       79
  Salim springs                                                 146
  Salome’s dance pleases Herod                                  117
  Salvation defined                                              22
  Samaria, Christines in                                     81, 84
  Samaritans at Jacob’s well                                     82
  Sanhedrim hear charges                                        166
  Save the lost, Jesus’ mission                                 131
  Saving sinners, Jesus’ address on                             119
  Saving life by giving life                                    129
  Savior of the world, resist not                               127
  Scheme to apprehend Jesus                                     159
  School, Elihu and Salome                                        7
  School of Chris                                           87, 103
  Schools of Egypt                                               11
  Scroll of temple brotherhood                                   48
  Scribes question Jesus                                        126
  Scribes and Pharisees try to kill Jesus                       135
  Sea of Galilee, Christines by                                  88
  Searching for Jesus in mountain                               128
  Secret lesson to apostles                                128, 158
  Secret sins exposed                                            27
  Secret place for prayer, Jesus’                                39
  Secret place in Decapolis                                     127
  Seize Judas, Apostles                                         164
  Self exaltation, Jesus’ lesson on                        141, 146
  Self laudation brings abasement                               145
  Selfs, the two                                                  8
  Selfish ones find gate locked                                 141
  Selfishness, Jesus’ lesson on selfishness of the people  108, 125
  Sense of right in every man                                   111
  Senses sense what seems to be                                  71
  Seven, the number of all                                      133
  Seven hours in prayer                                         158
  Seven days’ silence, the Sages’                                56
  Seven days’ silence, the Harbinger                             61
  Seven postulates                                               58
  Seven, its meaning                                             48
  Seven days prayer, the Christines                             122
  Seven baskets full taken up                                   128
  Seven, number of Holy Breath                                   96
  Sevens of time in God’s hands                                  96
  Seventy sent out                                              133
  Seventy return                                                140
  Seventy, number of God and man                                133
  Seventy’s missionary tour                                     133
  Sermon on the Mount                                       95, 101
  Service basis of Judgment                                     158
  Service, acceptable                                            26
  Serve God by serving man                                       96
  Serving two masters                                            99
  Sheep gate                                                     91
  Sheep and Goats                                               158
  Shepherds in hills, Jesus with                                 76
  Shepherd’s home in Bethlehem                                   76
  Shinar, Plains of                                              43
  Sick healed in Bethlehem                                       76
  Sick servant of Asher healed                                   78
  Sick healed at Sychar                                          83
  Sick woman healed by thought                                   84
  Sick son of nobleman healed                                    87
  Sick and obsessed healed at Capernaum                          89
  Signs not seen before                                         157
  Signs demanded of Jesus                                        86
  Silence, Jesus’ lesson on                                      40
  Silence in the courts of Heaven                               158
  Silence, Jesus and disciples sit in                            66
  Silent Brotherhood                                    38, 87, 172
  Silent prayer, Christines                                     182
  Simeon’s prophecy                                               4
  Simon of Cyrene, cross bearer                                 168
  Sin against Holy Breath                                       105
  Sin and sickness synonymous                                    90
  Sins of priesthood, Jesus’ lesson                              72
  Sinless man called to stand                                   134
  Sinless man not found                                         134
  Sin, Jesus crosses                                             37
  Sleeping disciples                                            163
  Sly fox, Jesus calls Herod                                    141
  Soldiers charge Silent Brotherhood                            172
  Soldiers bribed by priests                                    172
  Son of man will come                                          145
  Sons of God, Jesus’ lesson on                             91, 147
  Songs on the mount                                            129
  Sonnets of the dead                                           117
  Sorrowing rich young man                                      142
  Soul communion                                                 84
  Soul not immortal                                             109
  Soul of Jesus with apostles                                   127
  Specialists in sin                                             68
  Spirit truth is new, must expand                              120
  Spirit consciousness                                          124
  Spirit law abhorred by man                                    100
  Spirit control, the law revealed                               37
  Spirit, light and purity                                      107
  Spirit immortal                                               109
  Spirits of wind and wave                                      117
  Spiritual man, ethics of                                      100
  Standard law of judging crime, no                             132
  Statement of Jesus before Pilate                              167
  Stealing bread, trial of man for                              132
  Stewards of God’s wealth                                      111
  Stone Jesus, Jews attempt to                                  147
  Storm on Sea of Galilee                                  117, 124
  Strength through effort                                        46
  Strength and wisdom fill Jesus                                104
  Striving of the apostles                                      160
  Substitute for Holy Name                                       96
  Susanna’s guests, Christines                                  128
  Swearing prohibited                                            99
  Sychar, Jesus teaches in                                       83


  T

  Tao, God of the Orient                                          9
  Tax paid by Jesus and Peter                                   131
  Tax money in fish’s mouth                                     131
  Teacher of Jesus, Mary                                         16
  Teacher of Jesus, Barachia                                     17
  Teaches doctors and lawyers, Jesus                             19
  Teaches from a boat, Jesus                                    115
  Teacher who is wise                                           101
  Temple courts, Jesus teaches in                          133, 130
  Temple of God is the heart                                     81
  Temple priests invite Jesus                                    29
  Temperance lesson by John                                      62
  Temperance lesson by Jesus                                     92
  Temptations of Jesus in Egypt                               48-55
    First temptation--Hypocrisy                                  48
    First victory                                                48
    First Brotherhood degree--Sincerity                          48
    Second temptation--Prejudice                                 49
    Second victory                                               49
    Second Brotherhood degree                                    49
    Third temptation--Unbelief                                   50
    Third victory                                                50
    Third Brotherhood degree--Faith                              50
    Fourth temptation--Selfishness                               51
    Fourth victory                                               51
    Fourth Brotherhood degree--Philanthropy                      51
    Fifth temptation--Fear                                       52
    Fifth victory                                                52
    Fifth Brotherhood degree                                     52
    Sixth temptation--Carnal love                                53
    Sixth victory                                                53
    Sixth Brotherhood degree                                     53
    Seventh temptation--Emotion                                  54
    Seventh victory                                              54
    Seventh Brotherhood degree--The Christ                       55
  Temptations of Jesus in the Wilderness                         65
    First; to demonstrate power over earth substances.
    Second; to demonstrate power over the air.
    Third; to demonstrate power over men through wealth.
  Tempting thoughts                                              65
  Ten Commands; is there a greatest                              17
  Ten Commandments                                               96
  Ten is the number of God                                      133
  Ten lepers cleansed                                            13
  Testimonies must all be in                                    167
  Thanks to God                                                 140
  Thankfulness of Jesus                                         194
  Theft defined by man                                           98
  Theft defined by God                                           98
  Thirty pieces of silver                                       159
  Thought--the First Postulate                                   58
  Thought the greatest power on earth                            84
  Thought, Jesus’ lesson on                                      84
  Three thousand baptized                                       182
  Tibet, Jesus in                                                36
  Tigres and Euphrates                                           42
  Toil should bring happiness                                    33
  Tombs of Gadara                                               118
  Tongues of fire                                               182
  Transfiguration of Jesus                                      129
  Treasures in heaven                                            99
  Treasures, anchor of the soul                                  99
  Tree without fruit cut down                                   105
  Treasure box of Christines                                    114
  Tree known by its fruit                                       101
  Trial hour for apostles                                       161
  Triumphant entry into Jerusalem                               151
  Tribute to Caesar                                             155
  Tribulations indescribable                                    157
  Trust in God; He will care                                     99
  Truth, defined by Jesus                                        22
  Truth, the leavening power                                     10
  Truth, spoken in kindness                                     111
  Tuesday, Jesus in Jerusalem                                   153
  Twelve is the number of the Jew                               133
  Tyre, Jesus in                                                123


  U

  Unbelief precludes great work                                  86
  Unclean spirits afraid of Jesus                               118
  Unclean spirits obey Jesus                                    118
  Unclean spirits in animals                                    118
  Unclean animals drowned in sea                                118
  Unfoldment, Jesus’ lesson on                                   25
  Unity of God and man                                           84
  Unity of God, foundation of law                                96
  Universal Brotherhood                                      28, 81
  Universal Fatherhood                                           28
  Universal Church                                               60
  Universal family                                              106
  Unrest in Jerusalem                                           134
  Ur of Chaldea, Jesus in                                        42
  Unsuccessful fishermen                                         88
  Upbraids disciples for striving                               160
  Upbraids Judas for treachery                                  164
  Upper gate of consciousness                                   142


  V

  Vidyapati endorses Jesus                                       32
  Vidyapati states needs of India                                56
  Vigilance essential                                           112
  Vine and branches                                         87, 161
  Virtue of healing waters                                       41
  Virtue the salt of life                                       131
  Virtueless people lost                                        131
  Vision of Pilate’s wife                                       167
  Vision of Jesus                                                16
  Voice from heaven testifies                                    64
  Vow of Secret Brotherhood                                      47


  W

  Wages based on intent                                         143
  Walked on water, Jesus                                        124
  Walked on water, Peter                                        124
  Wandering musicians                                            37
  Washes his hands in innocence, Pilate                         168
  Washed not hands before eating                                108
  Way to Christ, Jesus’ address on                              129
  Wealth of earth hinders progress                              112
  Wealth within the heart                                        33
  Wealth of soul is purity                                      111
  Wednesday, Jesus and twelve in Mount Olives                   158
  Wept over Jerusalem, Jesus                                    151
  White, symbol of virtue and purity                             76
  Wicked spirit sent to its own place                            83
  Wife of Pilate urges non-interference                         167
  Will, faith, helpfulness and love, Fifth Postulate             59
  Wilderness, place of Jesus’ self-examination                   65
  Wine, water changed into                                       70
  Wise men visit Jesus                                            5
  Wise men return home                                            5
  Wise men meet Jesus in Persepolis                              38
  Wisdom defined by Jesus                                        22
  Wisdom of Jesus attracts Ravanna                               21
  Withered fig tree, Jesus’ lesson on                           153
  Woes described by Jesus                                        95
  Woes on cities of Galilee                                103, 156
  Wolves in sheep’s clothing                                    101
  Woman with hemorrhage healed                                  120
  Woman of Samaria at Jacob’s well                               81
  Words may hide a lie                                           99
  Words of Jesus upon the cross                                 171
  Work of seven sages                                            56
  Worth of a soul                                               129
  Worth of the soul, its measure                                111
  Wounded Malchus healed by Jesus                               164


  Y

  Yoke of Christ easy                                           104


  Z

  Zacharias and Elizabeth home, near Hebron                       2
  Zaccheus called to entertain Jesus                            149
  Zaccheus tells story of own life                              149
  Zarathustra; philosophy and works                              10
  Zara, Persian wise man                                         38
  Zoan, Jesus in                                                 47




THE AQUARIAN GOSPEL

OF JESUS THE CHRIST.




SECTION I.

ALEPH.

_Birth and Early Life of Mary, Mother of Jesus._


CHAPTER 1.

    _Palestine. Birth of Mary. Joachim’s feast. Mary is blest by
      the priests. His prophecy. Mary abides in the temple. Is
      betrothed to Joseph._

Augustus Cæsar reigned and Herod Antipas was ruler of Jerusalem.

2  Three provinces comprised the land of Palestine: Judea, and Samaria,
and Galilee.

3  Joachim was a master of the Jewish law, a man of wealth; he lived in
Nazareth of Galilee; and Anna, of the tribe of Judah, was his wife.

4  To them was born a child, a goodly female child, and they were glad;
and Mary was the name they gave the child.

5  Joachim made a feast in honor of the child; but he invited not the
rich, the honored and the great; he called the poor, the halt, the
lame, the blind, and to each one he gave a gift of raiment, food, or
other needful thing.

6  He said, The Lord has given me this wealth; I am his steward by his
grace, and if I give not to his children when in need, then he will
make this wealth a curse.

7  Now, when the child was three years old her parents took her to
Jerusalem, and in the temple she received the blessings of the priests.

8  The high priest was a prophet and a seer, and when he saw the child
he said,

9  Behold, this child will be the mother of an honored prophet and a
master of the law; she shall abide within this holy temple of the Lord.

10  And Mary did abide within the temple of the Lord; and Hillel, chief
of the Sanhedrim, taught her all the precepts of the Jews, and she
delighted in the law of God.

11  When Mary reached the age of womanhood she was betrothed to Joseph,
son of Jacob, and a carpenter of Nazareth.

12  And Joseph was an upright man; and a devoted Essenes.




SECTION II.

BETH.

_Birth and Infancy of John, the Harbinger, and of Jesus._


