CHAPTER 81.

    _The Christines journey toward Galilee. They tarry for a time
      at Jacob’s well and Jesus teaches a woman of Samaria._

The Christine gate into the kingdom of the Holy One was opened up, and
Jesus and the six disciples and Lamaas left the Jordan ford and turned
their faces toward Galilee.

2  Their way lay through Samaria, and as they journeyed on they came to
Sychar, which was near the plot of ground that Jacob gave to Joseph
when a youth.

3  And Jacob’s well was there, and Jesus sat beside the well in silent
thought, and his disciples went into the town to purchase bread.

4  A woman of the town came out to fill her pitcher from the well; and
Jesus was athirst, and when he asked the woman for a drink she said,

5  I am a woman of Samaria, and you a Jew; do you not know that there
is enmity between Samaritans and Jews? They traffic not; then why ask
me the favor of a drink?

6  And Jesus said Samaritans and Jews are all the children of one God,
our Father-God, and they are kin.

7  It is but prejudice born of the carnal mind that breeds this enmity
and hate.

8  While I was born a Jew I recognize the brotherhood of life.
Samaritans are just as dear to me as Jew or Greek.

9  And then had you but known the blessings that our Father-God has
sent to men by me, you would have asked me for a drink,

10  And I would glad have given you a cup of water from the Fount of
Life, and you would never thirst again.

11  The woman said, This well is deep, and you have naught with which
to draw; how could you get the water that you speak about?

12  And Jesus said, The water that I speak about comes not from Jacob’s
well; it flows from springs that never fail.

13  Lo, every one who drinks from Jacob’s well will thirst again; but
they who drink the water that I give will never thirst again;

14  For they themselves become a well, and from their inner parts the
sparkling waters bubble up into eternal life.

15  The woman said, Sir, I would drink from that rich well of life.
Give me to drink, that I may thirst no more.

16  And Jesus said, Go call your husband from the town that he may
share with you this living cup.

17  The woman said, I have no husband, sir.

18  And Jesus answered her and said, You scarcely know what husband
means; you seem to be a gilded butterfly that flits from flower to
flower,

19  To you there is no sacredness in marriage ties, and you affinitize
with any man.

20  And you have lived with five of them who were esteemed as husbands
by your friends.

21  The woman said, Do I not speak unto a prophet and a seer? Will you
not condescend to tell me who you are?

22  And Jesus said, I need not tell you who I am for you have read the
Law, the Prophets and the Psalms that tell of me,

23  I am one come to break away the wall that separates the sons of
men. In Holy Breath there is no Greek, nor Jew, and no Samaritan; no
bond, nor free; for all are one.

24  The woman asked, Why do you say that only in Jerusalem men ought to
pray, and that they should not worship in our holy mount?

25  And Jesus said, What you have said, I do not say. One place is just
as sacred as another place.

26  The hour has come when men must worship God within the temple of
the heart; for God is not within Jerusalem, nor in your holy mount in
any way that he is not in every heart.

27  Our God is Spirit; they who worship him must worship him in spirit
and in truth.

28  The woman said, We know that when Messiah comes that he will lead
us in the ways of truth.

29  And Jesus said, Behold the Christ has come; Messiah speaks to you.


CHAPTER 82.

    _While Jesus is teaching, his disciples come and marvel because
      he speaks with a Samaritan. Many people from Sychar come to
      see Jesus. He speaks to them. With his disciples he goes to
      Sychar and remains for certain days._

While Jesus yet was talking to the woman at the well, the six
disciples came from Sychar with the food.

2  And when they saw him talking to a woman of Samaria, and one they
thought a courtesan, they were amazed; yet no one asked him why he
spoke with her.

3  The woman was so lost in thought and so intent on what the master
said, that she forgot her errand to the well; she left her pitcher and
ran quickly to the town.

4  She told the people all about the prophet she had met at Jacob’s
well; she said, He told me every thing I ever did.

5  And when the people would know more about the man, the woman said,
Come out and see. And multitudes went out to Jacob’s well.

6  When Jesus saw them come he said to those who followed him, You need
not say, It is four months before the harvest time;

7  Behold, the harvest time is now. Lift up your eyes and look; the
fields are golden with the ripened grain.

8  Lo, many sowers have gone forth to sow the seeds of life; the seed
has grown; the plants have strengthened in the summer sun; the grain
has ripened, and the master calls for men to reap.

9  And you shall go out in the fields and reap what other men have
sown; but when the reckoning day shall come the sowers and the reapers
all together will rejoice.

10  And Philip said to Jesus, Stay now your work a time and sit beneath
this olive tree and eat a portion of this food; you must be faint for
you have eaten naught since early day.

11  But Jesus said, I am not faint, for I have food to eat you know not
of.

12  Then the disciples said among themselves, Who could have brought
him aught to eat?

13  They did not know that he had power to turn the very ethers into
bread.

14  And Jesus said, The master of the harvest never sends his reapers
forth and feeds them not.

15  My Father who has sent me forth into the harvest field of human
life will never suffer me to want; and when he calls for you to serve,
lo, he will give you food, will clothe and shelter you.

16  Then turning to the people of Samaria, he said, Think not it
strange that I, a Jew, should speak to you, for I am one with you.

17  The universal Christ who was, and is, and evermore shall be, is
manifest in me; but Christ belongs to every man.

18  God scatters forth his blessings with a lavish hand, and he is not
more kind to one than to another one of all the creatures of his hand.

19  I just came up from Judah’s hills, and God’s same sun was shining
and his flowers were blooming, and in the night his stars were just as
bright as they are here.

20  God cannot cast a child away; the Jew, the Greek and the Samaritan
are equal in his sight.

21  And why should men and women fret and quarrel, like children in
their plays?

22  The lines that separate the sons of men are made of straw, and just
a single breath of love would blow them all away.

23  The people were amazed at what the stranger said, and many said,
The Christ that was to come has surely come.

24  And Jesus went with them into the town, and tarried certain days.


