CHAPTER 139.

    _Jesus meets and instructs the man who was blind. Unfolds the
      mysteries of the kingdom. The sheepfold. Declares himself
      the shepherd. Goes to the home of Massalian, where he abides
      certain days._

When Jesus heard what had been done and how the priests had cast the
man whom he had healed, out of the synagogue, he found the man and
said to him,

2  Do you believe in God and in the son of God?

3  The man replied, I do believe in God; but who is he, the son of God,
of whom you speak?

4  And Jesus said, The son of God is he who speaks to you.

5  The man inquired then, Why do you say, The son of God? Is there but
one?

6  And Jesus said, All men are sons of God by birth; God is the Father
of the race; but all are not the sons of God by faith.

7  He who attains the victory over self is son of God by faith, and
he who speaks to you has overcome, and he is called the son of God,
because he is the pattern for the sons of men.

8  He who believes and does the will of God is son of God by faith.

9  The man in joy exclaimed, Lord, I believe in God, and in the son of
God.

10  And Jesus said, I came to open prison doors, to make the blind to
see; but, lo, the Pharisees are blind from birth.

11  And when I put the salve of truth upon their eyes, and bid them go
and wash, and speak the sacred Word they will not go; they love the
dark.

12  A multitude of people pressed about the Lord, and he stood forth
and said,

13  You men of Israel, I say to you, The fold of God is large; its
walls are strong, it has a gateway in the east, and he who does not
enter by the gate into the fold, but climbs into the fold some other
way, is thief and comes to rob.

14  The shepherd of the sheep stands by the gate; he gives the secret
sign; he knocks; the watchman opens up the gate.

15  And then the shepherd calls his sheep by name; they hear his voice
and follow him; they enter through the gate into the fold.

16  The sheep know not a stranger’s voice; they will not follow him;
they flee away.

17  The people did not understand the parable that Jesus spoke; and
then he said,

18  Christ is the gateway of the fold; I am the shepherd of the sheep,
and he who follows me through Christ shall come into the fold where
living waters flow, and where rich pastures are.

19  False prophets come and go; they claim to be the shepherds of the
sheep; they claim to know the way, but they know not the word of
power; the watchman opens not the gate; the sheep heed not their call.

20  The shepherd of the sheep will give his life to save the sheep.

21  A hireling flees to save his life when wolves infest the fold;
and then the tender lambs are snatched away, the sheep are scattered
everywhere.

22  I am the shepherd of the sheep; I know the sheep of God; they know
my voice, as God knows me and I know him.

23  The Father loves me with a deathless love, because I lay my life
down for the sheep.

24  I lay my life down when I will, but I may take it up again; for
every son of God by faith has power to lay his mortal flesh aside and
take it up again. These words I have received from God.

25  Again the people strove among themselves; they were divided in
their views concerning Christ. They could not comprehend the words
that Jesus spoke.

26  Some said again, He is obsessed, or he is mad; why listen to his
words?

27  And others said, His words are not the words of one obsessed. Can
unclean spirits open up the eyes of one born blind?

28  Then Jesus left Jerusalem and with Massalian he tarried certain
days.


CHAPTER 140.

    _Jesus and the three disciples return to Capernaum. Jesus
      receives the report of the seventy. With his disciples he
      goes through all Galilee encouraging the believers. He heals
      a woman. Relates the parable of the little seed and the great
      tree._

The time had come for the return of the three score and ten whom Jesus
sent abroad to preach.

2  And Jesus, Peter, James and John began their journey back to Galilee.

3  They went up through Samaria; they passed through many villages and
towns, and everywhere the people thronged the ways to see the man the
seventy had told about; and Jesus taught and healed the sick.

4  And when they reached Capernaum the seventy were there; and they
were filled with joy; they said,

5  The Spirit of the Lord of hosts was with us all the way, and we were
filled.

6  The power of the sacred Word was manifest in us; we healed the sick;
we caused the lame to walk, the deaf to hear, the blind to see.

7  The very devils trembled when we spoke the Word, and they were
subject unto us.

8  And Jesus said, As you were going on your way, the heavens were
bright with light, the earth was bright, they seemed to meet and be at
one; and I beheld, and Satan fell as lightning from the heavens.

9  Behold, for you have power to tread on serpents and on scorpions,
and these are symbols of the enemies of men. You are protected in the
way of right, and naught can harm.

10  And as you went I heard a master say, Well done.

11  But you may not rejoice because you have the power to heal the sick
and make the devils tremble by the Word; for such rejoicing is from
carnal self.

12  You may rejoice because the nations of the earth have ears to hear
the Word, and eyes to see the glory of the Lord, and hearts to feel
the inner breathing of the Holy Breath.

13  And you may well be glad because your names are written in the Book
of Life.

14  Then Jesus looked to heaven and said, I thank thee, Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, because thou hast revealed thyself to babes, and
taught them how to light the path and lead the wise to thee.

15  What thou hast given to me, lo, I have given to them, and through
the sacred Word I have bestowed on them the understanding heart,

16  That they might know and honor thee through Christ, who was, and
is, and evermore shall be.

17  And then he said aside, unto the seventy and twelve, Most blessed
are your eyes because you see the things you see;

18  And blessed are your ears because they hear the things they hear;

19  And blessed are your hearts because you understand.

20  In ages that are gone the wise of earth, the prophets, seers and
kings, desired to hear and see and know what you have heard and seen
and known; but they had not attained and could not hear, and see and
know.

21  And Jesus said again, Lo, I have gone before you many moons, and I
have given to you the bread of heaven and the cup of life;

22  Have been your buckler and your stay; but now that you have learned
the way, and have the strength to stand alone, behold, I lay my body
down and go to him who is the All.

23  In forty days then we will turn our faces toward Jerusalem where I
will find the altar of the Lord and give my life in willing sacrifice
for men.

24  Let us arise and go through all the coasts of Galilee, and give a
salutation of good cheer to all the sons of God by faith.

25  And they arose and went; they entered every town and village on the
coast, and everywhere they said, The benedictions of the Christ abide
with you forevermore.

26  Now, in a certain town they went up to the synagogue upon the
Sabbath day, and Jesus taught.

27  And as he spoke, two men brought on a cot a woman bent near double
with disease; she had not risen from her bed for eighteen years
without a helping hand.

28  And Jesus laid his hand upon the woman, and he said, Arise, be free
from your infirmity.

29  And as he spoke the Word the woman found that she was straight and
strong, and she arose and walked and said, Praise God.

30  The ruler of the synagogue was filled with wrath because the healer
healed upon the Sabbath day.

31  He did not censure Jesus face to face, but turning to the
multitudes he said,

32  You men of Galilee, why do you break the laws of God? There are
six days in every week when you may work, and then you may bring the
afflicted to be healed.

33  This is the day that God has blessed, the Sabbath day in which men
may not work.

34  And Jesus said, You inconsistent scribes and Pharisees! Upon the
Sabbath day you take your beasts of burden from their stalls, and lead
them forth to eat and drink; is this not work?

35  This daughter of your father Abraham, who has been bound for
eighteen years, has come in faith to be made free.

36  Now, tell me, men, is it a crime to break her bonds and set her
free upon the Sabbath day?

37  The ruler said no more; the people all rejoiced and said, Behold
the Christ!

38  And Jesus spoke a parable; he said, The kingdom of the Christ is
like a little seed that one put in the ground;

39  It grew and after many years became a mighty tree, and many people
rested in its shade, and birds built nests and reared their young
among its leafy boughs.


