CHAPTER 49.

    _Jesus passes the second brotherhood test, and receives the
      second degree, JUSTICE._

The Logos did not care to rest; he said, Why wait in this luxurious
room? I need not rest; my Father’s work upon me presses hard.

2  I would go on and learn my lessons all. If there are trials, let
them come, for every victory over self gives added strength.

3  And then the guide led on, and in a chamber, dark as night, was
Jesus placed and left alone; and days were spent in this deep solitude.

4  And Jesus slept, and in the dead of night a secret door was opened,
and, in priest’s attire, two men came in; each carried in his hand a
little flickering lamp.

5  Approaching Jesus, one spoke out and said, Young man, our hearts are
grieved because of what you suffer in these fearful dens, and we have
come as friends to bring you light, and show the way to liberty.

6  We once, like you, were in these dens confined, and thought that
through these weird, uncanny ways we could attain to blessedness and
power;

7  But in a luckful moment we were undeceived, and, making use of all
our strength, we broke our chains, and then we learned that all this
service is corruption in disguise. These priests are criminals just
hid away.

8  They boast in sacrificial rites; they offer to their gods, and burn
them while alive, poor birds, and beasts; yea, children, women, men.

9  And now they keep you here, and, at a certain time, may offer you in
sacrifice.

10  We pray you, brother, break your chains; come, go with us; accept
of freedom while you may.

11  And Jesus said, Your little tapers show the light you bring. Pray,
who are you? The words of man are worth no more than is the man
himself.

12  These temple walls are strong and high; how gained you entrance to
this place?

13  The men replied, Beneath these walls are many hidden ways, and we
who have been priests, spent months and years within these dens, know
all of them.

14  Then you are traitors, Jesus said. A traitor is a fiend; he who
betrays another man is never man to trust.

15  If one has only reached the plane of treachery, he is a lover of
deceit, and will betray a friend to serve his selfish self.

16  Behold, you men, or whatsoe’er you be, your words fall lightly on
my ears,

17  Could I prejudge these hundred priests, turn traitor to myself and
them, because of what you say when you confess your treachery?

18  No man can judge for me; and if I judge till testimony all is in I
might not judge aright.

19  Nay, men; by whatsoever way you came, return. My soul prefers the
darkness of the grave to little flickering lights like these you bring.

20  My conscience rules; what these, my brothers, have to say I’ll
hear, and when the testimony all is in I will decide. You cannot judge
for me, nor I for you,

21  Begone, you men, begone, and leave me to this charming light; for
while the sun shines not, within my soul there is a light surpassing
that of sun or moon.

22  Then, with an angry threat that they would do him harm, the wily
tempters left, and Jesus was again alone.

23  Again the white-robed priest appeared, and led the way, and Jesus
stood again before the hierophant;

24  And not a word was said, but in his hands the master placed a
scroll on which the word suggestive, JUSTICE, was inscribed.

25  And Jesus was the master of the phantom forms of prejudice and of
treachery.


CHAPTER 50.

    _Jesus passes the third brotherhood test, and receives the
      third degree, FAITH._

The Logos waited seven days, and then was taken to the Hall of Fame, a
chamber rich in furnishings, and lighted up with gold and silver lamps.

2  The colors of its ceilings, decorations, furnishings and walls were
blue and gold.

3  Its shelves were filled with books of master minds; the paintings
and the statues were the works of highest art.

4  And Jesus was entranced with all this elegance and these manifests
of thought. He read the sacred books, and sought the meanings of the
symbols and the hieroglyphs.

5  And when he was absorbed in deepest thought, a priest approached and
said,

6  Behold the glory of this place! my brother you are highly blest. Few
men of earth, so young, have reached such heights of fame.

7  Now, if you do not waste your life in search for hidden things that
men can never comprehend, you may be founder of a school of thought
that will insure you endless fame;

8  For your philosophy is deeper far than that of Plato, and your
teachings please the common people more than those of Socrates.

9  Why seek for mystic light within these antiquated dens? Go forth and
walk with men, and think with men, and they will honor you.

10  And, after all, these weird initiations may be myths, and your
Messiah hopes but base illusions of the hour.

11  I would advise you to renounce uncertain things and choose the
course that leads to certain fame.

12  And thus the priest, a demon in disguise, sung syren songs of
unbelief; and Jesus meditated long and well on what he said.

13  The conflict was a bitter one, for king Ambition is a sturdy foe to
fight.

14  For forty days the higher wrestled with the lower self, and then
the fight was won.

15  Faith rose triumphant; unbelief was not. Ambition covered up his
face and fled away, and Jesus said,

16  The wealth, the honor, and the fame of earth are but the baubles of
an hour.

17  When this short span of earthly life has all been measured out,
man’s bursting baubles will be buried with his bones.

18  Yea, what a man does for his selfish self will make no markings on
the credit side of life.

19  The good that men for other men shall do becomes a ladder strong on
which the soul may climb to wealth, and power and fame of God’s own
kind, that cannot pass away,

20  Give me the poverty of men, the consciousness of duty done in love,
the approbation of my God, and I will be content.

21  And then he lifted up his eyes to heaven and said,

22  My Father-God, I thank thee for this hour. I ask not for the glory
of thyself; I fain would be a keeper of thy temple gates, and serve my
brother man.

23  Again was Jesus called to stand before the hierophant; again no
word was said, but in his hands the master placed a scroll on which
was written FAITH.

24  And Jesus bowed his head in humble thanks; then went his way.


