CHAPTER 28.

    _Udraka gives a feast in Jesus’ honor. Jesus speaks on the
      unity of God and the brotherhood of life. Criticises the
      priesthood. Becomes the guest of a farmer._

Benares is the sacred city of the Brahms, and in Benares Jesus taught;
Udraka was his host.

2  Udraka made a feast in honor of his guest, and many high born Hindu
priests and scribes were there.

3  And Jesus said to them, With much delight I speak to you concerning
life--the brotherhood of life.

4  The universal God is one, yet he is more than one; all things are
God; all things are one.

5  By the sweet breaths of God all life is bound in one; so if you
touch a fiber of a living thing you send a thrill from center to the
outer bounds of life.

6  And when you crush beneath your foot the meanest worm, you shake the
throne of God, and cause the sword of right to tremble in its sheath.

7  The bird sings out its song for men, and men vibrate in unison to
help it sing.

8  The ant constructs her home, the bee its sheltering comb, the spider
weaves her web, and flowers breathe to them a spirit in their sweet
perfumes that gives them strength to toil.

9  Now, men and birds and beasts and creeping things are deities, made
flesh; and how dare men kill anything?

10  ’Tis cruelty that makes the world awry. When men have learned that
when they harm a living thing they harm themselves, they surely will
not kill, nor cause a thing that God has made to suffer pain.

11  A lawyer said, I pray you, Jesus, tell who is this God you speak
about; where are his priests, his temples and his shrines?

12  And Jesus said, The God I speak about is every where; he cannot be
compassed with walls, nor hedged about with bounds of any kind.

13  All people worship God, the One; but all the people see him not
alike.

14  This universal God is wisdom, will and love.

15  All men see not the Triune God. One sees him as the God of might;
another as the God of thought; another as the God of love.

16  A man’s ideal is his God, and so, as man unfolds, his God unfolds.
Man’s God today, tomorrow is not God.

17  The nations of the earth see God from different points of view, and
so he does not seem the same to every one.

18  Man names the part of God he sees, and this to him is all of God;
and every nation sees a part of God, and every nation has a name for
God.

19  You Brahmans call him Parabrahm; in Egypt he is Thoth; and Zeus is
his name in Greece; Jehovah is his Hebrew name; but everywhere he is
the causeless Cause, the rootless Root from which all things have
grown.

20  When men become afraid of God, and take him for a foe, they dress
up other men in fancy garbs and call them priests,

21  And charge them to restrain the wrath of God by prayers; and when
they fail to win his favor by their prayers, to buy him off with
sacrifice of animal, or bird,

22  When man sees God as one with him, as Father-God, he needs no
middle man, no priest to intercede;

23  He goes straight up to him and says, My Father-God! and then he
lays his hand in God’s own hand, and all is well.

24  And this is God. You are, each one, a priest, just for yourself;
and sacrifice of blood God does not want.

25  Just give your life in sacrificial service to the all of life, and
God is pleased.

26  When Jesus had thus said he stood aside; the people were amazed,
but strove among themselves.

27  Some said, He is inspired by Holy Brahm; and others said, He is
insane; and others said, He is obsessed; he speaks as devils speak.

28  But Jesus tarried not. Among the guests was one, a tiller of the
soil, a generous soul, a seeker after truth, who loved the words that
Jesus spoke; and Jesus went with him, and in his home abode.


CHAPTER 29.

    _Ajainin, a priest from Lahore, comes to Benares to see Jesus,
      and abides in the temple. Jesus refuses an invitation to
      visit the temple. Ajainin visits him at night in the farmer’s
      home, and accepts his philosophy._

Among Benares’ temple priests was one, a guest, Ajainin, from Lahore.

2  By merchantmen Ajainin heard about the Jewish boy, about his words
of wisdom, and he girt himself and journeyed from Lahore that he might
see the boy, and hear him speak.

3  The Brahmic priests did not accept the truth that Jesus brought, and
they were angered much by what he said at the Udraka feast.

4  But they had never seen the boy, and they desired much to hear him
speak, and they invited him to be a temple guest.

5  But Jesus said to them, The light is most abundant, and it shines
for all; if you would see the light come to the light.

6  If you would hear the message that the Holy One has given me to give
to men, come unto me.

7  Now, when the priests were told what Jesus said they were enraged.

8  Ajainin did not share their wrath, and he sent forth another
messenger with costly gifts to Jesus at the farmer’s home; he sent
this message with the gifts:

9  I pray you, master, listen to my words; The Brahmic law forbids that
any priest shall go into the home of any one of low estate; but you
can come to us;

10  And I am sure these priests will gladly hear you speak. I pray that
you will come and dine with us this day.

11  And Jesus said, The Holy One regards all men alike; the dwelling of
my host is good enough for any council of the sons of men.

12  If pride of caste keeps you away, you are not worthy of the light.
My Father-God does not regard the laws of man.

13  Your presents I return; you cannot buy the knowledge of the Lord
with gold, or precious gifts.

14  These words of Jesus angered more and more the priests, and they
began to plot and plan how they might drive him from the land.

15  Ajainin did not join with them in plot and plan; he left the temple
in the night, and sought the home where Jesus dwelt.

16  And Jesus said, There is no night where shines the sun; I have no
secret messages to give; in light all secrets are revealed.

17  Ajainin said, I came from far-away Lahore, that I might learn about
this ancient wisdom, and this kingdom of the Holy One of which you
speak.

18  Where is the kingdom? where the king? Who are the subjects? what
its laws?

19  And Jesus said, This kingdom is not far away, but man with mortal
eyes can see it not; it is within the heart.

20  You need not seek the king in earth, or sea, or sky; he is not
there, and yet is everywhere. He is the Christ of God; is universal
love.

21  The gate of this dominion is not high, and he who enters it must
fall down on his knees. It is not wide, and none can carry carnal
bundles through.

22  The lower self must be transmuted into spirit-self; the body must
be washed in living streams of purity.

23  Ajainin asked, Can I become a subject of this king?

24  And Jesus said, You are yourself a king, and you may enter through
the gate and be a subject of the King of kings.

25  But you must lay aside your priestly robes; must cease to serve the
Holy One for gold; must give your life, and all you have, in willing
service to the sons of men.

26  And Jesus said no more; Ajainin went his way; and while he could
not comprehend the truth that Jesus spoke, he saw what he had never
seen before.

27  The realm of faith he never had explored; but in his heart the
seeds of faith and universal brotherhood had found good soil.

28  And as he journeyed to his home he seemed to sleep, to pass through
darkest night, and when he woke the Sun of Righteousness had arisen;
he had found the king.

29  Now, in Benares Jesus tarried many days and taught.


