CHAPTER 147.

    _Jesus speaks to the people in the temple regarding the
      messiahship. Rebukes the Jews for treachery. The Jews attempt
      to stone him, but are prevented by Joseph. The Christines go
      to Jericho, and later to Bethabara._

Now, many Jews from Galilee, Judea and Samaria were in Jerusalem and
at the feast.

2  The porch of Solomon was filled with scribes and Pharisees and
doctors of the law, and Jesus walked with them.

3  A scribe approaching Jesus said, Rabboni, why do you keep the people
waiting in suspense? If you are the Messiah that the prophets said
would come, will you not tell us now?

4  And Jesus said, Lo, I have told you many times, but you believed me
not.

5  No man can do the work that I have done and bring to men the truth
as I have brought the truth who did not come from God.

6  What I have done and said are witnesses for me.

7  God calls, and they whose ears have been attuned to hear the
heavenly voice have heard the call and have believed in me; because
God testifies for me.

8  You cannot hear the voice of God, because your ears are closed. You
cannot comprehend the works of God, because your hearts are full of
self.

9  And you are busy-bodies, mischief-makers, hypocrites. You take these
men whom God has given me into your haunts and try to poison them with
sophistries and lies, and think that you will snatch them from the
fold of God.

10  I tell you, men, these men are tried and you can snatch not one of
them away.

11  My Father who has given them to me is greater than you all, and he
and I are one.

12  And then the Jews took stones to throw at him and cried, Now we
have heard enough; away with him; let him be stoned.

13  But Joseph, member of the great Sanhedrim of the Jews, was in the
porch and he came forth and said,

14  You men of Israel, do nothing rash; throw down those stones; your
reason is a better guide than passion in such times as these.

15  You do not know your accusations to be true, and if this man should
prove himself to be the Christ, and you should take his life, the
wrath of God would rest upon you evermore.

16  And Jesus said to them, Lo, I have healed your sick, have caused
your blind to see, your deaf to hear, your lame to walk, and cast out
unclean spirits from your friends;

17  For which of these great works would you desire to take my life?

18  The Jews replied, We would not stone you for your works of grace,
but for your vile, blasphemous words. You are but man and still you
say that you are God.

19  And Jesus said, A prophet of your own said to the sons of men, Lo,
you are gods!

20  Now, hark, you men, if he could say that to the men who simply
heard the word of God, why should you think that I blaspheme the name
of God because I say, I am a son of God?

21  If you believe not what I say you must have faith in what I do, and
you should see the Father in these works, and know that I dwell in the
Father-God, and that the Father dwells in me.

22  And then again the Jews took stones and would have stoned him in
the temple court; but he withdrew himself from sight and left the
porch and court and went his way;

23  And with the twelve he went to Jericho, and after certain days
they crossed the Jordan and in Bethabara abode for many days.


CHAPTER 148.

    _Lazarus dies and Jesus and the twelve return to Bethany. The
      resurrection of Lazarus, which greatly excites the rulers in
      Jerusalem. The Christines go to the hills of Ephriam, and
      there abide._

One day as Jesus and the twelve were in the silence in a home in Araba
a messenger came and said,

2  Lord, Jesus, hear! your friend in Bethany is sick, nigh unto death;
his sisters urge that you arise and come in haste.

3  Then turning to the twelve the master said, Lo, Lazarus has gone to
sleep, and I must go and waken him.

4  And his disciples said, What need to go if he has gone to sleep; he
will awaken by and by?

5  Then Jesus said, It is the sleep of death; for Lazarus is dead.

6  But Jesus did not haste to go; he stayed two days in Araba; and then
he said, The hour has come and we must go to Bethany.

7  But his disciples urged him not to go; they said, The Jews are
waiting your return that they may take your life.

8  And Jesus said, Men cannot take my life till I have handed unto them
my life.

9  And when the time shall come I will myself lay down my life; that
time is near, and God knows best; I must arise and go.

10  And Thomas said, Then we will also go; yes, we will offer up our
lives and die with him. And they arose and went.

11  Now, Mary, Martha, Ruth and many friends were weeping in their home
when one approached and said, The Lord has come; but Mary did not hear
the words.

12  But Ruth and Martha heard, and they arose and went to meet the
Lord; he waited at the village gate.

13  And when they met the master Martha said, You are too late, for
Lazarus is dead; if you had only been with us I know that he would not
have died.

14  But even now I know that you have power over death; that by the
sacred Word you may cause life to rise from death.

15  And Jesus said, Behold, for Lazarus shall live again.

16  And Martha said, I know that he will rise and live again when all
the dead shall rise.

17  And Jesus said, I am the resurrection and the life; he who has
faith in me, though he be dead, yet shall he live;

18  And he who is alive, and has a living faith in me, shall never die.
Do you believe what I have said?

19  And Martha said, Lord, I believe that you are come to manifest the
Christ of God.

20  Then Jesus said, Go back and call aside your sister, and my mother
and the prophetess and say that I have come; and I will stay here by
the gate till they have come to me.

21  And Ruth and Martha did as Jesus bade them do, and in a little
while the Marys and the prophetess had met the Lord.

22  And Mary said, Why did you tarry thus? If you had been with us our
brother, dear, would not have died.

23  Then Jesus went up to the house and when he saw the heavy grief of
all, he was himself stirred up with grief, and said, Where is the
tomb in which he lies?

24  They said, Lord, come and see. And Jesus wept.

25  The people said, Behold how Jesus loved this man!

26  And others said, Could not this Lord who opened up the eyes of one
born blind, have saved this man from death?

27  But soon the mourners stood beside the tomb, a sepulcher hewn out
of solid rock; a massive stone closed up the door.

28  And Jesus said, Take you away the stone.

29  But Martha said, Lord, is it well? Behold our brother has been dead
four days; the body must be in decay, and is it well that we should
see it now?

30  The Lord replied, Have you forgotten, Martha, what I said while we
were at the village gate? Did I not say that you should see the glory
of the Lord?

31  And then they rolled the stone away; the flesh had not decayed; and
Jesus lifted up his eyes to heaven and said,

32  My Father-God, thou who hast ever heard my prayers, I thank thee
now, and that these multitudes may know that thou hast sent me forth,
that I am thine and thou art mine, make strong the Word of power.

33  And then he spoke the Word, and in a voice that souls can
comprehend, he said, O Lazarus, awake!

34  And Lazarus arose and came out of the tomb. The grave clothes were
about him fast, and Jesus said,

35  Loose him and let him go.

36  The people were amazed and multitudes confessed their faith in him.

37  And some went to Jerusalem and told the Pharisees about this
resurrection of the dead.

38  The chief priests were confounded, and they said, What shall we do?
This man is doing many mighty deeds, and if we do not stay him in his
work, all men will look on him as king, and through the Romans he may
take the throne, and we will lose our place and power.

39  And then the chief priests and the Pharisees in council met and
sought a plan by which they might put him to death.

40  Caiaphas was the high priest then, and he came forth and said, You
men of Israel, do you not know the law?

41  Do you not know that in such times as these we may give up one life
to save our nation and our laws?

42  Caiaphas did not know that he was prophet, speaking out the words
of truth.

43  He did not know the time had come for Jesus to be offered up a
sacrifice for every man, for Jew and Greek, and all the world.

44  From that day forth the Jews conferred together every day, maturing
plans to put the Lord to death.

45  Now, Jesus and the twelve did not remain in Bethany; but in the
hills of Ephriam, upon the borders of Samaria, they found a home, and
there abode for many days.


