CHAPTER 4.

    _Consecration of Jesus. Mary offers sacrifices. Simeon and Anna
      prophesy. Anna is rebuked for worshipping the child. The
      family returns to Bethlehem._

Now, Mary took her son, when he was forty days of age, up to the
temple in Jerusalem, and he was consecrated by the priest.

2  And then she offered purifying sacrifices for herself, according to
the custom of the Jews; a lamb and two young turtle doves.

3  A pious Jew named Simeon was in the temple serving God.

4  From early youth he had been looking for Immanuel to come, and he
had prayed to God that he might not depart until his eyes had seen
Messiah in the flesh.

5  And when he saw the infant Jesus he rejoiced and said, I now am
ready to depart in peace, for I have seen the king.

6  And then he took the infant in his arms and said, Behold, this child
will bring a sword upon my people, Israel, and all the world; but he
will break the sword and then the nations will learn war no more.

7  The master’s cross I see upon the forehead of this child, and he
will conquer by this sign.

8  And in the temple was a widow, four and eighty years of age, and she
departed not, but night and day she worshipped God.

9  And when she saw the infant Jesus she exclaimed, Behold Immanuel!
Behold the signet cross of the Messiah on his brow!

10  And then the woman knelt to worship him, as God with us, Immanuel;
but one, a master clothed in white, appeared and said,

11  Good woman, stay; take heed to what you do; you may not worship
man; this is idolatry.

12  This child is man, the son of man, and worthy of all praise. You
shall adore and worship God; him only shall you serve.

13  The woman rose and bowed her head in thankfulness and worshipped
God.

14  And Mary took the infant Jesus and returned to Bethlehem.


CHAPTER 5.

    _Three magian priests honor Jesus. Herod is alarmed. Calls a
      council of the Jews. Is told that prophets had foretold the
      coming of a king. Herod resolves to kill the child. Mary and
      Joseph take Jesus and flee into Egypt._

Beyond the river Euphrates the magians lived; and they were wise,
could read the language of the stars and they divined that one, a
master soul, was born; they saw his star above Jerusalem.

2  And there were three among the magian priests who longed to see the
master of the coming age; and they took costly gifts and hastened to
the West in search of him, the new-born king, that they might honor
him.

3  And one took gold, the symbol of nobility; another myrrh, the symbol
of dominion and of power; gum-thus the other took, the symbol of the
wisdom of the sage.

4  Now when the magians reached Jerusalem the people were amazed, and
wondered who they were and why they came.

5  And when they asked, Where is the child that has been born a king?
the very throne of Herod seemed to shake.

6  And Herod sent a courtier forth to bring the magians to his court.

7  And when they came they asked again, Where is the new born king? And
then they said, While yet beyond the Euphrates we saw his star arise,
and we have come to honor him.

8  And Herod blanched with fear. He thought, perhaps, the priests were
plotting to restore the kingdom of the Jews, and so he said within
himself, I will know more about this child that has been born a king.

9  And so he told the magian priests to tarry in the city for a while
and he would tell them all about the king.

10  He called in council all the Jewish masters of the law and asked,
What have the Jewish prophets said concerning such a one?

11  The Jewish masters answered him and said, The prophets long ago
foretold that one would come to rule the tribes of Israel; that this
Messiah would be born in Bethlehem.

12  They said, The prophet Micah wrote, O Bethlehem Judea, a little
place among the Judean hills, yet out of you will one come forth to
rule my people, Israel; yea, one who lived in olden times, in very
ancient days.

13  Then Herod called the magian priests again and told them what the
masters of the Jewish law had said; and then he sent them on the way
to Bethlehem.

14  He said, Go search, and if you find the child that has been born a
king, return and tell me all, that I may go and honor him.

15  The magians went their way and found the child with Mary in the
shepherd’s home.

16  They honored him; bestowed upon him precious gifts and gave him
gold, gum-thus and myrrh.

17  These magian priests could read the hearts of men; they read the
wickedness of Herod’s heart, and knew that he had sworn to kill the
new born king.

18  And so they told the secret to the parents of the child, and bid
them flee beyond the reach of harm.

19  And then the priests went on their homeward way; they went not
through Jerusalem.

20  And Joseph took the infant Jesus and his mother in the night and
fled to Egypt land, and with Elihu and Salome in ancient Zoan they
abode.


