CHAPTER 66.

    _Six of John’s disciples follow Jesus and become his disciples.
      He teaches them. They sit in the Silence._

Among the followers of John were many men from Galilee. The most
devout were Andrew, Simon, James, and John, with Philip and his
brother of Bethsaida.

2  One day as Andrew, Philip and a son of Zebedee, were talking with
the harbinger, the Logos came, and John exclaimed, Behold the Christ!

3  And then the three disciples followed Jesus, and he asked, What do
you seek?

4  And the disciples asked, Where do you live? And Jesus answered, Come
and see.

5  And Andrew called his brother Simon, saying, Come with me, for I
have found the Christ.

6  When Jesus looked in Simon’s face he said, Behold a rock! and Peter
is your name.

7  And Philip found Nathaniel sitting by a tree, and said, My brother,
come with me, for I have found the Christ! In Nazareth he abides.

8  Nathaniel said, Can anything of good come out of Nazareth? And
Philip answered, Come and see.

9  When Jesus saw Nathaniel come he said, Behold an Israelite indeed in
whom there is no guile!

10  Nathaniel said, How can you speak about me thus?

11  And Jesus said, I saw you as you sat beneath the fig tree over
there, before your brother called.

12  Nathaniel lifted up his hands and said, This surely is the Christ,
the king, for whom the harbinger has often testified.

13  And John went forth and found his brother James, and brought him to
the Christ.

14  The six disciples went with Jesus to the place where he abode.

15  And Peter said, We long have sought for Christ. We came from
Galilee to John; we thought that he was Christ, but he confessed to us
that he was not;

16  That he was but the harbinger sent forth to clear the way, and
make the pathway easy for the coming king; and when you came he said,
Behold the Christ!

17  And we would gladly follow where you go. Lord, tell us what to do.

18  And Jesus said, The foxes of the earth have homes, the birds have
nests; I have no place to lay my head.

19  He who would follow me must give up all the cravings of the self
and lose his life in saving life.

20  I come to save the lost, and man is saved when he is rescued from
himself. But men are slow to comprehend this doctrine of the Christ.

21  And Peter said, I cannot speak for any other man, but for myself I
speak: I will leave all and follow where you lead.

22  And then the others spoke and said, You have the words of truth;
you came from God, and if we follow in your footsteps we cannot miss
the way.

23  Then Jesus and the six disciples sat a long, long time in silent
thought.


CHAPTER 67.

    _Jesus visits John at the Jordan. Delivers his first Christine
      address to the people. The address. He goes with his
      disciples to Bethany._

Now, on the morrow Jesus came again and stood with John beside the
ford; and John prevailed on him to speak, and standing forth he said,

2  You men of Israel, hear! The kingdom is at hand.

3  Behold the great key-keeper of the age stands in your midst; and
with the spirit of Elijah he has come.

4  Behold, for he has turned the key; the mighty gates fly wide and all
who will may greet the king.

5  Behold these multitudes of women, children, men! they throng the
avenues, they crowd the outer courts; each seems to be intent to be
the first to meet the king.

6  Behold, the censor comes and calls, Whoever will may come; but he
who comes must will to prune himself of every evil thought;

7  Must overcome desire to gratify the lower self; must give his life
to save the lost.

8  The nearer to the kingdom gate you come, more spacious is the room;
the multitudes have gone.

9  If men could come unto the kingdom with their carnal thoughts, their
passions and desires, there scarcely would be room for all.

10  But when they cannot take these through the narrow gate they turn
away; the few are ready to go in and see the king.

11  Behold, John is a mighty fisher, fishing for the souls of men. He
throws his great net out into the sea of human life; he draws it in
and it is full.

12  But what a medley catch! a catch of crabs, and lobsters, sharks and
creeping things, with now and then a fish of better kind.

13  Behold, the thousands come to hear the Wild Man of the hills; they
come in crowds that he may wash them in the crystal flood, and with
their lips they do confess their sins.

14  But when the morrow comes we find them in their haunts of vice
again, reviling John, and cursing God, and heaping insults on the king.

15  But blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see the king.

16  And blessed are the strong in heart, for they shall not be cast
about by every wind that blows;

17  But while the fickle and the thoughtless have gone back to Egypt
land for leeks and carnal herbs to satisfy their appetites, the pure
in heart have found the king.

18  But even those whose faith is weak, and who are naught but carnal
manifests, will some day come again, and enter in with joy to see the
king.

19  O men of Israel, take heed to what this prophet has to say! Be
strong in mind; be pure in heart; be vigilant in helpfulness; the
kingdom is at hand.

20  When Jesus had thus said he went his way, and with his six
disciples came to Bethany; and they abode with Lazarus many days.


