CHAPTER 132.

    _Jesus defends a man who has been convicted of stealing bread.
      The verdict is reversed. The man goes free, and the people
      supply the needs of his starving family._

A multitude of people thronged the streets. The officers were on the
way to court with one, a man accused of stealing bread.

2  And in a little while the man was brought before the judge to answer
to the charge.

3  And Jesus and the twelve were there. The man showed in his face and
hands the hard drawn lines of toil and want.

4  A woman richly clad, the accuser of the man, stood forth and said, I
caught this man myself; I know him well, for yesterday he came to beg
for bread,

5  And when I drove him from my door, he should have known that I would
harbor not a man like him; and then today he came and took the bread.

6  He is a thief and I demand that he be sent to jail.

7  The servants also testified against the man; he was adjudged a
thief, and officers were leading him away.

8  But Jesus standing forth exclaimed, You officers and judge, be not
in haste to lead this man away.

9  Is this a land of justice and of right? can you accuse and sentence
men to punishment for any crime until they testify themselves?

10  The Roman law will not permit such travesty on right, and I demand
that you permit this man to speak.

11  And then the judge recalled the man and said, If you have any tale
to tell, say on.

12  In tears the man stood forth and said, I have a wife and little
ones and they are perishing for bread, and I have told my story oft,
and begged for bread; but none would hear.

13  This morning when I left our cheerless hut in search of work my
children cried for bread, and I resolved to feed them or to die.

14  I took the bread, and I appeal to God, Was it a crime?

15  This woman snatched the loaf away and threw it to the dogs, and
called the officers and I am here.

16  Good people, do with me whate’er you will, but save my wife and
little ones from death.

17  Then Jesus said, Who is the culprit in this case?

18  I charge this woman as a felon in the sight of God.

19  I charge this judge as criminal before the bar of human rights.

20  I charge these servants and these officers as parties to the crime.

21  I charge the people of Capernaum with cruelty and theft, because
they heeded not the cries of poverty and want, and have withheld from
helpless ones that which is theirs by every law of right;

22  And I appeal unto these people here, and ask, Are not my charges
based on righteousness and truth?

23  And every man said, Yes.

24  The accusing woman blushed for shame; the judge shrank back in
fear; the officers threw off the shackles from the man and ran away.

25  Then Jesus said, Give this man what he needs and let him go and
feed his wife and little ones.

26  The people gave abundantly; the man went on his way.

27  And Jesus said, There is no standard law to judge of crime. The
facts must all be stated e’er a judgment can be rendered in a case.

28  You men with hearts; go forth and stand where stood this man and
answer me, What would you do?

29  The thief thinks every other man a thief and judges him accordingly.

30  The man who judges harshly is the man whose heart is full of crime.

31  The courtesan who keeps her wickedness concealed by what she calls
respectability, has not a word of pity for the honest courtesan who
claims to be just what she is.

32  I tell you, men, if you would censure not till you are free from
sin, the world would soon forget the meaning of the word, accused.


CHAPTER 133.

    _The twelve go to the feast in Jerusalem, but Jesus remains in
      Capernaum. He selects seventy disciples, and sends them out
      to teach and heal. He goes alone to the feast and on his way
      he heals ten lepers. He teaches in the temple._

The harvest feast drew near; the twelve went to Jerusalem, but Jesus
did not go with them; he tarried in Capernaum.

2  Among the multitudes that followed him were many who went not up to
the feast; they were not Jews.

3  And Jesus called three-score-and-ten of these disciples unto him and
said, The kingdom of the Christ is not for Jews alone; it is for every
man.

4  Lo, I have chosen twelve to preach the gospel, first unto the Jews;
and they are Jews.

5  Twelve is the number of the Jew and seven the number of the all,
including every man.

6  God is the ten, the holy Jod.

7  When God and man are multiplied we have three-score-and-ten, the
number of the brotherhood of man.

8  And now I send you forth by twos and twos; not to the Jews alone,
but unto every nation under heaven; to Greek and to Assyrian; to the
Samaritan; to those beyond the seas; to every man.

9  You need not go afar, for men of every land are here and in Samaria.

10  Arise and go your way; but go in faith; and take no gold nor silver
in your purse; no extra coat or shoes.

11  Go in the sacred name; trust God and you will never come to want.

12  And let this be your salutation everywhere, Peace be to all; good
will to all.

13  And if the son of peace be in the house, the door will open wide
and you will enter in; and then the holy peace will rest upon that
house.

14  The seventy in twos went forth; they went into Samaria, and as they
went they said, Peace be to all; good will to all!

15  Repent and turn from sin, and set your house in order, for a son of
man who bears the image of the Christ, will come, and you may see his
face.

16  They entered every village of Samaria; they preached in Tyre and
in Sidon by the sea. Some went to Crete, and others into Greece, and
others went to Gilead and taught.

17  And Jesus, all alone, went to the feast by the Samaria way; and as
he went through Sychar on the way, the lepers saw him and a company of
ten called from afar and said,

18  Lord Jesus, stay and speak the Word for us that we may be made
clean.

19  And Jesus said, Go forth and show yourselves unto the priests.

20  They went, and as they went their leprosy was healed. One of the
ten, a native of Samaria, returned to thank the master and to praise
the Lord.

21  And Jesus said to him, Lo, ten were cleansed; where are the nine?
Arise, and go your way; your faith has made you whole.

22  You have revealed your heart and shown that you are worthy of the
power; behold the nine will find again their leprous hands and feet.

23  And Jesus went his way, and while the feast was on he came into
Jerusalem, and went into the temple courts.

24  And he rebuked the scribes and Pharisees, the priests and doctors
of the law for their hypocrisy and selfishness.

25  The common people were amazed; they said, From whence has come the
wisdom of this man? he speaks as speaks a sage.

26  And Jesus said, I did not learn the wisdom of the Holy One within
the schools of men; my teaching is not mine; I speak the words of him
who sent me here to do his will.

27  If any man would know whereof I speak, lo, he must do the will of
God. No man can know except he enters into life and does the will of
God.

28  Now, Moses gave the law; but none of you have kept the law; how can
you judge the worthiness of any man?

29  Once in these courts I healed a man upon a Sabbath day, and in a
rage you sought to take my life; and now because I tell the truth you
seek again to take my life.

30  A scribe spoke out and said, You foolish man, you are obsessed; who
wants to take your life?

31  The common people said, Is this not Jesus whom the rulers long have
sought to kill? and now he comes and teaches in the temple courts.

32  If he is guilty of such monstrous crimes, why do they not take him
away in chains?

33  And Jesus said, You all know me, and know from whence I came; but
you know not the God who sent me here, whose words I speak.

34  The multitudes again stood forth in his defense; they said, If this
is not the Christ whom God has promised to reveal to men, will he do
greater works when he shall come than does this man?

35  The Pharisees and ruling priests were angered and they sent their
officers to take him e’er he went away. The officers were filled with
fear; they seized him not.

36  And Jesus said, Lo, I am here but for a little time and then I go
my way to him who sent me here to do his will.

37  You seek me now and you can find me now; the time will come when
you will seek and will not find, for where I go you cannot come.

38  The people said, Where will he go that men can find him not? Will
he go forth to Greece and teach the Greeks? or will he go to Egypt or
Assyria to teach?

39  But Jesus answered not; unnoticed by the multitudes he left the
temple courts and went his way.


