CHAPTER 166.

    _Jesus before the Sanhedrim. Nicodemus pleads for justice; he
      shows the incompetency of the witnesses. The council fail
      to declare Jesus guilty, but Caiaphas, the presiding judge,
      declares him guilty. The mob maltreat Jesus. He is taken to
      Pilate’s court._

When Jesus would not speak, Caiaphas stood before the Jewish mob and
said,

2  Bind fast the prisoner, for he must go before the great Sanhedrim of
the Jews to answer for his life.

3  We cannot execute a criminal until our findings have been verified
by this, the highest council of the Jews.

4  As soon as it was day the highest council of the people met; the
Lord and his accusers stood before the bar.

5  Caiaphas was the chief; he rose and said, Let the accusers of this
man from Galilee bring forth their charges and their evidence.

6  Caiaphas’ scribe stood forth and read the charges and the names of
those who had accused the man from Galilee.

7  And all the witnesses were made to stand and testify before the
council of the Jews.

8  And then the lawyers weighed the evidence, and Nicodemus stood among
the men who plead.

9  He raised his hands and said, Let justice now be done, though every
scribe and Pharisee and priest and Sadducee, as well as Jesus, the
accused, be judged a liar.

10  If we can prove this Jesus to be foe and traitor to our laws and
land, let him be judged a criminal and suffer for his crimes.

11  If it be proved that these who testify are perjurers in the sight
of God and man, then let them be adjudged as criminals, and let the
man from Galilee go free.

12  And then he brought the testimonies of the witnesses before the
judges of the law; no two of them agreed. In heat of passion, or for
gain, the men had testified.

13  The council would have gladly judged that Jesus was a criminal and
sentence him to death; but in the face of all the evidence they were
afraid.

14  And then Caiaphas said, You man from Galilee, Before the living
God, I now command that you shall answer me, Are you the Christ, the
son of God?

15  And Jesus said, If I would answer, Yes, you would not hear, nor yet
believe,

16  If I would answer, No, I would be like your witnesses, and stand a
liar in the sight of man and God. But this I say,

17  The time will come when you will see the son of man upon the throne
of power and coming in the clouds of heaven.

18  And then Caiaphas rent his clothes and said, Have you not heard
enough? Did you not hear his vile blasphemous words? What further need
have we of witnesses? What shall we do with him?

19  The people said, Put him to death. And then the mob rushed up and
spit into his face, and struck him with their hands.

20  And then they bound a cloth about his eyes and smote him in the
face and said, You are a prophet; tell us who it was who smote you in
the face.

21  And Jesus answered not and like a lamb before his shearer he, the
man from Galilee, resisted not.

22  Caiaphas said, We cannot put a man to death until the Roman ruler
shall confirm the sentence of this court;

23  So take this criminal away and Pilate will endorse what we have
done.

24  And then was Jesus dragged along the way up to the palace of the
Roman governor.


CHAPTER 167.

    _Jesus before Pilate. Is pronounced not guilty. Jesus before
      Herod and is tortured and returned to Pilate, who again
      declares him innocent. The Jews demand his death. Pilate’s
      wife urges her husband to have nothing to do with the
      punishment of Jesus. Pilate weeps._

Into the palace of the Roman governor the Jews would enter not lest
they become defiled and be unworthy to attend the feast; but they led
Jesus to the palace court, and Pilate met them there.

2  And Pilate said, Why this commotion in the early day? What is your
prayer?

3  The Jews replied, We bring before you one, an evil and seditious man.

4  He has been tried before the highest council of the Jews and has
been proven traitor to our laws, our state and to the government of
Rome.

5  We pray that you will sentence him to death upon the cross.

6  And Pilate said, Why do you bring him unto me? Go to, and judge him
for yourselves.

7  You have a law, and by the sanction of the Roman law, you have a
right to judge and right to execute.

8  The Jews replied, We have no right to execute a man upon the cross,
and since this man is traitor to Tiberius, our counsellors believe
that he should meet the most humiliating death--the death upon the
cross.

9  But Pilate said, No man can be found guilty of a crime by Roman law
until the testimony all is in, and the accused has been permitted to
defend himself;

10  So I will take your bill of charges, with the evidence you have,
and judge by Roman law.

11  The Jews had made a copy of the accusations in the language of the
Roman court, and they had added to the bill:

12  We charge that Jesus is an enemy of Rome; that he demands that men
shall pay no tribute to Tiberius.

13  And Pilate took the bill; his guards led Jesus up the steps into
the palace hall.

14  And Jesus stood before the Roman governor, and Pilate read to him
the charges of the Jews, and said,

15  What is your answer to this bill? These charges, are they true or
false?

16  And Jesus said, Why should I plead before an earthly court? The
charges have been verified by perjured men; what need I say?

17  Yes, I am king; but carnal men cannot behold the king, nor see the
kingdom of the God; it is within.

18  If I had been a king as carnal man is king, my servants would have
stood in my defense, and I would not have willingly surrendered to the
minions of the Jewish law.

19  I have no testimony from the sons of men. God is my witness, and my
words and deeds bear witness to the truth;

20  And every man who comprehends the truth will hearken to my words,
and in his soul give witness unto me.

21  And Pilate said, What is the truth?

22  And Jesus said, Truth is the God who knows. It is the changeless
one. The Holy Breath is truth; she changes not and cannot pass away.

23  And Pilate went again unto the Jews and said, This man is guilty of
no crime; I cannot sentence him to death.

24  And then the Jews grew boisterous; they cried aloud and said, Our
council surely knows. The wisest men of all the land have found him
guilty of a score of crimes.

25  He would pervert the nation of the Jews; would overthrow the Roman
rule and make himself the king. He is a culprit come from Galilee; he
must be crucified.

26  And Pilate said, If Jesus is from Galilee he is a subject of the
governor of Galilee, who should be judge.

27  Now, Herod had come down from Galilee and with his suite was in
Jerusalem.

28  And Pilate sent to him the Lord in chains; he also sent a copy of
the charges, and of the testimonies of the Jews, and asked that he
would pass in judgment on the case.

29  And Herod said, I have heard much about this man and I am pleased
to see him in my court.

30  And then he asked the Lord about his claims, about his doctrines
and his aims.

31  And Jesus answered not a word; and Herod was enraged; he said, Do
you insult the ruler of the land by answering not?

32  And then he called his guards and said, Take you this man and
torture him until he answers me.

33  The guards took Jesus and they smote him; mocked him; wrapped him
in a royal robe; they made a crown of thorns and put it on his head;
they put a broken reed into his hands;

34  And then they said deridingly, All hail, thou royal king! Where are
your armies and your guards? Where are your subjects and your friends?

35  But Jesus answered not a word. Then Herod sent him back to Pilate
with this note of courtesy:

36  Most worthy counsellor of Rome, I have examined all the charges and
the testimonies that you sent to me regarding this seditious man from
Galilee, and while I might adjudge him guilty of the crimes as charged,

37  I yield to you my rights as judge, because you are superior to me
in power. I will approve of any judgment you may render in this case.

38  Now, Pilate and the tetrarch had been foes, but the experience of
this hour destroyed their enmity and they were friends in after days.

39  When Jesus had been brought again to Pilate’s court, the Roman
governor stood forth before the accusers of the Lord and said,

40  I cannot find this Nazarene to be a criminal as charged; there is
no evidence that he should suffer death; so I will scourge him well
and let him go.

41  The Jews cried angrily, It is not mete that such a dangerous man
should live; he must be crucified.

42  Then Pilate said, I bid you wait a little time. And then he went
into an inner room and sat in silent thought.

43  And as he mused his wife, a godly woman, chosen from among the
Gauls, came in and said,

44  I pray you, Pilate, hearken unto me: Beware of what you do this
hour. Touch not this man from Galilee; he is a holy man.

45  If you should scourge this man you scourge the son of God. Last
night I saw it all in vision far too vivid to be set aside as idle
dream.

46  I saw this man walk on the waters of the sea; I heard him speak and
calm an angry storm; I saw him flying with the wings of light;

47  I saw Jerusalem in blood; I saw the statues of the Cæsars fall; I
saw a veil before the sun, and day was dark as night.

48  The earth on which I stood was shaken like a reed before the wind.
I tell you, Pilate, if you bathe your hands in this man’s blood then
you may dread the frowns of great Tiberius, and the curses of the
senators of Rome.

49  And then she left, and Pilate wept.


