BOOK IX

This ninth book, Sossius Senecio, contains the discourses we held at
Athens at the Muses feast, for this number nine is agreeable to the
number of the Muses. Nor must you wonder when you find more than ten
questions (which number I have observed in my other books) in it; for we
ought to give the Muses all that belongs to them, and be as careful of
robbing them as of a temple, since we owe them much more and much better
things than these.



QUESTION I. CONCERNING VERSES SEASONABLY AND UNSEASONABLY APPLIED.

AMMONIUS, PLUTARCH, ERATO, CERTAIN SCHOOLMASTERS, AND FRIENDS OF
AMMONIUS.

Ammonius, captain of the militia at Athens, would show Diogenianus the
proficiency of those youths that learned grammar, geometry, rhetoric,
and music; and invited the chief masters of the town to supper.
There were a great many scholars at the feast, and almost all his
acquaintance. Achilles invited only the single combatants to his feast,
intending (as the story goes) that, if in the heat of the encounter they
had conceived any anger or ill-will against one another, they might then
lay it aside, being made partakers of one common entertainment. But
the contrary happened to Ammonius, for the contentions of the masters
increased and grew more sharp midst their cups and merriment; and all
was disorder and confused babbling.

Therefore Ammonius commanded Erato to sing to his harp, and he sang some
part of Hesiod's Works beginning thus,

     Contention to one sort is not confined;
     ("Works and Days," 11.)

and I commended him for choosing so apposite a song. Then he began
to discourse about the seasonable use of verse, that it was not only
pleasant but profitable. And straight every one's mouth was full of that
poet who began Ptolemy's epithalamium (when he married his sister, a
wicked and abominable match) thus,

     Jove Juno called his sister and his wife;
     ("Iliad," xviii. 356.)

and another, who refused to sing after supper to Demetrius the king, but
after he sent him his young son Philip to be educated sang thus,

     Breed thou the boy as doth become
     Both Hercules's race and us;

and Anaxarchus who, being pelted with apples by Alexander at supper,
rose up and said,

     Some god shall wounded be by mortal hand.
     (Euripides, "Orestes," 271.)

But that Corinthian captive boy excelled all, who, when the city was
destroyed, and Mummius, taking a survey of all the free-born children
that understood letters, commanded each to write a verse, wrote thus:--

     Thrice, four times blest, the happy Greeks that fell.
     ("Odyssey," v. 306.)

For they say that Mummius was affected with it, wept and gave all the
free-born children that were allied to the boy their liberty. And some
mentioned the wife of Theodorus the tragedian, who refused his embraces
a little before he contended for the prize; but, when he was conqueror
and came in unto her, clasped him and said,

     Now, Agamemnon's son, you freely may
     (Sophocles "Electra," 2.)

After this a great many sayings were mentioned as unseasonably spoken,
it being fit that we should know such and avoid them;--as that to
Pompey the Great, to whom, upon his return from a dangerous war, the
schoolmaster brought his little daughter, and, to show him what a
proficient she was, called for a book, and bade her begin at this line,

     Returned from war; but hadst thou there been slain,
     My wish had been complete;
     ("Iliad," iii. 428.)

and that to Cassius Longinus, to whom a flying report of his son's
dying abroad being brought, and he no ways appearing either to know
the certain truth or to clear the doubt, an old senator came and said:
Longinus, will you not despise the flying uncertain rumor, as if you did
not know nor had read this line,

     For no report is wholly false?
     (Hesiod, "Works and Days," 763.)

And he that at Rhodes, to a grammarian demanding a line upon which he
might show his skill in the theatre, proposed this,

     Fly from the island, worst of all mankind,
     ("Odyssey," x. 72.)

either slyly put a trick upon him, or unwittingly blundered. And this
discourse quieted the tumult.



QUESTIONS II. AND III. WHAT IS THE REASON THAT ALPHA IS PLACED FIRST IN
THE ALPHABET, AND WHAT IS THE PROPORTION BETWEEN THE NUMBER OF VOWELS
AND SEMI-VOWELS?

AMMONIUS, HERMEAS, PROTOGENES, PLUTARCH, ZOPYRION.

It being the custom of the Muses' feast to draw lots, and those that
were matched to propose curious questions to one another, Ammonius,
fearing that two of the same profession might be matched together,
ordered, without drawing lots, a geometrician to propose questions to a
grammarian, and a master of music to a rhetorician.

First, therefore, Hermeas the geometrician demanded of Protogenes the
grammarian a reason why Alpha was the first letter of the alphabet. And
he returned the common answer of the schools, that it was fit the vowels
should be set before the mutes and semi-vowels. And of the vowels, some
being long, some short, some both long and short, it is just that the
latter should be most esteemed. And of these that are long and short,
that is to be set first which is usually placed before the other two,
but never after either; and that is Alpha. For that put after either
Iota or Upsilon will not be pronounced, will not make one syllable with
them, but as it were resenting the affront and angry at the position,
seeks the first as its proper place. But if you place Alpha before
either of those, they are obedient, and quietly join in one syllable,
as in these words, [Greek omitted] and a thousand others. In these three
respects therefore, as the conquerors in all the five exercises, it
claims the precedence,--that of most other letters by being a vowel,
that of other vowels by being dichronous, and lastly, that of these
double-timed vowels themselves because it is its nature to go before and
never after them.

Protogenes making a pause, Ammonius, speaking to me, said: What! have
you, being a Boeotian, nothing to say for Cadmus, who (as the story
goes) placed Alpha the first in order, because a cow is called Alpha by
the Phoenicians, and they account it not the second or third (as
Hesiod doth) but the first of their necessary things? Nothing at all, I
replied, for it is just that, to the best of my power, I should rather
assist my own than Bacchus's grandfather. For Lamprias my grandfather
said, that the first articulate sound that is made is Alpha; for the air
in the mouth is formed and fashioned by the motion of the lips; now as
soon as those are opened, that sound breaks forth, being very plain and
simple, not requiring or depending upon the motion of the tongue, but
gently breathed forth whilst that lies still. And therefore that is the
first sound that children make. Thus [Greek omitted], TO HEAR, [Greek
omitted], TO SING, [Greek omitted], TO PIPE, [Greek omitted], TO HOLLOW,
begin with the letter Alpha; and I think that [Greek omitted], TO LIFT
UP, and [Greek omitted], TO OPEN, were fitly taken from that opening and
lifting up of the lips when his voice is uttered. Thus all the names of
the mutes besides one have an Alpha, as it were a light to assist their
blindness; for Pi alone wants it, and Phi and Chi are only Pi and Kappa
with an aspirate.


Hermeas saying that he approved both reasons, why then (continued I) do
not you explain the proportion, if there be any, of the number of the
letters; for, in my opinion, there is; and I think so, because the
number of mutes and semi-vowels, compared between themselves or with the
vowels, doth not seem casual and undesigned, but to be according to the
first proportion which you call arithmetical. For their number being
nine, eight, and seven, the middle exceeds the last as much as it wants
of the first. And the first number being compared with the last,
hath the same proportion that the Muses have to Apollo; for nine is
appropriated to them, and seven to him. And these two numbers
tied together double the middle; and not without reason, since the
semi-vowels partake the power of both.

And Hermeas replied: It is said that Mercury was the first god that
discovered letters in Egypt; and therefore the Egyptians make the figure
of an Ibis, a bird dedicated to Mercury, for the first letter. But it
is not fit, in my opinion, to place an animal that makes no noise at the
head of the letters. Amongst all the numbers the fourth is peculiarly
dedicated to Mercury, because, as some say, the god was born on the
fourth day of the month. And the first letters called Phoenician from
Cadmus are four times four, or sixteen; and of those that were afterward
added, Palamedes found four, and Simonides four more. Now amongst
numbers, three is the first perfect, as consisting of a first, a middle,
and a last; and after that six, as being equal the sum of its own
divisors (1+2+3). Of these, six multiplied by four makes twenty-four;
and also the first perfect number, three, multiplied by the first cube,
eight, make the same.

Whilst he was discoursing thus, Zopyrion the grammarian sneered and
muttered between his teeth; and, as soon as he had done, cried out that
he most egregiously trifled; for it was mere chance, and not design,
that gave such a number and order to the letters, as it was mere chance
that the first and last verses of Homer's Iliads have just as many
syllables as the first and last of his Odysseys.



QUESTION IV. WHICH OF VENUS'S HANDS DIOMEDES WOUNDED.

HERMEAS, ZOPYRION, MAXIMUS.

Hermeas would have replied to Zopyrion, but we desired him to hold; and
Maximus the rhetorician proposed to him this far-fetched question out of
Homer, Which of Venus's hands Diomedes wounded. And Zopyrion presently
asking him again, of which leg was Philip lame?--Maximus replied, It is
a different case, for Demosthenes hath left us no foundation upon which
we may build our conjecture. But if you confess your ignorance in this
matter, others will show how the poet sufficiently intimates to an
understanding man which hand it was. Zopyrion being at a stand, we all,
since he made no reply, desired Maximus to tell us.

And he began: The verses running thus

     Then Diomedes raised his mighty spear,
     And leaping towards her just did graze her hand;
     ("Iliad," v. 335.  It is evident from what follows that
     Plutarch interprets [Greek omitted] in this passage HAVING
     LEAPED TO ONE SIDE. (G.))

it is evident that, if he designed to wound her left hand, there had
been no need of leaping, since her left hand was opposite to his right.
Besides, it is probable that he would endeavor to wound the strongest
hand, and that with which she drew away Aeneas; and which being wounded,
it was likely she would let him go. But more, after she returned to
Heaven, Minerva jeeringly said,

     No doubt fair Venus won a Grecian dame,
     To follow her beloved Trojan youths,
     And as she gently stroked her with her hand,
     Her golden buckler scratched this petty wound.
     ("Iliad", v. 422.)

And I suppose, you sir, when you stroke any of your scholars, you use
your right hand, and not your left; and it is likely that Venus, the
most skilful of all the goddesses, soothed the heroines after the same
manner.



QUESTION V. WHY PLATO SAYS THAT AJAX'S SOUL CAME TO DRAW HER LOT IN THE
TWENTIETH PLACE IN HELL.

HYLAS, SOSPIS, AMMONIUS, LAMPRIAS.

These discourses made all the other company merry; but Sospis the
rhetorician, seeing Hylas the grammarian sit silent and discomposed (for
he had not been very happy in his exercises), cried out,

     But Ajax's soul stood far apart;

and raising his voice repeated the rest to him,

     But sit, draw near, and patiently attend,
     Hear what I say, and tame, your violent rage.

To this Hylas, unable to contain, returned a scurvy answer saying that
Ajax's soul, taking her lot in the twentieth place in hell, changed her
nature, according to Plato, for a lion's; but, for his part, he could
not but often think upon the saying of the old comedian,

     'Tis better far to be an ass than see
     Unworthwhile men in greater honor shine

At this Sospis, laughing heartily, said: But in the meantime, before we
have the pack-saddles on, if you have any regard for Plato, tell us
why he makes Ajax's soul, after the lots drawn, to have the twentieth
choice. Hylas, with great indignation, refused, thinking that this was
a jeering reflection on his former miscarriage. And therefore my brother
began thus: What, was not Ajax counted the second for beauty, strength,
and courage, and the next to Achilles in the Grecian army? And twenty is
the second ten, and ten is the chiefest of numbers, as Achilles of the
Greeks. We laughing at this, Ammonius said: Well, Lamprias, let this
suffice for a joke upon Hylas; but since you have voluntarily taken upon
you to give an account of this matter, leave off jesting, and seriously
proceed.

This startled Lamprias a little, but, after a short pause, he continued
thus: Plato often tells merry stories under borrowed names, but when
he puts any fable into a discourse concerning the soul, he hath some
considerable meaning in it. The intelligent nature of the heavens he
calls a flying chariot, intimating the harmonious whirl of the world.
And here he introduceth one Er, the son of Harmonius, a Pamphylian, to
tell what he had seen in hell; intimating that our souls are begotten
according to harmony, and are agreeably united to our bodies, and that,
when they are separated, they are from all parts carried together into
the air, and from thence return to second generations. And what hinders
but that [Greek omitted] twentieth should intimate that this was not a
true story, but only probable and fictitious [Greek omitted], and that
the lot fell casually [Greek omitted]. For Plato always toucheth upon
three causes, he being the first and chiefest philosopher that knew
how fate accords with fortune, and how our free-will is mixed and
complicated with both. And now he hath admirably discovered what
influence each hath upon our affairs. The choice of our life he hath
left to our free-will, for virtue and vice are free. But that those who
have made a good choice should live religiously, and those who have made
an ill choice should lead a contrary life, he leaves to the necessity of
fate. But the chances of lots thrown at a venture introduce fortune into
the several conditions of life in which we are brought up, and which
pre-occupates and perverts our own choice. Now consider whether it is
not irrational to inquire after a cause of those things that are done by
chance. For if the lot seems to be disposed of by design, it ceaseth to
be chance and fortune, and becomes fate and providence.

Whilst Lamprias was speaking, Marcus the grammarian seemed to be
counting to himself, and when he had done, he began thus: Amongst the
souls which Homer mentions in his [Greek omitted], Elpenor's is not to
be reckoned as mixed with those in hell, but, his body being not buried,
as wandering about the banks of the river Styx. Nor is it fit that we
should reckon Tiresias's soul amongst the rest,--

     On whom alone, when deep in hell beneath,
     Wisdom Proserpina conferred,

to discourse and converse with the living even before he drank the
sacrifice's blood. Therefore, Lamprias, if you subtract these two,
you will find that Ajax was the twentieth that Ulysses saw, and Plato
merrily alludes to that place in Homer's [Greek omitted].



QUESTION VI. WHAT IS SIGNIFIED BY THE FABLE ABOUT THE DEFEAT OF
NEPTUNE? AND ALSO, WHY DO THE ATHENIANS OMIT THE SECOND DAY OF THE MONTH
BOEDROMION?

MENEPHYLUS, HYLAS, LAMPRIAS.

While all were making a disturbance, Menephylus, a Peripatetic
philosopher, addressing Hylas: You see, he said, how this investigation
is no foolery nor insolence. But leave now, my dear fellow, that
obstinate Ajax, whose name is ill-omened, as Sophocles says, and
side with Poseidon, whom you yourself are wont to tell has often been
overcome, once by Athene here, in Delphi by Apollo, in Argos by Here, in
Aegina by Zeus, in Naxos by Bacchus, yet in his misfortunes has always
been mild and amiable. Here at least he shares a temple in common with
Athene, in which there is an altar dedicated to Lethe. And Hylas, as if
he had become better tempered: One thing has escaped you, Menephylus,
that we have given up the second day of September, not on account of the
moon, but because on that day the gods seemed to have contended for the
country. By all means, said Lamprias, by as much as Poseidon was more
civilized than Thrasybulus, since not like him a winner but a loser....

(The rest of this book to Question XIII is lost; with the exception of
the titles that follow, and the fragment of Question XII.)



QUESTION VII. WHY THE ACCORDS IN MUSIC ARE SEPARATED INTO THREE.



QUESTION VIII. WHEREIN THE INTERVALS MELODIOUS DIFFER FROM THOSE THAT
ARE HARMONIC.



QUESTION IX. WHAT IS THE CAUSE OF ACCORD? AND ALSO, WHY, WHEN TWO
ACCORDANT STRINGS ARE TOUCHED TOGETHER, IS THE MELODY ASCRIBED TO THE
BASE?



QUESTION X. WHY, WHEN THE ECLIPTIC PERIODS OF THE SUN AND THE MOON ARE
EQUAL IN NUMBER, THE MOON APPEARS OFTENER ECLIPSED THAN THE SUN.



QUESTION XI. THAT WE CONTINUE NOT ALWAYS THE SAME, IN REGARD OF THE
DEFLUX OF OUR SUBSTANCE.



QUESTION XII. IS IT MORE PROBABLE THAT THE NUMBER OF THE STARS IS EVEN
OR ODD?

Men must be cheated by oaths. And Glaucias said: I have heard this
saying used against Polycrates the tyrant; probably too it was said
against others: but why do you ask these questions? Because, by Zeus,
said Sospis, I see the children playing odd and even with jackstones
and the Academics with words. For such tempers as these differ in no
way from those who ask whether they hold clutched in their hands odd or
even. Then Protogenes stood up and called me by name: What is the matter
with us that we allow these rhetoricians to be so conceited, and to
laugh down others while they are asked nothing, and contribute nothing
in the way of argument,--unless they swear that they have no part in the
wine as admirers and disciples of Demosthenes, a man who in his whole
life never drank wine. That is not the cause of this, said I; but we
have never asked them anything. But unless you have something more
useful, I think I can put before them from Homer's poetry a case of
antinomy in rhetorical theses.



QUESTION XIII. A MOOT-POINT OUT OF THE THIRD BOOK OF HOMER'S ILIADS.

PLUTARCH, PROTOGENES, GLAUCIAS, SOSPIS.

What question will you put them, said Protogenes? I will tell you,
continued I, and let them carefully attend. Paris makes his challenge in
these express words:--

     Let me and valiant Menelaus fight
     For Helen, and for all the goods she brought;
     And he that shall o'ercome, let him enjoy
     The goods and woman; let them be his own.

And Hector afterwards publicly proclaiming this challenge in these plain
words:--

     He bids the Trojans and the valiant Greeks
     To fix their arms upon the fruitful ground;
     Let Menelaus and stout Paris fight
     For all the goods; and he that beats have all.

Menelaus accepted the challenge, and the conditions were sworn to,
Agamemnon dictating thus:--

     If Paris valiant Menelaus kills,
     Let him have Helen, and the goods possess;
     If youthful Menelaus Paris kills,
     The woman and the goods shall all be his.
     (See "Iliad," iii. 68, 88, 255, and 281.)

Now since Menelaus only overcame but did not kill Paris, each party hath
somewhat to say for itself, and against the other. The one may demand
restitution, because Paris was overcome; the other deny it, because he
was not killed. Now how to determine this case and clear the seeming
repugnancies doth not belong to philosophers or grammarians, but to
rhetoricians, that are well skilled both in grammar and philosophy.

Then Sospis said: The challenger's word decides; for the challenger
proposed the conditions, and when they were accepted, the opposite
party had no power to make additions. Now the condition proposed in this
challenge was not killing, but overcoming; and there was reason that
it should be so, for Helen ought to be the wife of the bravest. Now the
bravest is he that overcomes; for it often happens that an excellent
soldier might be killed by a coward, as is evident in what happened
afterward, when Achilles was shot by Paris. For I do not believe that
you will affirm, that Achilles was not so brave a man as Paris because
he was killed by him, and that it should be called the victory, and not
rather the unjust good fortune, of him that shot him. But Hector was
overcome before he was killed by Achilles, because he would not stand,
but trembled and fled at his approach. For he that refuseth the combat
or flies cannot palliate his defeat, and plainly grants that his
adversary is the better man. And therefore Iris tells Helen beforehand,

     In single combat they shall fight for you,
     And you shall be the glorious victor's wife.
     (2 Ibid. iii. 137.)

And Jupiter afterwards adjudges the victory to Menelaus in these words:

     The conquest leans to Menelaus's side.
     (3 Ibid. iv. 13.)

For it would be ridiculous to call Menelaus a conqueror when he shot
Podes, a man at a great distance, before he thought of or could provide
against his danger, and yet not allow him the reward of conquest over
him whom he made fly and sneak into the embraces of his wife, and whom
he spoiled of his arms whilst he was yet alive, and who had himself
offered the challenge, by the articles of which Menelaus now appeared to
be the conqueror.

Glaucias subjoined: in all laws, decrees, contracts, and promises, those
latest made are always accounted more valid than the former. Now the
later contract was Agamemnon's, the condition of which was killing,
and not only overcoming. Besides the former was mere words, the latter
confirmed by oath; and, by the consent of all, those were cursed that
broke them; so that this latter was properly the contract, and the other
a bare challenge. And this Priam at his going away, after he had sworn
to the conditions, confirms by these words:--

     But Jove and other gods alone do know,
     Which is designed to see the shades below;
     ("Iliad," iii. 308.)

for he understood that to be the condition of the contract. And
therefore a little after Hector says,

     But Jove hath undetermined left our oaths,
     (Ibid. vii. 69.)

for the combat had not its designed and indisputable determination,
since neither of them fell. Therefore this question doth not seem to
me to contain any contrariety of law, since the former contract is
comprised and overruled by the latter; for he that kills certainly
overcomes, but he that overcomes doth not always kill. But, in short,
Agamemnon did not annul, but only explain the challenge proposed by
Hector. He did not change anything, but only added the most principal
part, placing victory in killing; for that is a complete conquest, but
all others may be evaded or disputed, as this of Menelaus, who neither
wounded nor pursued his adversary. Now as, where there are laws really
contrary, the judges take that side which is plain and indisputable,
and mind not that which is obscure; so in this case, let us admit
that contract to be most valid which contained killing, as a known and
undeniable evidence of victory. But (which is the greatest argument) he
that seems to have had the victory, not being quiet, but running up and
down the army, and searching all about,

     To find neat Paris in the busy throng,
     (Ibid. iii. 450.)

sufficiently testifies that he himself did not imagine that the conquest
was perfect and complete. For when Paris had escaped he did not forget
his own words:--

     And which of us black fate and death design,
     Let him be lost; the others cease from war.
     (Iliad, iii. 101,)

Therefore it was necessary for him to seek after Paris, that he might
kill him and complete the combat; but since he neither killed nor took
him, he had no right to the prize. For he did not conquer him, if we may
guess by what he said when he expostulated with Jove and bewailed his
unsuccessful attempt:--

     Jove, Heaven holds no more spiteful god than thou.
     Now would I punish Paris for his crimes;
     But oh! my sword is broke, my mighty spear,
     Stretched out in vain, flies idly from my hand!
     (Ibid. iii, 365.)

For in these words he confessed that it was to no purpose to pierce
the shield or take the head-piece of his adversary, unless he likewise
wounded or killed him.



QUESTION XIV. SOME OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE NUMBER OF THE MUSES, NOT
COMMONLY KNOWN.

HERODES, AMMONIUS, LAMPRIAS, TRYPHON, DIONYSIUS, MENEPHYLUS, PLUTARCH.

This discourse ended, we poured out our offerings to the Muses, and
together with a hymn in honor of Apollo, the patron of the Muses, we
sung with Erato, who played upon the harp, the generation of the Muses
out of Hesiod. After the song was done, Herod the rhetorician said:
Pray, sirs, hearken. Those that will not admit Calliope to be ours say
that she keeps company with kings, not such, I suppose, as are busied
in resolving syllogisms or disputing, but such who do those things that
belong to rhetoricians and statesmen. But of the rest of the Muses, Clio
abets encomiums, for praises are called [Greek omitted]; and Polymnia
history, for her name signifies the remembrance of many things; and it
is said that all the Muses were somewhere called Remembrances. And for
my part, I think Euterpe hath some relation to us too, if (as Chrysippus
says) her lot be agreeableness in discourse and pleasantness in
conversation. For it belongs to an orator to converse, as well as plead
or give advice; since it is his part to gain the favor of his auditors,
and to defend or excuse his client. To praise or dispraise is the
commonest theme; and if we manage this artfully, it will turn to
considerable account; if unskilfully, we are lost. For that saying,

     Gods! how he is honored and beloved by all,
     ("Odyssey," x. 38.)

chiefly, in my opinion, belongs to those men who have a pleasing and
persuasive faculty in discourse.

Then said Ammonius to Herod: We have no reason to be angry with you for
grasping all the Muses, since the goods that friends have are common,
and Jove hath begotten a great many Muses, that every man may be
plentifully supplied; for we do not all need skill in hunting, military
arts, navigation, or any mechanical trades; but learning and instruction
is necessary for every one that

     Consumes the fruits of the spacious earth.
     (From Simonides.)

And therefore Jove made but one Minerva, one Diana, one Vulcan, but many
Muses. But why there should be nine, and no more nor less, pray acquaint
us; for you, so great a lover of, and so well acquainted with, the
Muses, must certainly have considered this matter. What difficulty is
there in that? replied Herod. The number nine is in everybody's mouth,
as being the first square of the first odd number; and as doubly odd,
since it may be divided into three equal odd numbers. Ammonius with a
smile subjoined: Boldly said; and pray add, that this number is
composed of the two first cubes, one and eight, and according to another
composition of two triangles, three and six, each of which is itself
perfect. But why should this belong to the Muses more than any other of
the gods? For we have nine Muses, but not nine Cereses, nine Minervas or
Dianas. For I do not believe that you take it for a good argument,
that the Muses must be so many, because their mother's name (Mnemosyne)
consists of just so many letters. Herod smiling, and everybody being
silent, Ammonius desired our opinions.

My brother said, that the ancients celebrated but three Muses, and that
to bring proofs for this assertion would be pedantic and uncivil in such
a company. The reason of this number was (not as some say) the three
different sorts of music, the diatonic, the chromatic, and harmonic, nor
those stops that make the intervals nete, mese, and hypate, though
the Delphians gave the Muses this name erroneously, in my opinion,
appropriating it to one science, or rather to a part of one single
science, the harmoniac part of music. But, as I think, the ancients,
reducing all arts and sciences which are executed and performed
by reason or discourse to three heads, philosophy, rhetoric, and
mathematics, accounted them the gifts of three gods, and named them the
Muses. Afterwards, about Hesiod's time, the sciences being better and
more thoroughly looked into, and men subdividing them found that each
science contained three different parts. In mathematics are comprehended
music, arithmetic, and geometry; in philosophy are logic, ethics, and
physics. In rhetoric, they say the first part was demonstrative or
encomiastic, the second deliberative, the third judicial. None of all
which they believed to be without a god or a Muse or some superior power
for its patron, and did not, it is probable, make the Muses equal in
number to these divisions, but found them to be so. Now, as you may
divide nine into three threes, and each three into as many units;
so there is but one rectitude of reason, which is employed about the
highest truth, and which belongs to the whole in common, while each of
the three kinds of science is assigned three Muses, and each of these
has her distinct faculty assigned to her, which she disposes and orders.
And I do not think the poets and astrologers will find fault with us for
passing over their professions in silence, since they know, as well as
we, that astrology is comprehended in geometry, and poetry in music.

As soon as he had said this, Trypho the physician subjoined: How hath
our art offended you, that you have shut the Museum against us? And
Dionysius of Melite added: Sir, you have a great many that will side
with you in the accusation; for we farmers think Thalia to be ours,
assigning her the care of springing and budding seeds and plants. But
I interposing said: Your accusation is not just; for you have bountiful
Ceres, and Bacchus who (as Pindar phraseth it) increaseth the trees, the
chaste beauty of the fruits; and we know that Aesculapius is the patron
of the Physicians, and they make their address to Apollo as Paean, but
never as the Muses' leader. All men (as Homer says) stand in need of the
gods, but all stand not in need of all. But I wonder Lamprias did not
mind what the Delphians say in this matter; for they affirm that the
Muses amongst them were not named so either from the strings or sounds
in music; but the universe being divided into three parts, the first
portion was of the fixed stars, the second of the planets, the third of
those things that are under the concave of the moon; and all these are
ordered according to harmonical proportions, and of each portion a
Muse takes care; Hypate of the first, Nete of the last, and Mese in the
middle, combining as much as possible, and turning about mortal things
with the gods and earthly with heavenly. And Plato intimates the same
thing under the names of the Fates, calling one Atropos, the other
Lachesis, and the other Clotho. For he hath committed the revolutions of
the eight spheres to so many Sirens, and not Muses.

Then Menephylus the Peripatetic subjoined: The Delphians' opinion hath
indeed somewhat of probability in it; but Plato is absurd in committing
the eternal and divine revolutions not to the Muses but to the Sirens,
Daemons that neither love nor are benevolent to mankind, wholly passing
by the Muses, or calling them by the names of the Fates, the daughters
of Necessity. For Necessity is averse to the Muses; but Persuasion being
more agreeable and better acquainted with them, in my opinion, than the
grace of Empedocles,

     Intolerable Necessity abhors.

No doubt, said Ammonius, as it is in us a violent and involuntary
cause; but in the gods Necessity is not intolerable, uncontrollable, or
violent, unless it be to the wicked; as the law in a commonwealth to
the best man is its best gift, not to be violated or transgressed, not
because they have no power, but because they have no will, to change it.
And Homer's Sirens give us no just reason to be afraid; for he in that
fable rightly intimates the power of their music not to be hurtful to
man, but delightfully charming, and detaining the souls which pass
from hence thither and wander after death; working in them a love for
heavenly and divine things, and a forgetfulness of everything on earth;
and they extremely pleased follow and attend them. And from thence some
imperfect sound, and as it were echo of that music, coming to us by the
means of reason and good precepts, rouseth our souls, and restores the
notice of those things to our minds, the greatest part of which
lie encumbered with and entangled in disturbances of the flesh and
distracting passions. But the generous soul hears and remembers, and
her affection for those pleasures riseth up to the most ardent passion,
whilst she eagerly desires but is not able to free herself from the
body.

It is true, I do not approve what he says; but Plato seems to me, as he
hath strangely and unaccountably called the axes spindles and distaffs,
and the stars whirls, so to have named the Muses Sirens, as delivering
divine things to the ghosts below, as Ulysses in Sophocles says of the
Sirens,

     I next to Phorcus's daughters came,
     Who fix the sullen laws below.

Eight of the Muses take care of the spheres, and one of all about the
earth. The eight who govern the motions of the spheres maintain the
agreement of the planets with the fixed stars and one another. But that
one who looks after the place betwixt the earth and moon and takes care
of mortal things, by means of discourse and song introduceth persuasion,
aiding our natural consent to community and agreement, and giveth men
as much harmony, grace, and order as is possible for them to take;
introducing this persuasion to appease and quiet our disturbances, and
as it were to recall our wandering desires out of the wrong way, and to
set us in the right path. But, as Pindar says,

     Whom Jove abhors, he starts to hear
     The Muses sounding in his ear.
     (Pindar, "Pythian," i. 25.)

To this discourse Ammonius, as he used to do, subjoined that verse of
Xenophanes,

     This fine discourse seems near allied to truth,

and desired every one to deliver his opinion. And I after a short
silence, said: As Plato thinks by the name, as it were by tracks, to
discover the powers of the gods, so let us place in heaven and over
heavenly things one of the Muses, Urania. And it is likely that those
require no distracting variety of cares to govern them, since they have
the same single nature for the cause of all their motions. But where are
a great many irregularities and disorders, there we must place the eight
Muses, that we may have one to correct each particular irregularity and
miscarriage. There are two parts in a man's life, the serious and the
merry; and each must be regulated and methodized. The serious role,
which instructs us in the knowledge and contemplation of the gods,
Calliope, Clio, and Thalia appear chiefly to look after and direct.
The other Muses govern our weak part, which changes presently into
wantonness and folly; they do not neglect our brutish and violent
passions and let them run their own course, but by appropriate dancing,
music, song, and orderly motion mixed with reason, bring them down to
a moderate temper and condition. For my part, since Plato admits two
principles of every action, viz, the natural desire after pleasure, and
acquired opinion which covets and wishes for the best, and calls one
reason and the other passion, and since each of these is manifold,
I think that each requires a considerable and, to speak the truth, a
divine direction. For instance, one faculty of our reason is said to be
political or imperial, over which Hesiod says Calliope presides; Clio's
province is the noble and aspiring; and Polymnia's that faculty of the
soul which inclines to attain and keep knowledge (and therefore the
Sicyonians call one of their three Muses Polymathia); to Euterpe
everybody allows the searches into nature and physical speculations,
there being no greater, no sincerer pleasure belonging to any other sort
of speculation in the world. The natural desire to meat and drink Thalia
reduceth from brutish and uncivil to be sociable and friendly; and
therefore we say [Greek omitted] of those that are friendly, merry, and
sociable over their cups, and not of those that are quarrelsome and mad.
Erato, together with Persuasion, that brings along with it reason and
opportunity, presides over marriages; she takes away and extinguisheth
all the violent fury of pleasure, and makes it tend to friendship,
mutual confidence, and endearment, and not to effeminacy, lust, or
discontent. The delight which the eye or ear receives is a sort of
pleasure, either appropriate to reason or to passion, or common to them
both. This the two other Muses, Terpsichore and Melpomene, so moderate,
that the one may only tickle and not charm, the other only please and
not bewitch.



QUESTION XV. THAT THERE ARE THREE PARTS IN DANCING: [Greek omitted],
MOTION, [Greek omitted], GESTURE, AND [Greek omitted], REPRESENTATION.
WHAT EACH OF THOSE IS AND WHAT IS COMMON TO BOTH POETRY AND DANCING.

AMMONIUS AND THRASYBULUS.

After this, a match of dancing was proposed, and a cake was the prize.
The judges were Meniscus the dancing-master, and my brother Lamprias;
for he danced the Pyrrhic very well, and in the Palaestra none could
match him for the graceful motion of his hands and arms in dancing. Now
a great many dancing with more heat than art, some desired two of the
company who seemed to be best skilled and took most care to observe
their steps, to dance in the kind called [Greek omitted]. Upon this
Thrasybulus, the son of Ammonius, demanded what [Greek omitted]
signified, and gave Ammonius occasion to run over most of the parts of
dancing.

He said they were three,--[Greek omitted], [Greek omitted] and [Greek
omitted]. For dancing is made up of motion and manner [Greek omitted]
as a song of sounds and stops; stops are the ends of motion. Now the
motions they call [Greek omitted], and the gestures and likeness
to which the motions tend, and in which they end, they call [Greek
omitted]: as, for instance, when by their own motions they represent the
figure of Apollo, Pan, or any of the raging Bacchae. The third is [Greek
omitted]; which is not an imitation, but a plain downright indication
of the things represented. For as the poets, when they would speak of
Achilles, Ulysses, the earth, or heaven, use their proper names,
and such as the vulgar usually understand. But for the more lively
representation, they use such words as by their very sound express
some eminent quality in the thing, or metaphors; as when they say that
streams do "babble and flash"; that arrows fly "desirous the flesh to
wound"; or when they describe an equal battle by saying "the fight had
equal heads." They have likewise a great many significative compositions
in their verses. Thus Euripides of Perseus,

     He that Medusa slew, and flies in air;

and Pindar of a horse,

     When by the smooth Alpheus's banks
     He ran the race, and never felt the spur;

and Homer of a race,

     The chariots, overlaid with tin and brass,
     By fiery horses drawn ran swiftly on.
     (Euripedes, Frag. 975; Pindar, "Olympian," i. 31;
     "Iliad," xxiii. 503.)

So in dancing, the [Greek omitted] represents the shape and figure, the
[Greek omitted] shows some action, passion, or power; but by the [Greek
omitted] are properly and significatively shown the things themselves,
for instance, the heaven, earth, or the company. Which, being done in
a certain order and method, resembles the proper names used in poetry,
decently clothed and attended with suitable epithets. As in these lines,

     Themis the venerable and admired,
     And Venus beauteous with her bending brows,
     Fair Dione, and June crowned with gold.
     (Hesiod, "Theogony," 16.)

And in these,

     From Hellen kings renowned for giving laws,
     Great Dorus and the mighty Xuthus sprang,
     And Aeolus, whose chief delight was horse.

For if poets did not take this liberty, how mean, how grovelling and
flat, would be their verse! As suppose they wrote thus,

     From this sprung Hercules, from the other Iphitus.
     Her father, husband, and her son were kings,
     Her brother and forefathers were the same;
     And she in Greece Olympias was called.

The same faults may be committed in that sort of dancing called [Greek
omitted] unless the representation be lively and graceful, decent and
unaffected. And, in short, we may aptly transfer what Simonides said of
painting to dancing, and call dancing mute poetry, and poetry speaking
dancing; for poesy doth not properly belong to painting, nor painting
to poesy, neither do they any way make use of one another. But poesy
and dancing share much in common especially in that type of song called
Hyporchema, in which is the most lively representation imaginable,
dancing doing it by gesture, and poesy by words. So that poesy may bear
some resemblance to the colors in painting, while dancing is like the
lines which mark out the features. And therefore he who was the
most famous writer of Hyporchemes, who here even surpassed himself,
sufficiently proveth that these two arts stand in need of one another he
shows what tendency poetry hath to dancing; whilst the sound excites the
hands and feet, or rather as it were by some cords distends and raiseth
every member of the whole body; so that, whilst such songs are recited
or sung, they cannot be quiet. But nowadays no sort of exercise hath
such bad depraved music applied to it as dancing; and so it suffers that
which Ibyeus as to his own concerns was fearful of, as appears by these
lines,

     I fear lest, losing fame amongst the gods,
     I shall receive respect from men alone.

For having associated to itself a mean paltry sort of music, and falling
from that divine sort of poetry with which it was formerly acquainted,
it rules now and domineers amongst foolish and inconsiderate spectators,
like a tyrant, it hath subjected nearly all music, but hath lost all its
honor with excellent and wise men.

These, my Sossius Senecio, were almost the last discourses which we had
at Ammonius's house during the festival of the Muses.


END OF FIVE------------




COMMON CONCEPTIONS AGAINST THE STOICS.

LAMPRIAS, DIADUMENUS

LAMPRIAS. You, O Diadumenus, seem not much to care, if any one thinks
that you philosophize against the common notions; since you confess that
you contemn also the senses, from whence the most part of these notions
in a manner proceed, having for their seat and foundation the belief of
such things as appear to us. But I beseech you, with what speed you can,
either by reasons, incantations, or some other manner of discourse, to
cure me, who come to you full, as I seem to myself, of great and strange
perturbations; so much have I been shaken, and into such a perplexity of
mind have I been brought, by certain Stoics, in other things indeed very
good men and my familiar friends, but most bitterly and hostility bent
against the Academy. These, for some few words modestly spoken by me,
have (for I will tell you no lie) rudely and unkindly reprehended me;
angrily censuring and branding the ancient philosophers as Sophists
and corrupters of philosophy, and subverters of regular doctrines; and
saying things yet more absurd than these, they fell at last upon the
conceptions, into which (they contend) the Academics had brought a
certain confusion and disturbance. At length one of them said, that he
thought it was not by fortune, but by the providence of the gods, that
Chrysippus came into the world after Arcesilaus and before Carneades;
of which the one was the author of the contumelies and injuries done to
custom, and the other flourished most of all the Academics. Chrysippus
then, coming between them, by his writings against Arcesilaus, stopped
also the way against the eloquence of Carneades, leaving indeed many
things to the senses, as provisions against a siege, but wholly taking
away the trouble about anticipations and conceptions, directing every
one of them and putting it in its proper place; so that they who will
again embroil and disquiet matters should gain nothing, but be convinced
of being malicious and deceitful Sophists. I, having been this
morning set on fire by these discourses, want some cooling remedies to
extinguish and take away this doubting, as an inflammation, out of my
mind.

DIADUMENUS. You perhaps have suffered the same things with some of the
vulgar. But if you believe the poets, who say that the ancient city
Sipylus was overthrown by the providence of the gods when they punished
Tantalus, believe also the companions of the Stoa saying that Nature,
not by chance but by divine providence, brought forth Chrysippus, when
she had a mind to turn things upside down and alter the course of life;
for which purpose never any man was fitter than he. But as Cato said of
Caesar, that never any but he came to the management of public affairs
sober and considerately resolved on the ruin of the state; so does this
man seem to me with the greatest diligence and eloquence to overturn and
demolish custom, as those who magnify the man testify, when they dispute
against him concerning the sophism called Pseudomenos (or the Liar). For
to say, my best friend, that a conclusion drawn from contrary positions
is not manifestly false, and again to say that some arguments having
true premises and true inductions may yet moreover have the contrary
to their conclusions true, what conception of demonstration or what
assumption of confidence does it not overthrow? They say, that the
polypus in the winter gnaws his own claws; but the logic of Chrysippus,
taking away and cutting off its own chiefest parts and principles,--what
other notion has it left unsuspected of falsehood? For the
superstructures cannot be steady and sure, if the foundations remain not
firm but are shaken with so many doubts and troubles. But as those who
have dust or dirt upon their bodies, if they touch or rub the filth that
is upon them, seem rather to increase than remove it; so some men blame
the Academics, and think them guilty of the faults with which they
show themselves to be burdened. For who do more subvert the common
conceptions than the Stoic school? But if you please, let us leave
accusing them, and defend ourselves from the things with which they
charge us.

LAMPRIAS. Methinks, Diadumenus, I am this day become a various and
unconstant man. For erewhile I came dejected and trembling, as one that
wanted an apology; and now I am changed to an accuser, and desire
to enjoy the pleasure of revenge, in seeing them all convicted of
philosophizing against the common conceptions and presumptions, on which
they think chiefly their doctrine is founded, whence they say that it
alone agrees with Nature.

DIADUMENUS. Shall we then first attack those common and celebrated
doctrines of theirs which themselves, gently admitting their absurdity,
style paradoxes; as that only wise men are kings, that they only are
rich and fair, they only citizens and judges? Or shall we send all this
to the brokers, as old decayed frippery, and make our inquiry into such
things as are most practical and with the greatest earnestness delivered
by them?

LAMPRIAS. I indeed like this best. For who is there that is not already
full of the arguments brought against those paradoxes?

DIADUMENUS. First, then, consider this, whether, according to the
common conceptions, they can be said to agree with Nature, who think all
natural things indifferent, and esteem neither health, strength of body,
beauty, nor strength as desirable, commodious, profitable, or any way
contributory to the completing of natural perfection; nor consider that
their contraries, as maims, pains, disgraces, and diseases, are hurtful
or to be shunned? To the latter of these they themselves say that Nature
gives us an abhorrence, and an inclination to the former. Which very
thing is not a little repugnant to common understanding, that Nature
should incline us to such things as are neither good nor available, and
avert us from such as are neither ill nor hurtful, and which is more,
that she should render this inclination and this aversion so violent,
that they who either possess not the one or fall into the other detest
their life with good reason, and withdraw themselves out of it.

I think also that this is said by them against common sense, that Nature
herself is indifferent, and yet that it is good to agree with Nature.
For it is not our duty either to follow the law or be persuaded by
argument, unless the law and argument be good and honest. And this
indeed is the least of their errors. But if, as Chrysippus has written
in his First Book concerning Exhortation, a happy life consists only in
living according to virtue, other things (as he says) being nothing to
us, nor cooperating any ways towards it, Nature is not only indifferent,
but foolish also and stupid, in inclining us to such things as belong
nothing to us; and we also are fools in thinking felicity to be an
agreeing with Nature, which draws us after such things as contribute
nothing to happiness. For what can be more agreeable to common sense,
than that, as desirable things are requisite to live commodiously, so
natural things are necessary that we may live according to Nature? Now
these men say not so; but having settled the living according to Nature
for their end, do nevertheless hold those things which are according to
Nature to be indifferent.

Nor is this less repugnant to common sense, that an intelligent and
prudent man should not be equally affected to equal good things, but
should put no value on some, and be ready to undergo and suffer anything
for others, though the things themselves are neither greater nor less
one than another. For they say, It is the same thing to abstain from the
enjoyment of an old woman that is about to die as to take part in the
greatest actions with moderation... since in both cases we do what duty
requires. And yet for this, as a great and glorious thing, they should
be ready to die; when as to boast of the other would be shameful and
ridiculous. And even Chrysippus himself in his commentary concerning
Jupiter, and in the Third Book of the Gods, says, that it were a poor,
absurd, and impertinent thing to glory in such acts, as proceeding
from virtue, as bearing valiantly the stinging of a wasp, or abstaining
chastely from an old woman that lies a dying. Do not they then
philosophize against the common conception, who profess nothing to be
more commendable than those things which yet themselves are ashamed to
praise? For how can that be desirable or to be approved, which is worthy
neither of praise nor admiration, but the praisers and admirers of which
they esteem absurd and ridiculous?

And yet this will (I suppose) appear to you more against common sense,
that a wise man should take no care whether he enjoys or not enjoys the
greatest good things, but should carry himself after the same manner in
these things, as in those that are indifferent both in their management
and administration. For all of us, "whoever we are that eat the fruit
of the broad earth," judge that desirable, good, and profitable, which
being present we use, and absent we want and desire. But that which
no man thinks worth his concern, either for his profit or delight, is
indifferent. For we by no other means distinguish a laborious man from a
trifler, who is for the most part also employed in action, but that the
one busies himself in useless matters and indifferently, and the other
in things commodious and profitable. But these men act quite contrary;
for with them, a wise and prudent man, being conversant in many
comprehensions and memories of comprehension, esteems few of them to
belong to him; and not caring for the rest, he thinks he has neither
more or less by remembering that he lately had the comprehension of Dion
sneezing or Theon playing at ball. And yet every comprehension in a wise
man, and every memory having assurance and firmness, is a great, yea, a
very great good. When therefore his health fails, when some organ of
his senses is disordered, or when his wealth is lost, is a wise man so
careless as to think that none of these things concern him? Or does he,
"when sick, give fees to the physicians: for the gaining of riches sail
to Leucon, governor in the Bosphorus, or travel to Idanthyrsus, king of
the Scythians," as Chrysippus says? And being deprived of some of his
senses, does he not become weary even of life? How then do they not
acknowledge that they philosophize against the common notions, employing
so much care and diligence on things indifferent, and not minding
whether they have or have not great good things?

But this is also yet against the common conceptions, that he who is
a man should not rejoice when coming from the greatest evils to the
greatest goods. Now their wise men suffer this. Being changed from
extreme viciousness to the highest virtue, and at the same time escaping
a most miserable life and attaining to a most happy one, he shows no
sign of joy, nor does this so great change lift him up or yet move him,
being delivered from all infelicity and vice, and coming to a certain
sure and firm perfection of virtue. This also is repugnant to common
sense, to hold that the being immutable in one's judgments and
resolutions is the greatest of goods, and yet that he who has attained
to the height wants not this, nor cares for it when he has it, nay, many
times will not so much as stretch forth a finger for this security
and constancy, which nevertheless themselves esteem the sovereign and
perfect good. Nor do the Stoics say only these things, but they add
also this to them,--that the continuance of time increases not any good
thing; but if a man shall be wise but a minute of an hour, he will not
be any way inferior in happiness to him who has all his time practised
virtue and led his life happily in it. Yet, whilst they thus boldly
affirm these things, they on the contrary also say, that a short-lived
virtue is nothing worth; "For what advantage would the attainment of
wisdom be to him who is immediately to be swallowed up by the waves or
tumbled down headlong from a precipice? What would it have benefited
Lichas, if being thrown by Hercules, as from a sling into the sea, he
had been on a sudden changed from vice to virtue?" These therefore
are the positions of men who not only philosophize against the common
conceptions but also confound their own, if the having been but a little
while endued with virtue is no way short of the highest felicity, and
at the same time nothing worth. Nor is this the strangest thing you
will find in their doctrine; but their being of opinion that virtue and
happiness, when present, are frequently not perceived by him who enjoys
them, nor does he discern that, having but a little before been most
miserable and foolish, he is of a sudden become wise and happy. For
it is not only childish to say that he who is possessed of wisdom is
ignorant of this thing alone, that he is wise, and knows not that he is
delivered from folly; but, to speak in general, they make goodness to
have very little weight or strength, if it does not give so much as a
feeling of it when it is present. For according even to them, it is not
by nature imperceptible; nay, even Chrysippus in his books of the End
expressly says that good is sensible, and demonstrates it also, as he
maintains. It remains, then, that by its weakness and littleness it
flies the sense, when being present it is unknown and concealed from
the possessors. It were moreover absurd to imagine that the sight,
perceiving those things which are but a little whitish or inclining to
white, should not discern such as are white in perfection; or that the
touch, feeling those things which are but warm or moderately hot, should
be insensible of those that are hot in the highest degree. And yet more
absurd it is, that a man who perceives what is commonly according to
Nature--as are health and good constitution of body--should yet be
ignorant of virtue when it is present, which themselves hold to be most
of all and in the highest degree according to Nature. For how can it
but be against sense, to conceive the difference between health and
sickness, and yet so little to comprehend that between wisdom and folly
as to think the one to be present when it is gone, and possessing the
other to be ignorant that one has it? Now because there is from the
highest progress a change made to felicity and virtue, one of these two
things must of necessity follow; either that this progress is not
vice and infelicity, or that virtue is not far distant from vice, nor
happiness from misery, but that the difference between good and evil is
very small and not to be perceived by sense; for otherwise they who have
the one for the other could not be ignorant of it.

Since, then, they will not depart from any of these contrarieties, but
confess and hold them all,--that those who are proceeding towards virtue
are fools and vicious, that those who are become good and wise perceive
not this change in themselves, and that there is a great difference
between folly and wisdom,--they must assuredly seem to you wonderfully
to preserve an agreement in their doctrines, and yet more so in their
conduct, when affirming all men who are not wise to be equally wicked,
unjust, faithless, and fools, they on the other side abhor and detest
some of them,--nay, sometimes to such a degree that they refuse even to
speak to them when they meet them,--while others of them they trust
with their money, choose to offices, and take for husbands to their
daughters. Now if they say these things in jest, let them smooth their
brows; but if in earnest and as philosophers, it is against the common
notions to reprove and blame all men alike in words, and yet to deal
with some of them as moderate persons and with others as very wicked;
and exceedingly to admire Chrysippus, to deride Alexinus, and yet to
think neither of them more or less mad than the other. "'Tis so," say
they; "but as he who is not above a cubit under the superficies of the
sea is no less drowned than he who is five hundred fathom deep, so they
that are coming towards virtue are no less in vice their those that are
farther off. And as blind men are still blind, though they shall perhaps
a little after recover their sight; so these that have proceeded towards
virtue, till such time as they have attained to it, continue foolish and
wicked." But that they who are in the way towards virtue resemble not
the blind, but such as see less clearly, nor are like to those who
are drowned, but--those which swim, and that near the harbor--they
themselves testify by their actions. For they would not use counsellors
and generals and lawgivers as blind leaders, nor would they imitate
the works and actions and words and lives of some, if they saw them all
equally drowned in folly and wickedness. But leaving this, wonder at the
men in this behalf, that they are not taught by their own examples
to give up the doctrine that these men are wise being ignorant of
it themselves, and neither knowing nor being sensible that they are
recovered from being drowned and see the light, and that being gotten
above vice, they fetch breath again.

This also is against common sense, that it should be convenient for a
man who has all good things, and wants nothing requisite to felicity and
happiness, to make away himself; and much more this, that for him who
neither has nor ever shall have any good thing, but who is and ever
shall be accompanied with all adversities, difficulties, and mishaps, it
should not be fitting to quit this life unless some of the indifferent
things befall him. These laws are enacted in the Stoa; and by these they
incite many wise men to kill themselves, as if they would be thereby
more happy; and they prevent many foolish men, as if it were proper for
them to live on in misery. Although the wise man is fortunate, blessed,
every way happy, secure, and free from danger; but the vicious and
foolish man is "full, as I may say, of evils, so that there is not room
to put them in"; and yet they think that continuing in life is fit for
the latter, and departing out of it for the former. And not without
cause, says Chrysippus, for we are not to measure life by good things or
evil, but by those that are according to Nature. In this manner do they
maintain custom, and philosophize according to the common conceptions.
What do you say?--that he who enters upon a deliberation of life and
death has no right to consider

     What good or ill in his own house there is;

or to weigh, as in a balance, what things have the greatest sign of
serving to felicity or infelicity; but must argue whether he should live
or die from those things which are neither profitable nor prejudicial,
and follow such principles and sentences as command the choosing of a
life full of all things to be avoided, and the shunning of one which
wants nothing of all those things that are desirable? For though it is
an absurd thing, friend Lamprias, to shun a life in which there is
no evil, it is yet more absurd, if any one should leave what is good
because he is not possessed of what is indifferent, as these men do who
leave present felicity and virtue for want of riches and health which
they have not.

     Satumian Jove from Glaucus took his wits,

when he went about to change his suit of golden armor for a brazen one,
and to give what was worth a hundred oxen for that which was worth but
nine. And yet the brazen armor was no less useful for fight than the
golden; whereas beauty and health of body, as the Stoics say, contribute
not the least advantage so far as happiness is concerned. And yet they
seek health in exchange for wisdom. For they say, it would well enough
have become Heraclitus and Pherecydes to have parted with their virtue
and wisdom, if the one of them could have thereby been freed from his
lousy disease, and the other from his dropsy; and if Circe had used two
sorts of magical drinks, one to make wise men fools, and the other to
make fools wise, Ulysses would rather have drunk that of folly, than
have changed his shape for the form of a beast, though having with it
wisdom, and consequently also happiness. And, they say, wisdom itself
dictates to them these things, exhorting them thus: Let me go, and value
not my being lost, if I must be carried about in the shape of an ass.
But this, some will say, is an ass-like wisdom which teacheth thus;
granting that to be wise and enjoy felicity is good, and to wear the
shape of an ass is indifferent. They say, there is a nation of the
Ethiopians where a dog reigns, is called king, and has all regal honors
and services done to him; but men execute the offices of magistrates and
governors of cities. Do not the Stoics act in the very same manner? They
give the name and appearance of good to virtue, saying that it alone is
desirable, profitable, and available; but in the meantime they act
these things, they philosophize, they live and die, as at the command of
things indifferent. And yet none of the Ethiopians kill that dog; but he
sits in state, and is revered by all. But these men destroy and corrupt
their virtue, that they may obtain health and riches.

But the corollary which Chrysippus himself has given for a conclusion to
his doctrines seems to free us from the trouble of saying anything more
about it. For there being, says he, in Nature some things good,
some things bad, and some things between them both, which we call
indifferent; there is no man but would rather have the good than the
indifferent, and the indifferent than the bad. And of this we call
the gods to witness, begging of them by our prayers principally the
possession of good things, and if that may not be, deliverance from
evil; not desiring that which is neither good nor bad instead of good,
but willing to have it instead of evil. But this man, changing Nature
and inverting its order, removes the middle out of its own place into
the last, and brings back the last into the middle,--not unlike to those
tyrants who give the first place to the wicked,--and he gives us a law,
first to seek the good, and secondly the evil, and lastly to judge
that worst which is neither good nor evil; as if any one should place
infernal things next to celestial, thrusting the earth and earthly
things into Tartarus,

     Where very far from hence, deep under ground,
     Lies a vast gulf.
     (Iliad, viii. 14.)

Having therefore said in his Third Book concerning Nature, that it
is more expedient for a fool to live than not, though he should never
attain to wisdom, he adds these words: "For such are the good things of
men, that even evil things do in a manner precede other things that are
in the middle place; not that these things themselves really precede,
but reason, which makes us choose rather to live, though we were to be
fools." Therefore also, though we were to be unjust, wicked, hated of
the gods, and unhappy; for none of these things are absent from those
that live foolishly. Is it then convenient rather to live miserably than
not to live miserably, and better to be hurt than not hurt, to be unjust
than not unjust, to break the laws than not to break them? That is, is
it convenient to do things that are not convenient, and a duty to live
even against duty? Yes indeed, for it is worse to want sense and reason
than to be a fool. What then ails them, that they will not confess that
to be evil which is worse than evil? Why do they say that folly alone is
to be avoided, if it is not less but rather more convenient to shun that
disposition which is not capable of folly?

But who can complain of this, that shall remember what he has written in
his Second Book of Nature, declaring that vice was not unprofitably made
for the universe? But it is meet I should set down his doctrine in his
own words, that you may understand in what place those rank vice, and
what discourses they hold of it, who accuse Xenocrates and Speusippus
for not reckoning health indifferent and riches useless. "Vice," saith
he, "has its limit in reference to other accidents. For it is also in
some sort according to the reason of Nature, and (as I may so say) is
not wholly useless in respect of the universe; for other wise there
would not be any good." Is there then no good among the gods, because
there is no evil? And when Jupiter, having resolved all matter into
himself, shall be alone, other differences being taken away, will there
then be no good, because there will be no evil? But is there melody in a
choir though none in it sings faultily, and health in the body though no
member is sick; and yet cannot virtue have its existence without vice?
But as the poison of a serpent or the gall of an hyena is to be mixed
with some medicines, was it also of necessity that there must have
been some conjunction of the wickedness of Meletus with the justice
of Socrates, and the dissolute conduct of Cleon with the probity of
Pericles? And could not Jupiter have found a means to bring into the
world Hercules and Lycurgus, if he had not also made for us Sardanapalus
and Phalaris? It is now time for them to say that the consumption was
made for the sound constitution of men's bodies, and the gout for the
swiftness of their feet; and that Achilles would not have had a good
head of hair if Thersites had not been bald. For what difference
is there between such triflers and ravers, and those who say that
intemperance was not brought forth unprofitably for continence, nor
injustice for justice, so that we must pray to the gods, there may be
always wickedness,

     Lies, fawning speeches, and deceitful manners,
     (Hesiod, "Works and Days," 78.)

if, when these are taken away, virtue will also vanish and be lost?

Or do you desire to understand the greatest sweetness of his eloquence
and persuasion? "For," says he, "as comedies have in them sometimes
ridiculous epigrams, which, though bad in themselves, give nevertheless
a certain grace to the whole poem; so, though you may blame vice in
itself, yet is it not useless to other things." First, then, to say that
vice was made by the providence of God, as a wanton epigram by the will
of the poet, transcends in absurdity all imagination. For this being
granted, how will the gods be rather givers of good than evil? How will
wickedness be displeasing to them, and hated by them? And what shall we
have to oppose against these ill-sounding sentences of the poets.--

     A cause to men God sends,
     When to chastise some house his wrath intends;
     (From the "Niobe" of Aeschylus, Frag. 151.)

and again,

     What God those seeds of strife 'twixt them did sow?
     (Iliad, i. 8.)

Moreover, a lewd epigram adorns the comedy and contributes to its end,
which is to delight the spectators and make them laugh. But Jupiter,
who is surnamed fatherly, supreme, just, and (as Pindar has it) the most
perfect artist, framing the world, not as a great interlude, full of
variety and great learning, but as a common city of Gods and men, living
together in concord and happiness with justice and virtue,--what need
had he, for the attaining to this excellent end, of thieves, murderers,
parricides, and tyrants? For vice entered not as a morris-dance,
pleasing and delightful to the Divinity; nor was it brought in amongst
the affairs of men, to cause mirth and laughter by its raillery and
facetiousness, since there is not to be seen in it so much as a dream of
that celebrated agreement with Nature. Besides, that foolish epigram is
a very small part of the poem, and takes up but a very little place in
the comedy; neither do such things abound in it, nor do they corrupt any
of those things which seem to have been well done, or spoil their grace.
But all human affairs are replete with vice, and the whole life, from
the very prologue and beginning to the end, being disordered, depraved,
and disturbed, and having no part of it pure or irreprehensible (as
these men say), is the most filthy and most unpleasant of all farces.

Wherefore I would willingly ask, in what vice is profitable to the
universe. Not surely in respect of heavenly things, and such as are
divine by nature. For it would be ridiculous to say, that if there had
not arisen, or were not amongst men, malice and covetousness and lying,
or that if we did not rob, plunder, slander, and murder one another, the
sun would not run his appointed course, the world enjoy its seasons
and periods of time, or the earth, which is seated in the midst of the
universe, afford the principles of the wind and rain. It remains, then,
that the existence of vice must be profitable for us and our affairs;
and that perhaps these men mean. Are we more healthy for being vicious,
or do we more abound with necessaries? Or does vice contribute anything
to our beauty and strength? They say, no. But where on earth is virtue
to be met with? Is it then only a base name, and a visionary opinion
of night-walking Sophists, and not an actual thing lying conspicuous to
all, like vice, so that we cannot partake of anything as profitable,...
but least, O ye gods! of virtue, for which we were created? Is it
not then absurd, that the utensils of the husbandman, mariner, and
charioteer should be serviceable and aiding towards his intended end,
whilst that which was by God made for virtue destroys and corrupts
virtue? But perhaps it is time now to leave this point, and pass to
another.

LAMPRIAS. Not for my sake, my dear friend, I beseech you; for I desire
to understand, in what manner these men bring in evil things before the
good, and vice before virtue.

DIADUMENUS. It is indeed, sir, a thing worth knowing. They babble indeed
much; but in conclusion they say that prudence, being the knowledge of
good and evil, would be wholly taken away if there were no evil. For as,
if there are truths, it is impossible but there must be some lies also
near to them; so it stands with reason, that if there are good things,
there must also be evil things.

LAMPRIAS. One of these things is not said amiss; and I think also that
the other is not unapprehended by me. For I see a difference here:
that which is not true must immediately be false; but that is not of
necessity evil which is not good; because that between true and false
there is no medium, but between good and evil there is the indifferent.
Nor is it of necessity that the one must subsist with the other. For
Nature may have good without having any need of evil, but only having
that which is neither good nor evil. But if there is anything to be said
by you to the former reason, let us hear it.

DIADUMENUS. Many things indeed are said; but at present we shall make
use only of what is most necessary. In the first place, it is a folly
to imagine that good and evil have their existence for the sake
of prudence. For good and evil being already extant, prudence came
afterwards; as the art of physic was invented, there being already
things wholesome and unwholesome. For good and evil are not therefore
extant that there may be prudence; but the faculty by which we judge
good and evil that are already in being is named prudence. As sight is
a sense distinguishing white from black; which colors were not therefore
made that we might have sight, but we rather wanted sight to discern
these things. Secondly, when the world shall be set on fire (as the
Stoics hold), there will then no evil be left, but all will then be
prudent and wise. There is therefore prudence, though there is no evil;
nor is it of necessity for evil to exist that prudence may have a being.
But supposing that prudence must always be a knowledge of good and
evil, what inconvenience would it be if, evil being taken away, prudence
should no longer subsist; but instead of this we should have another
virtue, not being the knowledge of good and evil, but of good only? So,
if black should be wholly lost from among the colors, and any one should
therefore contend that sight is also lost, for that there is no more
the sense of discerning black and white, what should hinder us from
answering him: It is no prejudice to us, if we have not what you call
sight, but in lieu of that have another sense and faculty, by which we
apprehend colors that are white and not white. For I indeed think that
neither our taste would be lost, if bitter things were wanting, nor our
feeling, if pain were taken away, nor prudence, if evil had no being;
but that these senses would remain, to apprehend things sweet and
grateful and those that are not so, and prudence to be the science of
things good and not good. But let those who think otherwise take the
name to themselves, leaving us the thing.

Besides all this, what should hinder but there may be an understanding
of evil, and an existence of good? As the gods, I believe, enjoy health,
but understand the fever and pleurisy. Since even we, who, as they
say, have abundance of evils but no good, are not yet destitute of the
knowledge what prudence, what goodness, and what happiness is. And this
also would be remarkable, that if virtue were absent, there should be
those who could teach us what it is and give us a comprehension of
it, when if vice were not extant, it should be impossible to have any
understanding of it. For see what these men persuade us who philosophize
against the conceptions,--that by folly indeed we comprehend prudence,
but prudence without folly cannot so much as comprehend folly itself.

And if Nature had absolutely stood in need of the generation of evil,
yet might one or two examples of vice have been sufficient; or if you
will, it might have been requisite that ten, a thousand, or ten thousand
vicious men should be brought forth, and not that the multitude of vices
should be so great as "to exceed in number the sands of the sea, the
dust of the earth, and the feathers of all the various kinds of birds in
the world," and yet that there should not be so much all this while as a
dream of virtue. Those who in Sparta had the charge of the public halls
or eating places called Phiditia were wont to bring forth two or
three Helots drunken and full of wine, that the young men, seeing what
drunkenness was, might learn to keep sobriety. But in human life there
are many such examples of vice. For there is not any one sober to
virtue; but we all stagger up and down, acting shamefully and living
miserably. Thus does reason inebriate us, and with so much trouble and
madness does it fill us, that we fall in nothing short of those dogs of
whom Aesop says, that seeing certain skins swimming in the water, they
endeavored to gulp down the sea, but burst before they could get at
them. For reason also, by which we hope to gain reputation and attain
to virtue, does, ere we can reach to it, corrupt and destroy us, being
before filled with abundance of heady and bitter vice;--if indeed, as
these men say, they who are got even to the uppermost step have no ease,
cessation, or breathing from folly and infelicity.

But let us see what manner of thing he shows vice to be who says that it
was not brought forth unprofitably, and of what use and what a thing
he makes it to be to those who have it, writing in his book of right
conduct, that a wicked man wants nothing, has need of nothing, nothing
is useful to him, nothing proper, nothing fit for him. How then is
vice useful, with which neither health nor abundance of riches nor
advancement in virtue is profitable? Who then does not want these
things, of which some are "preferable" and "acceptable" and therefore
highly useful, and others are "according to Nature," as themselves term
them? But (they affirm) no one has need of them, unless he become wise.
So the vicious man does not even stand in want of being made wise.
Nor are men hungry and thirsty before they become wise. When thirsty,
therefore, they have no need of water, nor when hungry, of bread.

     Be like to courteous guests, and him
     Who asks only fire and shelter:

does this man now not need entertainment? Nor had he need of a cloak,
who said,

     Give Hipponax a cloak, for I'm stiff with cold.

But will you speak a paradox indeed, both extravagant and singular? Say
then that a wise man has need of nothing, that he wants nothing, he
is fortunate, he is free from want, he is self-sufficient, blessed,
perfect. Now what madness is this, that he to whom nothing is wanting
has need of the goods he has, but that the vicious indeed wants many
things, and stands in need of nothing. For thus indeed says Chrysippus,
that the vicious wants but stands not in need; removing the common
notions, like chessmen, backwards and forwards. For all men think that
having need precedes wanting, esteeming him who stands in need of things
that are not at hand or easy to be got, to want them. For no man wants
horns or wings, because no one has need of them. But we say that those
want arms and money and clothes who are destitute of them, when they
have occasion for them. But these men are so desirous of seeming always
to say something against the common notions, that for the love of
novelty they often depart from their own opinions, as they do here.

Recall yourself to the consideration of what has been said a little
above. This is one of their assertions against the common conception,
that no vicious man receives any utility. And yet many being instructed
profit, many being slaves are made free; many being besieged are
delivered, being lame are led by the hand, and being sick are cured.
"But possessing all these things, they are never the better, neither
do receive benefits, nor have they any benefactors, nor do they slight
them." Vicious men then are not ungrateful, no more than are wise men.
Ingratitude therefore has no being; because the good receiving a benefit
fail not to acknowledge it, and the bad are not capable of receiving
any. Behold, now, what they say to this,--that benefit is ranked among
mean or middle things, and that to give and receive utility belongs only
to the wise, but the bad also receive a benefit. Then they who partake
of the benefit partake not also of its use; and whither a benefit
extends, there is nothing useful or commodious. Now what else is there
that makes a kind office a benefit, but that the bestower of it is, in
some respect, useful to the needy receiver?

LAMPRIAS. But let these things pass. What, I beseech you, is this so
highly venerated utility, which preserving as some great and excellent
thing for the wise, they permit not so much as the name of it to the
vicious?

DIADUMENUS. If (say they) one wise man does but any way prudently
stretch out his finger, all the wise men all the world over receive
utility by it. This is the work of their amity; in this do the virtues
of the wise man terminate by their common utilities. Aristotle then and
Xenocrates doted, saving that men receive utility from the gods, from
their parents, from their masters, being ignorant of that wonderful
utility which wise men receive from one another, being moved according
to virtue, though they neither are together nor yet know it. Yet all
men esteem, that laying up, keeping, and bestowing are then useful and
profitable, when some benefit or profit is recovered by it. The thriving
man buys keys, and diligently keeps his stores,

     With 's hand unlocking wealth's sweet treasury.
     (From the "Bellerophontes" of Euripides, Frag. 287, vs. 8.)

But to store up and to keep with diligence and labor such things as are
for no use is not seemly or honorable, but ridiculous. If Ulysses indeed
had tied up with the knot which Circe taught him, not the gifts he
had received from Alcinous,--tripods, caldrons, cloths, and gold,--but
heaping up trash, stones, and such like trumpery, should have thought
his employment about such things, and the possession and keeping of
them, a happy and blessed work, would any one have imitated this
foolish providence and empty care? Yet this is the beauty, gravity, and
happiness of the Stoical consent, being nothing else but a gathering
together and keeping of useless and indifferent things. For such are
things according to Nature, and more exterior things; if indeed they
compare the greatest riches to fringes and golden chamberpots, and
sometimes also, as it happens, to oil-cruets. Then, as those who seem
proudly to have affronted and railed at some gods or demigods presently
changing their note, fall prostrate and sit humbly on the ground,
praising and magnifying the Divinity; so these men, having met with
punishment of this arrogancy and vanity, again exercise themselves in
these indifferent things and such as pertain nothing to them, crying
out with a loud voice that there is only one thing good, specious, and
honorable, the storing up of these things and the communication of them,
and that it is not meet for those to live who have them not, but to
despatch out of the way and famish themselves, bidding a long farewell
to virtue.

They esteem indeed Theognis to have been a man altogether of a base
and abject spirit, for saying, as one overfearful in regard to poverty,
which is an indifferent thing:--

     From poverty to fly, into the deep
     Throw thyself, Cyrnus, or from rocks so steep.

Yet they themselves exhort the same thing in prose, and affirm that a
man, to free himself from some great disease or exceedingly acute pain,
if he have not at hand sword or hemlock, ought to leap into the sea or
throw himself headlong from a precipice; neither of which is hurtful, or
evil, or incommodious, or makes them who fall into it miserable.

With what, then, says he, shall I begin? And what shall I take for the
principle of duty and matter of virtue, leaving Nature and that which is
according to Nature?

With what, O good sir, do Aristotle and Theophrastus begin? What
beginnings do Xenocrates and Polemo take? Does not also Zeno follow
these, who hold Nature and that which is according to Nature to be the
elements of happiness? But they indeed persisted in these things, as
desirable, good, and profitable; and joining to them virtue, which
employs them and uses every one of them according to its property,
thought to complete and consummate a perfect life and one every way
absolute, producing that concord which is truly suitable and consonant
to Nature. For these men did not run into confusion, like those who leap
up from the ground and presently fall down again upon it, terming
the same things acceptable and not desirable, proper and not good,
unprofitable and yet useful, nothing to us and yet the principles of
duties. But their life was such as their speech, and they exhibited
actions suitable and consonant to their sayings. But they who are of
the Stoic sect--not unlike to that woman in Archilochus, who deceitfully
carried in one hand water, in the other fire--by some doctrines draw
Nature to them, and by others drive her from them. Or rather, by their
deeds and actions they embrace those things which are according to
Nature, as good and desirable, but in words and speeches they reject and
contemn them, as indifferent and of no use to virtue for the acquiring
felicity.

Now, forasmuch as all men esteem the sovereign good to be joyous,
desirable, happy, of the greatest dignity, self-sufficient, and wanting
nothing; compare their good, and see how it agrees with this common
conception. Does the stretching out a finger prudently produce this joy?
Is a prudent torture a thing desirable? Is he happy, who with reason
breaks his neck? Is that of the greatest dignity, which reason often
chooses to let go for that which is not good? Is that perfect and
self-sufficient, by enjoying which, if they possess not too indifferent
things, they neither can nor will endure to live? There is also another
tenet of the Stoics, by which custom is still more injured, taking and
plucking from her genuine notions, which are as her legitimate children,
and supposing other bastardly, wild, and illegitimate ones in their
room, and necessitating her to nourish and cherish the one instead of
the other; and that too in those principles which concern things good
and bad, desirable and avoidable, proper and strange, the energy of
which ought to be more clearly distinguished than that of hot and cold,
black and white. For the imaginations of these things are brought in
by the senses from without; but those have their original bred from the
good things which we have within us. But these men entering with their
logic upon the topic of felicity, as on the sophism called Pseudomenos,
or that named Kyrieuon, have removed no ambiguities, but brought in very
many.

Indeed, of two good things, of which the one is the end and the other
belongs to the end, none is ignorant that the end is the greater and
perfecter good. Chrysippus also acknowledges this difference, as is
manifest from his Third Book of Good Things. For he dissents from
those who make science the end, and sets it down.... In his Treatise of
Justice, however, he does not think that justice can be preserved, if
any one makes pleasure to be the end; but allows it may, if pleasure is
not said to be the end, but simply a good. Nor do I think that you need
now to hear me repeat his words, since his Third Book of Justice is
everywhere to be had. When, therefore, O my friend, they elsewhere say
that no one good is greater or less than another, and that what is
not the end is equal to the end, they contradict not only the common
conceptions, but even their own words. Again, if of two evils, the one
when it is present renders us worse, and the other hurts us but renders
us not worse, it is against reason not to say that the evil which by
its presence renders us worse is greater than that which hurts us but
renders us not worse. Now Chrysippus indeed confesses, that there are
some fears and sorrows and errors which hurt us, but render us not
worse. Read his First Book of Justice against Plato; for in respect of
other things, it is worth the while to note the babbling of the man in
that place, expounding indifferently all matters and doctrines, as well
proper to his own sect as foreign to it.

It is likewise against common sense when he says that there may be two
ends or scopes proposed of life, and that all the things we do are not
to be referred to one; and yet this is more against common sense, to
say that there is an end, and yet that every action is to be referred to
another. Nevertheless they must of necessity endure one of these. For
if those things which are first according to Nature are not eligible for
themselves, but the choice and taking of them agreeably to reason is,
and if every one therefore does all his actions for the acquiring the
first things according to Nature, then all things which are done must
have their reference to this, that the principal things according to
Nature may be obtained. But they think that they who aim and aspire to
get these things do not have the things themselves as the end, but
that to which they must make reference, namely, the choice and not
the things. For the end indeed is to choose and receive these things
prudently. But the things themselves and the enjoying of them are not
the end, but the material ground, having its value only from the choice.
For it is my opinion that they both use and write this very expression,
to show the difference.

LAMPRIAS. You have exactly related both what they say and in what manner
they deliver it.

DIADUMENUS. But observe how it fares with them, as with those that
endeavor to leap over their own shadow; for they do not leave behind,
but always carry along with them in their speech some absurdity most
remote from common sense. For as, if any one should say that he who
shoots does all he can, not that he may hit the mark, but that he may do
all he can, such a one would rightly be esteemed to speak enigmatically
and prodigiously; so these doting dreamers, who contend that the
obtaining of natural things is not the end of aiming after natural
things, but the taking and choosing them is, and that the desire and
endeavor after health is not in every one terminated in the enjoyment of
health, but on the contrary, the enjoyment of health is referred to the
desire and endeavor after it, and that certain walkings and contentions
of speech and suffering incisions and taking of medicines, so they are
done by reason, are the end of health, and not health of them, they,
I say, trifle like to those who say, Let us sup, that we may offer
sacrifice, that we may bathe. But this rather changes order and custom,
and all things which these men say carry with them the total subversion
and confusion of affairs. Thus, we do not desire to take a walk in fit
time that we may digest our meat; but we digest our meat that we may
take a walk in fit time. Has Nature also made health for the sake of
hellebore, instead of producing hellebore for the sake of health?
For what is wanting to bring them to the highest degree of speaking
paradoxes, but the saying of such things? What difference is there
between him who says that health was made for the sake of medicines and
not medicines for the sake of health, and him who makes the choice
of medicines and their composition and use more desirable than health
itself?--or rather who esteems health not at all desirable, but placing
the end in the negotiation about these things, prefers desire to
enjoyment, and not enjoyment to desire? For to desire, forsooth (they
affirm), is joined the proceeding wisely and discreetly. It is true
indeed, we will say, if respect be had to the end, that is, the
enjoyment and possession of the things it pursues; but otherwise, it is
wholly void of reason, if it does all things for the obtaining of that
the enjoyment of which is neither honorable nor happy.

Now, since we are fallen upon this discourse, anything may rather
be said to agree with common sense, than that those who have neither
received nor have any conception of good do nevertheless desire
and pursue it. For you see how Chrysippus drives Ariston into this
difficulty, that he should understand an indifference in things
inclining neither to good nor to bad, before either good or bad is
itself understood; for so indifference will appear to have subsisted
even before itself, if the understanding of it cannot be perceived
unless good be first understood, while the good is nothing else than
this very indifference. Understand now and consider this indifference
which the Stoa refutes and calls consent, whence and in what manner it
gives us the knowledge of good. For if without good the indifference to
that which is not good cannot be understood, much less does the knowing
of good things give any intelligence of itself to those who had not
before some notion of the good. But as there can be no knowledge of the
art of things wholesome and unwholesome in those who have not first some
knowledge of the things themselves; so they cannot conceive any notion
of the science of good and evil who have not some fore-knowledge of good
and evil.

LAMPRIAS. What then is good? DIADUMENUS. Nothing but prudence. LAMPRIAS.
And what is prudence? DIADUMENUS. Nothing but the science of good.

LAMPRIAS. There is much then of "Jupiter's Corinth" (that is, much
begging the question) admitted into their reasoning. For I would have
you let alone the saying about the turning of the pestle, lest you
should seem to mock them; although an accident like to that has
insinuated itself into their discourse. For it seems that, to the
understanding of good, one has need to understand prudence, and to seek
for prudence in the understanding of good, being forced always to
pursue the one by the other, and thus failing of both; since to the
understanding of each we have need of that which cannot be known without
the other be first understood.

DIADUMENUS. But there is yet another way, by which you may perceive
not only the perversion but the eversion of their discourse, and the
reduction of it entirely to nothing. They hold the essence of good to be
the reasonable election of things according to Nature. Now the election
is not reasonable which is not directed to some end, as has been said
before. What, then, is this end? Nothing else, say they, but to reason
rightly in the election of things according to Nature. First, then, the
conception of good is lost and gone. For to reason rightly in election
is an operation proceeding from an habit of right reasoning, and
therefore being constrained to get this from the end; and the end not
without this, we fail of understanding either of them. Besides, which is
more, this reasonable election ought strictly to be a choice of
things good and useful, and cooperating to the end; for how can it be
reasonable to choose things which are neither convenient nor honorable
nor at all eligible? For be it, as they say, a reasonable election of
things having a fitness for the causing felicity; see then to what a
beautiful and solemn conclusion their discourse brings them. For the
end is (it seems), according to them, to reason rightly in the choice of
things which are useful in causing us to reason rightly.

LAMPRIAS. When I hear these words, my friend, what is laid down seems to
me strangely extravagant; and I farther want to know how this happens.

DIADUMENUS. You must then be more attentive; for it is not for every one
to understand this riddle. Hear therefore and answer. Is not the end,
according to them, to reason rightly in the election of things according
to Nature?

LAMPRIAS. So they say.

DIADUMENUS. And are these things according to Nature chosen as good,
or as having some fitness or preferences... either for this end or for
something else?

LAMPRIAS. I think not for anything else but for this end.

DIADUMENUS. Now, then, having discovered the matter, see what befalls
them. They affirm that the end is to reason rightly in the selection of
things which are of value in causing us to reason rightly, for they say
that we neither have nor understand any other principle either of good
or of felicity but this precious rectitude of reasoning in the election
of things that are of worth. But there are some who think that this is
spoken against Antipater, and not against the whole sect; for that he,
being pressed by Carneades, fell into these fooleries.

But as for those things that are against the common conceptions taught
in the Stoa concerning love, they are all of them concerned in the
absurdity. They say youths are deformed who are vicious and foolish,
and that the wise are fair; and yet that none of these beautiful ones
is either beloved or worthy of being beloved. Nor yet is this the worst;
but they add, that those who love the deformed ones cease to do so when
they are become fair. Now whoever knew such a love as is kindled and has
its being at the sight of the body's deformity joined with that of the
soul, and is quenched and decays at the accession of beauty joined with
prudence, justice, and temperance? These men are not unlike to those
gnats which love to settle on the dregs of wine, or on vinegar, but shun
and fly away from potable and pleasant wine. As for that which they call
and term an appearance of beauty, saying that it is the inducement of
love,--first, it has no probability, for in those who are very foul and
highly wicked there cannot be an appearance of beauty, if indeed (as is
said) the wickedness of the disposition fills the face with deformity.
And secondly, it is absolutely against all common experience for the
deformed to be worthy of love because he one day will be fair and
expects to have beauty, but that when he has got it and is become fair
and good, he is to be beloved of none.

LAMPRIAS. Love, they say, is a certain hunting after a young person
who is as yet indeed undeveloped, but naturally well disposed towards
virtue.

DIADUMENUS. And what do we now else, O my best friend, but demonstrate
that their sect perverts and destroys all our common conceptions with
improbable things and unusual expressions? For none would hinder the
solicitude of these wise men towards young persons, if it were free
from all passionate affection, from being named hunting or love
of instruction; but they ought to call love what all men and women
understand and call by this name, like that which Penelope's suitors in
Homer seem to acknowledge,

     Who all desired to lie with her;
     ("Odyssey," i. 366)

or as Jupiter in another place says to Juno,

     For neither goddess yet nor mortal dame
     E'er kindled in my heart so great a flame.
     ("Iliad." xiv. 315.)

Thus casting moral philosophy into these matters, in which all is

     A mazy whirl, with nothing sound, and all perplexed,
     (Euripides, "Andromache," 448.)

they contemn and deride it, as if boasting themselves to be the only
men who observe nature and custom as it ought to be, and who at the
same time adapted reason to each man by means of aversions, desires,
appetites, pursuits, and impulses. But custom has received no good from
their logic, but, like the ear diseased by vain sounds, is filled
with difficulty and obscurity,--of which, if you think good, we will
elsewhere begin a new discourse. But now we will run through the chief
and principal heads of their natural philosophy, which no less confounds
the common conceptions than that other concerning ends. =============
First, this is altogether absurd and against sense, to say that is which
is not, and things which are not are. But above all that is most
absurd which they say of the universe. For, putting round about the
circumference of the world an infinite vacuum, they say that the
universe is neither a body nor bodiless. It follows then from this that
the universe has no being, since with them body only has a being.
Since therefore it is the part of that which has a being both to do and
suffer, and the universe has no being, it follows that the universe will
neither do nor suffer. Neither will it be in a place; for that which
takes up place is a body, and the universe is not a body, therefore the
universe exists nowhere. And since that only rests which continues in
one and the same place, the universe rests not, because it takes not up
place. Neither yet is it moved, for what is moved must have a place and
space in which to move. Moreover, what is moved either moves itself, or
suffers motion from another. Now, that which is moved by itself has
some bents and inclinations proceeding from its gravity or levity; and
gravity and levity are either certain habits or faculties or differences
of bodies. But the universe is not a body. It follows then of necessity,
that the universe is neither, heavy nor light, and consequently, that it
has not in itself any principle of motion. Nor yet will the universe be
moved by any other; for there is nothing else besides the universe. Thus
are they necessitated to say as they do, that the universe neither rests
nor is moved. Lastly since according to their opinion it must not
be said that the universe is a body, and yet the heaven, the earth,
animals, plants, men, and stones are bodies, it follows that that
which is no body will have bodies for its parts, and things which have
existence will be parts of that which has no existence, and that which
is not heavy will have parts that are heavy, and what is not light
will have parts that are light;--than which there cannot be any dreams
imagined more repugnant to the common conceptions.

Moreover, there is nothing so evident or so agreeing to common sense as
this, that what is not animate is inanimate, and what is not inanimate
is animate. And yet they overthrow also this evidence, confessing the
universe to be neither animate nor inanimate. Besides this, none thinks
the universe, of which there is no part wanting to be imperfect; but
they deny the universe to be perfect, saying that what is perfect may be
defined, but the universe because of its infiniteness cannot be defined.
Therefore, according to them, there is something which is neither
perfect nor imperfect. Moreover, the universe is neither a part, since
there is nothing greater than it; nor the whole, for the whole (they
say) is predicated only of that which is digested into order; but the
universe is, through its infiniteness, undetermined and unordered.
Moreover, there is no other thing which can be the cause of the
universe, there being nothing besides the universe; nor is the universe
the cause of other things or even of itself; for its nature suffers it
not to act, and a cause is understood by its acting. Suppose, now, one
should ask all men what they imagine NOTHING to be, and what notion they
have of it. Would they not answer, that it neither is a cause nor has
a cause, that it is neither the whole nor a part that it is neither
perfect nor imperfect, that it is neither animate nor inanimate, that
it neither is moved nor rests nor subsists, that it is neither corporeal
nor incorporeal; and that this and no other thing is meant by NOTHING?
Since, then, they alone predicate that of the universe which all others
do of NOTHING, it seems plain that they make the universe and NOTHING to
be the same. Time must then be said to be nothing; the same also must
be said of predicate, axiom, junction, conjunction, which terms they use
more than any of the other philosophers, yet they say that they have
no existence. But farther, to say that what is true has no being or
subsistence but is comprehended, and that that is comprehensible and
credible which no way partakes of the essence of being,--does not this
exceed all absurdity?

But lest these things should seem to have too much of logical
difficulty, let us proceed to such as pertain more to natural
philosophy. Since, then, as themselves say,

     Jove is of all beginning, midst, and end,
     (See "Orphic Fragments," vi. 10 (Herm.).)

they ought chiefly to have applied themselves to remedy, redress, and
reduce to the best order the conceptions concerning the gods, if there
were in them anything confused or erroneous; or if not, to have left
every one in those sentiments which they had from the laws and custom
concerning the Divinity:--

    For neither now nor yesterday But always these things lived,
    No one knows from whence they came.
     (Sophocles, "Antigone," 456.)

But these men, having begun (as it were) "from Vesta" to disturb the
opinions settled and received in every country concerning the gods, have
not (to speak sincerely) left anything entire and uncorrupted. For
what man is there or ever was, except these, who does not believe the
Divinity to be immortal and eternal? Or what in the common anticipations
is more unanimously chanted forth concerning the gods than such things
as these:--

     There the blest gods eternally enjoy
     Their sweet delights;
     ("Odyssey," vi. 46.)

and again,

     Both gods immortal, and earth-dwelling men;
     ("Iliad," v. 442.)

and again,

     Exempt from sickness and old age are they,
     And free from toil, and have escaped the stream
     Of roaring Acheron?
     (From Pindar.)

One may perhaps light upon some nations so barbarous and savage as
not to think there is a God; but there was never found any man who,
believing a God, did not at the same time believe him immortal and
eternal. Certainly, those who were called Atheists, like Theodorus,
Diagoras, and Hippo, durst not say that the Divinity is corruptible, but
they did not believe that there is anything incorruptible; not indeed
admitting the subsistence of an incorruptibility, but keeping the notion
of a God. But Chrysippus and Cleanthes, having filled (as one may say)
heaven, earth, air, and sea with gods, have not yet made any one of
all these gods immortal or eternal, except Jupiter alone, in whom they
consume all the rest; so that it is no more suitable for him to consume
others than to be consumed himself. For it is alike an infirmity
to perish by being resolved into another, and to be saved by being
nourished by the resolution of others into himself. Now these are
not like other of their absurdities, gathered by argument from their
suppositions or drawn by consequence from their doctrines; but they
themselves proclaim it aloud in their writings concerning the gods,
Providence, Fate, and Nature, expressly saying that all the other gods
were born, and shall die by the fire, melting away, in their opinion,
as if they were of wax or tin. It is indeed as much against common sense
that God should be mortal as the man should be immortal; nay, indeed, I
do not see what the difference between God and man will be, if God also
is a reasonable and corruptible animal. For if they oppose us with
this subtle distinction, that man is mortal, and God not mortal but
corruptible, see what they get by it. For they will say either that
God is at the same time both immortal and corruptible, or else that he
neither is mortal nor immortal; the absurdity of which even those cannot
exceed who set themselves industriously to devise positions repugnant to
common sense. I speak of others; for these men have left no one of the
absurdest things unspoken or unattempted.

To these things Cleanthes, contending for the conflagration of the
world, says, that the sun will make the moon and all the other stars
like to himself, and will change them into himself. Indeed, if the
stars, being gods, should contribute anything to the sun towards
their own destruction by adding to its conflagration, it would be very
ridiculous for us to make prayers to them for our salvation, and to
think them the saviours of men, whose nature it is to accelerate their
own corruption and dissolution.

And yet these men leave nothing unsaid against Epicurus, crying out,
Fie, fie upon him, as confounding their presumption concerning God by
taking away Providence; for God (they say) is presumed and understood to
be not only immortal and happy, but also a lover of men and careful of
them and beneficial to them, and herein they say true. Now if they who
abolish Providence take away the preconception concerning God, what do
they who say that the gods indeed have care of us, but deny them to
be helpful to us, and make them not bestowers of good things but of
indifferent ones, giving, to wit, not virtue, but wealth, health,
children, and such like things, none of which is helpful, profitable,
desirable, or available? Or shall we not rather think, that Epicurus
does not take away the conceptions concerning the gods; but that these
Stoics scoff at the gods and deride them, saying one is a god of fruits,
another of marriage, another a physician, and another a diviner,
while yet health, issue, and plenty of fruits are not good things, but
indifferent things and unprofitable to those who have them?

The third point of the conception concerning the gods is, that the gods
do in nothing so much differ from men as in happiness and virtue. But
according to Chrysippus, they have not so much as this difference. For
he says that Jupiter does not exceed Dion in virtue, but that Jupiter
and Dion, being both wise, are equally aided by one another, when one
comes into the motion of the other. For this and none else is the good
which the gods do to men, and likewise men to the gods when they are
wise. For they say, that a man who falls not short in virtue comes not
behind them in felicity, and that he who, tormented with diseases and
being maimed in the body, makes himself away, is equally happy with
Jupiter the Saviour, provided he be but wise. But this man neither is
nor ever was upon the earth; but there are infinite millions of men
unhappy to the highest degree in the state and government of Jupiter,
which is most excellently administered. Now what can be more against
sense than that, when Jupiter governs exceedingly well, we should be
exceedingly miserable? But if (which it is unlawful even to say)
he would desire no longer to be a saviour, nor a deliverer, nor a
protector, but the contrary to all these glorious appellations, there
can no goodness be added to the things that are, either as to their
multitude or magnitude, since, as these men say, all men live to the
height miserably and wickedly, neither vice receiving addition, nor
unhappiness increase.

Nor is this the worst; but they are angry with Menander for saying upon
the stage,

     The chief beginning of men's miseries
     Are things exceeding good;

for that this is against sense. And yet they make God, who is good, the
beginning of evils. "For matter," they contend, "produced not any evil
of itself; for it is without quality, and whatever differences it has,
it has received them all from that which moves and forms it." But that
which moves and forms it is the reason dwelling in it, since matter is
not made to move and form itself. So that of necessity evil, if it come
by nothing, must have been produced from that which has no being; but if
by some moving principle, from God. But if they think that Jupiter has
not the command of his parts nor uses every one of them according to his
reason, they speak against common sense, and imagine an animal, many of
whose parts are not subservient to his will but use their own operations
and actions, to which the whole gives no incitation nor begins their
motion. For there is nothing which has life so ill compacted as that,
against its will, its feet shall go, its tongue speak, its horns push,
or its teeth bite. The most of which things God must of necessity
suffer, if the wicked, being parts of him, do against his will lie,
cheat, rob, and murder one another. But if, as Chrysippus says, the very
least part cannot possibly behave itself otherwise than according to
Jupiter's pleasure, and if every living thing is so framed by Nature as
to rest and move according as he inclines it and as he turns, stays, and
disposes it,

     This saying is more impious than the first.
     (See Nauck's "Tragic Fragments," p. 704 (No. 345).)

For it were more tolerable to say that many parts of Jupiter are,
through his weakness and want of power, hurried on to do many absurd
things against his nature and will, than that there is not any
intemperance or wickedness of which Jupiter is not the cause. Moreover,
since they affirm the world to be a city and the stars citizens, if this
be so, there must be also tribes-men and magistrates, the sun must be
some consul, and the evening star a praetor or mayor of a city. Now I
know not whether any one that shall go about to disprove such things
will not show himself more ridiculous than those who assert and affirm
them.

Is it not therefore against sense to say that the seed is more and
greater than that which is produced of it? For we see that Nature in all
animals and plants, even those that are wild, has taken small, slender,
and scarce visible things for principles of generation to the greatest.
For it does not only from a grain of wheat produce an ear-bearing stalk,
or a vine from the stone of a grape; but from a small berry or acorn
which has escaped being eaten by the bird, kindling and setting
generation on fire (as it were) from a little spark, it sends forth the
stock of a bush, or the tall body of an oak, palm, or pine tree. Whence
also they say that seed is in Greek called [Greek omitted], as it
were, the [Greek omitted] or the WINDING UP of a great mass in a little
compass; and that Nature has the name of [Greek omitted], as if it were
the INFLATION [Greek omitted] and diffusion of reason and numbers opened
and loosened by it. But now, in opposition to this, they hold that fire
is the seed of the world, which shall after the conflagration change
into seed the world, which will then have a copious nature from a
smaller body and bulk, and possess an infinite space of vacuum filled
by its increase; and the world being made, the form again recedes and
settles, the matter being after the generation gathered and contracted
into itself.

You may hear them and read many of their writings, in which they jangle
with the Academics, and cry out against them as confounding all things
with their paradox of indistinguishable identity, and as vehemently
contending that there is but one quality in two substances. And yet
there is no man who understands not this, and would not on the contrary
think it wonderful and extremely strange if there should not in all time
be found one kind of dove exactly and in all respects like to another
dove, a bee to a bee, a grain of wheat to a grain of wheat, or (as the
proverb has it) one fig to another. But these things are plainly against
common sense which the Stoics say and feign,--that there are in one
substance two individual qualities, and that the same substance, which
has particularly one quality, when another quality is added, receives
and equally conserves them both. For if there may be two, there may be
also three, four, and five, and even more than you can name, in one and
the same substance; I say not in its different parts, but all equally
in the whole, though even infinite in number. For Chrysippus says, that
Jupiter and the world are like to man, as is also Providence to the
soul; when therefore the conflagration shall be, Jupiter, who alone of
all the gods is incorruptible, will retire into Providence, and they
being together, will both perpetually remain in the one substance of the
ether.

But leaving now the gods, and beseeching them to give these Stoics
common sense and a common understanding, let us look into their
doctrines concerning the elements. It is against the common conceptions
that one body should be the place of another, or that a body should
penetrate through a body, neither of them containing any vacuity, but
the full passing into the full, and in which there is no vacuity--but
is full and has no place by reason of its continuity--receiving the
mixture. But these men, not thrusting one thing into one, nor yet two
or three or ten together, but jumbling all the parts of the world, being
cut piecemeal, into any one thing which they shall first light on, and
saying that the very least which is perceived by sense will contain the
greatest that shall come unto it, boldly frame a new doctrine, proving
themselves here, as in many other things, to be holding for their
suppositions things repugnant to common sense. And presently upon this
they are forced to admit into their discourse many monstrous and strange
positions, mixing whole bodies with whole; of which this also is one,
that three are four. For this others put as an example of those things
which cannot be conceived even in thought. But to the Stoics it is a
matter of truth, that when one cup of wine is mixed with two of water,
if it is not to disappear and if the mixture is to be equalized, it must
be spread through the whole and be confounded therewith, so as to make
that which was one two by the equalization of the mixture. For the one
remains, but is extended as much as two, and thus is equal to the double
of itself. Now if it happens in the mixture with two to take the measure
of two in the diffusion, this is together the measure both of three
and four,--of three because one is mixed with two, and of four because,
being mixed with two, it has an equal quantity with those with which
it is mixed. Now this fine subtilty is a consequence of their putting
bodies into a body, and so likewise is the unintelligibleness of the
manner how one is contained in the other. For it is of necessity that,
of bodies passing one into another by mixture, the one should not
contain and the other be contained, nor the one receive and the other be
received within; for this would not be a mixture, but a contiguity
and touching of the superficies, the one entering in, and the other
enclosing it without, and the rest of the parts remaining unmixed and
pure, and so it would be merely many different things. But there being
a necessity, according to their axiom of mixture, that the things which
are mixed should be mingled one within the other, and that the same
things should together be contained by being within, and by receiving
contain the other, and that neither of them could possibly exist again
as it was before, it comes to pass that both the subjects of the mixture
mutually penetrate each other, and that there is not any part of either
remaining separate, but that they are necessarily all filled with each
other.

Here now that famed leg of Arcesilaus comes in, with much laughter
insulting over their absurdities; for if these mixtures are through the
whole, what should hinder but that, a leg being cut off and putrefied
and cast into the sea and diffused, not only Antigonus's fleet (as
Arcesilaus said) might sail through it, but also Xerxes's twelve hundred
ships, together with the Grecians' three hundred galleys, might fight in
it? For the progress will not henceforth fail, nor the lesser cease
to be in the greater; or else the mixture will be at an end, and the
extremity of it, touching where it shall end, will not pass through the
whole, but will give over being mingled. But if the mixture is through
the whole, the leg will not indeed of itself give the Greeks room for
the sea-fight, for to this there is need of putrefaction and change;
but if one glass or but one drop of wine shall fall from hence into the
Aegean or Cretan Sea, it will pass into the Ocean or main Atlantic Sea,
not lightly touching its superficies, but being spread quite through
it in depth, breadth, and length. And this Chrysippus admits, saying
immediately in his First Book of Natural Questions, that there is
nothing to hinder one drop of wine from being mixed with the whole sea.
And that we may not wonder at this, he says that this one drop will by
mixtion extend through the whole world; than which I know not anything
that can appear more absurd.

And this also is against sense, that there is not in the nature of
bodies anything either supreme or first or last, in which the magnitude
of the body may terminate; but that there is always some phenomenon
beyond the body, still going on which carries the subject to infinity
and undeterminateness. For one body cannot be imagined greater or less
than another, if both of them may by their parts proceed IN INFINITUM;
but the nature of inequality is taken away. For of things that are
esteemed unequal, the one falls short in its last parts, and the other
goes on and exceeds. Now if there is no inequality, it follows that
there is no unevenness nor roughness of bodies; for unevenness is the
inequality of the same superficies with itself, and roughness is an
unevenness joined with hardness; neither of which is left us by those
who terminate no body in its last part, but extend them all by the
multitude of their parts unto an infinity. And yet is it not evident
that a man consists of more parts than a finger, and the world of more
than a man? This indeed all men know and understand, unless they become
Stoics; but if they are once Stoics, they on the contrary say and think
that a man has no more parts than a finger, nor the world than a man.
For division reduces bodies to an infinity; and of infinites neither is
more or less or exceeds in multitude, or the parts of the remainder will
cease to be divided and to afford a multitude of themselves.

LAMPRIAS. How then do they extricate themselves out of these
difficulties?

DIADUMENUS. Surely with very great cunning and courage. For Chrysippus
says: "If we are asked, if we have any parts, and how many, and of what
and how many parts they consist, we are to use a distinction, making
it a position that the whole body is compacted of the head, trunk, and
legs, as if that were all which is inquired and doubted of. But if they
extend their interrogation to the last parts, no such thing is to be
undertaken, but we are to say that they consist not of any certain
parts, nor yet of so many, nor of infinite, nor of finite." And I seem
to myself to have used his very words, that you may perceive how he
maintains the common notions, forbidding us to think of what or how many
parts every body is compacted, and whether of infinite or finite. For if
there were any medium between finite and infinite, as the indifferent
is between good and evil, he should, by telling us what that is, have
solved the difficulty. But if--as that which is not equal is
presently understood to be unequal, and that which is not mortal to be
immortal--we also understand that which is not finite to be immediately
infinite, to say that a body consists of parts neither finite nor
infinite is, in my opinion, the same thing as to affirm that an argument
is compacted of positions neither true nor false....

To this he with a certain youthful rashness adds, that in a pyramid
consisting of triangles, the sides inclining to the juncture are
unequal, and yet do not exceed one another in that they are greater.
Thus does he keep the common notions. For if there is anything greater
and not exceeding, there will be also something less and not deficient,
and so also something unequal which neither exceeds nor is deficient;
that is, there will be an unequal thing equal, a greater not greater,
and a less not less. See it yet farther, in what manner he answered
Democritus, inquiring philosophically and to the point, if a cone is
divided by a plane parallel with its base, what is to be thought of the
superficies of its segments, whether they are equal or unequal; for
if they are unequal, they will render the cone uneven, receiving many
steplike incisions and roughnesses; but if they are equal, the sections
will be equal, and the cone will seem to have the same qualities as the
cylinder, to wit, to be composed not of unequal but of equal circles;
which is most absurd. Here, that he may convince Democritus of
ignorance, he says, that the superficies are neither equal or unequal,
but that the bodies are unequal, because the superficies are neither
equal nor unequal. Indeed to assert this for a law, that bodies are
unequal while the superficies are not unequal, is the part of a man who
takes to himself a wonderful liberty of writing whatever comes into
his head. For reason and manifest evidence, on the contrary, give us to
understand, that the superficies of unequal bodies are unequal, and that
the bigger the body is, the greater also is the superficies, unless the
excess, by which it is the greater, is void of a superficies. For if the
superficies of the greater bodies do not exceed those of the less, but
sooner fail, a part of that body which has an end will be without an
end and infinite. For if he says that he is compelled to this. For
those rabbeted incisions, which he suspects in a cone, are made by the
inequality of the body, and not of the superficies. It is ridiculous
therefore not to reckon the superficies, and to leave the inequality in
the bodies themselves. But to persist still in this matter, what is more
repugnant to sense than the imagining of such things? For if we admit
that one superficies is neither equal nor unequal to another, we may say
also of magnitude and of number, that one is neither equal nor unequal
to another; and this, not having anything that we can call or think to
be a neuter or medium between equal and unequal. Besides, if there are
superficies neither equal nor unequal, what hinders but there may be
also circles neither equal nor unequal? For indeed these superficies
of conic sections are circles. And if circles, why may not also their
diameters be neither equal nor unequal? And if so, why not also angles,
triangles, parallelograms, parallelopipeds, and bodies? For if the
longitudes are neither equal nor unequal to one another, so will the
weight, percussion, and bodies be neither equal nor unequal. How then
dare these men inveigh against those who introduce vacuums, and suppose
that there are indivisible atoms, and who say that motion and rest
are not incompatible with each other, when they themselves affirm such
axioms as these to be false: If any things are not equal to one another,
they are unequal to one another; and the same things are not equal and
unequal to one another? But when he says that there is something greater
and yet not exceeding, it were worth the while to ask, whether these
things quadrate with one another. For if they quadrate, how is either
the greater? And if they do not quadrate, how can it be but the one must
exceed and the other fall short? For if neither of these are true, the
other both will and will not quadrate with the greater. For those
who keep not the common conceptions must of necessity fall into such
perplexities.

It is moreover against sense to say that nothing touches another; nor is
this less absurd, that bodies touch one another, but touch by nothing.
For they are necessitated to admit these things, who allow not the
least parts of a body, but assume something before that which appears to
touch, and never ceases to proceed still farther. What, therefore, these
men principally object to the patrons of those indivisible bodies called
atoms is this, that there is neither a touching of the whole by the
whole, nor of the parts by the parts; for that the one makes not a
touching but a mixture, and that the other is not possible, these
individuals having no parts. How then do not they themselves fall into
the same inconvenience, leaving no first or last part, whilst they say,
that whole bodies mutually touch one another by a term or extremity and
not by a part? But this term is not a body; therefore one body shall
touch one another by that which is incorporeal, and again shall not
touch, that which is incorporeal coming between them. And if it shall
touch, the body shall both do and suffer something by that which is
incorporeal. For it is the nature of bodies mutually to do and
suffer, and to touch. But if the body has a touching by that which
is incorporeal, it will have also a contact, and a mixture, and a
coalition. Again, in these contacts and mixtures the extremities of the
bodies must either remain, or not remain but be corrupted. Now both
of these are against sense. For neither do they themselves admit
corruptions and generations of incorporeal things; nor can there be a
mixture and coalition of bodies retaining their own extremities. For
the extremity determines and constitutes the nature of the body;
and mixtions, unless the mutual laying of parts by parts are thereby
understood, wholly confound all those that are mixed. And, as these men
say, we must admit the corruption of extremities in mixtures, and their
generation again in the separation of them. But this none can easily
understand. Now by what bodies mutually touch each other, by the same
they press, thrust, and crush each other. Now that this should be done
or take place in things that are incorporeal, is impossible and not
so much as to be imagined. But yet this they would constrain us to
conceive. For if a sphere touch a plane by a point, it is manifest that
it may be also drawn over the plane upon a point; and if the superficies
of it is painted with vermilion, it will imprint a red line on the
plane; and if it is fiery hot, it will burn the plane. Now for an
incorporeal thing to color, or a body to be burned by that which is
incorporeal, is against sense. But if we should imagine an earthen
or glassy sphere to fall from on high upon a plane of stone, it were
against reason to think it would not be broken, being struck against
that which is hard and solid; but it would be more absurd that it should
be broken, falling upon an extremity or point that is incorporeal. So
that the presumptions concerning things incorporeal and corporeal are
wholly disturbed, or rather taken away, by their joining to them many
impossibilities.

It is also against common sense, that there should be a time future and
past, but no time present; and that EREWHILE and LATELY subsist, but NOW
is nothing at all. Yet this often befalls the Stoics, who admit not the
least time between, nor will allow the present to be indivisible; but
whatsoever any one thinks to take and understand as present, one part of
that they say to be future, and the other part past; so that there is no
part remaining or left of the present time: but of that which is said
to be present, one part is distributed to the future, the other to the
past. Therefore one of these two things follows: either that, holding
there was a time and there will be a time, we must deny there is a time;
or we must hold that there is a time present, part of which has already
been and part will be, and say that of that which now is, one part is
future and the other past; and that of NOW, one part is before and the
other behind; and that now is that which is neither yet now nor any
longer NOW; for that which is past is no longer now, and that which is
to come is not yet NOW. And dividing thus the present, they must needs
say of the year and of the day, that part of it was of the year or day
past, and part will be of the year or day to come; and that of what is
together, there is a part before and a part after. For no less are they
perplexed, confounding together these terms, NOT YET and ALREADY and NO
LONGER and NOW and NOT NOW. But all other men suppose, esteem, and think
EREWHILE and AWHILE HENCE to be different parts of time from NOW, which
is followed by the one and preceded by the other. But Archedemus, saying
that now is the beginning and juncture of that which is past and that
which is near at hand, has (as it seems) without perceiving it thereby
destroyeth all time. For if NOW is no time, but only a term or extremity
of time, and if every part of time is such as now, all time seems
to have no parts, but to be wholly dissolved into terms, joints, and
beginnings. But Chrysippus, desiring to show more artifice in his
division, in his book of Vacuity and some others, says, that the past
and future time are not, but have subsisted (or will subsist), and
that the present only is; but in his third, fourth, and fifth books
concerning Parts, he asserts, that of the present time one part is past,
the other to come. Thus it comes to pass, that he divides subsisting
time into non-subsisting parts of a subsisting total, or rather leaves
nothing at all of time subsisting, if the present has no part but what
is either future or past.

These men's conception therefore of time is not unlike the grasping of
water, which, the harder it is held, all the more slides and runs away.
As to actions and motions, all evidence is utterly confounded. For if
NOW is divided into past and future, it is of necessity that what is now
moved partly has been moved and partly shall be moved, that the end and
beginning of motion have been taken away, that nothing of any work
has been done first, nor shall anything be last, the actions being
distributed with time. For as they say that of present time, part is
past and part to come; so of that which is doing, it will be said that
part is done and part shall be done. When therefore had TO DINE, TO
WRITE, TO WALK, a beginning, and when shall they have an end, if every
one who is dining has dined and shall dine, and every one who is
walking has walked and shall walk? But this is, as it is said, of all
absurdities the most absurd, that if he who now lives has already lived
and shall live, then to live neither had beginning nor shall have end;
but every one of us, as it seems, was born without commencing to live,
and shall die without ceasing to live. For if there is no last part,
but he who lives has something of the present still remaining for the
future, to say "Socrates shall live" will never be false so long as it
shall be true to say "Socrates lives"; and so long also will it be false
to say "Socrates is dead." So that, if "Socrates shall live" is true
in infinite parts of time, it will in no part of time be true to say
"Socrates is dead." And verily what end will there be of a work, and
where will you terminate an action, if, as often as it is true to say
"This is doing," it is likewise true to say "This shall be doing"? For
he will lie who shall say, there will be an end of Plato's writing and
disputing; since Plato will never give over writing and disputing, if it
is never false to say of him who disputes that he shall dispute, and of
him who writes that he shall write. Moreover, there will be no part of
that which now is, but either has been or is to be, and is either past
or future; but of what has been and is to be, of past and future, there
is no sense; wherefore there is absolutely no sense of anything. For we
neither see what is past and future, nor do we hear or have any other
sense of what has been or is to be. Nothing, then, even what is present,
is to be perceived by sense, if of the present, part is always future
and part past,--if part has been and part is to be.

Now they indeed say, that Epicurus does intolerable things and violates
the conceptions, in moving all bodies with equal celerity, and admitting
none of them to be swifter than another. And yet it is much more
intolerable and farther remote from sense, that nothing can be overtaken
by another:--

     Not though Adrastus's swift-footed steed
     Should chase the tortoise slow,

as the proverb has it. Now this must of necessity fall out, if things
move according to PRIUS and POSTERIUS, and the intervals through which
they pass are (as these men's tenet is) divisible IN INFINITUM; for if
the tortoise is but a furlong before the horse, they who divide
this furlong in infinitum, and move them both according to PRIUS and
POSTERIUS, will never bring the swiftest to the slowest; the slower
always adding some interval divisible into infinite spaces. Now to
affirm that, water being poured from a bowl or cup, it will never be all
poured out, is it not both against common sense, and a consequence of
what these men say? For no man can understand the motion according to
PRIUS of things infinitely divisible to be consummated; but leaving
always somewhat divisible, it will make all the effusion, all the
running and flux of a liquid, motion of a solid, and fall of an heavy
thing imperfect.

I pass by many absurdities of theirs, touching only such as are against
sense. The dispute concerning increase is indeed ancient; for the
question, as Chrysippus says, was put by Epicharmus. Now, whereas those
of the Academy think that the doubt is not very easy and ready all of
a sudden to be cleared, these men have mightily exclaimed against them,
and accused them of taking away the fixed ideas, and yet themselves are
so far from preserving the common notions, that they pervert even
sense itself. For the discourse is simple, and these men grant the
suppositions,--that all particular substances flow and are carried, some
of them emitting forth somewhat from themselves, and others receiving
things coming from elsewhere; and that the things to which there is
made an accession or from which there is a decession by numbers and
multitudes, do not remain the same, but become others by the said
accessions, the substance receiving a change; and that these changes
are not rightly called by custom increasings or diminutions, but it is
fitter they should be styled generations and corruptions, because they
drive by force from one state to another, whereas to increase and be
diminished are passions of a body that is subject and permanent. These
things being thus in a manner said and delivered, what would these
defenders of evidence and canonical masters of common conceptions have?
Every one of us (they say) is double, twin-like, and composed of a
double nature; not as the poets feigned of the Molionidae, that they in
some parts grow together and in some parts are separated,--but every one
of us has two bodies, having the same color, the same figure, the same
weight and place.... These things were never before seen by any man;
but these men alone have discerned this composition, doubleness, and
ambiguity, how every one of us is two subjects, the one substance, the
other quality; and the one is in perpetual flux and motion, neither
increasing nor being diminished nor remaining altogether; the other
remains and increases and is diminished, and suffers all things contrary
to the former, with which it is so concorporated, conjoined, and
confounded, that it exhibits not any difference to be perceived by
sense. Indeed, Lynceus is said to have penetrated stones and oaks with
his sight; and a certain man sitting on a watch-tower in Sicily beheld
the ships of the Carthaginians setting forth from their harbor, which
was a day and a night's sail from thence. Callicrates and Myrmecides
are said to have made chariots that might be covered with the wings of
a fly, and to have engraved verses of Homer on a sesame seed. But none
ever discerned or discovered this diversity in us; nor have we perceived
ourselves to be double, in one part always flowing, and in the other
remaining the same from our birth even to our death. But I make the
discourse more simple, since they make four subjects in every one, or
rather every one of us to be four. But two are sufficient to show their
absurdity. For if, when we hear Pentheus in the tragedy affirm that he
sees two suns and two cities of Thebes, (Euripides, "Bacchae," 918.)
we say that he does not see, but that his sight is dazzled, he being
transported and troubled in his head; why do we not bid those farewell,
who assert not one city alone, but all men and animals, and all trees,
vessels, instruments, and clothes, to be double and composed of two,
as men who constrain us to dote rather than to understand? But this
feigning other natures of subjects must perhaps be pardoned them; for
there appears no other invention by which they can maintain and uphold
the augmentations of which they are so fond.

But by what cause moved, or for the adorning of what other suppositions,
they frame in a manner innumerable differences and forms of bodies
in the soul, there is none can say, unless it be that they remove, or
rather wholly abdicate and destroy, the common and usual notions, to
introduce other foreign and strange ones. For it is very absurd that,
making all virtues and vices--and with them all arts, memories, fancies,
passions, impulses, and assents--to be bodies, they should affirm that
they neither lie nor subsist in any subject, leaving them for a place
one only hole, like a prick in the heart, where they crowd the principal
part of the soul, enclosed with so many bodies, that a very great number
of them lie hid even from those who think they can spare and distinguish
them one from another. Nay that they should not only make them bodies,
but also intelligent beings, and even a swarm of such creatures, not
friendly or mild, but a multitude rebellious and having a hostile mind,
and should so make of each one of us a park or menagerie or Trojan
horse, or whatever else we may call their inventions,--this is the very
height of contempt and contradiction to evidence and custom. But they
say, that not only the virtues and vices, not only the passions, as
anger, envy, grief, and maliciousness, not only comprehensions, fancies,
and ignorances, not only arts, as shoemaking and working in brass, are
animals; but besides these, also they make even the operations bodies
and animals, saying that walking is an animal, as also dancing,
supposing, saluting, and railing. The consequence of this is that
laughing and weeping are also animals; and if so, then also are
coughing, sneezing, groaning, spitting, blowing the nose, and other such
like things sufficiently known. Neither have they any cause to take it
ill that they are by reason, proceeding leisurely, reduced to this, if
they shall call to mind how Chrysippus, in his First Book of Natural
Questions, argues thus: "Is not night a body? And are not then the
evening, dawning, and midnight bodies? Or is not a day a body? Is not
then the first day of the month a body? And the tenth, the fifteenth,
and the thirtieth, are they not bodies? Is not a month a body? Summer,
autumn, and the year, are they not bodies?"

These things they maintain against the common conceptions; but those
which follow they hold also against their own, engendering that which
is most hot by refrigeration, and that which is most subtile by
condensation. For the soul, to wit, is a substance most hot and most
subtile. But this they make by the refrigeration and condensation of
the body, changing, as it were, by induration the spirit, which of
vegetative is made animal. Moreover, they say that the sun became
animated, his moisture changing into intellectual fire. Behold how the
sun is imagined to be engendered by refrigeration! Xenophanes indeed,
when one told him that he had seen eels living in hot water, answered,
We will boil them then in cold. But if these men engender heat by
refrigeration and lightness by condensation, it follows, they must also
generate cold things by heat, thick things by dissolution, and heavy
things by rarefaction, that so they may keep some proportion in their
absurdity.

And do they not also determine the substance and generation of
conception itself, even against the common conceptions? For conception
is a certain imagination, and imagination an impression in the soul. Now
the nature of the soul is an exhalation, in which it is difficult for
an impression to be made because of its tenuity, and for which it is
impossible to keep an impression it may have received. For its nutriment
and generation, consisting of moist things, have continual accession and
consumption. And the mixture of respiration with the air always makes
some new exhalation which is altered and changed by the flux of the air
coming from abroad and again going out. For one may more easily imagine
that a stream of running water can retain figures, impressions, and
images, than that a spirit can be carried in vapors and humors, and
continually mingled with another idle and strange breath from without.
But these men so far forget themselves, that, having defined the
conceptions to be certain stored-up intelligences, and memoirs to be
constant and habitual impressions, and having wholly fixed the sciences,
as having stability and firmness, they presently place under them a
basis and seat of a slippery substance, easy to be dissipated and in
perpetual flux and motion.

Now the common conception of an element and principle, naturally
imprinted in almost all men, is this, that it is simple, unmixed, and
uncompounded. For that is not an element or principle which is mixed;
but those things are so of which it is mixed. But these men, making God,
who is the principle of all things, to be an intellectual body and
a mind seated in matter, pronounce him to be neither simple nor
uncompounded, but to be composed of and by another; matter being
of itself indeed without reason and void of quality, and yet having
simplicity and the propertv of a principle. If, then, God is not
incorporeal and immaterial, he participates of matter as a principle.
For if matter and reason are one and the same thing, they have not
rightly defined matter to be reasonless; but if they are different
things, then is God constituted of them both, and is not a simple but
compound thing, having to the intellectual taken the corporeal from
matter.

Moreover, calling these four bodies, earth, water, air, and fire, the
first elements, they do (I know not how) make some of them simple and
pure, and others compound and mixed. For they maintain that earth and
water hold together neither themselves nor other things, but preserve
their unity by the participation of air and force of fire; but that
air and fire do both fortify themselves by their own strength, or being
mixed with the other two, give them force, permanence, and subsistence.
How, then, is either earth or water an element, if neither of them
is either simple, or first or self-sufficient, but if each one wants
somewhat from without to contain and keep it in its being? For they have
not left so much as a thought of their substance; but this discourse
concerning the earth has much confusion and uncertainty, when they say
that it subsists of itself; for if the earth is of itself, how has it
need of the air to fix and contain it? But neither the earth nor water
can any more be said to be of itself; but the air, drawing together
and thickening the matter, has made the earth, and again dissolving
and mollifying it, has produced the water. Neither of these then is an
element, since something else has contributed being and generation to
them both.

Moreover, they say that subsistence and matter are subject to qualities,
and do so in a manner define them; and again, they make the qualities to
be also bodies. But these things have much perplexity. For if qualities
have a peculiar substance, for which they both are and are called
bodies, they need no other substance; for they have one of their own.
But if they have under them in common only that which the Stoic school
calls essence and matter, it is manifest they do but participate of the
body; for they are not bodies. But the subject and recipient must of
necessity differ from those things which it receives and to which it is
subject. But these men see by halves; for they say indeed that matter
is void of quality, but they will not call qualities immaterial. Now how
can they make a body without quality, who understand no quality without
a body? For the reason which joins a body to all quality suffers not
the understanding to comprehend any body without some quality. Either,
therefore, he who oppugns incorporeal quality seems also to oppugn
unqualified matter; or separating the one from the other, he mutually
parts them both. As for the reason which some pretend, that matter is
called unqualified not because it is void of all quality, but because
it has all qualities, it is most of all against sense. For no man calls
that unqualified which is capable of every quality, nor that impassible
which is by nature always apt to suffer all things, nor that immovable
which is moved every way. And this doubt is not solved, that, however
matter is always understood with quality, yet it is understood to be
another thing and differing from quality.


END OF SIX-------------




CONTRADICTIONS OF THE STOICS.

I first lay this down for an axiom, that there ought to be seen in men's
lives an agreement with their doctrines. For it is not so necessary that
the pleader (as Aeschines has it) and the law speak one and the same
thing, as that the life of a philosopher be consonant to his speech. For
the speech of a philosopher is a law of his own and voluntarily imposed
on himself, unless they esteem philosophy to be a game, or an acuteness
in disputing invented for the gaining of applause, and not--what it
really is--a thing deserving our greatest study.

Since, then, there are in their discourses many things written by Zeno
himself, many by Cleanthes, and most of all by Chrysippus, concerning
policy, governing, and being governed, concerning judging and pleading,
and yet there is not to be found in any of their lives either leading of
armies, making of laws, going to parliament, pleading before the judges,
fighting for their country, travelling on embassies, or making of public
gifts, but they have all, feeding (if I may so say) on rest as on the
lotus, led their whole lives, and those not short but very long ones,
in foreign countries, amongst disputations, books, and walkings; it
is manifest that they have lived rather according to the writings and
sayings of others than their own professions, having spent all their
days in that repose which Epicurus and Hieronymus so much commend.

Chrysippus indeed himself, in his Fourth Book of Lives, thinks there is
no difference between a scholastic life and a voluptuous one. I will
set down here his very words: "They who are of opinion that a scholastic
life is from the very beginning most suitable to philosophers seem to me
to be in an error, thinking that men ought to follow this for the sake
of some recreation or some other thing like to it, and in that manner
to spin out the whole course of their life; that is, if it may be
explained, to live at ease. For this opinion of theirs is not to be
concealed, many of them delivering it clearly, and not a few more
obscurely." Who therefore did more grow old in this scholastic life than
Chrysippus, Cleanthes, Diogenes, Zeno, and Antipater, who left their
countries not out of any discontent but that they might quietly enjoy
their delight, studying, and disputing at their leisure. To verify
which, Aristocreon, the disciple and intimate friend of Chrysippus,
having erected his statue of brass upon a pillar, engraved on it these
verses:--

     This brazen statue Aristocreon
     To's friend Chrysippus newly here has put,
     Whose sharp-edged wit, like sword of champion,
     Did Academic knots in sunder cut.

Such a one then was Chrysippus, an old man, a philosopher, one who
praised the regal and civil life, and thought there was no difference
between a scholastic and voluptuous one.

But those others of them who intermeddle in state affairs act yet more
contradictorily to their own doctrines. For they govern, judge, consult,
make laws, punish, and honor, as if those were indeed cities in the
government of which they concern themselves, those truly counsellors and
judges who are at any time allotted to such offices, those generals who
are chosen by suffrages, and those laws which were made by Clisthenes,
Lycurgus, and Solon, whom they affirm to have been vicious men and
fools. Thus even over the management of state affairs are they at
variance with themselves.

Indeed Antipater, in his writings concerning the difference between
Cleanthes and Chrysippus, has related that Zeno and Cleanthes would not
be made citizens of Athens, lest they might seem to injure their own
countries. I shall not much insist upon it, that, if they did well,
Chrysippus acted amiss in suffering himself to be enrolled as a member
of that city. But this is very contradictory and absurd, that, removing
their persons and their lives so far off amongst strangers, they
reserved their names for their countries; which is the same thing as if
a man, leaving his wife, and cohabiting and bedding with another, and
getting children on her, should yet refuse to contract marriage with the
second, lest he might seem to wrong the former.

Again, Chrysippus, writing in his treatise of Rhetoric, that a wise
man will so plead and so act in the management of a commonwealth, as if
riches, glory, and health were really good, confesses that his speeches
are inextricable and impolitic, and his doctrines unsuitable for the
uses and actions of human life.

It is moreover a doctrine of Zeno's, that temples are not to be built to
the gods; for that a temple is neither a thing of much value nor holy;
since no work of carpenters and handicrafts-men can be of much value.
And yet they who praise these things as well and wisely said are
initiated in the sacred mysteries, go up to the Citadel (where
Minerva's temple stands), adore the shrines, and adorn with garlands the
sacraries, being the works of carpenters and mechanical persons. Again,
they think that the Epicureans, who sacrifice to the gods and yet deny
them to meddle with the government of the world, do thereby refute
themselves; whereas they themselves are more contrary to themselves,
sacrificing on altars and in temples, which they affirm ought not to
stand nor to have been built.

Moreover, Zeno admits (as Plato does) several virtues having various
distinctions--to wit, prudence, fortitude, temperance, and justice--as
being indeed inseparable, but yet divers and different from one another.
But again, defining every one of them, he says that fortitude is
prudence in executing, justice prudence in distributing, as being one
and the same virtue, but seeming to differ in its relation to different
affairs when it comes to action. Nor does Zeno alone seem to contradict
himself in these matters; but Chrysippus also, who blames Ariston for
saying that the other virtues are different habits of one and the same
virtue, and yet defends Zeno, who in this manner defines every one of
the virtues. And Cleanthes, having in his Commentaries concerning Nature
said, that vigor is the striking of fire, which, if it is sufficient
in the soul to perform the duties presented to it, is called force and
strength; subjoins these very words: "Now this force and strength, when
it is in things apparent and to be persisted in, is continence; when
in things to be endured, it is fortitude; when about worthiness, it is
justice; and when about choosing or refusing, it is temperance." Against
him, who said,

     Give not thy judgment till both sides are heard,
     (In the "Pseudo-Phocylidea," vs. 87 (Bergk).)

Zeno on the contrary made use of such an argument as this: "If he who
spake first has plainly proved his cause, the second is not to be heard,
for the question is at an end; and if he has not proved it, it is the
same case as if being cited he did not appear, or appearing did nothing
but wrangle; so that, whether he has proved or not proved his cause, the
second is not to be heard." And yet he who made this dilemma has
written against Plato's Commonweal, dissolved sophisms, and exhorted his
scholars to learn logic, as enabling them to do the same. Now Plato
has either proved or not proved those things which he writ in his
Commonweal; but in neither case was it necessary to write against
him, but wholly superfluous and vain. The same may be said concerning
sophisms.

Chrysippus is of opinion, that young students should first learn logic,
secondly, ethics, and after these, physics, and likewise in this to
meddle last of all with the disputes concerning the gods. Now these
things having been often said by him, it will suffice to set down what
is found in his Fourth Book of Lives, being thus word for word: "First,
then, it seems to me, according as it has been rightly said by the
ancients, that there are three kinds of philosophical speculations,
logical, ethical, and physical, and that of these, the logical ought to
be placed first, the ethical second, and the physical third, and that
of the physical, the discourse concerning the gods ought to be the last;
wherefore also the traditions concerning this have been styled [Greek
omitted], or the ENDINGS." But that very discourse concerning the gods,
which he says ought to be placed the last, he usually places first and
sets before every moral question. For he is seen not to say anything
concerning the ends, or concerning justice, or concerning good and evil,
or concerning marriage and the education of children, or concerning the
law and the commonwealth; but, as those who propose decrees to states
set before them the words To Good Fortune, so he also premises something
of Jupiter, Fate, Providence, and of the world's being one and finite
and maintained by one power. None of which any one can be persuaded to
believe, who has not penetrated deeply into the discourses of natural
philosophy. Hear what he says of this in his Third Book of the
Gods: "For there is not to be found any other beginning or any other
generation of Justice, but what is from Jupiter and common Nature. From
thence must every such thing have its beginning, if we will say anything
concerning good and evil." And again, in his Natural Positions he says:
"For one cannot otherwise or more properly come to the discourse of good
and evil, to the virtues, or to felicity, than from common Nature and
the administration of the world." And going farther on, he adds: "For to
these we must annex the discourse concerning good and evil, there being
no other better beginning or relation thereof, and the speculation of
Nature being learned for nothing else, but to understand the difference
between good and evil." According to Chrysippus, therefore, the
natural science is both before and after the moral; or rather, it is an
inversion of order altogether absurd, if this must be put after
those things none of which can be comprehended without this; and his
contradicting himself is manifest, when he asserts the discourse of
Nature to be the beginning of that concerning good and evil, and yet
commands it to be delivered, not before, but after it.

Now, if any one shall say that Chrysippus in his book concerning the Use
of Speech has written, that he who applies himself to logic first needs
not absolutely to abstain from the rest, but should take as much of them
as shall fall in his way, he will indeed say the truth, but will withal
confirm the fault. For he oppugns himself, one while commanding that
the science concerning God should be taken last and for a conclusion,
as being therefore also called [Greek omitted], and again, another while
saying that this is to be learned together with the very first. For
order is at an end, if all things must be used at all times. But this is
more, that having made the science concerning the gods the beginning of
that concerning good and evil, he bids not those who apply themselves to
the ethics to begin with that; but learning these, to take of that
also as it shall come in their way, and then to go from these to that,
without which, he says, there is no beginning or entrance upon these.

As for disputing on both sides, he says, that he does not universally
reject it, but exhorts us to use it with caution, as is done in
pleadings, not with the aim really to disprove, but to dissolve their
probability. "For to those," says he, "who endeavor a suspension of
assent concerning all things, it is convenient to do this, and it
co-operates to what they desire; but as for those who would work
and constitute in us a certain science according to which we shall
professedly live, they ought, on the contrary, to state the first
principles, and to direct their novices who are entered from the
beginning to the end; and where there is occasion to make mention
of contrary discourses, to dissolve their probability, as is done in
pleadings." For this he hath said in express words. Now that it is
absurd for philosophers to think that they ought to set down the
contrary opinion, not with all its reasons, but like pleaders, disabling
it, as if they contended not for truth but victory, we have elsewhere
spoken against him. But that he himself has, not in one or two places
in his disputations, but frequently, confirmed the discourses which
are contrary to his own opinions, and that stoutly, and with so much
earnestness and contention that it was not for every one to understand
what he liked,--the Stoics themselves affirm, who admire the man's
acuteness, and think that Carneades said nothing of his own, but that
catching hold of those arguments which Chrysippus alleged for the
contrary opinion, he assaulted with them his positions, and often cried
out,

     Wretch, thy own strength will thee undo,
     ("Iliad", vi. 407.)

as if Chrysippus had given great advantages against himself to those who
would disturb and calumniate his doctrines.

But of those things which he has written against Custom they are so
proud and boastful, that they fear not to affirm, that all the sayings
of all the Academics together, if they were collected into one body,
are not comparable to what Chrysippus has writ in disparagement of the
senses. Which is an evident sign of the ignorance or self-love of the
speakers; but this indeed is true, that being afterwards desirous to
defend custom and the senses, he was inferior to himself, and the
latter treatise was much weaker than the former. So that he contradicts
himself; for having always directed the proposing of an adversary's
opinions not with approbation, but with a demonstration of their
falsity, he has showed himself more acute in opposing than defending
his own doctrines; and having admonished others to take heed of contrary
arguments, as withdrawing comprehension, he has been more sedulous in
framing such proofs as take away comprehension, than such as confirm it.
And yet he plainly shows that he himself feared this, writing thus in
his Fourth Book of Lives: "Repugnant arguments and probabilities on the
contrary side are not rashly to be proposed, but with caution, lest the
hearers distracted by them should let go their conceptions, not being
able sufficiently to apprehend the solutions, but so weakly that their
comprehensions may easily be shaken. For even those who have, according
to custom, preconceived both sensible phenomena and other things
depending on the senses quickly forego them, being distracted by
Megarian interrogatories and by others more numerous and forcible."
I would willingly therefore ask the Stoics, whether they think these
Megarian interrogatories to be more forcible than those which Chrysippus
has written in six books against custom; or rather this should be
asked of Chrysippus himself. For observe what he has written about the
Megarian reason, in his book concerning the Use of Speech, thus: "Some
such things fell out in the discourse of Stilpo and Menedemus; for,
whereas they were renowned for wisdom, their disputing has turned to
their reproach, their arguments being part clumsy, and the rest plainly
sophistical." And yet, good sir, you fear lest those arguments which you
deride and term the disgrace of their proposers, as having a manifest
faultiness, should divert some from comprehension. And did not you
yourself, writing so many books against custom, in which you have added
whatever you could invent, ambitiously striving to exceed Arcesilaus,
expect that you should perplex some of your readers? For neither does
he use slender arguments against custom; but as if he were pleading, he
with some passion in himself stirs up the affections of others, telling
his opponent that he talks foolishly and labors in vain. And that he
may leave no room to deny his speaking of contradictions, he has in
his Natural Positions written thus: "It may be lawful for those who
comprehend a thing to argue on the contrary side, applying to it that
kind of defence which the subject itself affords; and sometimes, when
they comprehend neither, to discourse what is alleged for either." And
having said in his book concerning the Use of Speech, that we ought no
more to use the force of reason than of arms for such things as are not
fitting, he subjoins this: "For they are to be employed for the finding
out of truths and for the alliance of them, and not for the contrary,
though many men do it." By "many" perhaps he means those who withhold
their assent. But these teachers, understanding neither, dispute on
both sides, believing that, if anything is comprehensible, thus only or
chiefly does truth afford a comprehension of itself. But you, who
accuse them, and do yourself write contrary to those things which you
understood concerning custom, and exhort others under your authority to
do the same, confess that you wantonly use the faculty of disputing, out
of vain ambition, even on useless and hurtful things.

They say, that a good deed is the command, and sin the prohibition of
the law; and therefore that the law forbids the wicked many things, but
commands them nothing, because they cannot do a good deed. But who is
ignorant that he who cannot do a good deed cannot also sin? Therefore
they make the law to contradict itself, commanding men those things
which they cannot perform, and forbidding them those things from which
they cannot abstain. For a man who cannot be temperate cannot but act
intemperately; and he who cannot be wise cannot but act foolishly. And
they themselves affirm, that those who forbid say one thing, forbid
another and command another. For he who says "Thou shalt not steal" at
the same time that he says these words, "Thou shalt not steal, forbids
also to steal and directs not to steal. The law therefor bids the wicked
nothing, unless it also commands them something. And they say, that the
physician bids his disciple to cut and cauterize, omitting to add
these words, 'seasonably and moderately'; and the musician commands his
scholar to play on the harp and sing, omitting 'tunably' and 'keeping
time'." Wherefore also they punish those who do these things unskilfully
and faultily; for that they were commanded to do them well, and they
have done them ill. If therefore a wise man commands his servant to say
or do something, and punishes him for doing it unseasonably or not as he
ought, is it not manifest that he commanded him to do a good action and
not an indifferent one? But if wise men command wicked ones indifferent
things, what hinders but the commands of the law may be also such?
Moreover, the impulse (called [Greek omitted]) is, according to him, the
reason of a man commanding him to do something, as he has written in
his book of the law. Is not therefore also the aversion (called [Greek
omitted]) a prohibiting reason, and a disinclination, a disinclination
agreeable to reason? Caution therefore is also reason prohibiting a w
cautious is proper only to the wise, and not to the wicked. If, then,
the reason of a wise man is one thing and the law another, wise men
have caution contrary to the law; but if the law is nothing else but the
reason of a wise man, the law is found to forbid wise men the doing of
those things of which they are cautious.

Chrysippus says, that nothing is profitable to the wicked, that the
wicked have neither use nor need of anything. Having said this in his
First Book of Good Deeds, he says again, that both commodiousness and
grace pertain to mean or indifferent things, none of which according to
them, is profitable. In the same place he affirms, that there is nothing
proper, nothing convenient for a vicious man, in these words: "On the
same principle we declare that there is nothing foreign or strange to
the good man, and nothing proper or rightfully belonging to the bad man,
since the one is good and the other bad." Why, then, does he break our
heads, writing particularly in every one of his books, as well natural
as moral, that as soon as we are born we are appropriated to ourselves,
our parts, and our offspring? And why in his First Book of Justice does
he say that the very brutes, proportionably to the necessity of
their young, are appropriated to them, except fishes, whose young are
nourished by themselves? For neither have they sense who have
nothing sensible, nor they appropriation who have nothing proper; for
appropriation seems to be the sense and perception of what is proper.

And this opinion is consequent to their principal ones. It is moreover
manifest that Chrysippus, though he has also written many things to the
contrary, lays this for a position, that there is not any vice greater
or any sin more grievous than another, nor any virtue more excellent or
any good deed better than another; so that he says in his Third Book of
Nature: "As it well beseems Jupiter to glory in himself and his life,
to magnify himself, and (if we may so say) to bear up his head, have an
high conceit of himself, and speak big, for that he leads a life worthy
of lofty speech; so the same things do not misbeseem all good men, since
they are in nothing exceeded by Jupiter." And yet himself, in his Third
Book of Justice, says, that they who make pleasure the end destroy
justice, but they who say it is only a good do not destroy it. These are
his very words: "For perhaps, if we leave this to pleasure, that it is a
good but not the end, and that honesty is one of those things which are
eligible for themselves, we may preserve justice, making the honest and
the just a greater good than pleasure." But if that only is good which
is honest, he who affirms pleasure to be a good is in an error, but
he errs less than he who makes it also the end; for the one destroys
justice, the other preserves it; and by the one human society is
overthrown, but the other leaves a place to goodness and humanity. Now
I let pass his saying farther in his book concerning Jupiter, that the
virtues increase and go on, lest I may seem to catch at words; though
Chrysippus is indeed in this kind very sharp upon Plato and others. But
when he forbids the praising of everything that is done according to
virtue, he shows that there is some difference between good deeds. Now
he says thus in his book concerning Jupiter: "For since each virtue has
its own proper effects, there are some of these that are to be praised
more highly than others; for he would show himself to be very frigid,
that should undertake to praise and extol any man for holding out the
finger stoutly, for abstaining continently from an old woman ready to
drop into the grave, and patiently hearing it said that three are not
exactly four." What he says in his Third Book of the Gods is not unlike
to this: "For I moreover think that the praises of such things as to
abstain from an old woman who has one foot in the grave, and to endure
the sting of a fly, though proceeding from virtue, would be very
impertinent." What other reprehender of his doctrines does this man
then expect? For if he who praises such things is frigid, he who asserts
every one of them to be a great--nay, a very great good deed--is much
more frigid. For if to endure a fly is equal to being valiant, and to
abstain from an old woman now at the edge of the grave is equal to being
temperate, there is, I think, no difference whether a virtuous man
is prized for these or for those. Moreover, in his Second Book of
Friendship, teaching that friendships are not for every fault to be
dissolved, he has these very expressions: "For it is meet that some
faults should be wholly passed by, others lightly reprehended,
others more severely, and others deemed worthy a total dissolution of
friendship." And which is more, he says in the same book, that we will
converse with some more and some less, so that some shall be more and
some less friends; and this diversity extending very far, some are
worthy of such an amity, others of a greater; and these will deserve to
be so far trusted, those not so far, and the like. For what else has
he done in these places, but shown the great diversity there is between
these things? Moreover, in his book concerning Honesty, to demonstrate
that only to be good which is honest, he uses these words: "What is
good is eligible; what is eligible is acceptable; what is acceptable is
laudable; and what is laudable is honest." And again: "What is good is
joyous; what is joyous is venerable; what is venerable is honest."
But these speeches are repugnant to himself; for either all good is
commendable, and then the abstaining chastely from an old woman is
also commendable; or all good is neither venerable nor joyous, and his
reasoning falls to the ground. For how can it possibly be frigid in
others to praise any for such things, and not ridiculous for him to
rejoice and glory in them?

Such indeed he frequently is; but in his disputations against others he
takes not the least care of speaking things contrary and dissonant to
himself. For in his books of Exhorting, reprehending Plato, who
said, that to him who has neither learned nor knows how to live it is
profitable not to live, he speaks in this manner: "For this speech
is both repugnant to itself, and not at all conclusive. For first
insinuating that it is best for us not to live, and in a sort
counselling us to die, he will excite us rather to anything else than to
be philosophers; for neither can he who does not live philosophize, nor
he who shall live long wickedly and ignorantly become wise." And going
on, he says that it is convenient for the wicked also to continue in
life. And afterwards thus, word for word: "First, as virtue, barely
taken, has nothing towards our living, so neither has vice anything to
oblige us to depart." Nor is it necessary to turn over other books,
that we may show Chrysippus's contradictoriness to himself; but in
these same, he sometimes with commendation brings forth this saying of
Antisthenes, that either understanding or a halter is to be provided, as
also that of Tyrtaeus,

     Come nigh the bounds of virtue or of death.

Now what else will this show, but that to wicked men and fools not to
live is more profitable than to live? And sometimes correcting Theognis,
he says, that the poet should not have written,

     From poverty to fly;--

but rather thus,

     From wickedness to fly, into the deep
     Throw thyself, Cyrnus, or from rocks so steep.
     (See "Theognis," vs. 175.)

What therefore else does he seem to do, but to set down himself those
things and doctrines which, when others write them, he expunges;
condemning, indeed, Plato for showing that not to live is better than
to live viciously and ignorantly; and yet advising Theognis to let a man
break his neck or throw himself into the sea, that he may avoid vice?
For having praised Antisthenes for directing fools to an halter, he
again blames him, saying that vice has nothing that should oblige us to
depart out of life.

Moreover, in his books against the same Plato, concerning Justice, he
immediately at the very beginning leaps into a discourse touching the
gods, and says, that Cephalus did not rightly avert men from injustice
by the fear of the gods, and that his teaching is easily refuted,
and that it affords to the contrary many arguments and probabilities
impugning the discourse concerning divine punishments, as nothing
differing from the tales of Acco and Alphito (or Raw-Head and
Bloody-Bones), with which women are wont to frighten little children
from their unlucky pranks. Having thus traduced Plato, he in other
places again praises him, and often alleges this saying of Euripides:--

     Howe'er you may deride it, there's a Jove,
     With other gods, who sees men's ills above.

And likewise, in his First Book of Justice citing these verses of
Hesiod,

     Then Jove from heaven punishments did send,
     And plague and famine brought them to their end,
     ("Works and Days," 242.)

he says, the gods do these things, that the wicked being punished,
others admonished by these examples may less dare to attempt the doing
of such things.

Again, in his book of Justice, subjoining, that it is possible for those
who make pleasure a good but not the end to preserve also justice, he
said in express terms: "For perhaps if we leave this to pleasure, that
it is a good but not the end, and that honesty is one of those things
which are eligible for themselves, we may preserve justice, making the
honest and the just a greater good than pleasure." So much he says in
this place concerning pleasure. But in his book against Plato, accus
temperance, and all the other virtues will be taken away, if we make
pleasure, health, or anything else which is not honest, to be a good.
What therefore is to be said for Plato, we have elsewhere written
against him. But here his contradicting himself is manifest, when he
says in one place, that if a man supposes that with honesty pleasure
also is a good, justice is preserved, and in another, accuses those
who make anything besides honesty to be a good of taking away all the
virtues. But that he may not leave any means of making an apology for
his contradictions, writing against Aristotle concerning justice, he
affirms him not to have spoken rightly when he said, that pleasure being
made the end, justice is taken away, and together with justice, every
one also of the other virtues. For justice (he says) will indeed be
taken away; but there is nothing to hinder the other virtues from
remaining and being, though not eligible for themselves, yet good and
virtues. Then he reckons up every one of them by name. But it will be
better to set down his own words. "For pleasure," says he, "appearing
according to this discourse to be made the end, yet all this seems not
to me to be contained in it. Wherefore we must say, that neither any of
the virtues is eligible nor any of the vices to be avoided for itself,
but that all these things are to be referred to the proposed scope. Yet
nothing, according to their opinion, will hinder but that fortitude,
prudence, continence, and patience may be good, and their contraries
to be avoided." Has there ever then been any man more peevish in his
disputes than he, who has blamed two of the principal philosophers, the
one for taking away all virtue, by not making that only to be good which
is honest, and the other for not thinking all the virtues except justice
to be preserved, though pleasure is made the end? For it is a wonderful
licentiousness that, discoursing of the same matters, he should when
accusing Plato take away again those very things which himself sets down
when reprehending Aristotle. Moreover, in his demonstrations concerning
justice, he says expressly, that every good deed is both a lawful action
and a just operation; but that everything which is done according
to continence, patience, prudence, or fortitude is a good deed, and
therefore also a just operation. Why, then, does he not also leave
justice to them to whom he leaves prudence, fortitude, and continence;
since whatever they do well according to the said virtue, they do also
justly?

Moreover, Plato having said, that injustice, as being the corruption
and sedition of the soul, loses not its power even in those who have it
within them, but sets the wicked man against himself, and molests and
disturbs him; Chrysippus, blaming this, affirms that it is absurdly
said, "A man injures himself"; for that injustice is to another, and not
to one's self. But forgetting this, he again says, in his demonstrations
concerning justice, that the unjust man is injured by himself and
injures himself when he injures another, becoming to himself the cause
of transgressing, and undeservedly hurting himself. In his books indeed
against Plato, contending that we cannot talk of injustice against one's
self, but as concerns another, he has these words: "For men cannot be
unjust by themselves; injustice requires several on different sides,
speaking contrary one unto another and the injustice must be taken in
different ways. But no such thing extends to one alone, except inasmuch
as he is affected towards his neighbor." But in his demonstrations
he has such discourses as these, concerning the unjust man's being
injurious also to himself: "The law forbids the being any way the
author of transgression, and to act unjustly will be transgression. He
therefore who is to himself the author of acting unjustly transgresses
against himself. Now he that transgresses against any one also injures
him; therefore he who is injurious to any one whomsoever is injurious
also to himself." Again: "Sin is a hurt, and every one who sins
sins against himself; every one therefore who sins hurts himself
undeservedly, and if so, is also unjust to himself." And farther thus:
"He who is hurt by another hurts himself, and that undeservedly. Now
that is to be unjust. Every one therefore that is injured, by whomsoever
it is, is unjust also to himself."

He says, that the doctrine concerning good and evil which himself
introduces and approves is most agreeable to life, and does most of all
reach the inbred prenotions; for this he has affirmed in his Third Book
of Exhortations. But in his First Book he says, that this doctrine
takes a man off from all other things, as being nothing to us, nor
co-operating anything towards felicity. See, now, how consonant he is
to himself, when he asserts a doctrine which takes us off from life,
health, indolence, and integrity of the senses, and says that those
things we beg of the gods are nothing to us, though most agreeable to
life and to the common presumptions. But that there may be no denial of
his speaking contradictions, in his Third Book of Justice he has said
thus: "Wherefore also, from the excellence of their greatness and
beauty, we seem to speak things like to fictions, and not according to
man or human nature." Is it then possible that any one can more plainly
confess his speaking things contrary to himself than this man does, who
affirms those things which (he says) for their excellency seem to be
fictions and to be spoken above man and human nature, to be agreeable to
life, and most of all to reach the inbred prenotions?

In every one of his natural and ethical books, he asserts vice to be
the very essence of unhappiness; writing and contending that to live
viciously is the same thing as to live unhappily. But in his Third Book
of Nature, having said that it is profitable for a fool to live rather
than to die, though he is never to become wise, he subjoins: "For such
is the nature of good things among mortals, that evil things are in some
sort chosen before indifferent ones." I let pass therefore, that having
elsewhere said that nothing is profitable to fools, he here says that
to live foolishly is profitable to them. Now those things being by them
called indifferent which are neither bad nor good, when he says that bad
things precede them, he says nothing else but that evil things precede
those that are not evil, and that to be unhappy is more profitable than
not to be unhappy; and if so, he esteems not to be unhappy to be
more unprofitable--and if more unprofitable, more hurtful--than to
be unhappy. Desiring therefore to mitigate this absurdity, he adds
concerning evils: "But it is not these evils that have precedence, but
reason; with which it is more convenient to live, though we shall be
fools." First therefore he says that vice and things participating
of vice are evil, and that nothing else is so. Now vice is something
reasonable, or rather depraved reason. For those therefore who are fools
to live with reason, is nothing else but to live with vice. Thence to
live being fools is to live being unhappy. In what then is this to be
preferred to indifferent things? For he surely will not say that with
regard to happiness unhappiness is to be preferred. But neither, say
they, does Chrysippus altogether think that the remaining in life is to
be reckoned amongst good things, or the going out of it amongst bad; but
both of them amongst indifferent ones, according to Nature. Wherefore
also it sometimes becomes meet for the happy to make themselves
away, and again for the unhappy to continue in life. Now what greater
repugnance can there be than this in the choice and avoiding of things,
if it is convenient for those who are in the highest degree happy to
forsake those good things that are present, for the want of some one
indifferent thing? And yet they esteem none of the indifferent things
either desirable or to be avoided; but only good desirable, and only
evil to be avoided. So that it comes to pass, according to them, that
the reasoning about actions regards neither things desirable nor things
refusable; but that aiming at other things, which they neither shun nor
choose, they make life and death to depend on these.

Chrysippus confesses that good things are totally different from bad;
and it must of necessity be so, if these make them with whom they are
present miserable to the very utmost point, and those render their
possessors in the highest degree happy. Now he says, that good and evil
things are sensible, writing thus in his First Book of the End: "That
good and evil things are perceptible by sense, we are by these reasons
forced to say; for not only the passions, with their species, as sorrow,
fear, and such others, are sensible; but we may also have a sense of
theft, adultery, and the like, and generally, of folly, cowardice, and
other vices not a few; and again, not only of joy, beneficence, and many
other dependences on good deeds, but also of prudence, fortitude,
and the other virtues." Let us pass by the other absurdities of these
things; but that they are repugnant to those things which are delivered
by him concerning "the wise man that knows nothing of his being so," who
does not confess? For good, when present, being sensible and having a
great difference from evil, is it not most absurd, that he who is of
bad become good should be ignorant of it, and not perceive virtue when
present, but think that vice is still within him? For either none who
has all virtues can be ignorant and doubt of his having them; or the
difference of virtue from vice, of happiness from misery, and of a most
honest life from a most shameful one, is little and altogether difficult
to be discerned, if he who has taken the one in exchange for the other
does not perceive it.

He has written one volume of lives divided into four books; in the
fourth of these he says, that a wise man meddles with no business but
his own, and is employed about his own affairs. His words are these:
"For I am of opinion, that a prudent man shuns affairs, meddles little,
and at the same time minds his own occasions; civil persons being both
minders of their own affairs and meddlers with little else." He has said
almost the same in his book of Things eligible for Themselves, in these
very words: "For indeed a quiet life seems to have in it a certain
security and freedom from danger, though there are not very many who
can comprehend it." It is manifest that he does not much dissent from
Epicurus, who takes away Providence that he may leave God in repose.
But the same Chrysippus in his First Book of Lives says, that a wise man
willingly takes upon him a kingdom, making his profit by it; and if he
cannot reign himself, will dwell with a king, and go to the wars with
a king like Hydanthyrsus the Scythian or Leucon the Pontic. But I will
here also set down his very discourse, that we may see whether, as from
the treble and the base strings there arises a symphony in music, so
the life of a man who chooses quietness and meddling with little accords
with him who, upon any necessity, rides along with the Scythians and
manages the affairs of the tyrants in the Bosphorus: "For that a wise
man will both go to the wars and live with potentates, we will again
consider this hereafter; some indeed upon the like arguments not so much
as suspecting this, and we for semblable reasons admitting it." And
a little after: "Not only with those who have proceeded well, and are
become proficients in discipline and good manners, as with Leucon and
Hydanthyrsus."

Some there are who blame Callisthenes for sailing to Alexander in hopes
to obtain the rebuilding of Olynthus, as Aristotle had procured that of
Stagira; and commend Ephorus, Xenocrates, and Menedemus, who rejected
Alexander's solicitation. But Chrysippus thrusts his wise man
headforwards for the sake of gain, as far as Panticapaeum and the desert
of the Scythians. And that he does this for the sake of profit and gain,
he has showed before, supposing three ways of gaining most suitable for
a wise man,--the first by a kingdom, the second by his friends, and the
third, besides these, by teaching philosophy. And yet he frequently even
tires us with his praises of this saying:--

     What need have men of more than these two things?

And in his books of Nature he says, that a wise man, if he has lost the
greatest wealth imaginable, seems to have lost but a single groat. But
having there thus elevated and puffed him up, he again here throws him
down to mercenariness and sophistry; nay, to asking money and even to
receiving it beforehand, sometimes at the very entrance of his scholar,
and otherwhiles after some time past. The last, he says indeed, is the
more polite, but to receive beforehand the more sure; delay allowing
of injuries. Now he says thus: "All who are well advised do not require
their salary in the same manner, but differently; a multitude of them,
as opportunity offers, not promising to make their scholars good men,
and that within a year, but to do this, as far as in them lies, within
a time agreed on." And again going on, he says: "But he will know his
opportunity, whether he ought to receive his recompense presently at
the very entrance (as many have done), or to give them time, this manner
being more liable to injuries, but withal, seeming the more courteous."
And how is the wise man a contemner of wealth, who upon a contract
delivers virtue for money, and if he has not delivered it, yet requires
his reward, as having done what is in him? Or how is he above being
endamaged, when he is so cautious lest he be wronged of his recompense?
For no man is wronged who is not endamaged. Therefore, though he has
elsewhere asserted that a wise man cannot be injured, he here says, that
this manner of dealing is liable to injury.

In his book of a Commonweal he says, that his citizens will neither act
nor prepare anything for the sake of pleasure, and praises Euripides for
having uttered this sentence:--

     What need have men of more than these two things,
     The fruits of Ceres, and thirst-quenching springs?

And yet a little after this, going on, he commends Diogenes, who forced
his nature to pass from himself in public, and said to those that were
present: I wish I could in the same manner drive hunger also out of my
belly. What reason then is there to praise in the same books him who
rejects all pleasure, and withal, him who for the sake of pleasure does
such things, and proceeds to such a degree of filthiness? Moreover,
having in his book of Nature written, that Nature has produced many
creatures for the sake of beauty, delighting in pulchritude and pleasing
herself with variety, and having added a most absurd expression, that
the peacock was made for the sake of his tail and for the beauty of it;
he has, in his treatise of a Commonweal, sharply reprehended those who
bred peacocks and nightingales, as if he were making laws contrary to
the lawgiver of the world, and deriding Nature for pleasing herself in
the beauty of animals to which a wise man would not give a place in
his city. For how can it but be absurd to blame those who nourish these
creatures, if he commends Providence which created them? In his Fifth
Book of Nature, having said, that bugs profitably awaken us out of our
sleep, that mice make us cautious not to lay up everything negligently,
and that it is probable that Nature, rejoicing in variety, takes delight
in the production of fair creatures, he adds these words: "The evidence
of this is chiefly shown in the peacock's tail; for here she manifests
that this animal was made for the sake of his tail, and not the
contrary; so, the male being made, the female follows." In his book of
a Commonweal, having said that we are ready to paint even dunghills,
a little after he adds, that some beautify their cornfields with vines
climbing up trees, and myrtles set in rows, and keep peacocks, doves,
and partridges, that they may hear them cry and coo, and nightingales.
Now I would gladly ask him, what he thinks of bees and honey? For it
was of consequence, that he who said bugs were created profitably should
also say that bees were created unprofitably. But if he allows these a
place in his city, why does he drive away his citizens from things that
are pleasing and delight the ear? To be brief,--as he would be very
absurd who should blame the guests for eating sweetmeats and other
delicacies and drinking of wine, and at the same time commend him who
invited them and prepared such things for them; so he that praises
Providence, which has afforded fishes, birds, honey, and wine, and at
the same time finds fault with those who reject not these things, nor
content themselves with

     The fruits of Ceres and thirst-quenching springs,

which are present and sufficient to nourish us, seems to make no scruple
of speaking things contradictory to himself.

Moreover, having said in his book of Exhortations, that the having
carnal commerce with our mothers, daughters, or sisters, the eating
forbidden food, and the going from a woman's bed or a dead carcass to
the temple, have been without reason blamed, he affirms, that we ought
for these things to have a regard to the brute beasts, and from what
is done by them conclude that none of these is absurd or contrary to
Nature; for that the comparisons of other animals are fitly made for
this purpose, to show that neither their coupling, bringing-forth, nor
dying in the temples pollutes the Divinity. Yet he again in his Fifth
Book of Nature says, that Hesiod rightly forbids urinating into rivers
and fountains, and that we should rather abstain from doing this against
any altar, or statue of the gods; and that it is not to be admitted for
an argument, that dogs, asses, and young children do it, who have no
discretion or consideration of such things. It is therefore absurd to
say in one place, that the savage example of irrational animals is fit
to be considered, and in another, that it is unreasonable to allege it.

To give a solution to the inclinations, when a man seems to be
necessitated by exterior causes, some philosophers place in the
principal faculty of the soul a certain adventitious motion, which is
chiefly manifested in things differing in no way from one another. For
when, with two things altogether alike and of equal importance, there is
a necessity to choose the one, there being no cause inclining to either,
for that neither of them differs from the other, this adventitious
power of the soul, seizing on its inclination, determines the doubt.
Chrysippus, discoursing against these men, as offering violence to
Nature by imagining an effect without a cause, in many places alleges
the die and the balance, and several other things, which cannot fall or
incline either one way or the other without some cause or difference,
either wholly within them or coming to them from without; for that
what is causeless (he says) is wholly insubsistent, as also what
is fortuitous; and in those motions devised by some and called
adventitious, there occur certain obscure causes, which, being concealed
from us, move our inclinations to one side or other. These are some of
those things which are most evidently known to have been frequently said
by him; but what he has said contrary to this, not lying so exposed to
every one's sight, I will set down in his own words. For in his book
of Judging, having supposed two running for a wager to have exactly
finished their race together, he examines what is fit for the judge in
this case to do. "Whether," says he, "may the judge give the palm to
which of them he will, since they both happen to be so familiar to him,
that he would in some sort appear to bestow on them somewhat of his own?
Or rather, since the palm is common to both, may it be, as if lots had
been cast, given to either, according to the inclination he chances
to have? I say the inclination he chances to have, as when two groats,
every way else alike, being presented to us, we incline to one of them
and take it." And in his Sixth Book of Duties, having said that there
are some things not worthy of much study or attention, he thinks we
ought, as if we had cast lots, to commit the choice of those things to
the casual inclination of the mind: "As if," says he, "of those who
try the same two drams in a certain time, some should approve this and
others that, and there being no more cause for the taking of one than
the other, we should leave off making any farther investigation and
take that which chances to come first; thus casting the lot (as it were)
according to some uncertain principle, and being in danger of choosing
the worse of them." For in these passages, the casting of lots and the
casual inclining of the mind, which is without any cause, introduce the
choice of indifferent things.

In his Third Book of Dialectics, having said that Plato, Aristotle, and
those who came after them, even to Polemon and Straton, but especially
Socrates, diligently studied dialectics, and having cried out that one
would even choose to err with such and so great men as these, he brings
in these words: "For if they had spoken of these things cursorily,
one might perhaps have cavilled at this place; but having treated of
dialectic skill as one of the greatest and most necessary faculties, it
is not probable they should have been so much mistaken, having been such
in all the parts of philosophy as we esteem them." Why, then (might some
one say to him), do you never cease to oppose and argue against such
and so great men, as if you thought them to err in the principal and
greatest matters? For it is not probable that they writ seriously of
dialectics, and only transitorily and in sport of the beginning, end,
gods, and justice, in which you affirm their discourse to be blind and
contradictory to itself, and to have a thousand other faults.

In one place he says, that the vice called [Greek omitted], or the
rejoicing at other men's harms, has no being; since no good man ever
rejoiced at another's evils. But in his Second Book of Good, having
declared envy to be a sorrow at other men's good,--to wit, in such as
desire the depression of their neighbors that themselves may excel, he
joins to it this rejoicing at other men's harms, saying thus: "To this
is contiguous the rejoicing at other men's harms, in such as for like
causes desire to have their neighbors low; but in those that are
turned according to other natural motions, is engendered mercy." For he
manifestly admits the joy at other men's harms to be subsistent, as
well as envy and mercy; though in other places he affirms it to have no
subsistence; as he does also the hatred of wickedness, and the desire of
dishonest gain.

Having in many places said, that those who have a long time been happy
are nothing more so, but equally and in like manner with those who have
but a moment been partakers of felicity, he has again in many other
places affirmed, that it is not fit to stretch out so much as a finger
for the obtaining momentary prudence, which flies away like a flash of
lightning. It will be sufficient to set down what is to this purpose
written by him in his Sixth Book of Moral Questions. For having said,
that neither does every good thing equally cause joy, nor every good
deed the like glorying, he subjoins these words: "For if a man should
have wisdom only for a moment of time or the final minute of life, he
ought not so much as to stretch out his finger for such a shortlived
prudence." And yet men are neither more happy for being longer so, nor
is eternal felicity more eligible than that which lasts but a moment.
If he had indeed held prudence to be a good, producing felicity, as
Epicurus thought, one should have blamed only the absurdity and the
paradoxicalness of this opinion; but since prudence of itself is not
another thing differing from felicity, but felicity itself, how is
it not a contradiction to say, that momentary happiness is equally
desirable with eternal, and yet that momentary happiness is nothing
worth?

Chrysippus also says, that the virtues follow one another, and that not
only he who has one has all, but also that he who acts according to any
one of them acts according to them all; and he affirms, that there is
not any man perfect who is not possessed of all the virtues, nor any
action perfect to the doing of which all the virtues do not concur. But
yet in his Sixth Book of Moral Questions he says, that a good man
does not always act valiantly, nor a vicious man always fearfully; for
certain objects being presented to the fancies, the one must persist in
his judgments, and the other depart from them; and he says that it is
not probable a wicked man should be always indulging his lust. If then
to act valiantly is the same thing as to use fortitude; and to act
timorously as to yield to fear, they cannot but speak contradictions who
say, that he who is possessed of either virtue or vice acts at she
same time according to all the virtues or all the vices, and yet that a
valiant man does not always act valiantly nor a vicious man timorously.

He defines Rhetoric to be an art concerning the ornament and the
ordering of a discourse that is pronounced. And farther in his First
Book he has written thus: "And I am of opinion not only that a regard
ought to be had to a liberal and simple adorning of words, but also that
care is to be taken for proper delivery, as regards the right elevation
of the voice and the compositions of the countenance and hands." Yet
he, who is in this place so curious and exact, again in the same book,
speaking of the collision of the vowels, says: "We ought not only to let
these things pass, minding somewhat that is better, but also to neglect
certain obscurities and defects, nay, solecisms also, of which others,
and those not a few, would be ashamed." Certainly, in one place to allow
those who would speak eloquently so carefully to dispose their speech
as even to observe a decorum in the very composition of their mouth and
hands, and in another place to forbid the taking care of defects and
inelegancies, and the being ashamed even of committing solecisms, is
the property of a man who little cares what he says, but rashly utters
whatever comes first into his mouth.

Moreover, in his Natural Positions having warned us not to trouble
ourselves but to be at quiet about such things as require experience
and scientific investigation, he says: "Let us not think after the same
manner with Plato, that liquid nourishment is conveyed to the lungs, and
dry to the stomach; nor let us embrace other errors like to these." Now
it is my opinion, that to reprehend others, and then not to keep one's
self from falling into those things which one has reprehended, is the
greatest of contradictions and shamefullest of errors. But he says, that
the connections made by ten axioms amount to above a million in number,
having neither searched diligently into it by himself nor attained to
the truth by men experienced in it. Yet Plato had to testify for him the
most renowned of the physicians, Hippocrates, Philistion, and Dioxippus
the disciple of Hippocrates; and of the poets, Euripides, Aleaeus,
Eupolis, and Eratosthenes, who all say that the drink passes through the
lungs. But all the arithmeticians refute Chrysippus, amongst whom also
is Hipparchus, demonstrating that the error of his computation is very
great; since the affirmative makes of the ten axioms one hundred and
three thousand forty and nine connections, and the negative three
hundred and ten thousand nine hundred fifty and two.

Some of the ancients have said, that the same befell Zeno which befalls
him who has sour wine which he can sell neither for vinegar nor wine;
for his "things preferable," as he called them, cannot be disposed of,
either as good or as indifferent. But Chrysippus has made the matter yet
far more intricate; for he sometimes says, that they are mad who make no
account of riches, health, freedom from pain, and integrity of the body,
nor take any care to attain them; and having cited that sentence of
Hesiod,

     Work hard, O God-born Perses,
     ("Works and Days," 299.)

he cries out, that it would be a madness to advise the contrary and say,

     Work not, O God-born Perses.

And in his book of Lives he affirms, that a wise man will for the sake
of gain live with kings, and teach for money, receiving from some of his
scholars his reward beforehand, and making contract with others of them;
and in his Seventh Book of Duties he says, that he will not scruple
to turn his heels thrice over his head, if for so doing he may have a
talent. In his First Book of Good Things, he yields and grants to those
that desire it to call these preferable things good and their contraries
evil, in these very words: "Any one who likes, according to these
permutations, may call one thing good and another evil, if he has a
regard to the things themselves, not wandering elsewhere, not failing in
the understanding of the thing signified, and in the rest accommodating
himself to custom in the denomination." Having thus in this place set
his things preferable so near to good, and mixed them therewith, he
again says, that none of these things belongs at all to us, but that
reason withdraws and averts us from all such things; for he has written
thus in his First Book of Exhortations. And in his Third Book of Nature
he says, that some esteem those happy who reign and are rich, which is
all one as if those should be reputed happy who make water in golden
chamber-pots and wear golden fringes; but to a good man the losing of
his whole estate is but as the losing of one groat, and the being sick
no more than if he had stumbled. Wherefore he has not filled virtue
only, but Providence also, with these contradictions. For virtue would
seem to the utmost degree sordid and foolish, if it should busy itself
about such matters, and enjoin a wise man for their sake to sail to
Bosphorus or tumble with his heels over his head. And Jupiter would
be very ridiculous to be styled Ctesius, Epicarpius, and Charitodotes,
because forsooth he gives the wicked golden chamber-pots and golden
fringes, and the good such things as are hardly worth a groat, when
through Jupiter's providence they become rich. And yet much more
ridiculous is Apollo, if he sits to give oracles concerning golden
fringes and chamber-pots and the recovering of a stumble.

But they make this repugnancy yet more evident by their demonstration.
For they say, that what may be used both well and ill, the same is
neither good nor bad; but fools make an ill use of riches, health, and
strength of body; therefore none of these is good. If therefore God
gives not virtue to men,--but honesty is eligible of itself,--and yet
bestows on them riches and health without virtue, he confers them on
those who can use them not well but ill, that is hurtfully, shamefully,
and perniciously. Now, if the gods can bestow virtue and do not, they
are not good; but if they cannot make men good, neither can they help
them, for outside of virtue nothing is good and advantageous. Now
to judge those who are otherwise made good according to virtue and
strength... is nothing to the purpose, for good men also judge the gods
according to virtue and strength; so that they do no more aid men than
they are aided by them.

Now Chrysippus neither professes himself nor any one of his disciples
and teachers to be virtuous. What then do they think of others, but
those things which they say,--that they are all mad fools, impious,
transgressors of laws, and in the most degree of misery and unhappiness?
And yet they say that our affairs, though we act thus miserably, are
governed by the providence of the gods. Now if the gods, changing their
minds, should desire to hurt, afflict, overthrow, and quite crush us,
they could not put us in a worse condition than we already are; as
Chrysippus demonstrates that life can admit only one degree either of
misery or of unhappiness; so that if it had a voice, it would pronounce
these words of Hercules:

     I am so full of miseries, there is
     No place to stow them in.
     (Euripides, "Hercules Furens," 1245.)

Now who can imagine any assertions more repugnant to one another than
chat of Chrysippus concerning the gods and that concerning men; when he
says, that the gods do in the best manner possible provide for men, and
yet men are in the worst condition imaginable?

Some of the Pythagoreans blame him for having in his book of Justice
written concerning cocks, that they are usefully procreated, because
they awaken us from our sleep, hunt out scorpions, and animate us to
battle, breeding in us a certain emulation to show courage; and yet that
we must eat them, lest the number of chickens should be greater than
were expedient. But he so derides those who blame him for this, that he
has written thus concerning Jupiter the Saviour and Creator, the father
of justice, equity, and peace, in his Third Book of the Gods: "As cities
overcharged with too great a number of citizens send forth colonies into
other places and make war upon some, so does God give the beginnings of
corruption." And he brings in Euripides for a witness, with others who
say that the Trojan war was caused by the gods, to exhaust the multitude
of men.

But letting pass their other absurdities (for our design is not
to inquire what they have said amiss, but only what they have said
dissonantly to themselves), consider how he always attributes to
the gods specious and kind appellations, but at the same time cruel,
barbarous, and Galatian deeds. For those so great slaughters and
earnages, as were the productions of the Trojan war and again of the
Persian and Peloponnesian, were no way like to colonies unless these men
know of some cities built in hell and under the earth. But Chrysippus
makes God like to Deiotarus, the Galatian king, who having many sons,
and being desirous to leave his kingdom and house to one of them, killed
all the rest; as he that cuts and prunes away all the other branches
from the vine, that one which he leaves remaining may grow strong and
great. And yet the vine-dresser does this, the sprigs being slender
and weak; and we, to favor a bitch, take from her many of her new-born
puppies, whilst they are yet blind. But Jupiter, having not only
suffered and seen men to grow up, but having also both created and
increased them, plagues them afterwards, devising occasions of their
destruction and corruption; whereas he should rather not have given them
any causes and beginnings of generation.

However, this is but a small matter; but that which follows is greater.
For there is no war amongst men without vice. But sometimes the love of
pleasure, sometimes the love of money, and sometimes the love of glory
and rule is the cause of it. If therefore God is the author of wars, he
must be also of sins, provoking and perverting men. And yet himself says
in his treatise of Judgment and his Second Book of the Gods, that it is
no way rational to say that the Divinity is in any respect the cause of
dishonesty. For as the law can in no way be the cause of transgression,
so neither can the gods of being impious; therefore neither is it
rational that they should be the causes of anything that is filthy.
What therefore can be more filthy to men than the mutual killing of one
another?--to which Chrysippus says that God gives beginnings. But some
one perhaps will say, that he elsewhere praises Euripides for saying,

     If gods do aught dishonest, they're no gods;

and again,

     'Tis a most easy thing t' accuse the gods;
     (From the "Bellerophontes" of Euripides, Frag. 294;
     and the "Archelaus," Frag. 256.)

as if we were now doing anything else than setting down such words and
sentences of his as are repugnant to one another. Yet that very thing
which is now praised may be objected, not once or twice or thrice, but
even ten thousand times, against Chrysippus:--

     'Tis a most easy thing t' accuse the gods.

For first having in his book of Nature compared the eternity of motion
to a drink made of divers species confusedly mixed together, turning and
jumbling the things that are made, some this way, others that way, he
goes on thus: "Now the administration of the universe proceeding in this
manner, it is of necessity we should be in the condition we are, whether
contrary to our own nature we are sick or maimed, or whether we are
grammarians or musicians." And again a little after, "According to this
reason we shall say the like of our virtue and vice, and generally of
arts or the ignorance of arts, as I have said." And a little after,
taking away all ambiguity, he says: "For no particular thing, not even
the least, can be otherwise than according to common Nature and its
reason." But that common Nature and the common reason of Nature are
with him Fate and Providence and Jupiter, is not unknown even to the
antipodes. For these things are everywhere inculcated in the Stoic
system; and Chrysippus affirms that Homer said very well,

     Jove's purposes were ripening,
     ("Iliad," i. 5.)

having respect to Fate and the Nature of the universe, according to
which everything is governed. How then do these agree, both that God is
no way the cause of any dishonest thing, and again, that not even the
least thing imaginable can be otherwise done than according to common
Nature and its reason? For amongst all things that are done, there must
of necessity be also evil things attributed to the gods. And though
Epicurus indeed turns himself every way, and studies artifices, devising
how to deliver and set loose our voluntary free will from this eternal
motion, that he may not leave vice irreprehensible; yet Chrysippus gives
vice a most absolute liberty, as being done not only of necessity or
according to Fate, but also according to the reason of God and
best Nature. And these things are yet farther seen in what he says
afterwards, being thus word for word: "For common Nature extending to
all things, it will be of necessity that everything, howsoever done in
the whole or in any one soever of its parts, must be done according to
this common Nature and its reason, proceeding on regularly without
any impediment. For there is nothing without that can hinder the
administration, nor is there any of the parts that can be moved or
habituated otherwise than according to common Nature." What, then, are
these habits and motions of the parts? It is manifest, that the habits
are vices and diseases, covetousness, luxury, ambition, cowardice,
injustice; and that the motions are adulteries, thefts, treasons,
murders, parricides. Of these Chrysippus thinks, that no one, either
little or great, is contrary to the reason of Jupiter, or to his law,
justice, and providence; so neither is the transgressing of the law
done against the law, nor the acting unjustly against justice, nor the
committing of sin against Providence.

And yet he says, that God punishes vice, and does many things for the
chastising of the wicked. And in his Second Book of the Gods he says,
that many adversities sometimes befall the good, not as they do the
wicked, for punishment, but according to another dispensation, as it
is in cities. And again in these words: "First we are to understand of
evils in like manner as has been said before: then that these things are
distributed according to the reason of Jupiter, whether for punishment,
or according to some other dispensation, having in some sort respect to
the universe." This therefore is indeed severe, that wickedness is both
done and punished according to the reason of Jupiter. But he aggravates
this contradiction in his Second Book of Nature, writing thus: "Vice in
reference to grievous accidents, has a certain reason of its own. For it
is also in some sort according to the reason of Nature, and, as I may
so say, is not wholly useless in respect of the universe. For otherwise
also there would not be any good." Thus does he reprehend those that
dispute indifferently on both sides, who, out of a desire to say
something wholly singular and more exquisite concerning everything,
affirms, that men do not unprofitably cut purses, calumniate, and play
madmen, and that it is not unprofitable there should be unprofitable,
hurtful, and unhappy persons. What manner of god then is Jupiter,--I
mean Chrysippus's Jupiter,--who punishes an act done neither willingly
nor unprofitably? For vice is indeed, according to Chrysippus's
discourse, wholly reprehensible; but Jupiter is to be blamed, whether
he has made vice which is an unprofitable thing, or, having made it not
unprofitable, punishes it.

Again, in his First Book of Justice, having spoken of the gods as
resisting the injustices of some, he says: "But wholly to take away
vice is neither possible nor expedient." Whether it were not better
that law-breaking, injustice, and folly should be taken away, is not the
design of this present discourse to inquire. But he himself, as much
as in him lies, by his philosophy taking away vice, which it is not
expedient to take away, does something repugnant both to reason and God.
Besides this, saying that God resists some injustices, he again makes
plain the impiety of sins.

Having often written that there is nothing reprehensible, nothing to
be complained of in the world, all things being finished according to a
most excellent nature, he again elsewhere leaves certain negligences
to be reprehended, and those not concerning small or base matters. For
having in his Third Book of Substance related that some such things
befall honest and good men, he says: "May it not be that some things are
not regarded, as in great families some bran--yea, and some grains
of corn also--are scattered, the generality being nevertheless well
ordered; or maybe there are evil Genii set over those things in which
there are real and faulty negligence?" And he also affirms that there
is much necessity intermixed. I let pass, how inconsiderate it is
to compare such accidents befalling honest and good men, as were the
condemnation of Socrates, the burning of Pythagoras, whilst he was
yet living, by the Cyloneans, the putting to death--and that with
torture--of Zeno by the tyrant Demylus, and of Antiphon by Dionysius,
with the letting of bran fall. But that there should be evil Genii
placed by Providence over such charges,--how can it but be a reproach
to God, as it would be to a king, to commit the administration of his
provinces to evil and rash governors and captains, and suffer the best
of his subjects to be despised and ill-treated by them? And furthermore,
if there is much necessity mixed amongst affairs, then God has not power
over them all, nor are they all administered according to his reason.

He contends much against Epicurus and those that take away providence
from the conceptions we have of the gods, whom we esteem beneficial and
gracious to men. And these things being frequently said by them, there
is no necessity of setting down the words. Yet all do not conceive the
gods to be good and favorable to us. For see what the Jews and Syrians
think of the gods; consider also with how much superstition the poets
are filled. But there is not any one, in a manner to speak of, that
imagines God to be corruptible or to have been born. And to omit all
others, Antipater the Tarsian, in his book of the gods writes thus, word
for word: "At the opening of our discourse we will briefly repeat the
opinion we have concerning God. We understand therefore God to be an
animal, blessed and incorruptible, and beneficial to men." And then
expounding every one of these terms he says: "And indeed all men esteem
the gods to be incorruptible." Chrysippus therefore is, according to
Antipater, not one of "all men"; for he thinks none of the gods, except
Fire, to be incorruptible, but that they all equally were born and will
die. These things are, in a manner, everywhere said by him. But I will
set down his words out of his Third Book of the Gods: "It is otherwise
with the gods. For some of them are born and corruptible, but others not
born. And to demonstrate these things from the beginning will be more
fit for a treatise of Nature. For the Sun, the Moon, and other gods who
are of a like nature, were begotten; but Jupiter is eternal." And again
going on: "But the like will be said concerning dying and being
born, both concerning the other gods and Jupiter. For they indeed are
corruptible, but his past incorruptible." With these I compare a few of
the things said by Antipater: "Whosoever they are that take away from
the gods beneficence, they affect in some part our conception of them;
and according to the same reason they also do this, who think they
participate of generation and corruption." If, then, he who esteems the
gods corruptible is equally absurd with him who thinks them not to be
provident and gracious to men, Chrysippus is no less in an error than
Epicurus. For one of them deprives the gods of beneficence, the other
of incorruptibility. ============ And moreover, Chrysippus, in his Third
Book of the Gods treating of the other gods being nourished, says thus:
"The other gods indeed use nourishment, being equally sustained by it;
but Jupiter and the World are maintained after another manner from those
who are consumed and were engendered by fire." Here indeed he declares,
that all the other gods are nourished except the World and Jupiter; but
in his First Book of Providence he says: "Jupiter increases till he has
consumed all things into himself. For since death is the separation
of the soul from the body, and the soul of the World is not indeed
separated, but increases continually till it has consumed all matter
into itself, it is not to be said that the World dies." Who can
therefore appear to speak things more contradictory to himself than he
who says that the same god is now nourished and again not nourished? Nor
is there any need of gathering this by argument: for himself has
plainly written in the same place: "But the World alone is said to be
self-sufficient, because it alone has in itself all things it stands in
need of, and is nourished and augmented of itself, the other parts being
mutually changed into one another." He is then repugnant to himself, not
only by declaring in one place that all the gods are nourished except
the World and Jupiter, and saying in another, that the World also is
nourished; but much more, when he affirms that the World increases by
nourishing itself. Now the contrary had been much more probable, to wit,
that the World alone does not increase, having its own destruction for
its food; but that addition and increase are incident to the other gods,
who are nourished from without, and the World is rather consumed into
them, if so it is that the World feeds on itself, and they always
receive something and are nourished from that.

Secondly, the conception of the gods contains in it felicity,
blessedness, and self-perfection. Wherefore also Euripides is commanded
for saying:--

     For God, if truly God, does nothing want,
     So all these speeches are the poets' cant.
     ("Hercules Furens," 1345.)

But Chrysippus in the places I have alleged says, that the World only is
self-sufficient, because this alone has in itself all things it needs.
What then follows from this, that the World alone is self-sufficient?
That neither the Sun, Moon, nor any other of the gods is
self-sufficient, and not being self-sufficient, they cannot be happy or
blessed.

He says, that the infant in the womb is nourished by Nature, like a
plant; but when it is brought forth, being cooled and hardened by the
air, it changes its spirit and becomes an animal; whence the soul is not
unfitly named Psyche because of this refrigeration [Greek omitted]. But
again he esteems the soul the more subtile and fine spirit of Nature,
therein contradicting himself; for how can a subtile thing be made of a
gross one, and be rarefied by refrigeration and condensation? And what
is more, how does he, declaring an animal to be made by refrigeration,
think the sun to be animated, which is of fire and made of an exhalation
changed into fire? For he says in his Third Book of Nature: "Now the
change of fire is such, that it is turned by the air into water; and the
earth subsiding from this, the air exhales; the air being subtilized,
the ether is produced round about it; and the stars are, with the
sun, kindled from the sea." Now what is more contrary to kindling than
refrigeration, or to rarefaction than condensation? For the one makes
water and earth of fire and air, and the other changes that which
is moist and earthy into fire and air. But yet in one place he makes
kindling, in another cooling, to be the beginning of animation. And he
moreover says, that when the inflammation is throughout, it lives and
is an animal, but being again extinct and thickened, it is turned into
water and earth and corporeity. Now in his First Book of Providence he
says: "For the world, indeed, being wholly set on fire, is presently
also the soul and guide of itself; but when it is changed into moisture,
and has altered the soul remaining within it by some method into a body
and soul, so as to consist of these two it exists then after another
manner." Here, forsooth, he plainly says, that the inanimate parts of
the world are by inflammation turned into an animated thing, and that
again by extinction the soul is relaxed and moistened, being changed
into corporeity. He seems therefore very absurd, one while by
refrigeration making animals of senseless things, and again, by the
same changing the greatest part of the world's soul into senseless and
inanimate things.

But besides this, his discourse concerning the generation of the soul
has a demonstration contrary to his own opinion; or he says, that the
soul is generated when the infant is already brought forth, the spirit
being changed by refrigeration, as by hardening. Now for the soul's
being engendered, and that after the birth, he chiefly uses this
demonstration, that the children are for the most part in manners and
inclinations like to their parents. Now the repugnancy of these things
is evident. For it is not possible that the soul, which is not generated
till after the birth, should have its inclination before the birth; or
it will fall out that the soul is like before it is generated; that is,
it will be in likeness, and yet not be, because it is not yet generated.
But if any one says that, the likeness being bred in the tempers of the
bodies, the souls are changed when they are generated, he destroys the
argument of the soul's being generated. For thus it may come to pass,
that the soul, though not generated, may at its entrance into the body
be changed by the mixture of likeness.

He says sometimes, that the air is light and mounts upwards, and
sometimes, that it is neither heavy nor light. For in his Second Book of
Motion he says, that the fire, being without gravity, ascends upwards,
and the air like to that; the water approaching more to the earth, and
the air to the fire. But in his Physical Arts he inclines to the other
opinion, that the air of itself has neither gravity nor levity.

He says that the air is by nature dark, and uses this as an argument of
its being also the first cold; for that its darkness is opposite to the
brightness, and its coldness to the heat of fire. Moving this in his
First Book of Natural Questions, he again in his treatise of Habits
says, that habits are nothing else but airs; for bodies are contained by
these, and the cause that every one of the bodies contained in any
habit is such as it is, is the containing air, which they call in iron
hardness, in stone solidness, in silver whiteness. These words have in
them much absurdity and contradiction. For if the air remains such as it
is of its own nature, how comes black, in that which is not white, to
be made whiteness; and soft, in that which is not hard, to be made
hardness; and rare, in that which is not thick, to be made thickness?
But if, being mixed with these, it is altered and made like to them, how
is it a habit or power or cause of these things by which it is subdued?
For such a change, by which it loses its own qualities, is the property
of a patient, not of an agent, and not of a thing containing, but of a
thing languishing. Yet they everywhere affirm, that matter, being of its
own nature idle and motionless, is subjected to qualities, and that the
qualities are spirits, which, being also aerial tensions, give a form
and figure to every part of matter to which they adhere. These things
they cannot rationally say, supposing the air to be such as they affirm
it. For if it is a habit and tension, it will assimilate every body to
itself, so that it shall be black and soft. But if by the mixture with
these things it receives forms contrary to those it has, it will be in
some sort the matter, and not the cause or power of matter.

It is often said by Chrysippus, that there is without the world an
infinite vacuum, and that this infinity has neither beginning, middle,
nor end. And by this the Stoics chiefly refute that spontaneous motion
of the atoms downward, which is taught by Epicurus; there not being in
infinity any difference according to which one thing is thought to be
above, another below. But in his Fourth Book of Things Possible, having
supposed a certain middle place and middle region, he says that the
world is situated there. The words are these: "Wherefore, if it is to be
said of the world that it is corruptible, this seems to want proof; yet
nevertheless it rather appears to me to be so. However, its occupation
of the place wherein it stands cooperates very much towards its immunity
from corruption, because it is in the midst; since if it were conceived
to be anywhere else, corruption would absolutely happen to it." And
again, a little after: "For so also in a manner has essence happened
eternally to possess the middle place, being immediately from the
beginning such as it is; so that both by another manner and through this
chance it admits not any corruption, and is therefore eternal." These
words have one apparent and visible contradiction, to wit, his admitting
a certain middle place and middle region infinity. They have also a
second, more obscure indeed, but withal more absurd than this. For
thinking that the world would not have remained incorruptible if its
situation had happened to have been in any other part of the vacuum,
he manifestly appears to have feared lest, the parts of essence moving
towards the middle, there should be a dissolution and corruption of the
world. Now this he would not have feared, had he not thought that bodies
do by nature tend from every place towards the middle, not of essence,
but of the region containing essence; of which also he has frequently
spoken, as of a thing impossible and contrary to Nature; for that (as
he says) there is not in the vacuum any difference by which bodies are
drawn rather this way than that way, but the construction of the world
is the cause of motion, bodies inclining and being carried from every
side to the centre and middle of it. It is sufficient to this purpose,
to set down the text out of his Second Book of Motion; for having
discoursed, that the world indeed is a perfect body, but that the parts
of the world are not perfect, because they have in some sort respect to
the whole and are not of themselves; and going forward concerning its
motion, as having been framed by Nature to be moved by all its parts
towards compaction and cohesion, and not towards dissolution and
breaking, he says thus: "But the universe thus tending and being moved
to the same point, and the arts having the same motion from the nature
of the body, it is probable that all bodies have this first motion
according to Nature towards the centre of the world,--the world being
thus moved as concerns itself, and the parts being moved as being its
parts." What, then, ailed you, good sir (might some one say to him),
that you have so far forgotten those words, as to affirm that the world,
if it had not casually possessed the middle place, would have been
dissoluble and corruptible? For if it is by nature so framed as always
to incline towards the middle, and its parts from every side tend to
the same, into what place soever of the vacuum it should have been
transposed,--thus containing and (as it were) embracing itself,--it
would have remained incorruptible and without danger of breaking. For
things that are broken and dissipated suffer this by the separation and
dissolution of their parts, every one of them hasting to its own place
from that which it had contrary to Nature. But you, being of opinion
that, if the world should have been seated in any other place of the
vacuum, it would have been wholly liable to corruption, and affirming
the same, and therefore asserting a middle in that which naturally
can have no middle,--to wit, in that which is infinite,--have indeed
dismissed these tensions, coherences, and inclinations, as having
nothing available to its preservation, and attributed all the cause of
its permanency to the possession of place. And, as if you were ambitious
to confute yourself, to the things you have said before you join this
also: "In whatsoever manner every one of the parts moves, being coherent
to the rest, it is agreeable to reason that in the same also the whole
should move by itself; yea, though we should, for argument's sake,
imagine and suppose it to be in some vacuity of this world; for as,
being kept in on every side, it would move towards the middle, so it
would continue in the same motion, though by way of disputation we
should admit that there were on a sudden a vacuum round about it."
No part then whatsoever, though encompassed by a vacuum, loses its
inclination moving it towards the middle of the world; but the world
itself, if chance had not prepared it a place in the middle, would have
lost its containing vigor, the parts of its essence being carried some
one way, some another.

And these things indeed contain great contradictions to natural
reason; but this is also repugnant to the doctrine concerning God and
Providence, that assigning to them the least causes, he takes from them
the most principal and greatest. For what is more principal than the
permanency of the world, or that its essence, united in its parts, is
contained in itself? But this, as Chrysippus says, fell out casually.
For if the possession of place is the cause of incorruptibility, and
this was the production of chance, it is manifest that the preservation
of the universe is a work of chance, and not of Fate and Providence.

Now, as for his doctrine of possibles, how can it but be repugnant to
his doctrine of Fate? For if that is not possible which either is true
or shall be true, as Diodorus has it, but everything which is capable of
being, though it never shall be, is possible, there will be many things
possible which will never be according to invincible, inviolable, and
all-conquering Fate. And thus either Fate will lose its power; or if
that, as Chrysippus thinks, has existence, that which is susceptible of
being will often fall out to be impossible. And everything indeed which
is true will be necessary, being comprehended by the principal of all
necessities; and everything that is false will be impossible, having
the greatest cause to oppose its ever being true. For how is it possible
that he should be susceptible of dying on the land, who is destined to
die at sea? And how is it possible for him who is at Megara to come to
Athens, if he is prohibited by Fate?

But moreover, the things that are boldly asserted by him concerning
fantasies or imaginations are very opposite to Fate. For desiring to
show that fantasy is not of itself a perfect cause of consent, he says,
that the Sages will prejudice us by imprinting false imaginations in our
minds, if fantasies do of themselves absolutely cause consent; for
wise men often make use of falsity against the wicked, representing a
probable imagination,--which is yet not the cause of consent, for
then it would be also a cause of false apprehension and error. Any one
therefore, transferring these things from the wise man to Fate, may say,
that consents are not caused by Fate; for if they were, false consents
and opinions and deceptions would also be by Fate. Thus the reason which
exempts the wise man from doing hurt also demonstrates at the same time
that Fate is not the cause of all things. For if men neither opine
nor are prejudiced by Fate, it is manifest also that they neither
act rightly nor are wise nor remain firm in their sentiments nor have
utility by Fate, but that there is an end of Fate's being the cause of
all things. Now if any one shall say that Chrysippus makes not Fate the
absolute cause of all things, but only a PROCATARCLICAL (or antecedent)
one, he will again show that he is contradictory to himself, since he
excessively praises Homer for saying of Jupiter,

     Receive whatever good or ill
     He sends to each of you;

as also Euripides for these words,

     O Jove, how can I say that wretched we,
     Poor mortals, aught do understand?  On thee
     We all depend, and nothing can transact,
     But as thy sacred wisdom shall enact.
     (Euripides, "Suppliants," 734.)

And himself writes many things agreeable to these. In fine, he says that
nothing, be it never so little, either rests or is moved otherwise than
according to the reason of Jupiter, which is the same thing with Fate.
Moreover, the antecedent cause is weaker than the absolute one, and
attains not to its effect when it is subdued by others that rise
up against it. But he himself declaring Fate to be an invincible,
unimpeachable, and inflexible cause, calls it Atropos, (That is,
Unchangeable.) Adrasteia, (That is, Unavoidable.) Necessity, and
Pepromene (as putting a limit to all things). Whether then shall we say,
that neither consents nor virtues nor vices nor doing well nor doing
ill is in our power? Or shall we affirm, that Fate is deficient, that
terminating destiny is unable to determine, and that the motions
and habits of Jupiter cannot be effective? For the one of these two
consequences will follow from Fate's being an absolute, the other from
its being only an antecedent cause. For if it is an absolute cause, it
takes away our free will and leaves nothing in our control; and if it is
only antecedent, it loses its being unimpeachable and effectual. For
not once or ten times, but everywhere, especially in his Physics, he
has written, that there are many obstacles and impediments to particular
natures and motions, but none to that of the universe. And how can the
motion of the universe, extending as it does to particular ones, be
undisturbed and unimpeached, if these are stopped and hindered? For
neither can the nature of man be free from impediment, if that of the
foot or hand is not so; nor can the motion of a ship but be hindered, if
there are any obstacles about the sails or the operation of the oars.

Besides all this, if the fantasies are not according to Fate, neither
are they causes of consents; but if, because it imprints fantasies
leading to consent, the consents are said to be according to Fate,
how is it not contrary to itself, imprinting in the greatest matters
different imaginations and such as draw the understanding contrary ways?
For (they say) those who adhere to one of them, and withhold not their
consent, do amiss: if they yield to obscure things, they stumble; if to
false, they are deceived; if to such as are not commonly comprehended,
they opine. And yet one of these three is of necessity,--either that
every fantasy is not the work of Fate, or that every receipt and consent
of fantasy is faultless, or that Fate itself is not irreprehensible. For
I do not know how it can be blameless, proposing to us such fantasies
that not the resisting or going against them, but the following and
yielding to them, is blamable. Moreover, both Chrysippus and Antipater,
in their disputes against the Academics, take not a little pains to
prove that we neither act nor are incited without consent, saying, that
they build on fictions and false suppositions who think that, a proper
fantasy being presented, we are presently incited, without having either
yielded or consented. Again, Chrysippus says, that God imprints in us
false imaginations, as does also the wise man; not that they would have
us consent or yield to them, but only that we should act and be incited
with regard to that which appears; but we, being evil, do through
infirmity consent to such fantasies. Now, the perplexity and discrepancy
of these discourses among themselves are not very difficult to be
discerned. For he that would not have men consent but only act according
to the fantasies which he offers unto them--whether he be God or a
wise man--knows that the fantasies are sufficient for acting, and that
consents are superfluous. For if, knowing that the imagination gives us
not an instinct to work without consent, he ministers to us false and
probable fantasies, he is the voluntary cause of our falling and erring
by assenting to incomprehensible things.


END OF SEVEN-----------




THE EATING OF FLESH.

TRACT I. You ask of me then for what reason it was that Pythagoras
abstained from eating of flesh. I for my part do much wonder in what
humor, with what soul or reason, the first man with his mouth touched
slaughter, and reached to his lips the flesh of a dead animal, and
having set before people courses of ghastly corpses and ghosts, could
give those parts the names of meat and victuals, that but a little
before lowed, cried, moved, and saw; how his sight could endure the
blood of slaughtered, flayed, and mangled bodies; how his smell could
bear their scent; and how the very nastiness happened not to offend the
taste, while it chewed the sores of others, and participated of the saps
and juices of deadly wounds.

     Crept the raw hides, and with a bellowing sound
     Roared the dead limbs; the burning entrails groaned.
     ("Odyssey," xii. 395.)

This indeed is but a fiction and fancy; but the fare itself is truly
monstrous and prodigious,--that a man should have a stomach to creatures
while they yet bellow, and that he should be giving directions which of
things yet alive and speaking is fittest to make food of, and ordering
the several kinds of the seasoning and dressing them and serving them up
to tables. You ought rather, in my opinion, to have inquired who first
began this practice, than who of late times left it off.

And truly, as for those people who first ventured upon eating of flesh,
it is very probable that the whole reason of their so doing was scarcity
and want of other food; for it is not likely that their living together
in lawless and extravagant lusts, or their growing wanton and capricious
through the excessive variety of provisions then among them, brought
them to such unsociable pleasures as these, against Nature. Yea, had
they at this instant but their sense and voice restored to them, I am
persuaded they would express themselves to this purpose:

"Oh! happy you, and highly favored of the gods, who now live! Into what
an age of the world are you fallen, who share and enjoy among you a
plentiful portion of good things! What abundance of things spring up for
your use! What fruitful vineyards you enjoy! What wealth you gather from
the fields! What delicacies from trees and plants, which you may gather!
You may glut and fill yourselves without being polluted. As for us, we
fell upon the most dismal and affrighting part of time, in which we
were exposed by our production to manifold and inextricable wants and
necessities. As yet the thickened air concealed the heaven from our
view, and the stars were as yet confused with a disorderly huddle of
fire and moisture and violent fluxions of winds. As yet the sun was not
fixed to a regular and certain course, so as to separate morning and
evening, nor did the seasons return in order crowned with wreaths from
the fruitful harvest. The land was also spoiled by the inundations of
disorderly rivers; and a great part of it was deformed with marshes, and
utterly wild by reason of deep quagmires, unfertile forests, and woods.
There was then no production of tame fruits, nor any instruments of art
or invention of wit. And hunger gave no time, nor did seed-time then
stay for the yearly season. What wonder is it if we made use of the
flesh of beasts contrary to Nature, when mud was eaten and the bark of
wood, and when it was thought a happy thing to find either a sprouting
grass or a root of any plant! But when they had by chance tasted of
or eaten an acorn, they danced for very joy about some oak or esculus,
calling it by the names of life-giver, mother, and nourisher. And this
was the only festival that those times were acquainted with; upon all
other occasions, all things were full of anguish and dismal sadness. But
whence is it that a certain ravenousness and frenzy drives you in these
happy days to pollute yourselves with blood, since you have such an
abundance of things necessary for your subsistence? Why do you belie the
earth as unable to maintain you? Why do you profane the lawgiver Ceres,
and shame the mild and gentle Bacchus, as not furnishing you with
sufficiency? Are you not ashamed to mix tame fruits with blood and
slaughter? You are indeed wont to call serpents, leopards, and lions
savage creatures; but yet yourselves are defiled with blood, and
come nothing behind them in cruelty. What they kill is their ordinary
nourishment, but what you kill is your better fare."

For we eat not lions and wolves by way of revenge; but we let those go,
and catch the harmless and tame sort, and such as have neither stings
nor teeth to bite with, and slay them; which, so may Jove help us,
Nature seems to us to have produced for their beauty and comeliness
only. [Just as if one seeing the river Nilus overflowing its banks,
and thereby filling the whole country with genial and fertile moisture,
should not at all admire that secret power in it that produces plants
and plenteousness of most sweet and useful fruits, but beholding
somewhere a crocodile swimming in it, or an asp crawling along, or mice
(savage and filthy creatures), should presently affirm these to be the
occasion of all that is amiss, or of any want or defect that may happen.
Or as if indeed one contemplating this land or ground, how full it is
of tame fruits, and how heavy with ears of corn, should afterwards espy
somewhere in these same cornfields an ear of darnel or a wild vetch, and
thereupon neglect to reap and gather in the corn, and fall a complaining
of these. Such another thing it would be, if one--listening to the
harangue of some advocate at some bar or pleading, swelling and
enlarging and hastening towards the relief of some impending danger, or
else, by Jupiter, in the impeaching and charging of certain audacious
villanies or indictments, flowing and rolling along, and that not in a
simple and poor strain, but with many sorts of passions all at once, or
rather indeed with all sorts, in one and the same manner, into the many
and various and differing minds of either hearers or judges that he is
either to turn and change, or else, by Jupiter, to soften, appease, and
quiet--should overlook all this business, and never consider or reckon
upon the labor or struggle he had undergone, but pick up certain loose
expressions, which the rapid motion of the discourse had carried along
with it, as by the current of its course, and so had slipped and escaped
the rest of the oration, and, hereupon undervalue the orator.]

But we are nothing put out of countenance, either by the beauteous
gayety of the colors, or by the charmingness of the musical voices,
or by the rare sagacity of the intellects, or by the cleanliness and
neatness of diet, or by the rare discretion and prudence of these poor
unfortunate animals; but for the sake of some little mouthful of flesh,
we deprive a soul of the sun and light, and of that proportion of life
and time it had been born into the world to enjoy. And then we fancy
that the voices it utters and screams forth to us are nothing else
but certain inarticulate sounds and noises, and not the several
deprecations, entreaties, and pleadings of each of them, as it were
saying thus to us: "I deprecate not thy necessity (if such there be),
but thy wantonness. Kill me for thy feeding, but do not take me off for
thy better feeding." O horrible cruelty! It is truly an affecting sight
to see the very table of rich people laid before them, who keep them
cooks and caterers to furnish them with dead corpses for their daily
fare; but it is yet more affecting to see it taken away, for the
mammocks remaining are more than that which was eaten. These therefore
were slain to no purpose. Others there are, who are so offended by what
is set before them that they will not suffer it to be cut or sliced;
thus abstaining from them when dead, while they would not spare them
when alive.

Well, then, we understand that that sort of men are used to say, that
in eating of flesh they follow the conduct and direction of Nature.
But that it is not natural to mankind to feed on flesh, we first of all
demonstrate from the very shape and figure of the body. For a human
body no ways resembles those that were born for ravenousness; it hath no
hawk's bill, no sharp talon, no roughness of teeth, no such strength of
stomach or heat of digestion, as can be sufficient to convert or alter
such heavy and fleshy fare. But even from hence, that is, from the
smoothness of the tongue, and the slowness of the stomach to digest,
Nature seems to disclaim all pretence to fleshy victuals. But if you
will contend that yourself was born to an inclination to such food as
you have now a mind to eat, do you then yourself kill what you would
eat. But do it yourself, without the help of a chopping-knife, mallet,
or axe,--as wolves, bears, and lions do, who kill and eat at once. Rend
an ox with thy teeth, worry a hog with thy mouth, tear a lamb or a hare
in pieces, and fall on and eat it alive as they do. But if thou hadst
rather stay until what thou greatest is become dead, and if thou art
loath to force a soul out of its body, why then dost thou against Nature
eat an animate thing? Nay, there is nobody that is willing to eat even a
lifeless and a dead thing as it is; but they boil it, and roast it, and
alter it by fire and medicines, as it were, changing and quenching the
slaughtered gore with thousands of sweet sauces, that the palate being
thereby deceived may admit of such uncouth fare. It was indeed a witty
expression of a Lacedaemonian, who, having purchased a small fish in
a certain inn, delivered it to his landlord to be dressed; and as he
demanded cheese, and vinegar, and oil to make sauce, he replied, if I
had had those, I would not have bought the fish. But we are grown so
wanton in our bloody luxury, that we have bestowed upon flesh the name
of meat [Greek omitted], and then require another seasoning [Greek
omitted], to this same flesh, mixing oil, wine, honey, pickle, and
vinegar, with Syrian and Arabian spices, as though we really meant to
embalm it after its disease. Indeed when things are dissolved and
made thus tender and soft, and are as it were turned into a sort of a
carrionly corruption, it must needs be a great difficulty for concoction
to master them, and when it hath mastered them, they must needs cause
grievous oppressions and qualmy indigestions.

Diogenes ventured once to eat a raw pourcontrel, that he might disuse
himself from meat dressed by fire; and as several priests and other
people stood round him, he wrapped his head in his cassock, and so
putting the fish to his mouth, he thus said unto them: It is for your
sake, sirs, that I undergo this danger, and run this risk. A noble and
gallant risk, by Jupiter! For far otherwise than as Pelopidas ventured
his life for the liberty of the Thebans, and Harmodius and Aristogiton
for that of the Athenians, did this philosopher encounter with a raw
pourcontrel, to the end he might make human life more brutish. Moreover,
these same flesh-eatings not only are preternatural to men's bodies,
but also by clogging and cloying them, they render their very minds
and intellects gross. For it is well known to most, that wine and much
flesh-eating make the body indeed strong and lusty, but the mind weak
and feeble. And that I may not offend the wrestlers, I will make use
of examples out of my own country. The Athenians are wont to call us
Boeotians gross, senseless, and stupid fellows, for no other reason but
our over-much eating; by Pindar we are called hogs, for the same reason.
Menander the comedian calls us "fellows with long jaws." It is observed
also that, according to the saying of Heraclitus, "the wisest soul is
like a dry light." Earthen jars, if you strike them, will sound; but if
they be full, they perceive not the strokes that are given them. Copper
vessels also that are thin communicate the sound round about them,
unless some one stop and dull the ambient stroke with his fingers.
Moreover, the eye, when seized with an over-great plenitude of humors,
grows dim and feeble for its ordinary work. When we behold the sun
through a humid air and a great quantity of gross and indigested
vapors, we see it not clear and bright, but obscure and cloudy, and with
glimmering beams. Just so in a muddy and clogged body, that is swagged
down with heavy and unnatural nourishments; it must needs happen that
the gayety and splendor of the mind be confused and dulled, and that it
ramble and roll after little and scarce discernible objects, since it
wants clearness and vigor for higher things.

But to pass by these considerations, is not accustoming one's self to
mildness and a human temper of mind an admirable thing? For who would
wrong or injure a man that is so sweetly and humanly disposed with
respect to the ills of strangers that are not of his kind? I remember
that three days ago, as I was discoursing, I made mention of a saying
of Xenocrates, and how the Athenians gave judgment upon a certain person
who had flayed a living ram. For my part I cannot think him a worse
criminal that torments a poor creature while living, than a man that
shall take away its life and murder it. But (as it seems) we are more
sensible of what is done against custom than against Nature. There,
however, I discussed these matters in a more popular style. But as
for that grand and mysterious principle which (as Plato speaks) is
incredible to base minds and to such as affect only mortal things, I
as little care to move it in this discourse as a pilot doth a ship in
a storm, or a comedian his machine while the scenes are moving; but
perhaps it would not be amiss, by way of introduction and preface,
to repeat certain verses of Empedocles.... For in these, by way of
allegory, he hints at men's souls, as that they are tied to mortal
bodies, to be punished for murders, eating of flesh and of one another,
although this doctrine seems much, ancienter than his time. For the
fables that are storied and related about the discerption of Bacchus,
and the attempts of the Titans upon him, and of their tasting of
his slain body, and of their several punishments and fulminations
afterwards, are but a representation of the regeneration. For what in
us is unreasonable, disorderly, and boisterous, being not divine but
demoniac, the ancients termed Titans, that is, TORMENTED and PUNISHED
(from [Greek omitted])....



TRACT II. Reason persuades us now to return with fresh cogitations
and dispositions to what we left cold yesterday of our discourse about
flesh-eating. It is indeed a hard and a difficult task to undertake (as
Cato once said) to dispute with men's bellies, that have no ears; since
most have already drunk that draught of custom, which is like that of
Ciree,

     Of groans and frauds and sorcery replete.
     ("Odyssey," x. 234.)

And it is no easy task to pull out the hook of flesh-eating from the
jaws of such as have gorged themselves with luxury and are (as it
were) nailed down with it. It would indeed be a good action, if as
the Egyptians draw out the stomach of a dead body, and cut it open and
expose it to the sun, as the only cause of all its evil actions, so
we could, by cutting out our gluttony and blood-shedding, purify and
cleanse the remainder of our lives. For the stomach itself is not guilty
of bloodshed, but is involuntarily polluted by our intemperance. But
if this may not be, and we are ashamed by reason of custom to live
unblamably, let us at least sin with discretion. Let us eat flesh; but
let it be for hunger and not for wantonness. Let us kill an animal; but
let us do it with sorrow and pity, and not abusing and tormenting it, as
many nowadays are used to do, while some run red-hot spits through the
bodies of swine, that by the tincture of the quenched iron the blood may
be to that degree mortified, that it may sweeten and soften the flesh in
its circulation; others jump and stamp upon the udders of sows that are
ready to pig, that so they may crush into one mass (O Piacular Jupiter!)
in the very pangs of delivery, blood, milk, and the corruption of the
mashed and mangled young ones, and so eat the most inflamed part of the
animal; others sew up the eyes of cranes and swans, and so shut them up
in darkness to be fattened, and then souse up their flesh with certain
monstrous mixtures and pickles.

By all which it is most manifest, that it is not for nourishment,
or want, or any necessity, but for mere gluttony, wantonness, and
expensiveness, that they make a pleasure of villany. Just as it happens
in persons who cannot satiate their passion upon women, and having made
trial of everything else and falling into vagaries, at last attempt
things not to be mentioned; even so inordinateness in feeding, when it
hath once passed the bounds of nature and necessity, studies at last to
diversify the lusts of its intemperate appetite by cruelty and villany.
For the senses, when they once quit their natural measures, sympathize
with each other in their distempers, and are enticed by each other
to the same consent and intemperance. Thus a distempered ear first
debauched music, the soft and effeminate notes of which provoke immodest
touches and lascivious tickling. These things first taught the eye
not to delight in Pyrrhic dances, gesticulations of hands, or elegant
pantomimes, nor in statues and fine paintings; but to reckon the
slaughtering and death of mankind and wounds and duels the most
sumptuous of shows and spectacles. Thus unlawful tables are accompanied
with intemperate copulations, with unmusicianlike balls, and theatres
become monstrous through shameful songs and rehearsals; and barbarous
and brutish shows are again accompanied with an unrelenting temper and
savage cruelty towards mankind. Hence it was that the divine Lycurgus in
his Three Books of Laws gave orders that the doors and ridges of
men's houses should be made with a saw and an axe, and that no other
instrument should so much as be brought to any house. Not that he
did hereby intend to declare war against augers and planes and other
instruments of finer work; but because he very well knew that with such
tools as these you will never bring into your house a gilded couch,
and that you will never attempt to bring into a slender cottage either
silver tables, purple carpets, or costly stones; but that a plain supper
and a homely dinner must accompany such a house, couch table, and cup.
The beginning of a vicious diet is presently followed by all sorts of
luxury and expensiveness,

     Ev'n as a mare is by her thirsty colt.
============= And what meal is not expensive? One for which no animal is
put to death. Shall we reckon a soul to be a small expense? I will not
say perhaps of a mother, or a father, or of some friend, or child, as
Empedocles did; but one participating of feeling, of seeing, of hearing,
of imagination, and of intellection; which each animal hath received
from Nature for the acquiring of what is agreeable to it, and the
avoiding what is disagreeable. Do but consider this with yourself now,
which sort of philosophers render us most tame and civil, they who bid
people to feed on their children, friends, fathers, and wives, when they
are dead; or Pythagoras and Empedocles, that accustom men to be just
towards even the other members of the creation. You laugh at a man that
will not eat a sheep: but we (they will say again)--when we see you
cutting off the parts of your dead father or mother, and sending it to
your absent friends, and calling upon and inviting your present
friends to eat the rest freely and heartily--shall we not smile? Nay,
peradventure we offend at this instant time while we touch these books,
without having first cleansed our hands, eyes, feet, and ears; if it be
not (by Jupiter) a sufficient purgation of them to have discoursed of
these matters in potable and fresh language (as Plato speaketh), thereby
washing off the brackishness of hearing. Now if a man should set these
books and discourses in opposition to each other, he will find that
the philosophy of the one sort suits with the Seythians, Sogdians, and
Melanchlaenians, of whom Herodotus's relation is scarce believed; but
the sentiments of Pythagoras and Empedocles were the laws and customs of
the ancients Grecians.

Who, then, were the first authors of this opinion, that we owe no
justice to dumb animals?

     Who first beat out accursed steel,
     And made the lab'ring ox a knife to feel.

In the very same manner oppressors and tyrants begin first to shed
blood. For example, the first man that the Athenians ever put to death
was one of the basest of all knaves, who had the reputation of deserving
it; after him they put to death a second and a third. After this, being
now accustomed to blood, they patiently saw Niceratus the son of Nicias,
and their own general Theramenes, and Polemarchus the philosopher suffer
death. Even so, in the beginning, some wild and mischievous beast was
killed and eaten, and then some little bird or fish was entrapped.
And the desire of slaughter, being first experimented and exercised
in these, at last passed even to the laboring ox, and the sheep that
clothes us, and to the poor cock that keeps the house; until by little
and little, unsatiableness, being strengthened by use, men came to
the slaughter of men, to bloodshed and wars. Now even if one cannot
demonstrate and make out, that souls in their regenerations make a
promiscuous use of all bodies, and that that which is now rational
will at another time be irrational, and that again tame which is now
wild,--for that Nature changes and transmutes everything,

     With different fleshy coats new clothing all,--

this thing should be sufficient to change and show men, that it is a
savage and intemperate habit, that it brings sickness and heaviness upon
the body, and that it inclines the mind the more brutishly to bloodshed
and destruction, when we have once accustomed ourselves neither to
entertain a guest nor keep a wedding nor to treat our friends without
blood and slaughter.

And if what is argued about the return of souls into bodies is not of
force enough to beget faith, yet methinks the very uncertainty of the
thing should fill us with apprehension and fear. Suppose, for instance,
one should in some night-engagement run on with his drawn sword upon one
that had fallen down and covered his body with his arms, and should
in the meantime hear one say, that he was not very sure, but that
he fancied and believed, that the party lying there was his own son,
brother, father, or tent-companion; which were more advisable, think
you,--to hearken to a false suggestion, and so to let go an enemy under
the notion of a friend, or to slight an authority not sufficient to
beget faith, and to slay a friend instead of a foe? This you will all
say would be insupportable. Do but consider the famous Merope in the
tragedy, who taking up a hatchet, and lifting it at her son's head, whom
she took for her son's murderer, speaks thus as she was ready to give
the fatal blow,

     Villain, this holy blow shall cleave thy head;
     (Euripides, "Cresphontes," Frag. 457.)

what a bustle she raises in the whole theatre while she raises herself
to give the blow, and what a fear they are all in, lest she should
prevent the old man that comes to stop her hand, and should wound the
youth. Now if another old man should stand by her and say, "Strike, it
is thy enemy," and this, "Hold, it is thy son"; which, think you, would
be the greater injustice, to omit the punishing of an enemy for the sake
of one's child, or to suffer one's self to be so carried away with anger
at an enemy as to slay one's child? Since then neither hatred nor wrath
nor any revenge nor fear for ourselves carries us to the slaughter of
a beast, but the poor sacrifice stands with an inclined neck, only to
satisfy thy lust and pleasure, and then one philosopher stands by
and tells thee, "Cut him down, it is but an unreasonable animal," and
another cries, "Hold, what if there should be the soul of some kinsman
or god enclosed in him?"--good gods! is there the like danger if I
refuse to eat flesh, as if I for want of faith murder my child or some
other friend?

The Stoics' way of reasoning upon this subject of flesh-eating is no
way equal nor consonant with themselves. Who is this that hath so many
mouths for his belly and the kitchen? Whence comes it to pass, that they
so very much womanize and reproach pleasure, as a thing that they will
not allow to be either good or preferable, or so much as agreeable, and
yet all on a sudden become so zealous advocates for pleasures? It were
indeed but a reasonable consequence of their doctrine, that, since they
banish perfumes and cakes from their banquets, they should be much more
averse to blood and to flesh. But now, just as if they would reduce
their philosophy to their account-books, they lessen the expenses of
their suppers in certain unnecessary and needless matters, but the
untamed and murderous part of their expense they nothing boggle at.
"Well! What then?" say they. "We have nothing to do with brute beasts."
Nor have you any with perfumes, nor with foreign sauces, may some one
answer; therefore leave these out of your banquets, if you are driving
out everything that is both useless and needless.

Let us therefore in the next place consider, whether we owe any justice
to the brute beasts. Neither shall we handle this point artificially, or
like subtle sophisters, but by casting our eye into our own breasts, and
conversing with ourselves as men, we will weigh and examine the whole
matter....


END OF EIGHT-----------




CONCERNING FATE.


("This little Treatise is so pitiously torne, maimed, and dismembred
thorowout, that a man may sooner divine and guess thereat (as I have
done) than translate it."--HOLLAND.)

I will endeavor, my dearest Piso, to send you my opinion concerning
Fate, written with all the clearness and compendiousness I am capable
of; since you, who are not ignorant how cautious I am of writing, have
thought fit to make it the subject of your request.

You are first, then, to know that this word Fate is spoken and
understood two manner of ways; the one as it is an energy, the other
as it is a substance. First, therefore, as it is an action, Plato (See
Plato, "Phaedrus," p. 248 C; "Timaeus," p.41 E; "Republic," x. p.617
D.) has under a type described it, saying thus in his dialogue entitled
Phaedrus: "And this is a sanction of Adrastea (or an inevitable
ordinance), that whatever soul being an attendant on God," &c. And in
his treatise called Timaeus: "The laws which God in the nature of the
universe has established for immortal souls." And in his book of a
Commonweal he entitles Fate "the speech of the virgin Lachesis, who is
the daughter of Necessity." By which sentences he not tragically but
theologically shows us what his sentiments are in this matter. Now if
any one, paraphrasing the fore-cited passages, would have them expressed
in more familiar terms, the description in Phaedrus may be thus
explained: That Fate is a divine sentence, intransgressible since its
cause cannot be divested or hindered. And according to what he has
said in his Timaeus, it is a law ensuing on the nature of the universe,
according to which all things that are done are transacted. For this
does Lachesis effect, who is indeed the daughter of Necessity,--as we
have both already related, and shall yet better understand by that which
will be said in the progress of our discourse. Thus you see what Fate
is, when it is taken for an action.

But as it is a substance, it seems to be the universal soul of the
world, and admits of a threefold distribution; the first destiny being
that which errs not; the second, that which is thought to err; and the
third that which, being under the heaven, is conversant about the
earth. Of these, the highest is called Clotho, the next Atropos, and the
lowest, Lachesis; who, receiving the celestial influences and efficacies
of her sisters, transmits and fastens them to the terrestrial things
which are under her government. Thus have we declared briefly what is to
be said of Fate, taken as a substance; what it is, what are its parts,
after what manner it is, how it is ordained, and how it stands, both
in respect to itself and to us. But as to the particularities of these
things, there is another fable in his Commonweal, by which they are in
some measure covertly insinuated, and we ourselves have, in the best
manner we can, endeavored to explain them to you.

But we now once again turn our discourse to Fate, as it is an energy.
For concerning this it is that there are so many natural, moral, and
logical questions. Having therefore already in some sort sufficiently
defined what it is, we are now in the next place to say something of
its quality, although it may to many seem absurd. I say then that Fate,
though comprehending as it were in a circle the infinity of all those
things which are and have been from infinite times and shall be to
infinite ages, is not in itself infinite, but determinate and finite;
for neither law, reason, nor any other divine thing can be infinite.
And this you will the better understand, if you consider the total
revolution and the total time in which the revolutions of the eight
circles (that is, of the eight spheres of the fixed stars, sun, moon,
and five planets), having (as Timaeus (Plato, "Timaeus," p.39 D.) says)
finished their course, return to one and the same point, being measured
by the circle of the Same, which goes always after one manner. For in
this order, which is finite and determinate, shall all things (which, as
well in heaven as in earth, consist by necessity from above) be reduced
to the same situation, and restored again to their first beginning.
Wherefore the habitude of heaven alone, being thus ordained in all
things, as well in regard of itself as of the earth and all terrestrial
matters, shall again (after long revolutions) one day return; and
those things that in order follow after, and being linked together in
a continuity are maintained in their course, shall follow, every one of
them by necessity bringing what is its own. But for the better clearing
of this matter, let us understand that whatever is in us or about us
is not wrought by the course of the heavens and heavenly influences, as
being entirely the efficient cause both of my writing what I now write,
and of your doing also what you at present do, and in the same manner as
you do it. Hereafter, then, when the same cause shall return, we shall
do the same things we now do and in the same manner, and shall again
become the same men; and so it will be with all others. And that which
follows after shall also happen by the following cause; and in brief,
all things that shall happen in the whole and in every one of these
universal revolutions shall again become the same. By this it appears
(as we have said before) that Fate, being in some sort infinite, is
nevertheless determinate and finite; and it may be also in some sort
seen and comprehended, as we have farther said, that it is as it were
a circle. For as a motion of a circle is a circle, and the time that
measures it is also a circle; so the order of things which are done and
happen in a circle may be justly esteemed and called a circle.

This, therefore, though there should be nothing else, almost shows us
what sort of thing Fate is; but not particularly or in every respect.
What kind of thing then is it in its own form? It is, as far as one can
compare it, like to the civil or politic law. For first it orders the
most part of things at least, if not all, conditionally; and then it
comprises (as far as is possible for it) all things that belong to the
public in general; and the better to make you understand both the one
and the other, we must specify them by an example. The civil law speaks
and ordains in general of a valiant man, and also of a deserter and a
coward; and in the same manner of others. Now this is not to make the
law speak of this or that man in particular, but principally to propose
such things as are universal or general, and consequently such as fall
under them. For we may very well say, that it is legal to reward
this from his colors; because the law has virtually--though not in express
terms and particularly yet in such general ones as they are comprehended
under,--so determined of them. As the law (if I may so speak) of
physicians and masters of corporal exercises potentially comprehends
particular and special things within the general; so the law of Nature,
determining first and principally general matters, secondarily and
subordinately determines such as are particular. Thus, general things
being decreed by Fate, particular and individual things may also in
some sort be said to be so, because they are so by consequence with the
general. But perhaps some one of those who more accurately examine and
more subtly search into these things may say, on the contrary, that
particular and individual things precede the composition of general
things, and that the general exist only for the particular, since that
for which another thing is always goes before that which is for it.
Nevertheless, this is not the proper place to treat of this difficulty,
but it is to be remitted to another. However, that Fate comprehends not
all things clearly and expressly, but only such as are universal and
general, let it pass for resolved on at present, as well for what we
have already said a little before, as for what we shall say hereafter.
For that which is finite and determinate, agreeing properly with
divine Providence, is seen more in universal and general things than in
particular; such therefore is the divine law, and also the civil; but
infinity consists in particulars and individuals.

After this we are to declare what this term "conditionally" means; for
it is to be thought that Fate is also some such thing. That, then, is
said to be conditionally, which is supposed to exist not of itself or
absolutely, but as really dependent upon and joined to another; which
signifies a suit and consequence. "And this is the sanction of Adrastea
(or an inevitable ordinance), that whatever soul, being an attendant
on God, shall see anything of truth, shall till another revolution be
exempt from punishment; and if it is ever able to do the same, it shall
never suffer any damage." This is said both conditionally and also
universally. Now that Fate is some such thing is clearly manifest,
as well from its substance as from its name. For it is called [Greek
omitted] as being [Greek omitted], that is, dependent and linked; and it
is a sanction or law, because things are therein ordained and disposed
consequentially, as is usual in civil government.

We ought in the next place to consider and treat of mutual relation
and affection; that is, what reference and respect Fate has to divine
Providence, what to Fortune, what also to "that which is in our power,"
what to contingent and other such like things; and furthermore we are
to determine, how far and in what it is true or false that all things
happen and are done by and according to Fate. For if the meaning is,
that all things are comprehended and contained in Fate, it must be
granted that this proposition is true; and if any would farther have it
so understood, that all things which are done amongst men, on earth,
and in heaven are placed in Fate, let this also pass as granted for the
present. But if (as the expression seems rather to imply) the "being
done according to Fate" signifies not all things, but only that which
is a direct consequent of Fate, then it must not be said that all things
happen and are done by and according to Fate, though all things are so
according to Fate as to be comprised in it. For all things that the law
comprehends and of which it speaks are not legal or according to law;
for it comprehends treason, it treats of the cowardly running away from
one's colors in time of battle, of adultery, and many other such like
things, of which it cannot be said that any one of them is lawful.
Neither indeed can I affirm of the performing a valorous act in war, the
killing of a tyrant, or the doing any other virtuous deed, that it
is legal; because that only is proper to be called legal, which is
commanded by the law. Now if the law commands these things, how can they
avoid being rebels against the law and transgressors of it, who neither
perform valiant feats of arms, kill tyrants, nor do any other such
remarkable acts of virtue? And if they are transgressors of the law, why
is it not just they should be punished? But if this is not reasonable,
it must then be also confessed that these things are not legal or
according to law; but that legal and according to law is only that which
is particularly prescribed and expressly commanded by the law, in any
action whatsoever. In like manner, those things only are fatal and
according to Fate, which are the consequences of causes preceding in the
divine disposition. So that Fate indeed comprehends all things which are
done; yet many of those things that are comprehended in it, and almost
all that precede, should not (to speak properly) be pronounced to be
fatal or according to Fate.

These things being so, we are next in order to show, how "that which is
in our power" (or free will), Fortune, possible, contingent, and other
like things which are placed among the antecedent causes, can consist
with Fate, and Fate with them; for Fate, as it seems, comprehends all
things, and yet all these things will not happen by necessity, but every
one of them according to the principle of its nature. Now the nature
of the possible is to presubsist, as the genus, and to go before the
contingent; and the contingent, as the matter and subject, is to be in
the sphere of free will; and our free will ought as a master to make
use of the contingent; and Fortune comes in by the side of free will,
through the property of the contingent of inclining to either part. Now
you will more easily apprehend what has been said, if you shall consider
that everything which is generated, and the generation itself, is not
done without a generative faculty or power, and the power is not without
a substance. As for example, neither the generation of man, nor that
which is generated, is without a power; but this power is about man, and
man himself is the substance. Now the power or faculty is between the
substance, which is the powerful, and the generation and the thing
generated, which are both possibles. There being then these three
things, the power, the powerful, and the possible; before the power can
exist, the powerful must of necessity be presupposed as its subject,
and the power must also necessarily subsist before the possible. By
this deduction then may in some measure be understood what is meant by
possible; which may be grossly defined as "that which power is able to
produce;" or yet more exactly, if to this same there be added, "provided
there be nothing from without to hinder or obstruct it." Now of possible
things there are some which can never be hindered, as are those in
heaven, to wit, the rising and setting of the stars, and the like to
these; but others may indeed be hindered, as are the most part of human
things, and many also of those which are done in the air. The first,
as being done by necessity, are called necessary; the others, which may
fall one way or other, are called contingent; and they may both thus be
described. The necessary possible is that whose contrary is impossible;
and the contingent possible is that whose contrary is also possible.
For that the sun should set is a thing both necessary and possible,
forasmuch as it is contrary to this that the sun should not set, which
is impossible; but that, when the sun is set, there should be rain or
not rain, both the one and the other is possible and contingent. And
then again of things contingent, some happen oftener, others rarely and
not so often, others fall out equally or indifferently, as well the one
way as the other, even as it happens. Now it is manifest that those are
contrary to one another,--to wit, those which fall out oftener and those
which happen but seldom,--and they both for the most part are dependent
on Nature; but that which happens equally, as much one way as another,
depends on ourselves. For that under the Dog it should be either hot or
cold, the one oftener, the other seldomer, are both things subject to
Nature; but to walk and not to walk, and all such things of which both
the one and the other are submitted to the free will of man, are said
to be in us and our election; but rather more generally to be in us.
For there are two sorts of this "being in our power"; the one of which
proceeds from some sudden passion and motion of the mind, as from anger
or pleasure; the other from the discourse and judgment of reason, which
may properly be said to be in our election. And some reason there is to
hold that this possible and contingent is the same thing with that which
is said to be in our power and according to our free will, although
named differently. For in respect to the future, it is called possible
and contingent; and in respect of the present, it is named "in our
power" and "in our free choice." These things may thus be defined: The
contingent is that which is itself--as well as its contrary--possible;
and "that which is in our power" is one part of the contingent, to wit,
that which now takes place according to our choice. Thus have we in a
manner declared, that the possible in the order of Nature precedes the
contingent, and that the contingent exists before free will; as also
what each of them is, whence they are so named, and what are the
qualities adjoined or appertaining to them.

It now remains, that we treat of Fortune and casual adventure, and
whatever else is to be considered with them. It is therefore certain
that Fortune is a cause. Now of causes, some are causes by themselves,
and others by accident. Thus for example, the proper cause by itself
of an house or a ship is the art of the mason, the carpenter, or the
shipwright; but accidental causes are music, geometry, and whatever else
may happen to be joined with the art of building houses or ships, in
respect either of the body, the soul, or any exterior thing. Whence it
appears, that the cause by itself must needs be determinate and one;
but the causes by accident are never one and the same, but infinite and
undetermined. For many--nay, infinite--accidents, wholly different one
from the other, may be in one and the same subject. Now the cause by
accident, when it is found in a thing which not only is done for some
end but has in it free will and election, is then called Fortune; as is
the finding a treasure while one is digging a hole to plant a tree, or
the doing or suffering some extraordinary thing whilst one is flying,
following, or otherwise walking, or only turning about, provided it be
not for the sake of that which happens, but for some other intention.
Hence it is, that some of the ancients have declared Fortune to be a
cause unknown that cannot be foreseen by the human reason. But according
to the Platonics, who have approached yet nearer to the true reason of
it, it is thus defined: Fortune is a cause by accident, in those
things which are done for some end, and which are of our election. And
afterwards they add, that it is unforeseen and unknown to the human
reason; although that which is rare and strange appears also by the same
means to be in this kind of cause by accident. But what this is, if it
is not sufficiently evidenced by the oppositions and disputations made
against it, will at least most clearly be seen by what is written in
Plato's Phaedo, where you will find these words:--

PHAED. Have you not heard how and in what manner the judgment passed?
ECH. Yes indeed; for there came one and told us of it. At which we
wondered very much that, the judgment having been given long before, it
seems that he died a great while after. And what, Phaedo, might be the
cause of it? PHAED. It was a fortune which happened to him, Echecrates.
For it chanced that, the day before the judgment, the prow of the galley
which the Athenians send every year to the isle of Delos was crowned.
(Plato, "Phaedo," p.58 A.)

In which discourse it is to be observed, that the expression HAPPENED TO
HIM is not simply to be understood by WAS DONE or CAME TO PASS, but
it much rather regards what befell him through the concurrence of many
causes together, one being done in connection with another. For the
priest crowned the ship and adorned it with garlands for another end and
intention, and not for the sake of Socrates; and the judges also had
for some other cause condemned him. But the event was contrary to
experience, and of such a nature that it might seem to have been
effected by the foresight of some human creature, or rather of the
superior powers. And so much may suffice to show with what Fortune must
of necessity subsist, and that there must subsist first such things as
are in our free will: what it effects is, like itself called Fortune.
============== But chance or casual adventure is of a larger extent than
Fortune; which it comprehends, and also several other things which may
of their own nature happen sometimes one way, sometimes another. And
this, as it appears by the derivation of the word, which is in Greek
[Greek omitted] CHANCE, is that which happens of itself, when that which
is ordinary happens not, but another thing in its place; such as cold
in the dog-days seems to be; for it is sometimes then cold.... Once for
all, as "that which is in our power" is a part of the contingent, so
Fortune is a part of chance or casual adventure; and both the two events
are conjoined and dependent on the one and the other, to wit, chance on
contingent, and Fortune on "that which is in our choice,"--and yet
not on all, but on what is in our election, as we have already said.
Wherefore chance is common to things inanimate, as well as to those
which are animated; whereas Fortune is proper to man only, who has his
actions voluntary. And an argument of this is, that to be fortunate and
to be happy are thought to be one and the same thing. Now happiness is
a certain well-doing, and well-doing is proper only to man, and to him
perfect.

These, then, are the things which are comprised in Fate, to wit,
contingent, possible, election, "that which is in our power," Fortune,
chance, and their adjuncts, as are the things signified by the words
perhaps and peradventure; all which indeed are contained in Fate. Yet
none Of them is fatal. It now remains, that we discourse of divine
Providence, and show how it comprehends even Fate itself.

The supreme therefore and first Providence is the understanding or (if
you had rather) the will of the first and sovereign God, doing good
to everything that is in the world, by which all divine things have
universally and throughout been most excellently and most wisely
ordained and disposed. The second Providence is that of the second
gods, who go through the heaven, by which temporal and mortal things are
orderly and regularly generated, and which pertains to the continuation
and preservation of every kind. The third may probably be called the
Providence and procuration of the Daemons, which, being placed on the
earth, are the guardians and overseers of human actions. This threefold
Providence therefore being seen, of which the first and supreme is
chiefly and principally so named, we shall not be afraid to say,
although we may in this seem to contradict the sentiments of some
philosophers, that all things are done by Fate and by Providence, but
not also by Nature. But some are done according to Providence, these
according to one, those according to another,--and some according to
Fate; and Fate is altogether according to Providence, while Providence
is in no wise according to Fate. But let this discourse be understood
of the first and supreme Providence. Now that which is done according to
another, whatever it is, is always posterior to that according to which
it is done; as that which is according to the law is after the law,
and that which is according to Nature is after Nature, so that which is
according to Fate is after Fate, and must consequently be more new and
modern. Wherefore supreme Providence is the most ancient of all things,
except him whose will or understanding it is, to wit, the sovereign
author, maker, and father of all things. "Let us therefore," says
Timaeus, "discourse for what cause the Creator made and framed this
machine of the universe. He was good, and in him that is good there
can never be imprinted or engendered any envy against anything. Being
therefore wholly free from this, he desired that all things should, as
far as it is possible, resemble himself. He, therefore, who admits
this to have been chiefly the principal original of the generation
and creation of the world, as it has been delivered to us by wise men,
receives that which is most right. For God, who desired that all things
should be good, and nothing, as far as possibly might be, evil, taking
thus all that was visible,--restless as it was, and moving rashly and
confusedly,--reduced it from disorder to order, esteeming the one to be
altogether better than the other. For it neither was nor is convenient
for him who is in all perfection good, to make anything that should
not be very excellent and beautiful." (Plato, "Timaeus," p.29 D.) This,
therefore, and all that follows, even to his disputation concerning
human souls, is to be understood of the first Providence, which in the
beginning constituted all things. Afterwards he speaks thus: "Having
framed the universe, he ordained souls equal in number to the stars, and
distributed to each of them one; and having set them, as it were, in a
chariot, showed the nature of the universe, and appointed them the laws
of Fate." (Ibid. p.41 D.) Who, then, will not believe, that by these
words he expressly and manifestly declares Fate to be, as it were, a
foundation and political constitution of laws, fitted for the souls of
men? Of which he afterwards renders the cause.

As for the second Providence, he thus in a manner explains it, saying:
"Having prescribed them all these laws, to the end that, if there should
afterwards happen any fault, he might be exempt from being the cause of
any of their evil, he dispersed some of them upon the earth, some into
the moon, and some into the other instruments of time. And after this
dispersion, he gave in charge to the young gods the making of human
bodies, and the making up and adding whatever was wanting and deficient
in human souls; and after they had perfected whatever is adherent and
consequent to this, they should rule and govern, in the best manner
they possibly could, this mortal creature, so far as it might not be the
cause of its own evils." (Ibid. p.42 D.) For by these words, "that he
might be exempt from being the cause of any of their evil," he most
clearly signifies the cause of Fate; and the order and office of the
young gods manifests the second Providence; and it seems also in
some sort to have touched a little upon the third, if he therefore
established laws and ordinances that he might be exempt from being the
cause of any of their evil. For God, who is free from all evil, has no
need of laws or Fate; but every one of these petty gods, drawn on by the
providence of him who has engendered them, performs what belongs to his
office. Now that this is true and agreeable to the opinion of Plato,
these words of the lawgiver, spoken by him in his Book of Laws, seems to
me to give sufficient testimony: "If there were any man so sufficient
by Nature, being by divine Fortune happily engendered and born, that he
could comprehend this, he would have no need of laws to command him.
For there is not any law or ordinance more worthy and powerful than
knowledge; nor is it suitable that Mind, provided it be truly and really
free by Nature, should be a subject or slave to any one, but it ought to
command all." (Plato, "Laws," ix. p.875 C.)

I therefore do for mine own part thus understand and interpret this
sentence of Plato. There being a threefold Providence, the first, as
having engendered Fate, does in some sort comprehend it; the second,
having been engendered with Fate, is with it totally comprehended and
embraced by the first; the third, as having been engendered after Fate,
is comprehended by it in the same manner as are free choice and Fortune,
as we have already said. "For they whom the assistance of a Daemon's
power does help in their intercourse" says Socrates, declaring to
Theages what is the almost settled ordinance of Adrastea "are those whom
you also mean; for they advance quickly." (Plato, "Theages", p.129 E.)
In which words, what he says of a Daemon's aiding some is to be ascribed
to the third Providence, and the growing and coming forward with speed
to Fate. In brief, it is not obscure or doubtful but that this also is
a kind of Fate. And perhaps it may be found much more probable that the
second Providence is also comprehended under Fate, and indeed all things
that are done; since Fate, as a substance, has been rightly divided
by us into three parts, and the simile of the chain comprehends the
revolutions of the heavens in the number and rank of those things
which happen conditionally. But concerning these things I will not much
contend, to wit, whether they should be called conditional, or rather
conjoined with Fate, the precedent cause and commander of Fate being
also fatal.

Our opinion, then, to speak briefly, is such. But the contrary sentiment
not only places all things in Fate, but affirms them all to be done by
Fate. It agrees indeed in all things to the other (the Stoic) doctrine;
and that which accords to another thing, 'tis clear, is the same with
it. In this discourse therefore we have first spoken of the contingent;
secondly, of "that which is in our power"; thirdly, of Fortune and
chance, and whatever depends on them; fourthly, of praise, blame, and
whatever depends on them; the fifth and last of all may be said to be
prayers to the gods, with their services and ceremonies.

For the rest, as to those which are called idle and cropping arguments,
and that which is named the argument against destiny, they are indeed
but vain subtleties and captious sophisms, according to this discourse.
But according to the contrary opinion, the first and principal
conclusion seems to be, that there is nothing done without a cause,
but that all things depend upon antecedent causes; the second, that the
world is governed by Nature, and that it conspires, consents, and is
compatible with itself; the third seems rather to be testimonies,--of
which the first is divination, approved by all sorts of people, as being
truly in God; the second is the equanimity and patience of wise men, who
take mildly and bear patiently whatever befalls, as happening by divine
ordinance and as it ought; the third is the speech so common and usual
in every one's mouth, to wit, that every proposition is true or false.
Thus have we contracted this discourse into a small number of short
articles, that we might in few words comprehend the whole matter of
Fate; into which a scrutiny ought to be made, and the reasons of both
opinions to be weighed with a most exact balance. But we shall come to
discuss particulars later.


END OF NINE-----------




AGAINST COLOTES, THE DISCIPLE AND FAVORITE OF EPICURUS.

COLOTES, whom Epicurus was wont diminutively and by way of familiarity
or fondness to call Colotaras and Colotarion, composed, O Saturninus,
and published a little book which he entitled, "That according to the
opinions of the other philosophers one cannot so much as live." This was
dedicated to King Ptolemy. Now I suppose that it will not be unpleasant
for you to read, when set down in writing, what came into my mind
to speak against this Colotes, since I know you to be a lover of all
elegant and honest treatises, and particularly of such as regard the
science of antiquity, and to esteem the bearing in memory and having (as
much as possible may be) in hand the discourses of the ancient sages to
be the most royal of all studies and exercises.

Not long since, therefore, as this book was being read, Aristodemus of
Aegium, a familiar friend of ours (whom you well know to be one of the
Academy, and not a mere thyrsus-bearer, but one of the most frantic
celebrators of Plato's name), did, I know not how, keep himself contrary
to his custom very still all the while, and patiently gave ear to it
even to the end. But the reading was scarce well over when he said:
Well, then, whom shall we cause to rise up and fight against this man,
in defence of the philosophers? For I am not of Nestor's opinion, who,
when the most valiant of those nine warriors that presented themselves
to enter into combat was to be chosen, committed the election to the
fortune of a lot.

Yet, answered I, you see he so disposed himself in reference to the lot,
that the choice might pass according to the arbitrament of the wisest
man;

     And th' lot drawn from the helmet, as they wished,
     On Ajax fell.

But yet since you command me to make the election,

     How can I think a better choice to make
     Than the divine Ulysses?
     ("Iliad," vii. 182; x. 243.)

Consider therefore, and be well advised, in what manner you will
chastise this man.

But you know, replied Aristodemus, that Plato, when highly offended with
his boy that waited on him, would not himself beat him, but requested
Speusippus to do it for him, saying that he himself was angry. As much
therefore may I say to you; Take this fellow to you, and treat him as
you please; for I am in a fit of choler.

When therefore all the rest of the company desired me to undertake this
office; I must then, said I, speak, since it is your pleasure. But I
am afraid that I also shall seem more vehemently transported than is
fitting against this book, in the defending and maintaining Socrates
against the rudeness, scurrility, and insolence of this man; who,
because Socrates affirmed himself to know nothing certainly, instead
of bread (as one would say) present him hay, as if he were a beast, and
asks him why he puts meat into his mouth and not into his ear. And yet
perhaps some would make but a laughing matter of this, considering the
mildness and gentleness of Socrates; "but for the whole host of
the Greeks," that is, of the other philosophers, amongst which are
Democritus, Plato, Stilpo, Empedocles, Parmenides, and Melissus, who
have been basely traduced and reviled by him, it were not only a shame
to be silent, but even a sacrilege in the least point to forbear
or recede from freedom of speech in their behalf, who have advanced
philosophy to that honor and reputation it has gotten.

And our parents indeed have, with the assistance of the gods, given
us our life; but to live well comes to us from reason, which we have
learned from the philosophers, which favors law and justice, and
restrains our concupiscence. Now to live well is to live sociably,
friendly, temperately, and justly; of all which conditions they leave
us not one, who cry out that man's sovereign good lies in his belly, and
that they would not purchase all the virtues together at the expense of
a cracked farthing, if pleasure were totally and on every side removed
from them. And in their discourses concerning the soul and the gods,
they hold that the soul perishes when it is separated from the body, and
that the gods concern not themselves in our affairs. Thus the Epicureans
reproach the other philosophers, that by their wisdom they bereave man
of his life; whilst the others on the contrary accuse them of teaching
men to live degenerately and like beasts.

Now these things are scattered here and there in the writings of
Epicurus, and dispersed through all his philosophy. But this Colotes, by
having extracted from them certain pieces and fragments of discourses,
destitute of any arguments whatever to render them credible and
intelligible, has composed his book, being like a shop or cabinet of
monsters and prodigies; as you better know than any one else, because
you have always in your hands the works of the ancients. But he seems to
me, like the Lydian, to open not only one gate against himself, but
to involve Epicurus also in many and those the greatest doubts and
difficulties. For he begins with Democritus, who receives of him an
excellent and worthy reward for his instruction; it being certain that
Epicurus for a long time called himself a Democritean, which as well
others affirm, as Leonteus, a principal disciple of Epicurus, who in
a letter which he writ to Lycophron says, that Epicurus honored
Democritus, because he first attained, though a little at a distance,
the right and sound understanding of the truth, and that in general all
the treatise concerning natural things was called Democritean, because
Democritus was the first who happened upon the principles and met with
the primitive foundations of Nature. And Metrodorus says openly of
philosophy, If Democritus had not gone before and taught the way,
Epicurus had never attained to wisdom. Now if it be true, as Colotes
holds, that to live according to the opinions of Democritus is not to
live, Epicurus was then a fool in following Democritus, who led him to a
doctrine which taught him not to live.

Now the first thing he lays to his charge is, that, by supposing
everything to be no more individual than another, he wholly confounds
human life. But Democritus was so far from having been of this opinion,
that he opposed Protagoras the philosopher who asserted it, and writ
many excellent arguments concluding against him, which this fine fellow
Colotes never saw nor read, nor yet so much as dreamed of; but deceived
himself by misunderstanding a passage which is in his works, where he
determines that [Greek omitted] is no more than [Greek omitted], naming
in that place the body by [Greek omitted], and the void by [Greek
omitted], and meaning that the void has its own proper nature and
subsistence, as well as the body.

But he who is of opinion that nothing has more of one nature than
another makes use of a sentence of Epicurus, in which he says that all
the apprehensions and imaginations given us by the senses are true. For
if of two saying, the one, that the wine is sour, and the other, that it
is sweet, neither of them shall be deceived by his sensation, how shall
the wine be more sour than sweet? And we may often see that some men
using one and the same bath find it to be hot, and others find it to be
cold; because those order cold water to be put into it, as these do hot.
It is said that, a certain lady going to visit Berenice, wife to
King Deiotarus, as soon as ever they approached each other, they both
immediately turned their backs, the one, as it seemed, not being able to
bear the smell of perfume, nor the other of butter. If, then, the sense
of one is no truer than the sense of another, it is also probable, that
water is no more cold than hot, nor sweet ointment or butter better or
worse scented one than the other. For if any one shall say that it seems
the one to one, and the other to another, he will, before he is aware,
affirm that they are both the one and the other.

And as for these symmetries and proportions of the pores, or little
passages in the organs of the senses, about which they talk so much,
and those different mixtures of seeds, which, they say, being dispersed
through all savors, odors, and colors, move the senses of different
persons to perceive different qualities, do they not manifestly drive
them to this, that things are no more of one nature than another? For to
pacify those who think the sense is deceived and lies because they see
contrary events and passions in such as use the same objects, and to
solve this objection, they teach,--that when almost everything was
confused and mixed up together, since it has been arranged by Nature
that one thing shall fit another thing, it was not the contact or the
apprehension of the same quality nor were all parts affected in the same
way by what was influencing them. But those only coalesced with anything
to which they had a characteristic, symmetrical in a corresponding
proportion; so that they are in error so obstinately to insist that a
thing is either good or bad, white or not white, thinking to establish
their own senses by destroying those of others; whereas they ought
neither to combat the senses,--because they all touch some quality,
each one drawing from this confused mixture, as from a living and large
fountain, what is suitable and convenient,--nor to pronounce of the
whole, by touching only the parts, nor to think that all ought to be
affected after one and the same manner by the same thing, seeing
that one is affected by one quality and faculty of it, and another
by another. Let us investigate who those men are which bring in this
opinion that things are not more of one quality than another, if they
are not those who affirm that every sensible object is a mixture,
compounded of all sorts of qualities, like a mixture of new wine
fermenting, and who confess that all their rules are lost and their
faculty of judging quite gone, if they admit any sensible object that is
pure and simple, and do not make each one thing to be many?

See now to this purpose, what discourse and debate Epicurus makes
Polyaenus to have with him in his Banquet concerning the heat of wine.
For when he asked, "Do you, Epicurus, say, that wine does not heat?"
some one answered, "It is not universally to be affirmed that wine
heats." And a little after: "For wine seems not to be universally a
heater; but such a quantity may be said to heat such a person." And
again subjoining the cause, to wit, the compressions and disseminations
of the atoms, and having alleged their commixtures and conjunctions
with others when the wine comes to be mingled in the body, he adds this
conclusion: "It is not universally to be said that wine is endued with a
faculty of heating; but that such a quantity may heat such a nature and
one so disposed, while such a quantity to such a nature is cooling.
For in such a mass there are such natures and complexions of which cold
might be composed, and which, united with others in proper measure,
would yield a refrigerative virtue. Wherefore some are deceived, who
say that wine is universally a heater; and others, who say that it is
universally a cooler." He then who says that most men are deceived and
err, in holding that which is hot to be heating and that which is cold
to be cooling, is himself in an error, unless he should allow that his
assertion ends in the doctrine that one thing is not more of one nature
than another. He farther adds afterwards that oftentimes wine entering
into a body brings with it thither neither a calefying nor refrigerating
virtue, but, the mass of the body being agitated and disturbed, and
a transposition made of the parts, the heat-effecting atoms being
assembled together do by their multitude cause a heat and inflammation
in the body, and sometimes on the contrary disassembling themselves
cause a refrigeration.

But it is moreover wholly evident, that we may employ this argument to
all those things which are called and esteemed bitter, sweet, purging,
dormitive, and luminous, not any one of them having an entire and
perfect quality to produce such effects, nor to act rather than to be
acted on when they are in the bodies, but being there susceptible,
of various temperatures and differences. For Epicurus himself, in
his Second Book against Theophrastus, affirming that colors are not
connatural to bodies, but are engendered there according to certain
situations and positions with respect to the sight of man, says: "For
this reason a body is no more colored than destitute of color." And a
little above he writes thus, word for word: "But apart from this, I
know not how a man may say that those bodies which are in the dark have
color; although very often, an air equally dark being spread about them,
some distinguish diversities of colors, others perceive them not through
the weakness of their sight. And moreover, going into a dark house or
room, we at our first entrance see no color, but after we have stayed
there awhile, we do. Wherefore we are to say that every body is not more
colored than not colored. Now, if color is relative and has its being in
regard to something else, so also then is white, and so likewise blue;
and if colors are so, so also are sweet and bitter. So that it may truly
be affirmed of every quality, that it cannot more properly be said
to exist than not to exist. For to those who are in a certain manner
disposed, they will be; but to those who are not so disposed, they will
not be." Colotes therefore has bedashed and bespattered himself and
his master with that dirt, in which he says those lie who maintain that
things are not more of one quality than another.

But is it in this alone, that this excellent man shows himself--

     To others a physician, whilst himself
     Is full of ulcers?
     (Euripides, Frag. 1071.)

No indeed; but yet much farther in his second reprehension, without any
way minding it, he drives Epicurus and Democritus out of this life. For
he affirms that the statement of Democritus--that the atoms are to the
senses color by a certain human law or ordinance, that they are by the
same law sweetness, and by the same law concretion--is at war with our
senses, and that he who uses this reason and persists in this opinion
cannot himself imagine whether he is living or dead. I know not how to
contradict this discourse; but this I can boldly affirm, that this is
as inseparable from the sentences and doctrines of Epicurus as they say
figure and weight are from atoms. For what is it that Democritus says?
"There are substances, in number infinite, called atoms (because
they cannot be divided), without difference, without quality, and
passibility, which move, being dispersed here and there, in the infinite
voidness; and that when they approach one another, or meet and are
conjoined, of such masses thus heaped together, one appears water,
another fire, another a plant, another a man; and that all things are
thus properly atoms (as he called them), and nothing else; for there is
no generation from what does not exist; and of those things which are
nothing can be generated, because these atoms are so firm, that they can
neither change, alter, nor suffer; wherefore there cannot be made color
of those things which are without color, nor nature or soul of those
things which are without quality and impassible." Democritus then is
to be blamed, not for confessing those things that happen upon his
principles, but for supposing principles upon which such things happen.
For he should not have supposed immutable principles; or having supposed
them, he should have seen that the generation of all quality is taken
away; but having seen the absurdity, to deny it is most impudent. But
Epicurus says, that he supposes the same principles with Democritus, but
that he says not that color, sweet, white, and other qualities, are
by law and ordinance. If therefore NOT TO SAY is the same as NOT TO
CONFESS, he does merely what he is wont to do. For it is as when, taking
away divine Providence, he nevertheless says that he leaves piety and
devotion towards the gods; and when, choosing friendship for the sake
of pleasure, that he suffers most grievous pains for his friends; and
supposing the universe to be infinite, that he nevertheless takes not
away high and low.... Indeed having taken the cup, one may drink what
he pleases, and return the rest. But in reasoning one ought chiefly
to remember this wise apothegm, that where the principles are not
necessary, the ends and consequences are necessary. It was not
then necessary for him to suppose or (to say better) to steal from
Democritus, that atoms are the principles of the universe; but having
supposed this doctrine, and having pleased and glorified himself in the
first probable and specious appearances of it, he must afterwards also
swallow that which is troublesome in it, or must show how bodies which
have not any quality can bring all sorts of qualities to others only by
their meetings and joining together. As--to take that which comes next
neither had heat when they came, nor are become hot after their being
joined together? For the one presupposes that they had some quality, and
the other that they were fit to receive it. And you affirm, that neither
the one nor the other must be said to be congruous to atoms, because
they are incorruptible.

How then? Do not Plato, Aristotle, and Xenocrates produce gold from
that which is not gold, and stone from that which is not stone, and many
other things from the four simple first bodies? Yes indeed; but with
those bodies immediately concur also the principles for the generation
of everything, bringing with them great contributions, that is, the
first qualities which are in them; then, when they come to assemble and
join in one the dry with the moist, the cold with the hot, and the solid
with the soft,--that is, active bodies with such as are fit to suffer
and receive every alteration and change,--then is generation wrought by
passing from one temperature to another. Whereas the atom, being alone,
is alone, is deprived and destitute of all quality and generative
faculty, and when it comes to meet with the others, it can make only a
noise and sound because of its hardness and firmness, but nothing more.
For they always strike and are stricken, not being able by this means
to compose or make an animal, a soul, or a nature, nay, not so much as
a mass or heap of themselves; for that as they beat upon one another, so
they fly back again asunder.

But Colotes, as if he were speaking to some ignorant and unlettered
king, again attacks Empedocles for expressing the same thought:--

     I've one thing more to say.  'Mongst mortals there
     No Nature is; nor that grim thing men fear
     So much, called death.  There only happens first
     A mixture, and mixt things asunder burst
     Again, when them disunion does befall.
     And this is that which men do Nature call.

For my part, I do not see how this is repugnant and contrary to life or
living, especially amongst those who hold that there is no generation
of that which is not, nor corruption of that which is, but that the
assembling and union of the things which are is called generation, and
their dissolution and disunion named corruption and death. For that he
took Nature for generation, and that this is his meaning, he has himself
declared, when he opposed Nature to death. And if they neither live nor
can live who place generation in union and death in disunion, what else
do these Epicureans? Yet Empedocles, gluing, (as it were) and conjoining
the elements together by heats, softnesses, and humidifies, gives them
in some sort a mixtion and unitive composition; but these men who hunt
and drive together the atoms, which they affirm to be immutable and
impassible, compose nothing proceeding from them, but indeed make many
and continual percussions of them.

For the interlacement, hindering the dissolution, more and more augments
the collision and concussion; so that there is neither mixtion nor
adhesion and conglutination, but only a discord and combat, which
according to them is called generation. And if the atoms do now recoil
for a moment by reason of the shock they have given, and then return
again after the blow is past, they are above double the time absent from
one another, without either touching or approaching, so as nothing can
be made of them, not even so much as a body without a soul. But as for
sense, soul, understanding, and prudence, there is not any man who can
in the least conceive or imagine how it is possible they should be made
in a voidness, and atoms which neither when separate and apart have
any quality, nor any passion or alteration when they are assembled and
joined together, especially seeing this their meeting together is not
an incorporation or congress, making a mixture or coalition, but rather
percussions and repercussions. So that, according to the doctrine of
these people, life is taken away, and the existence of an animal denied,
since they posit principles void, impassible, godless, and soulless, and
such as cannot allow or receive any mixture or commingling whatever.

How then is it, that they admit and allow Nature, soul, and living
creature? Even in the same manner as they do an oath, prayer, and
sacrifice, and the adoration of the gods. Thus they adore by word and
mouth, only naming and feigning that which by their principles they
totally take away and abolish. If now they call that which is born
Nature, and that which is engendered generation,--as those who are
accustomed to call wood wood-work and the voices that accord and sound
together symphony,--whence came it into his mind to object these words
against Empedocles? "Why," says he, "do we tire ourselves in taking such
care of ourselves, in desiring and longing after certain things, and
shunning and avoiding others? For we neither are ourselves, nor do we
live by making use of others." But be of good cheer, my dear little
Colotes, may one perhaps say to him: there is none who hinders you
from taking care of yourself by teaching that the nature of Colotes
is nothing else but Colotes himself, or who forbids you to make use of
things (now things with you are pleasures) by showing that there is no
nature of tarts and marchpanes, of sweet odors, or of venereal delights,
but that there are tarts, marchpanes, perfumes, and women. For neither
does the grammarian who says that the "strength of Hercules" is Hercules
himself deny the being of Hercules; nor do those who say that symphonies
and roofings are but absolute derivations affirm that there are neither
sounds nor timbers; since also there are some who, taking away the soul
and intelligence, do not yet seem to take away either living or being
intelligent.

And when Epicurus says that the nature of things is to be found in
bodies and their place, do we so comprehend him as if he meant that
Nature were something else than the things which are, or as if
he insinuated that it is merely the things which are, and nothing
else?--as, to wit, he is wont to call voidness itself the nature of
voidness, and the universe, by Jupiter, the nature of the universe. And
if any one should thus question him; What sayst thou, Epicurus, that
this is voidness, and that the nature of voidness? No, by Jupiter, would
he answer; but this transference of names is in use by law and custom.
I grant it is. Now what has Empedocles done else, but taught that Nature
is nothing else save that which is born, and death no other thing but
that which dies? But as the poets very often, forming as it were an
image, say thus in figurative language,

     Strife, tumult, noise, placed by some angry god,
     Mischief, and malice there had their abode;
     ("Iliad," xvii. 525.)

so do some authors attribute generation and corruption to things that
are contracted together and dissolved. But so far has he been from
stirring and taking away that which is, or contradicting that which
evidently appears, that he casts not so much as one single word out of
the accustomed use; but taking away all figurative fraud that might
hurt or endamage things, he again restored the ordinary and useful
signification to words in these verses:--

     When from mixed elements we sometimes see
     A man produced, sometimes a beast, a tree,
     Or bird, this birth and geniture we name;
     But death, when this so well compacted frame
     And juncture is dissolved.

And yet I myself say that Colotes, though he alleged these verses, did
not understand that Empedocles took not away men, beasts, trees, or
birds, which he affirmed to be composed of the elements mixed together;
and that, by teaching how much they are deceived who call this
composition Nature and life, and this dissolution unhappy destruction
and miserable death, he did not abrogate the using of the customary
expressions in this respect.

And it seems to me, indeed, that Empedocles did not aim in this place at
the disturbing the common manner of expression, but that he really, as
it has been said, had a controversy about generation from things that
have no being, which some call Nature. Which he manifestly shows by
these verses:--

     Fools, and of little thought, we well may deem
     Those, who so silly are as to esteem
     That what ne'er was may now engendered be,
     And that what is may perish utterly.

For these are the words of one who cries loud enough to those which have
ears, that he takes not away generation, but procreation from nothing;
nor corruption, but total destruction that is, reduction to nothing.
For to him who would not so savagely and foolishly but more gently
calumniate, the following verses might give a colorable occasion of
charging Empedocles with the contrary, when he says:--

     No prudent man can e'er into his mind
     Admit that, whilst men living here on earth
     (Which only life they call) both fortunes find,
     They being have, but that before the birth
     They nothing were, nor shall be when once dead.

For these are not the expressions of a man who denies those that are
born to be, but rather of him who holds those to be that are not yet
born or that are already dead. And Colotes also does not altogether
accuse him of this, but says that according to his opinion we shall
never be sick, never wounded. But how is it possible, that he who
affirms men to have being both before their life and after their death,
and during their life to find both fortunes (or to be accompanied both
by good and evil), should not leave them the power to suffer? Who then
are they, O Colotes, that are endued with this privilege never to be
wounded, never to be sick? Even you yourselves, who are composed of
atoms and voidness, neither of which, you say, has any sense. Now there
is no great hurt in this; but the worst is, you have nothing left that
can cause you pleasure, seeing an atom is not capable to receive those
things which are to effect it, and voidness cannot be affected by them.

But because Colotes would, immediately after Democritus, seem to inter
and bury Parmenides, and I have passed over and a little postponed his
defence, to bring in between them that of Empedocles, as seeming to
be more coherent and consequent to the first reprehensions, let us now
return to Parmenides. Him, then, does Colotes accuse of having broached
and set abroad certain shameful and villanous sophistries; and yet by
these his sophisms he has neither rendered friendship less honorable,
nor voluptuousness or the desire of pleasures more audacious and
unbridled. He has not taken from honesty its attractive property or its
being venerable or recommendable of itself, nor has he disturbed the
opinions we ought to have of the gods. And I do not see how, by saying
that the All (or the universe) is one, he hinders or obstructs our
living. For when Epicurus himself says that the All is infinite, that it
is neither engendered nor perishable, that it can neither increase
nor be diminished, he speaks of the universe as of one only thing. And
having in the beginning of his treatise concerning this matter said,
that the nature of those things which have being consists of bodies and
of vacuum, he makes a division (as it were) of one thing into two parts,
one of which has in reality no subsistence, being, as you yourselves
term it, impalpable, void, and incorporeal; so that by this means, even
with you also, all comes to be one; unless you desire, in speaking of
voidness, to use words void of sense, and to combat the ancients, as if
you were fighting against a shadow.

But these atomical bodies, you will say, are, according to the opinion
of Epicurus, infinite in number, and everything which appears to us is
composed of them. See now, therefore, what principles of generation
you suppose, infinity and voidness; one of which, to wit, voidness, is
inactive, impassible, and incorporeal; the other, to wit, infinity, is
disorderly, unreasonable, and unintelligible, dissolving and confounding
itself, because it cannot for its multitude be contained, circumscribed,
or limited. But Parmenides has neither taken away fire, nor water, nor
precipices, nor yet cities (as Colotes says) which are inhabited as
well in Europe as in Asia; since he has both constructed an order of the
world, and mixing the elements, to wit, light and dark, does of them and
by them arrange and finish all things that appear in the world. For he
has written very largely of the earth, heaven, sun, moon, and stars, and
has spoken of the generation of man; and being, as he was, an ancient
author in physiology, and one who in writing sought to save his own
and not to destroy another's doctrine, he has overlooked none of the
essential things in Nature. Moreover, Plato, and before him Socrates
himself, understood that in Nature there is one part subject to opinion,
and another subject to intelligence. As for that which is subject to
opinion, it is always unconstant, wandering, and carried away with
several passions and changes, liable to diminution and increase, and to
be variously disposed to various men, and not always appearing after one
manner even to the same individual. But as to the intelligible part, it
is quite of another kind,

     Constant, entire, and still engenerable,

as himself says, always like to itself, and perdurable in its being.

Here Colotes, sycophant-like, catching at his expressions and drawing
the discourse from things to words, flatly affirms that Parmenides in
one word destroys the existence of all things by supposing ENS (or that
which is) to be one. But, on the contrary, he takes away neither the one
nor the other part of Nature; but rendering to each of them what belongs
to it and is convenient for it, he places the intelligible in the idea
of one and of "that which is," calling it ENS because it is eternal and
incorruptible, and one because it is always like itself and admits no
diversity. And as for that part which is sensible, he places it in the
rank of uncertain, disorderly, and always moving. Of which two parts, we
may see the distinct judgment:--

     One certain truth and sincere knowledge is,

as regarding that which is intelligible, and always alike and of the
same sort;

     The other does on men's opinions rest,
     Which breed no true belief within our breast,

because it is conversant in things which receive all sorts of changes,
passions, and inequalities. Now how he could have left sense and
opinion, if he had not also left any sensible and opinable object, it
is impossible for any man to say. But because to that which truly IS
it appertains to continue in its being, and because sensible things
sometimes are, sometimes are not, continually passing from one being to
another and perpetually changing their state, he thought they required
some other name than that of ENTIA, or things which always are. This
speech therefore concerning ENS (or that which is), that it should be
but one, is not to take away the plurality of sensible things, but to
show how they differ from that which is intelligible. Which difference
Plato in his discussion of Ideas more fully declaring, has thereby
afforded Colotes an opportunity of cavilling.

Therefore it seems not unfitting to me to take next into our
consideration, as it were all in a train, what he has also said against
him. But first let us contemplate a little the diligence--together with
the manifold and profound knowledge--of this our philosopher, who says,
that Aristotle, Xenocrates, Theophrastus, and all the Peripateties
have followed these doctrines of Plato. For in what corner of the
uninhabitable world have you, O Colotes, written your book, that,
composing all these accusations against such personages, you never have
lighted upon their works, nor have taken into your hands the books of
Aristotle concerning Heaven and the Soul, nor those of Theophrastus
against the Naturalists, nor the Zoroaster of Heraclides, nor his books
of Hell, nor that of Natural Doubts and Difficulties, nor the book of
Dicaearchus concerning the Soul; in all which books they are in the
highest degree contradictory and repugnant to Plato about the principal
and greatest points of natural philosophy? Nay, Strato himself, the very
head and prince of the other Peripatetics, agrees not in many things
with Aristotle, and holds opinions altogether contrary to Plato,
concerning motion, the understanding, the soul, and generation. In fine,
he says that the world is not an animal, and that what is according to
Nature follows what is according to Fortune; for that Chance gave
the beginning, and so every one of the natural effects was afterwards
finished.

Now as to the ideas,--for which he quarrels with Plato,--Aristotle,
by moving this matter at every turn, and alleging all manner of doubts
concerning them, in his Ethics, in his Physics, and in his Exoterical
Dialogues seems to some rather obstinately than philosophically to have
disputed against these doctrines, as having proposed to himself the
debasing and undervaluing of Plato's philosophy; so far he was from
following it. What an impudent rashness then is this, that having
neither seen nor understood what these persons have written and what
were their opinions, he should go and devise such things as they never
imagined; and persuading himself that he reprehends and refutes others,
he should produce a proof, written with his own hand, arguing and
convincing himself of ignorance, licentiousness, and shameful impudence,
in saying that those who contradict Plato agree with him, and that those
who oppose him follow him.

Plato, says he, writes that horses are in vain by us considered horses,
and men men. And in which of Plato's commentaries has he found this
hidden? For as to us, we read in all his books, that horses are horses,
that men are men, and that fire is by him esteemed fire, because he
holds that every one of these things is sensible and subject to opinion.
But this Colotes, as if he were not a hair's breadth distance from
wisdom, takes it to be one and the same thing to say, "Man is not" and
"Man is a NON ENS."

Now to Plato there seems to be a wonderful great difference between
not being at all and being a NON ENS; because the first imports an
annihilation and abolishment of all substance, and the other shows the
diversity there is between that which is participated and that which
participates. Which diversity those who came after distinguished only
into the difference of genus and species, and certain common and proper
qualities or accidents, as they are called, but ascended no higher,
falling into more logical doubts and difficulties. Now there is the
same proportion between that which is participated and that which
participates, as there is between the cause and the matter, the original
and the image, the faculty and the result. Wherein that which is by
itself and always the same principally differs from that which is by
another and never remains in one and the same manner; because the one
never was nor ever shall be non-existent, and is therefore totally and
essentially an ENS; but to the other that very being, which it has not
of itself but happens to take by participation from another, does not
remain firm and constant, but it goes out of it by its imbecility,--the
matter always gliding and sliding about the form, and receiving several
functions and changes in the image of the substance, so that it is
continually moving and shaking. As therefore he who says that the image
of Plato is not Plato takes not away the sense and substance of the
image, but shows the difference of that which is of itself from that
which is only in regard to some other, so neither do they take away
the nature, use, or sense of men, who affirm that every one of us, by
participating in a certain common substratum, that is, in the idea, is
become the image of that which afforded the likeness for our generation.
For neither does he who says that a red-hot iron is not fire, or that
the moon is not the sun, but, as Parmenides has it,

     A torch which round the earth by night
     Does bear about a borrowed light,

take away therefore the use of iron, or the nature of the moon. But if
he should deny it to be a body, or affirm that it is not illuminated,
he would then contradict the senses, as one who admitted neither body,
animal, generation, nor sense. But he who by his opinion imagines that
these things subsist only by participation, and reflects how far remote
and distant they are from that which always is and which communicates
to them their being, does not reject the sensible, but affirms that the
intelligible is; nor does he take away and abolish the results which
are wrought and appear in us; but he shows to those who follow him that
there are other things, firmer and more stable than these in respect
of their essence, because they are neither engendered, nor perish,
nor suffer anything; and he teaches them, more purely touching the
difference, to express it by names, calling these [Greek omitted] or
[Greek omitted] (THINGS THAT HAVE BEING), and those [Greek omitted]
or FIENTIA (THINGS ENGENDERED). And the same also usually befalls
the moderns; for they deprive many--and those great things--of the
appellation of ENS or BEING; such as are voidness, time, place, and
simply the entire genus of things spoken, in which are comprised all
things true. For these things, they say, are not ENTIA but SOME
THINGS; and they perpetually treat of them in their lives and in their
philosophy, as of things having subsistence and existence.

But I would willingly ask this our fault-finder, whether themselves do
not in their affairs perceive this difference, by which some things
are permanent and immutable in their substances,--as they say of their
atoms, that they are at all times and continually after one and the
same manner, because of their impassibility and hardness,--but that
all compound things are fluxible, changeable, generated, and perishing;
forasmuch as infinite images are always departing and going from them,
and infinite others as it is probable, repair to them from the ambient
air, filling up what was diminished from the mass, which is much
diversified and transvasated, as it were, by this change, since those
atoms which are in the very bottom of the said mass can never cease
stirring and reciprocally beating upon one another; as they themselves
affirm. There is then in things such a diversity of substance. But
Epicurus is in this wiser and more learned than Plato, that he calls
them all equally ENTIA,--to wit, the impalable voidness, the solid and
resisting body, the principles, and the things composed of them,--and
thinks that the eternal participates of the common substance with that
which is generated, the immortal with the corruptible, and the natures
that are impassible, perdurable, unchangeable, and that can never fall
from their being, with those which have their essence in suffering and
changing, and can never continue in one and the same state. But though
Plato had with all the justness imaginable deserved to be condemned
for having offended in this, yet should he have been sentenced by these
gentlemen, who use Greek more elegantly and discourse more correctly
than he, only as having confounded the terms, and not as having taken
away the things and driven life from us, because he named them FIENTIA
(or things engendered), and not ENTIA (things that have being), as these
men do.

But because we have passed over Socrates, who should have come next
after Parmenides, we must now turn back our discourse to him. Him
therefore has Colotes begun at the very first to remove, as the
common proverb has it, from the sacred line; and having mentioned
how Chaerephon brought from Delphi an oracle, well known to us all,
concerning Socrates, he says thus: "Now as to this narration of
Chaerephon's, because it is odious and entirely sophistical, we will
overpass it." Plato, then, that we may say nothing of others, is also
odious, who has committed it to writing; and the Lacedaemonians are yet
more odious, who keep the oracle of Lycurgus amongst their most ancient
and most authentic inscriptions. The oracle also of Themistocles, by
which he persuaded the Athenians to quit their town, and in a naval
fight defeated the barbarous Xerxes, was a sophistical fiction. Odious
also were all the ancient legislators and founders of Greece who
established the most part of their temples, sacrifices, and solemn
festivals by the answer of the Pythian Oracle. But if the oracle brought
from Delphi concerning Socrates, a man ravished with a divine zeal to
virtue, by which he is styled and declared wise, is odious, fictitious,
and sophistical, by what name shall we call your cries, noises, and
shouts, your applauses, adorations and canonizations, with which you
extol and celebrate him who incites and exhorts you to frequent
and continual pleasures? For thus has he written in his epistle to
Anaxarchus: "I for my part incite and call you to continual pleasures,
and not to vain and empty virtues, which have nothing but turbulent
hopes of uncertain fruits." And yet Metrodorus, writing to Timarchus,
says: "Let us do some extraordinarily excellent thing, not suffering
ourselves to be plunged in reciprocal affections, but retiring from this
low and terrestrial life, and elevating ourselves to the truly holy
and divinely revealed ceremonies and mysteries of Epicurus." And even
Colotes himself, hearing one day Epicurus discoursing of natural things,
fell suddenly at his feet and embraced his knees, as Epicurus himself,
glorying in it, thus writes: "For as if you had adored what we were then
saying, you were suddenly taken with a desire, proceeding not from any
natural cause, to come to us, prostrate yourself on the ground, embrace
our knees, and use all those gestures to us which are ordinarily
practised by those who adore and pray to the gods. So that you made
us also," says he, "reciprocally sanctify and adore you." Those, by
Jupiter, well deserve to be pardoned, who say, they would willingly give
any money for a picture in which should be presented to the life this
fine story of one lying prostrate at the knees and embracing the legs of
another, who mutually again adores him and makes his devout prayers to
him. Nevertheless this devout service, how well soever it was ordered
and composed by Colotes, received not the condign fruit he expected; for
he was not declared wise; but it was only said to him: Go they ways, and
walk immortal; and understand that we also are in like manner immortal.

These men, knowing well in their consciences that they have used
such foolish speeches, have had such motions, and such passions, dare
nevertheless call others odious. And Colotes, having shown us these fine
first-fruits and wise positions touching the natural senses,--that
we eat meat, and not hay or forage; and that when rivers are deep and
great, we pass them in boats, but when shallow and easily fordable, on
foot,--cries out, "You use vain and arrogant speeches, O Socrates; you
say one thing to those who come to discourse with you, and practise
another." Now I would fain know what these vain and arrogant speeches
of Socrates were, since he ordinarily said that he knew nothing, that he
was always learning, and that he went inquiring and searching after
the truth. But if, O Colotes, you had happened on such expressions of
Socrates as are those which Epicurus writ to Idomeneus, "Send me then
the first-fruits for the entertainment of our sacred body, for ourself
and for our children: for so it comes upon me to speak;" what more
arrogant and insolent words could you have used? And yet that Socrates
spake otherwise than he lived, you have wonderful proofs in his gests
at Delium, at Potidaea, in his behavior during the time of the Thirty
Tyrants, towards Archelaus, towards the people of Athens, in his
poverty, and in his death. For are not these things beseeming and
answerable to the doctrine of Socrates? They would indeed, good sir,
have been indubitable testimonies to show that he acted otherwise than
he taught, if, having proposed pleasure for the end of life, he had led
such a life as this.

Thus much for the calumnies he has uttered against Socrates. Colotes
besides perceives not that he is himself found guilty of the same
offences in regard to theory and practice which he objects against
Socrates. For this is one of the sentences and propositions of Epicurus,
that none but the wise man ought irrevocably and unchangeably to be
persuaded of anything. Since then Colotes, even after those adorations
he performed to Epicurus, became not one of the sages, let him first
make these questions and interrogatories his own: How is it that being
hungry he eats meat and not hay, and that he puts a robe about his body
and not about a pillar, since he is not indubitably persuaded either
that a robe is a robe or that meat is meat? But if he not only does
these things, but also passes not over rivers, when they are great and
high, on foot, and flies from wolves and serpents, not being irrevocably
persuaded that any of these things is such as it seems, but yet doing
everything according to what appears to him; so likewise the opinion of
Socrates concerning the senses was no obstacle to him, but that he might
in like manner make use of things as they appeared to him. For it is not
likely that bread appeared bread and hay hay to Colotes, because he had
read those holy rules of Epicurus which came down from heaven, while
Socrates on account of his vanity imagined that hay was bread and bread
hay. For these wise men use better opinions and reasons than we; but to
have sense, and to receive an impression from objects as they appear, is
common as well to the ignorant as to the wise, as proceeding from causes
where there needs not the discourse of reason. And the proposition which
affirms that the natural senses are not perfect, nor certain enough to
cause an entire belief, hinders not that everything may appear to us;
but leaving us to make use of our senses in our actions according to
that which appears, it permits us not so to give credit to them as if
they were exactly true and without error. For it is sufficient that in
what is necessary and commodious for use there is nothing better. But as
for the science and knowledge which the soul of a philosopher desires to
have concerning everything, the senses have it not.

But as to this, Colotes will farther give us occasion to speak of
it hereafter, for he brings this objection against several others.
Furthermore, whereas he profusely derides and despises Socrates for
asking what man is, and in a youthful bravery (as he terms it) affirming
that he was ignorant of it, it is manifest that he himself, who scoffs
at it, never so much as thought of this matter; but Heraclitus on the
contrary, as having done some great and worthy thing, said, I have
been seeking myself. And of the sentences that were written in Apollo's
temple at Delphi, the most excellent and most divine seems to have been
this, Know thyself. And this it was which gave Socrates an occasion and
beginning of doubting and inquiring into it, as Aristotle says in his
Platonics. And yet this appears to Colotes ridiculous and fit to be
scoffed at. And I wonder that he derides not also his master himself,
who does as much whenever he writes concerning the substance of the soul
and the creation of man. For if that which is compounded of both, as
they themselves hold,--of the body, to wit, and the soul,--is man, he
who searches into the nature of the soul consequently also searches into
the nature of man, beginning from his chiefest principle. Now that the
soul is very difficult to be comprehended by reason, and altogether
incomprehensible by the exterior senses, let us not learn from Socrates,
who is a vainglorious and sophistical disputer, but let us take it from
these wise men, who, having forged and framed the substance of the soul
of somewhat hot, spiritual, and aerial, as far as to the faculties of
the flesh, by which she gives heat, softness and strength to the body,
proceed not to that which is the principal, but give over faint and
tired by the way. For that by which she judges, remembers, loves,
hates,--in a word, that which is prudent and rational, is,--say they,
made afterwards of I know not what nameless quality. Now we well know,
that this nameless thing is a confession of their shameful ignorance,
whilst they pretend they cannot name what they are not able to
understand or comprehend. But let this, as they say, be pardoned them.
For it seems not to be a light and easy matter, which every one can at
the first attempt find out and attain to, but has retired itself to the
bottom of some very remote place, and there lies obscurely concealed.
So that there is not, amongst so many words and terms as are in use, any
one that can explain or show it. Socrates therefore was not a fool
or blockhead for seeking and searching what himself was; but they are
rather to be thought shallow coxcombs, who inquire after any other thing
before this, the knowledge of which is so necessary and so hard to find.
For how could he expect to gain the knowledge of other things, who has
not been able to comprehend the principal element even of himself?

But granting a little to Colotes, that there is nothing so vain,
useless, and odious as the seeking into one's self, let us ask him, what
confession of human life is in this, and how it is that a man cannot
continue to live, when he comes once thus to reason and discourse in
himself: "Go to now, what am I? Am I a composition, made up of soul and
body; or rather a soul, serving itself and making use of the body, as an
horseman using his horse is not a subject composed of horse and man?
Or is every one of us the principal part of the soul, by which we
understand, infer, and act; and are all the other parts, both of soul
and body, only organs and utensils of this power? Or, to conclude, is
there no proper substance of the soul at all apart, but is only the
temperature and complexion of the body so disposed, that it has force
and power to understand and live?" But Socrates does not by these
questions overthrow human life, since all natural philosophers treat
of the same matter. But those perhaps are the monstrous questions and
inquiries that turn everything upside down, which are in Phaedrus,
(Plato, "Phaedrus," p. 230 A.) where he says, that every one ought
to examine and consider himself, whether he is a savage beast, more
cautelous, outrageous, and furious than ever was the monster Typhon; or
on the contrary, an animal more mild and gentle, partaking by Nature of
a certain divine portion, and such as is free from pride. Now by these
discourses and reasonings he overturns not the life of man, but drives
from it presumption and arrogance, and those haughty and extravagant
opinions and conceits he has of himself. For this is that monster
Typhon, which your teacher and master has made to be so great in you by
his warring against the gods and divine men.

Having done with Socrates and Plato, he next attacks Stilpo. Now as for
those his true doctrines and good discourses, by which he managed and
governed himself, his country, his friends, and such kings and princes
as loved him and esteemed him, he has not written a word; nor yet what
prudence and magnanimity was in his heart, accompanied with meekness,
moderation, and modesty. But having made mention of one of those little
sentences he was wont in mirth and raillery to object against the
sophisters, he does, without alleging any reason against it or solving
the subtlety of the objection, stir up a terrible tragedy against
Stilpo, saying that the life of man is subverted by him, inasmuch as he
affirms that one thing cannot be predicated of another. "For how," says
he, "shall we live, if we cannot style a man good, nor a man a captain,
but must separately name a man a man, good good, and a captain a
captain; nor can say ten thousand horsemen, or a fortified town, but
only call horsemen horsemen, and ten thousand ten thousand, and so of
the rest?" Now what man ever was there that lived the worse for this? Or
who is there that, hearing this discourse, does not immediately perceive
and understand it to be the speech of a man who rallies gallantly, and
proposes to others this logical question for the exercise of their wits?
It is not, O Colotes, a great and dangerous scandal not to call any man
good, or not to say ten thousand horsemen; but not to call God God,
and not to believe him to be God,--as you and the rest do, who will not
confess that there is a Jupiter presiding over generation, or a Ceres
giving laws, or a Neptune nourishing the plants,--it is this separation
of names that is pernicious, and fills our life with audaciousness and
an atheistical contempt of the gods. When you pluck from the gods the
names and appellations that are tied to them, you abolish also the
sacrifices, mysteries, processions, and feasts. For to whom shall we
offer the sacrifices preceding the tilling of the ground? To whom those
for the obtaining of preservation? How shall we celebrate the Phosphoria
or torch-festivals, the Bacchanals, and the ceremonies that go before
marriage, if we admit neither Bacchantes, gods of light, gods who
protect the sown field, nor preservers of the state? For this it is
that touches the principal and greatest points, being an error in
things,--not in words, in the structure of propositions, or use of
terms.

Now if these are the things that disturb and subvert human life, who are
there that more offend in speech than you? For you take utterly away
the whole category of namable things, which constitute the substance of
language; and leave only words and their accidental objects, while you
take away in the meantime the things particularly signfied by them, by
which are wrought disciplines, doctrines, preconceptions, intelligences,
inclination, and assent, which you hold to be nothing at all.

But as for Stilpo, thus his reasoning proceeds. "If of a man we
predicate good, and of an horse running, the predicate or thing
predicated is not the same with the subject or that of which it is
predicated, but the essential definition of man is one, and of good
another. And again, to be a horse differs from to be running. For being
asked the definition of the one and of the other, we do not give the
same for them both; and therefore those err who predicate the one of
the other. For if good is the same with man, and to run the same with
a horse, how is good affirmed also of food and medicine, and again (by
Jupiter) to run of a lion and a dog? But if the predicate is different,
then we do not rightly say that a man is good, and a horse runs." Now
if Stilpo is in this exorbitant and grossly mistaken, not admitting
any copulation of such things as are in the subject, or affirmed of the
subject, with the subject itself; but holding that every one of them,
if it is not absolutely one and the same thing with that to which it
happens or of which it is spoken, ought not to be spoken or affirmed of
it,--no, not even as an accident; it is nevertheless manifest, that he
was only offended with some words, and opposed the usual and accustomed
manner of speaking, and not that he overthrew man's life, and turned his
affairs upside down.

Colotes, then, having got rid of the old philosophers, turns to those of
his own time, but without naming any of them; though he would have done
better either to have reproved by name these moderns, as he did the
ancients, or else to have named neither of them. But he who has so often
employed his pen against Socrates, Plato, and Parmenides, evidently
demonstrates that it is through cowardice he dares not attack the
living, and not for any modesty or reverence, of which he showed not
the least sign to those who were far more excellent than these. But his
meaning is, as I suspect, to assault the Cyrenaics first, and afterwards
the Academics, who are followers of Arcesilaus. For it was these who
doubted of all things; but those, placing the passions and imaginations
in themselves, were of opinion that the belief proceeding from them is
not sufficient for the assuring and affirming of things but, as if it
were in the siege of a town, abandoning what is without, they have shut
themselves up in the passions, using only it seems, and not asserting
it is, of things without. And therefore they cannot, as Colotes says
of them, live or have the use of things. And then speaking comically of
them, he adds: "These deny that there is a man, a horse, a wall; but say
that they themselves (as it were) become walls, horses, men," or "take
on the images of walls, horses, or men." In which he first maliciously
abuses the terms, as caluminators are usually wont to do. For though
these things follow from the sayings of the Cyrenaics, yet he ought to
have declared the fact as they themselves teach it. For they affirm that
things then become sweet, bitter, lightsome, or dark, when each thing
has in itself the natural unobstructed operation of one of these
impressions. But if honey is said to be sweet, an olive-branch bitter,
hail cold, wine hot, and the nocturnal air dark, there are many beasts,
things, and men that testify the contrary. For some have an aversion for
honey, others feed on the branches of the olive-tree; some are scorched
by hail, others cooled with wine; and there are some whose sight is
dim in the sun but who see well by night. Wherefore opinion, containing
itself within these sensations, remains safe and free from error; but
when it goes forth and attempts to be curious in judging and pronouncing
concerning exterior things, it often deceives itself, and opposes
others, who from the same objects receive contrary sensations and
different imaginations.

And Colotes seems properly to resemble those young children who are but
beginning to learn their letters. For, being accustomed to learn them
where they see them in their own horn-books and primers, when they see
them written anywhere else, they doubt and are troubled; so those very
discourses, which he praises and approves in the writings of Epicurus,
he neither understands nor knows again, when they are spoken by others.
For those who say that the sense is truly informed and moulded when
there is presented one image round and another broken, but nevertheless
permit us not to pronounce that the tower is round and the oar broken,
confirm their own sensations and imaginations, but they will not
acknowledge and confess that the things without are so affected. But
as the Cyrenaics must say that they are imprinted with the figure of
a horse or of a wall, but refuse to speak of the horse or the wall; so
also it is necessary to say that the sight is imprinted with a figure
round or with three unequal sides, and not that the tower is in that
manner triangular or round. For the image by which the sight is affected
is broken; but the oar whence that image proceeds is not broken. Since,
then, there is a difference between the sensation and the external
subject, the belief must either remain in the sensation, or else--if
it maintains the being in addition to the appearing--be reproved and
convinced of untruth. And whereas they cry out and are offended in
behalf of the sense, because the Cyrenaics say not that the thing
without is hot, but that the effect made on the sense is such; is it not
the same with what is said touching the taste, when they say that the
thing without is not sweet, but that some function and motion about
the sense is such? And for him who says that he has received the
apprehension of an human form, but perceives not whether it is a man,
whence has he taken occasion so to say? Is it not from those who affirm
that they receive an apprehension of a bowed figure and form, but that
the sight pronounces not that the thing which was seen is bowed or
round, but that a certain image of it is such? Yes, by Jupiter, will
some one say; but I, going near the tower or touching the oar, will
pronounce and affirm that the one is straight and the other has many
angles and faces; but he, when he comes near it, will confess that it
seems and appears so to him, and no more. Yes, certainly, good sir, and
more than this, when he sees and observes the consequence, that every
imagination is equally worthy of belief for itself, and none for
another; but that they are all in like condition. But this your opinion
is quite lost, that all the imaginations are true and none false or to
be disbelieved, if you think that these ought to pronounce positively
of that which is without, but those you credit no farther than that they
are so affected. For if they are in equal condition as to their being
believed, when they are near or when they are far off, it is just that
either upon all of them, or else not upon these, should follow the
judgment pronouncing that a thing is. But if there is a difference in
the being affected between those that are near and those that are far
off, it is then false that one sense and imagination is not more express
and evident than another. Therefore those they call attestations and
counter-attestations are nothing to the sense, but are concerned only
with opinion. So, if they would have us following these to pronounce
concerning exterior things, making being a judgment of opinion, and what
appears an affection of sense, they transfer the judicature from which
is totally true to that which often fails.

But how full of trouble and contradictions in respect of one another
these things are, what need is there to say at present? But the
reputation of Arcesilaus, who was the best beloved and most esteemed of
all the philosophers in his time, seems to have been no small eyesore to
Epicurus; who says of him that delivering nothing peculiar to himself
or of his own invention, he imprinted in illiterate men the opinion and
esteem of his being very knowing and learned. Now Arcesilaus was so far
from desiring any glory by being a bringer-in of new opinions, and from
arrogating to himself those of the ancients, that the sophisters of
that time blamed him for attributing to Socrates, Plato, Parmenides,
and Heraclitus the doctrines concerning the retention of assent, and the
incomprehensibility of things; having no need so to do, but only that
he might strengthen them and render them recommendable by ascribing them
such illustrious personages. For this, therefore, thanks to Colotes, and
to every one who declares that the academic doctrine was from a higher
times derived to Arcesilaus. Now as for retention of assent and the
doubting of all things, not even those who have much labored in the
manner, and strained themselves to compose great books and large
treatises concerning it, were ever able to stir it; but bringing at last
out of the Stoa itself the cessation from all actions, as the Gorgon to
frighten away the objections that came against them, they were at last
quite tired and gave over. For they could not, what attempts and stirs
soever they made, obtain so much from the instinct by which the appetite
is moved to act, as to suffer itself to be called an assent, or to
acknowledge sense for the origin and principle of its propension, but it
appeared of its own accord to present itself to act, as having no need
to be joined with anything else. For against such adversaries the combat
and dispute is lawful and just. And

     Such words as you have spoke, the like you may
     Expect to hear.
     ("Iliad," xx. 250.)

For to speak to Colotes of instinct and consent is, I suppose, all one
as to play on the harp before an ass. But to those who can give ear
and conceive, it is said that there are in the soul three sorts of
motions,--the imaginative, the appetitive, and the consenting. As to
the imaginative or the apprehension, it cannot be taken away, though one
would. For one cannot, when things approach, avoid being informed and
(as it were) moulded by them, and receiving an impression from them. The
appetite, being stirred up by the imaginative, effectually moves man to
that which is proper and agreeable to his nature, just as when there is
made a propension and inclination in the principal and reasonable part.
Now those who withhold their assent and doubt of all things take
not away this, but make use of the appetition or instinct naturally
conducting every man to that which seems convenient for him. What, then,
is the only thing that they shun? That in which is bred falsehood and
deceit,--that is, opining, and haste in giving consent,--which is a
yielding through weakness to that which appears, and has not any
true utility. For action stands in need of two things, to wit, the
apprehension or imagination of what is agreeable to Nature, and the
instinct or appetition driving to that which is so imagined; of which,
neither the one nor the other is repugnant to the retention of assent.
For reason withdraws us from opinion, and not from appetition or
imagination. When, therefore, that which is delectable seems to us to be
proper for us, there is no need of opinion to move and carry us to it,
but appetition immediately exerts itself, which is nothing else but the
motion and inclination of the soul.

It is their own axiom, that a man must only have sense and be flesh and
blood and pleasure will appear to be good. Wherefore also it will seem
good to him who withholds his assent. For he also participates of sense,
and is made of flesh and blood, and as soon as he has conceived an
imagination of good, desires it and does all things that it may not
escape from him; but as much as possibly he can, he will keep himself
with that which is agreeable to his nature, being drawn by natural and
not by geometrical constraints. For these goodly, gentle, and tickling
motions of the flesh are, without any teacher, attractive enough of
themselves--even as these men forget not to say--to draw even him who
will not in the least acknowledge and confess that he is softened and
rendered pliable by them. "But how comes it to pass," perhaps you will
say, "that he who is thus doubtful and withholds his assent hastens not
away to the mountain, instead of going to the bath? Or that, rising
up to go forth into the market-place, he runs not his head against the
wall, but takes his way directly to the door?" Do you ask this, who
hold all the senses to be infallible, and the apprehensions of the
imagination certain and true? It is because the bath appears to him not
a mountain, but a bath; and the door seems not a wall, but a door;
and the same is to be said of every other thing. For the doctrine of
retention does not pervert the sense, nor by absurd passions and motions
work in it an alteration disturbing the imaginative faculty; but it
only takes away opinions, and for the rest, makes use of other things
according to their nature.

But it is impossible, you will say, not to consent to things that are
evident; for to deny such things as are believed is more absurd than
neither to deny nor affirm. Who then are they that call in question
things believed, and contend against things that are evident? They
who overthrow and take away divination, who say that there is not any
government of Divine Providence, who deny the sun and the moon--to whom
all men offer sacrifices and whom they honor and adore--to be animated.
And do not you take away that which is apparent to all the world, that
the young are contained in the nature of their parents? Do you not,
contrary to the sense of all men, affirm that there is no medium
between pleasure and pain, saying that not to be in pain is to be in
the fruition of pleasure, that not to do is to suffer, and that not to
rejoice is to be grieved?

But to let pass all the rest, what is more evident and more generally
believed by all men, than that those who are seized with melancholy
distempers, and whose brain is troubled and whose wits are distracted,
do, when the fit is on them and their understanding altered and
transported, imagine that they see and hear things which they neither
see nor hear? Whence they frequently cry out:--


     Women in black arrayed bear in their hands,
     To burn mine eyes, torches and fiery brands.

And again:--

     See, in her arms she holds my mother dear.
     (Euripides, "Iphigenia in Tauris," 289.)

These, and many other illusions more strange and tragical than
these,--resembling those mormos and bugbears which they themselves laugh
at and deride, as they are described by Empedocles to be, "with sinuous
feet and undeveloped hands, bodied like ox and faced like man,"--with
certain other prodigious and unnatural phantoms, these men have gathered
together out of dreams and the alienations of distracted minds, and
affirm that none of them is a deception of the sight, a falsity, or
inconsistence; but that all these imaginations are true, being bodies
and figures that come from the ambient air. What thing then is there so
impossible in Nature as to be doubted of, if it is possible to believe
such reveries as these? For these men, supposing that such things as
never any mask-maker, potter, designer of wonderful images, or skilful
and all-daring painter durst join together, to deceive or make sport for
the beholders, are seriously and in good earnest existent,--nay, which
is more, affirming that, if they are not really so, all firmness of
belief, all certainty of judgment and truth, is forever gone,--do
by these their suppositions and affirmations cast all things into
obscurity, and bring fears into our judgments, and suspicions into
our actions,--if the things which we apprehend, do, are familiarly
acquainted with, and have at hand are grounded on the same imagination
and belief with these furious, absurd, and extravagant fancies. For the
equality which they suppose to be in all apprehensions rather derogates
from the credit of such as are usual and rational, than adds any belief
to those that are unusual and repugnant to reason. Wherefore we know
many philosophers who would rather and more willingly grant that no
imagination is true than that all are so, and that would rather simply
disbelieve all the men they never had conversed with, all the things
they had not experimented, and all the speeches they had not heard
with their own ears, than persuade themselves that any one of these
imaginations, conceived by these frantic, fanatical, and dreaming
persons, is true. Since then there are some imaginations which may,
and others which may not be rejected, it is lawful for us to retain
our assent concerning them, though there were no other cause but this
discordance, which is sufficient to work in us a suspicion of things,
as having nothing certain and assured, but being altogether full of
obscurity and perturbation. For in the disputes about the infinity of
worlds and the nature of atoms and individuums and their inclinations,
although they trouble and disturb very many, there is yet this comfort,
that none of all these things that are in question is near us, but
rather every one of them is far remote from sense. But as to this
diffidence, perplexity, and ignorance concerning sensible things and
imaginations, found even in our eyes, our ears, and our hands, what
opinion does it not shock? What consent does it not turn upside down?
For if men neither drunk, intoxicated, nor otherwise disturbed in their
senses, but sober, sound in mind, and professedly writing of the truth
and of the canons and rules by which to judge it, do in the most evident
passions and motions of the senses set down either that which has no
existence for true, or that which is existent for false, it is not
strange that a man should be silent about all things, but rather that he
assent to anything; nor is it incredible that he should have no judgment
about things which appear, but rather that he should have contrary
judgments. For it is less to be wondered, that a man should neither
affirm the one nor the other but keep himself in a mean between two
opposite things, than that he should set down things repugnant and
contrary to one another. For he that neither affirms nor denies, but
keeps himself quiet, is less repugnant to him who affirms an opinion
than he who denies it, and to him who denies an opinion than he who
affirms it. Now if it is possible to withhold one's assent concerning
these things, it is not impossible also concerning others, at least
according to your opinion, who say that one sense does not exceed
another, nor one imagination another.

The doctrine then of retaining the assent is not, as Colotes thinks,
a fable or an invention of rash and light-headed young men who please
themselves in babbling and prating; but a certain habit and disposition
of men who desire to keep themselves from falling into error, not
leaving the judgment at a venture to such suspected and inconstant
senses, nor suffering themselves to be deceived by those who hold
that in doubtful matters things which do not appear to the senses are
credible and ought to be believed, when they see so great obscurity and
uncertainty in things which do appear. But the infinity you assert is a
fable, and so indeed are the images you dream of: and he breeds in
young men rashness and self-conceitedness who writ of Pythocles, not yet
eighteen years of age, that there was not in all Greece a better or more
excellent nature, that he admirably well expressed his convictions, and
that he was in other respects behaved like a women,--praying that all
these extraordinary endowments of the young man might not work him
hatred and envy. But these are sophists and arrogant, who write so
impudently and proudly against great and excellent personages. I confess
indeed, that Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus and Democritus contradicted
those who went before them; but never durst any man besides Colotes set
forth with such an insolent title as this against all at once.

Whence it comes to pass that, like to such as have offended some
Divinity, confessing his fault, he says thus towards the end of His
book: "Those who have established laws and ordinances and instituted
monarchies and other governments in towns and cities, have placed human
life in great repose and security and delivered it from many troubles;
and if any one should go about to take this away, we should lead the
life of savage beasts, and should be every one ready to eat up one
another as we meet." For these are the very words of Colotes, though
neither justly nor truly spoken. For if any one, taking away the laws,
should leave us nevertheless the doctrines of Parmenides, Socrates,
Plato, and Heraclitus, we should be far from mutually devouring one
another and leading the life of beasts. For we should fear dishonest
things, and should for honesty alone venerate justice, the gods our
superiors, and magistrates, believing that we have spirits and daemons
who are the guardians and superintendents of human life, esteeming
all the gold that is upon and within the earth not to be equivalent to
virtue; and doing that willingly by reason, as Xenocrates says, which
we now do by force and through fear of the law. When then will our life
become savage, uncivilized, and bestial? When, the laws being taken
away, there shall be left doctrines inciting men to pleasure; when the
world shall bethought not to be ruled and governed by Divine Providence;
when those men shall be esteemed wise who spit at honesty if it is not
joined with pleasure; and when such discourses and sentences as these
shall be scoffed at and derided:--

     For Justice has an eye which all things sees;

and again:--

     God near us stands, and views whate'er we do;

and once more: "God, as antiquity has delivered to holding the
beginning, middle, and end of the universe, makes a direct line, walking
according to Nature. After him follows Justice, a punisher of those who
have been deficient in their duties by transgressing the divine law."

For they who contemn these things as if they were fables, and think that
the sovereign good of man consists about the belly, and in those other
passages by which pleasure is admitted, are such as stand in need of the
law, and fear, and stripes, and some king, prince, or magistrate, having
in his hand the sword of justice; to the end that they may not devour
their neighbors through their gluttony, rendered confident by their
atheistical impiety. For this is the life of brutes, because brute
beasts know nothing better nor more honest than pleasure, understand not
the justice of the gods, nor revere the beauty of virtue; but if Nature
has bestowed on them any point of courage, subtlety, or activity, they
make use of it for the satisfaction of their fleshly pleasure and the
accomplishment of their lusts. And the sapient Metrodorus believes that
this should be so, for he says: "All the fine, subtle, and ingenious
inventions of the soul have been found out for the pleasure and delight
of the flesh, or for the hopes of attaining to it and enjoying it, and
every act which tends not to this end is vain and unprofitable." The
laws being by such discourses and philosophical reasons as these taken
away, there wants nothing to a beast-like life but lions' paws, wolves'
teeth, oxen's paunches, and camels' necks; and these passions and
doctrines do the beasts themselves, for want of speech and letters,
express by their bellowings, neighings, and brayings, all their voice
being for their belly and the pleasure of their flesh, which they
embrace and rejoice in either present or future; unless it be perhaps
some animal which naturally takes delight in chattering and garrulity.

No sufficient praise therefore or equivalent to their deserts can be
given those who, for the restraining of such bestial passions, have
set down laws, established policy and government of state, instituted
magistrates and ordained good and wholesome laws. But who are they
that utterly confound and abolish this? Are they not those who withdraw
themselves and their followers from all part in the government? Are they
not those who say that the garland of tranquillity and a reposed life
are far more valuable than all the kingdoms and principalities in the
world? Are they not those who declare that reigning and being a king is
a mistaking the path and straying from the right way of felicity? And
they write in express terms: "We are to treat how a man may best keep
and preserve the end of Nature, and how he may from the very beginning
avoid entering of his own free will and voluntarily upon offices of
magistracy, and government over the people." And yet again, these other
words are theirs: "There is no need at all that a man should tire out
his mind and body to preserve the Greeks, and to obtain from them
a crown of wisdom; but to eat and drink well, O Timocrates, without
prejudicing, but rather pleasing the flesh." And yet in the constitution
of laws and policy, which Colotes so much praises, the first and most
important article is the belief and persuasion of the gods. Wherefore
also Lycurgus heretofore consecrated the Lacedaemonians, Numa the
Romans, the ancient Ion the Athenians, and Deucalion universally all the
Greeks, through prayers, oaths, oracles, and omens, making them devout
and affectionate to the gods by means of hopes and fears at once. And if
you will take the pains to travel through the world, you may find
towns and cities without walls, without letters, without kings, without
houses, without wealth, without money, without theatres and places of
exercise; but there was never seen nor shall be seen by man any city
without temples and gods, or without making use of prayers, oaths,
auguries, and sacrifices for the obtaining of blessings and benefits,
and the averting of curses and calamities. Nay, I am of opinion, that
a city might sooner be built without any ground to fix it on, than a
commonweal be constituted altogether void of any religion and opinion
of the gods,--or being constituted, be preserved. But this, which is the
foundation and ground of all laws, do these men, not going circularly
about, nor secretly and by enigmatical speeches, but attacking it
with the first of their most principal opinions directly subvert and
overthrow; and then afterwards, as if they were haunted by the Furies,
they come and confess that they have grievously offended in thus taking
away the laws, and confounding the ordinances of justice and policy,
that they may not be capable of pardon. For to err in opinion, though it
be not the part of wise men, is at least human; but to impute to others
the errors and offences they commit themselves, how can any one declare
what it is, if he forbears to give it the name it deserves?

For if, in writing against Antidorus or Bion the sophister, he had made
mention of laws, policy, order, and justice, might not either of them
have said to him, as Electra did to her mad brother Orestes:--

     Lie still at ease, poor wretch; keep in thy bed,
     (Euripides, "Orestes," 258.)

and there cherish thy bit of body, leaving those to expostulate and
find fault with me who have themselves lived the life of a citizen and
householder? Now such are all those whom Colotes has reviled and railed
at in his book. Amongst whom, Democritus in his writings advises
and exhorts to the learning of the science of politics, as being the
greatest of all, and to the accustoming one's self to bear fatigues, by
which men attain to great wealth and honor. And as for Parmenides, he
beautified and adorned his native country with most excellent laws which
he there established, so that even to this day the officers every year,
when they enter first on the exercise of their charges, are obliged
to swear that they will observe the laws and ordinances of Parmenides.
Empedocles brought to justice some of the principal of his city, and
caused them to be condemned for their insolent behavior and embezzling
of the public treasure, and also delivered his country from sterility
and the plague--to which calamities it was before subject--by immuring
and stopping up the holes of certain mountains, whence there issued an
hot south wind, which overspread all the plain country and blasted it.
And Socrates, after he was condemned, when his friends offered him, if
he pleased, an opportunity of making his escape, absolutely refused
to make use of it, that he might maintain the authority of the laws,
choosing rather to die unjustly than to save himself by disobeying the
laws of his country. Melissus, being captain general of his country,
vanquished the Athenians in a battle at sea. Plato left in his writings
excellent discourses concerning the laws, government, and policy of a
commonweal; and yet he imprinted much better in the hearts and minds of
his disciples and familiars, which caused Sicily to be freed by Dion,
and Thrace to be set at liberty by Pytho and Heraclides, who slew Cotys.
Chabrias also and Phocion, those two great generals of the Athenians,
came out of the Academy.

As for Epicurus, he indeed sent certain persons into Asia to chide
Timocrates, and caused him to be removed out of the king's palace,
because he had offended his brother Metrodorus; and this is written
in their own books. But Plato sent of his disciples and friends,
Aristonymus to the Arcadians, to set in order their commonweal, Phormio
to the Eleans, and Menedemus to the Pyrrhaeans. Eudoxus gave laws to
the Cnidians, and Aristotle to the Stagirites, who were both of them the
intimates of Plato. And Alexander the Great demanded of Xenocrates
rules and precepts for reigning well. And he who was sent to the same
Alexander by the Grecians dwelling in Asia, and who most of all
inflamed and stimulated him to embrace and undertake the war against
the barbarian king of Persia, was Delius the Ephesian, one of Plato's
familiars. Zeno, the disciple of Parmenides, having attempted to kill
the tyrant Demylus, and failing in his design, maintained the doctrine
of Parmenides, like pure and fine gold tried in the fire, that there is
nothing which a magnanimous man ought to dread but dishonor, and that
there are none but children and women, or effeminate and women-hearted
men, who fear pain. For, having with his own teeth bitten off his
tongue, he spit it in the tyrant's face.

But out of the school of Epicurus, and from among those who follow his
doctrine, I will not ask what tyrant-killer has proceeded, nor yet what
man valiant and victorious in feats of arms, what lawgiver, what prince,
what counsellor, or what governor of the people; neither will I demand,
who of them has been tormented or has died for supporting right and
justice. But which of all these sages has for the benefit and service of
his country undertaken so much as one voyage at sea, gone of an embassy,
or expended a sum of money? What record is there extant of one civil
action in matter of government, performed by any of you? And yet,
because Metrodorus went down one day from the city as far as the haven
of Piraeus, taking a journey of forty stadia to assist Mithres a Syrian,
one of the king of Persia's court who had been arrested and taken
prisoner, he writ of it to every one and in all his letters, Epicurus
also highly magnifying and extolling this wonderful voyage. What value
then, think you, would they have put upon it, if they had done such an
act as Aristotle did, who procured the restoration and rebuilding of
Stagira, the town of his nativity, after it had been destroyed by King
Philip? Or as Theophrastus, who twice delivered his city, when possessed
and held by tyrants? Would not the river Nile sooner have given over to
bear the paper-reed, than they have been weary of writing their brave
exploits?

And it is not the greatest dishonor, that, of so many sects of
philosophers as have existed, they alone should enjoy the benefits that
are in cities, without having ever contributed to them anything of
their own; but far more serious is it that, while there are not even any
tragical or comical poets who do not always endeavor to do or say some
good thing or other in defence of the laws and policy these men, if
peradventure they write, write of policy, that we may not concern
ourselves in the government of the commonweal,--of rhetoric, that we may
not perform an act of eloquence,--and of royalty, that we may shun the
living and conversing with kings. Nor do they ever name any of those
great personages who have intermeddled in civil affairs, but only to
scoff at them and abolish their glory. Thus they say that Epaminondas
had something of good, but that infinitesimal, or [Greek omitted], for
that is the very word they use. They moreover call him iron-hearted,
and ask what ailed him that he went marching his army through all
Peloponnesus, and why he did not rather keep himself quiet at home with
a garland on his head, employed only in cherishing and making much of
his body. But methinks I ought not in this place to omit what Metrodorus
writ in his book of Philosophy, when, utterly abjuring all meddling in
the management of the state, he said thus: "Some, through an excess of
vanity and arrogance, have so deep a comprehension into the business of
it, that in discussing the precepts of good life and virtue, they
allow themselves to be carried away with the very same desires as were
Lycurgus and Solon." What is this? Was it then vanity and abundance of
vanity, to set free the city of Athens, to render Sparta well-policied
and governed by wholesome laws, that young men might do nothing
licentiously, nor get children upon common courtesans and whores, and
that riches, delights, intemperance, and dissolution might no longer
bear sway and have command in cities, but law and justice? For these
were the desires of Solon. To this Metrodorus, by way of scorn and
contumely, adds this conclusion: "It is then very well beseeming a
native born gentleman to laugh heartily, as at other men, so especially
at these Solons and Lycurguses." But such a one, O Metrodorus, is not
a gentleman, but a servile and dissolute person, and deserves to be
scourged, not with that whip which is for free-born persons, but with
that scourge made with ankle-bones, with which those eunuch sacrificers
called Galli were wont to be chastised, when they failed of performing
their duty in the ceremonies and sacrifices of the Goddess Cybele, the
great Mother of the Gods.

But that they made war not against the lawgivers but against the laws
themselves, one may hear and understand from Epicurus. For in his
questions, he asks himself, whether a wise man, being assured that it
will not be known, will do anything that the laws forbid. To which he
answers: "That is not so easy to settle simply,"--that is "I will do
it indeed, but I am not willing to confess it." And again, I suppose
writing to Idomeneus, he exorts him not to make his life a slave to the
laws or to the options of men, unless it be to avoid the trouble they
prepare, by the scourge and chastisement, so near at hand. If those who
abolish laws, governments, and polices of men subvert and destroy
human life, and if Metrodorus and Epicurus do this, by dehorting and
withdrawing their friends from concerning themselves in public affairs,
by hating those who intermeddle in them, by reviling the first most wise
lawgivers, and by advising contempt of the laws provided there is no
fear and danger of the whip punishment. I do not see that Colotes has
brought so many false accusations against the other philosophers as he
has alleged and advanced true ones against the writings and doctrines of
Epicurus.


END OF TEN------------




PLATONIC QUESTIONS.

QUESTION I. WHY DID GOD COMMAND SOCRATES TO ACT THE MIDWIFE'S PART
TO OTHERS, BUT CHARGED HIMSELF NOT TO GENERATE; AS HE AFFIRMS IN
THEAETETUS? (See Plato, "Theaetetus," p. 149 B.)

For he would never have used the name of God in such a merry, jesting
manner, though Plato in that book makes Socrates several times to talk
with great boasting and arrogance, as he does now. "There are many, dear
friend, so affected towards me, that they are ready even to snap at me,
when I offer to cure them of the least madness. For they will not be
persuaded that I do it out of goodwill, because they are ignorant that
no god bears ill-will to man, and that therefore I wish ill to no man;
but I cannot allow myself either to stand in a lie or to stifle the
truth." (Ibid. p. 151 C.) Whether therefore did he style his own nature,
which was of a very strong and pregnant wit, by the name of God,--as
Menander says, "For our mind is God," and as Heraclitus, "Man's genius
is a Deity"? Or did some divine cause or some daemon or other impart
this way of philosophizing to Socrates, whereby constantly interrogating
others, he cleared them of pride, error, and ignorance, and of being
troublesome both to themselves and to others? For about that time there
happened to be in Greece several sophists; to these some young men
paid great sums of money, for which they purchased a strong opinion of
learning and wisdom, and of being stout disputants; but this sort of
disputation spent much time in trifling squabblings, which were of no
credit or profit. Now Socrates, using an argumentative discourse by way
of a purgative remedy procured belief and authority to what he said,
because in refuting others he himself affirmed nothing; and he the
sooner gained upon people, because he seemed rather to be inquisitive
after the truth as well as they, than to maintain his own opinion.

Now, however useful a thing judgment is, it is mightily infected By
the begetting of a man's own fancies. For the lover is blinded with the
thing loved; and nothing of a man's own is so beloved as is the opinion
and discourse he has begotten. And the distribution of children said to
be the justest, in respect of discourses is the unjustest; for there a
man must take his own, but here a man must choose the best, though it
be another man's. Therefore he that has children of his own, is a worse
judge of other men's; it being true, as the sophister said well, "The
Eleans would be the most proper judges of the Olympic games, were no
Eleans gamesters." So he that would judge of disputations cannot be
just, if he either seeks the bays for himself, or is himself antagonist
to either of the antagonists. For as the Grecian captains, when they
were to settle by their suffrages who had behaved himself the best,
every man of them voted for himself; so there is not a philosopher of
them all but would do the like, besides those that acknowledge, like
Socrates, that they can say nothing that is their own; and these only
are the pure uncorrupt judges of the truth. For as the air in the ears,
unless it be still and void of noise in itself, without any sound or
humming, does not exactly take sounds so the philosophical judgment
in disputations, if it be disturbed and obstreperous within, is hardly
comprehensive of what is said without. For our familiar and inbred
opinion will not allow that which disagrees with itself, as the number
of sects and parties shows, of which philosophy--if she deals with them
in the best manner--must maintain one to be right, and all the others to
be contrary to the truth in their positions.

Furthermore, if men can comprehend and know nothing, God did justly
interdict Socrates the procreation of false and unstable discourses,
which are like wind-eggs, and did him convince others who were of any
other opinion. And reasoning, which rids us of the greatest of evils,
error and vanity of mind, is none of the least benefit to us; "For God
has not granted this to the Esculapians." (Theognis, vs. 432,) Nor did
Socrates give physic to the body; indeed he purged the mind of secret
corruption. But if there be any knowledge of the truth, and if the truth
be one, he has as much that learns it of him that invented it, as the
inventor himself. Now he the most easily attains the truth, that is
persuaded he has it not; and he chooses best, just as he that has
no children of his own adopts the best. Mark this well, that poetry,
mathematics, oratory, and sophistry, which are the things the Deity
forbade Socrates to generate, are of no value; and that of the sole
wisdom about what is divine and intelligible (which Socrates called
amiable and eligible for itself), there is neither generation nor
invention by man, but reminiscence. Wherefore Socrates taught nothing,
but suggesting principles of doubt, as birth-pains, to young men, he
excited and at the same time confirmed the innate notions. This he
called his Art of Midwifery, which did not (as others professed)
extrinsically confer intelligence upon his auditors; but demonstrated it
to be innate, yet imperfect and confused, and in want of a nurse to feed
and fortify it.



QUESTION II. WHY DOES HE CALL THE SUPREME GOD FATHER AND MAKER OF ALL
THINGS? (Plato, "Timaeus," p. 28 C.)

Is it because he is (as Homer calls him) of created gods and men
the Father, and of brutes and things that have no soul the maker? If
Chrysippus may be believed, he is not properly styled the father of the
afterbirth who supplied the seed, although it arose from the seed. Or
has Plato figuratively called the maker of the world the father of
it? In his Convivium he calls Phaedrus the father of the amatorious
discourse which he had commenced; and so in his Phaedrus ("Phaedrus,"
p. 261 A.) he calls him "father of noble children," when he had been the
occasion of many pre-eminent discourses about philosophical questions.
Or is there any difference between a father and a maker? Or between
procreation and making? For as what is procreated is also made, but not
the contrary recreated did also make, for the procreation of an animal
is the making of it. Now the work of a maker--as of a builder, a weaver,
a musical-instrument maker, or a statuary--is altogether apart and
separate from its author; but the principle and power of the procreator
is implanted in the progeny, and contains his nature, the progeny being
a piece pulled off the procreator. Since therefore the world is neither
like a piece of potter's work nor joiner's work, but there is a great
share of life and divinity in it, which God from himself communicated
to and mixed with matter, God may properly be called Father of the
world--since it has life in it--and also the maker of it.

And since these things come very near to Plato's opinion, consider, I
pray, whether there may not be some probability in them. Whereas the
world consists of two parts, body and soul, God indeed made not the
body; but matter being at hand, he formed and fitted it, binding up and
confirming what was infinite within proper limits and figures. But the
soul, partaking of mind, reason, and harmony, was not only the work of
God, but part of him not only made by him, but begot by him.



QUESTION III. In the Republic, ("Republic," vi. pp. 509 D-511 E.) he
assumes the universe, as one line to be cut into two unequal parts;
again he cuts each of these parts in two after the same manner, and
supposes the two sections first made to form the two genera of things
sensible and things intelligible. The first stands for the genus of
intelligibles, comprehending in the first subdivision the primitive
forms, in the second the mathematics. Of sensibles, the first
subdivision comprehends solid bodies, the second comprehends the images
and representations of them. Moreover, to every one of these four he has
assigned its proper criterion;--to the first reason; to the mathematics,
the understanding; to sensibles, belief; to images and likenesses,
conjecture.

BUT WHAT DOES HE MEAN BY DIVIDING THE UNIVERSE INTO UNEQUAL PARTS? AND
WHICH OF THE SECTIONS, THE INTELLIGIBLE OR THE SENSIBLE, IS THE GREATER?
FOR IN THIS HE HAS NOT EXPLAINED HIMSELF.

At first glance it will appear that the sensible is the greater portion.
For the essence of intelligibles being indivisible, and in the same
respect ever the same, is contracted into a little, and pure; but an
essence divisible and running through bodies constitutes the sensible
part. Now what is immaterial is limited; but body in respect of matter
is infinite and unlimited, and it becomes sensible only when it is
limited by partaking of the intelligible. Besides, as every sensible
has many images, shadows, and representations, and from one and the
same original several copies may be taken both by nature and art; so the
latter must surpass the former in number, according to Plato, who makes
things of the intellect to be patterns or ideas of things sensible,
as if the last were images and reflections. Further, Plato derives the
knowledge of ideas by abstraction and cutting away of body, leading
us by mathematical discipline from arithmetic to geometry, thence
to astronomy, and placing harmony above them all. For things become
geometrical by the accession of magnitude to quantity; solid, by the
accession of profundity to magnitude; astronomical, by the accession
of motion to solidity; harmonical, by the accession of sound to motion.
Take then sound from moving bodies, motion from solids, profundity from
superficies, magnitude from quantity, we then reach pure intelligible
ideas, which have no difference among themselves as regards the one
single intelligible essence. For unity makes no number unless joined by
the infinite binary; then it makes a number. And thence we proceed
to points, thence to lines, from them to superficies, and solids, and
bodies, and to the qualities of the bodies so and so affected. Now the
reason is the only criterion of intelligibles; and the understanding
is the reason in the mathematics, where intelligibles appear as if in
mirrors. But as to the knowledge of bodies, because of their multitude,
Nature has given us five powers or distinctions of senses; nor are
all bodies discerned by them, many escaping sense by reason of their
smallness. And though every one of us consists of a body and soul, yet
the hegemonic and intellectual faculty is small, being hid in the huge
mass of flesh. And the case is the same in the universe, as to sensible
and intelligible. For intelligibles are the principles of bodily things,
but everything is greater than the principle whence it came.

Yet, on the contrary, some will say that, by comparing sensibles with
intelligibles, we match things mortal with divine, in some measure; for
God is in intelligibles. Besides, the thing contained is ever less than
the containing, and the nature of the universe contains the sensible in
the intelligible. For God, having placed the soul in the middle, hath
extended it through all, and hath covered it all round with bodies.
The soul is invisible, and cannot be perceived by any of the senses, as
Plato says in his Book of Laws; therefore every man must die, but the
world shall never die. For mortality and dissolution surround every one
of our vital faculties. The case is quite otherwise in the world;
for the corporeal part, contained in the middle by the more noble and
unalterable principle, is ever preserved. And a body is said to
be without parts and indivisible for its minuteness; but what is
incorporeal and intelligible is so, as being simple and sincere, and
void of all firmness and difference. Besides, it were folly to think to
judge of incorporeal things by corporeal. The present, or now, is said
to be without parts and indivisible, since it is everywhere and no part
of the world is void of it. But all affections and actions, and all
corruptions and generations in the world, are contained by this same
now. But the mind is judge only of what is intelligible, as the sight is
of light, by reason of its simplicity and similitude. But bodies, having
several differences and diversities, are comprehended, some by one
judicatory function, others by another, as by several organs. Yet they
do not well who despise the discriminative faculty in us; for being
great, it comprehends all sensibles, and attains to things divine. The
chief thing he himself teaches in his Banquet, where he shows us how we
should use amatorious matters, turning our minds from sensible goods to
things discernible only by the mind, that we ought not to be enslaved
by the beauty of any body, study, or learning, but laying aside
such weakness, should turn to the vast ocean of beauty. (See Plato's
"Symposium," p. 210 D.)



QUESTION IV. WHAT IS THE REASON THAT, THOUGH PLATO ALWAYS SAYS THAT THE
SOUL IS ANCIENTER THAN THE BODY, AND THAT IT IS THE CAUSE AND PRINCIPLE
OF ITS RISE, YET HE LIKEWISE SAYS, THAT NEITHER COULD THE SOUL EXIST
WITHOUT THE BODY, NOR THE REASON WITHOUT THE SOUL, BUT THE SOUL IN THE
BODY AND THE REASON IN THE SOUL? FOR 80 THE BODY WILL SEEM TO BE AND NOT
TO BE, BECAUSE IT BOTH EXISTS WITH THE SOUL, AND IS BEGOT BY THE SOUL.

Perhaps what we have often said is true; viz., that the soul without
reason and the body without form did mutually ever coexist, and neither
of them had generation or beginning. But after the soul did partake of
reason and harmony, and being through consent made wise, it wrought a
change in matter, and being stronger than the other's motions, it drew
and converted these motions to itself. So the body of the world drew its
original from the soul, and became conformable and like to it. For
the soul did not make the nature of the body out of itself, or out
of nothing; but it wrought an orderly and pliable body out of one
disorderly and formless. Just as if a man should say that the virtue
of the seed is with the body, and yet that the body of the fig-tree or
olive-tree was made of the seed, he would not be much out; for the body,
its innate motion and mutation proceeding from the seed, grew up and
became what it is. So, when formless and indefinite matter was once
formed by the inbeing soul, it received such a form and disposition.



QUESTION V. WHY, SINCE BODIES AND FIGURES ARE CONTAINED PARTLY BY
RECTILINEARS AND PARTLY BY CIRCLES, DOES HE MAKE ISOSCELES TRIANGLES AND
TRIANGLES OF UNEQUAL SIDES THE PRINCIPLES OF RECTILINEARS; OF WHICH THE
ISOSCELES TRIANGLE CONSTITUTES THE CUBE, THE ELEMENT OF THE EARTH; AND A
SCALENE TRIANGLE FORMS THE PYRAMID, THE OCTAHEDRON THE SEED OF FIRE,
AIR AND WATER RESPECTIVELY, AND THE ICOSAHEDRON;--WHILE HE PASSES OVER
CIRCULARS, THOUGH HE DOES MENTION THE GLOBE, WHERE HE SAYS THAT EACH OF
THE AFORE-RECKONED FIGURES DIVIDES A ROUND BODY THAT CIRCUMSCRIBES IT
INTO EQUAL PARTS. (See "Timaeus," pp. 53-56.)

Is their opinion true who think that he ascribed a dodecahedron to the
globe, when he says that God made use of it in delineating the universe?
For upon account of the multitude of its bases and the obtuseness of its
angles, avoiding all rectitude, it is flexible, and by circumtension,
like globes made of twelve skins, it becomes circular and comprehensive.
For it has twenty solid angles, each of which is contained by three
obtuse planes, and each of these contains one and the fifth part of
a right angle. Now it is made up of twelve equilateral and equangular
quinquangles (or pentagons), each of which consists of thirty of the
first scalene triangles. Therefore it seems to resemble both the Zodiac
and the year, it being divided into the same number of parts as these.

Or is a right line in Nature prior to circumference; or is circumference
but an accident of rectilinear? For a right line is said to bend; and
a circle is described by a centre and distance, which is the place of a
right line from which a circumference is measured, this being everywhere
equally distant from the middle. And a cone and a cylinder are made
by rectilinears; a cone by keeping one side of a triangle fixed and
carrying another round with the base,--a cylinder, by doing the like
with a parallelogram. Further, that is nearest to principle which is
less; but a right is the least of all lines, as it is simple; whereas
in a circumference one part is convex without, another concave within.
Besides, numbers are before figures, as unity is before a point,
which is unity in position. But indeed unity is triangular; for every
triangular number (Triangular numbers are those of which equilateral
triangles can be formed in this way:

                              .
                   .      ..
          .    ..    ...
     . .. ... .... ..............

Such are: 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, 36, 45, etc.; that is, numbers formed by
adding the digits in regular order. (G.)) taken eight times, by adding
unity, becomes quadrate; and this happens to unity. Therefore a triangle
is before a circle, whence a right line is before a circumference.
Besides, no element is divided into things compounded of itself; indeed
there is a dissolution of all other things into the elements. Now a
triangle is divided into no circumference, but two diameters cut a
circle into four triangles; therefore a rectilinear figure is before a
circular, and has more of the nature of an element. And Plato himself
shows that a rectilinear is in the first place, and a circular is only
consequential and accidental. For when he says the earth consists of
cubes, each of which is contained with rectilinear superficies, he says
the earth is spherical and round. Therefore there was no need of making
a peculiar element for round things, since rectilinears, fitted after a
certain manner among themselves, do make up this figure.

Besides, a right line, whether great or little, preserves the same
rectitude; but as to the circumference of a circle, the less it is,
the crookeder it is; the larger, the straighter. Therefore if a convex
surface stands on a plane, it sometimes touches the under plane in
a point, sometimes in a line. So that a man may imagine that a
circumference is made up of little right lines.

But observe whether this be not true, that no circle or sphere in this
world is exactly drawn; but since by the tension and circumtension of
the straight lines, or by the minuteness of the parts, the difference
is hidden, the figure seems circular and round. Therefore no corruptible
body moves circularly, but altogether in a right line. To be truly
spherical is not in a sensible body, but is the element of the soul and
mind, to which he has given circular motion, as being agreeable to their
nature.



QUESTION VI. HOW COMES IT TO PASS THAT IN PHAEDRUS IT IS SAID, THAT THE
NATURE OF A WING, BY WHICH ANYTHING THAT IS HEAVY IS CARRIED UPWARDS,
PARTICIPATES MOST OF THE BODY OF GOD? (See "Phaedrus," p. 246 D.)

Is it because the discourse is of love, and love is of beauty inherent
in a body? Now beauty, by similitude to things divine, moves and reminds
the soul. Or it may be (without too much curiosity) he may be understood
in plain meaning, to wit, that the several faculties of the soul being
employed about bodies, the power of reasoning and understanding partakes
most about divine and heavenly things; which he did not improperly call
a wing, it raising the soul from mean and mortal things to things above.



QUESTION VII. IN WHAT SENSE DOES PLATO SAY, THAT THE ANTIPERISTASIS (OR
REACTION) OF MOTION--BY REASON THERE IS NO VACUUM--IS THE CAUSE OF THE
PHENOMENA IN PHYSICIANS' CUPPING-GLASSES, IN SWALLOWING, IN CASTING
WEIGHTS, IN THE RUNNING OF WATER, IN THUNDER, IN THE ATTRACTION OF THE
LOADSTONE, AND IN THE HARMONY OF SOUNDS? (See "Timaeus," pp. 79-81.)

For it seems unreasonable to ascribe the reason of such different
effects to the selfsame cause.

How respiration is made by the reaction of the air, he has sufficiently
shown. But the others, he says, seem to be effected miraculously, but
really the bodies force each other aside and change places with one
another; while he has left for us to discover how each is particularly
done.

As to cupping-glasses, the case is thus: the air next to the flesh being
comprehended and inflamed by the heat, and being made more rare than
the pores of the brass, does not go into a vacuum (for there is no such
thing), but into the air that is without the cupping-glass, and has an
impulse upon it. This air drives that before it; and each, as it gives
way, strives to succeed into the place which was vacuated by the cession
of the first. And so the air approaching the flesh comprehended by
the cupping-glass, and attracting it, draws the humors into the
cupping-glass.

Swallowing takes place in the same way. For the cavities about the mouth
and stomach are full of air; when therefore the meat is squeezed down by
the tongue and tonsils, the elided air follows what gives way, and also
forces down the meat.

Weights also thrown cleave the air and dissipate it, as they fall with
force; the air recoiling back, according to its proper tendency to rush
in and fill the vacuum, follows the impulse, and accelerates the motion.

The fall also of thunderbolts is like to darting anything. For by the
blow in the cloud, the fiery matter exploded breaks into the air; and it
being broken gives way, and again being contracted above, by main force
it presses the thunderbolt downwards contrary to Nature.

And neither amber nor the loadstone draws anything to it which is near,
nor does anything spontaneously approach them. But this stone emits
strong exhalations, by which the surrounding air being impelled forceth
that which is before it; and this being drawn round in the circle, and
returning into the vacuated place, forcibly draws the iron in the same
movement. In amber there is a flammeous and spirituous nature, and this
by rubbing on the surface is emitted by recluse passages, and does the
same that the loadstone does. It also draws the lightest and driest of
adjacent bodies, by reason of their tenuity and weakness; for it is not
so strong nor so endued with weight and strength as to force much air
and to act with violence and to have power over great bodies, as the
magnet has. But what is the reason the air never draws a stone, nor
wood, but iron only, to the loadstone? This is a common question both by
those who think the coition of these bodies is made by the attraction
of the loadstone, and by such as think it done by the incitement of the
iron. Iron is neither so rare as wood, nor altogether so solid as
gold or a stone; but has certain pores and asperities, which as far as
inequality is concerned are proportionable to the air; and the air being
received in certain positions, and having (as it were) certain stays to
hang to, does not slip off; but when it is carried up to the stone and
is forced against it, it draws the iron by force along with it to the
stone. Such then may be the reason of this.

But the manner of the waters running over the earth is not so evident.
But it is observable that the waters of lakes and ponds stand immovable,
because the air about them stagnates immovable and admits of no
vacuity. For the water on the surface of lakes and seas is troubled and
fluctuates as the air is moved, it following the motion of the air, and
moving as it is moved. For the force from below causes the hollowness of
the wave, and from above the swelling thereof; until the air ambient
and containing the water is still. Therefore the flux of such waters as
follow the motion of the receding air, and are impelled by that which
presses behind, is continued without end. And this is the reason that
the stream increases with the waters, and is slow where the water is
weak, the air not giving way, and therefore enduring less reaction.
So the water of fountains must needs go upwards, the extrinsic air
succeeding into the vacuity and throwing the water out. In a close
house, that keeps in the air and wind, the floor sprinkled with water
causes an air or wind, because, as the sprinkled water falls, the air
gives way. For it is so provided by Nature that air and water force
one another and give way to one another; because there is no vacuity in
which one can be fixed without experiencing the change and alteration in
the other.

Concerning symphony, he shows how sounds harmonize. A quick sound is
acute, a slow is grave. Therefore acute sounds move the senses the
quicker; and these dying and grave sounds supervening, what arises from
the contemperation of one with the other causes pleasure to the ear,
which we call harmony. And by what has been said, it may easily be
understood that air is the instrument of these things. For sound is
the stroke upon the sense of the hearer, caused by the air; and the air
strikes as it is struck by the thing moving,--if violent, acutely,--if
languid, softly. The violent stroke comes quick to the ear; then the
circumambient air receiving a slower, it affects and carries the sense
along with it.



QUESTION VIII. WHAT MEANS TIMAEUS (See "Timaeus," p. 42 D.) WHEN HE
SAYS THAT SOULS ARE DISPERSED INTO THE EARTH, THE MOON, AND INTO OTHER
INSTRUMENTS OF TIME?

Does the earth move like the sun, moon, and five planets, which for
their motions he calls organs or instruments of time? Or is the earth
fixed to the axis of the universe; yet not so built as to remain
immovable, but to turn and wheel about, as Aristarchus and Seleucus
have shown since; Aristarchus only supposing it, Seleucus positively
asserting it? Theophrastus writes how that Plato, when he grew old,
repented him that he had placed the earth in the middle of the universe,
which was not its place.

Or is this contradictory to Plato's opinion elsewhere, and in the Greek
instead of [Greek omitted] should it be written [Greek omitted], taking
the dative case instead of the genitive, so that the stars will not
be said to be instruments, but the bodies of animals? So Aristotle has
defined the soul to be "the actualization of a natural organic body,
having the power of life." The sense then must be this, that souls are
dispersed into meet organical bodies in time. But this is far besides
his opinion. For it is not once, but several times, that he calls the
stars instruments of time; as when he says, the sun was made, as well
as other planets, for the distinction and conservation of the numbers of
time.

It is therefore most proper to understand the earth to be here an
instrument of time; not that the earth is moved, as the stars are; but
that, they being carried about it, it standing still makes sunset and
sunrising, by which the first measures of time, nights and days, are
circumscribed. Wherefore he called it the infallible guard and artificer
of night and day. For the gnomons of dials are instruments and measures
of time, not in being moved with the shadows, but in standing still;
they being like the earth in closing out the light of the sun when it
is down,--as Empedocles says that the earth makes night by intercepting
light. This therefore may be Plato's meaning.

And so much the rather might we consider whether the sun is not absurdly
and without probability said to be made for the distinction of time,
with the moon and the rest of the planets. For as in other respects
the dignity of the sun is great; so by Plato in his Republic (Plato,
"Republic." vi. pp. 508, 509.) the sun is called the king and lord of
the whole sensible nature, as the Chief Good is of the intelligible. For
it is said to be the offspring of Good, it supplying both generation
and appearance to things visible; as it is from Good that things
intelligible both are and are understood. But that this God, having such
a nature and so great power, should be only an instrument of time, and
a sure measure of the difference that happens among the eight orbs,
as they are slow or swift in motion, seems neither decent nor highly
rational. It must therefore be said to such as are startled at these
things, that it is their ignorance to think that time is the measure of
motion in respect of sooner or later, as Aristotle calls it; or quantity
in motion, as Speusippus; or an interval of motion and nothing else,
as some of the Stoics define it, by an accident, not comprehending
its essence and power, which Pindar has not ineptly expressed in these
words: Time, who surpasses all in the seats of the blest. Pythagoras
also, when he was asked what time was, answered, it was the soul of the
universe. For time is no affection or accident of motion, but the
cause, power, and principle of that symmetry and order that confines all
created beings, by which the animated nature of the universe is moved.
Or rather, this order and symmetry itself--so far as it is motion--is
called time. For this,

     Walking by still and silent ways,
     Mortal things with justice leads.
     (Euripides, "Troades," 887.)

According to the ancients, the principle of the soul is a number moving
itself. Therefore Plato says that time and heaven were coexistent, but
that motion was before heaven had being. But time was not. For then
there neither was order, nor measure, nor determination; but indefinite
motion, as it were, the formless and rude matter of time.... But when
matter was informed with figures, and motion with circuitions, from that
came the world, from this time. Both are representations of God; the
world, of his essence; time, of his eternity in the sphere of motion,
as the world is God in creation. Therefore they say heaven and motion,
being bred together, will perish together, if ever they do perish. For
nothing is generated without time, nor is anything intelligible without
eternity; if this is to endure forever, and that never to die when once
bred. Time, therefore, having a necessary connection and affinity with
heaven, cannot be called simple motion, but (as it were) motion in order
having terms and periods; whereof since the sun is prefect and overseer,
to determine, moderate, produce, and observe changes and seasons, which
(according to Heraclitus) produce all things, he is coadjutor to the
governing and chief God, not in trivial things, but in the greatest and
most momentous affairs.



QUESTION IX. Since Plato in his Commonwealth, discoursing of the
faculties of the soul, has very well compared the symphony of reason and
of the irascible and the concupiscent faculties to the harmony of the
middle, lowest, and highest chord, (See "Republic," iv. p. 443.) some
men may properly inquire:--

DID PLATO PLACE THE RATIONAL OR THE IRASCIBLE FACULTY IN THE MIDDLE? FOR
HE IS NOT CLEAR IN THE POINT.

Indeed, according to the natural system of the parts, the place of the
irascible faculty must be in the middle, and of the rational in the
highest, which the Greeks call hypate. For they of old called the chief
and supreme [Greek omitted]. So Xenocrates calls Jove, in respect of
immutable things, [Greek omitted] (or HIGHEST), in respect of sublunary
things [Greek omitted] (or LOWEST). And long before him, Homer calls
the chief God [Greek omitted], HIGHEST OF RULERS. And Nature has of due
given the highest place to what is most excellent, having placed reason
as a steersman in the head, and the appetitive faculty at a distance,
last of all and lowest. And the lowest place they call [Greek omitted],
as the names of the dead, [Greek omitted] and [Greek omitted], do show.
And some say, that the south wind, inasmuch as it blows from a low
and obscure place, is called [Greek omitted]. Now since the appetitive
faculty stands in the same opposition to reason in which the lowest
stands to the highest and the last to the first, it is not possible for
the reason to be uppermost and first, and yet for any other part to be
the one called [Greek omitted] (or HIGHEST). For they that ascribe the
power of the middle to it, as the ruling power, are ignorant how
they deprive it of a higher power, namely, of the highest, which is
compatible neither to the irascible nor to the concupiscent faculty;
since it is the nature of them both to be governed by and obsequious to
reason, and the nature of neither of them to govern and lead it. And the
most natural place of the irascible faculty seems to be in the middle
of the other two. For it is the nature of reason to govern, and of the
irascible faculty both to govern and be governed, since it is obsequious
to reason, and commands the appetitive faculty when this is disobedient
to reason. And as in letters the semi-vowels are middling between mutes
and vowels, having something more than those and less than these; so in
the soul of man, the irascible faculty is not purely passive, but hath
often an imagination of good mixed with the irrational appetite of
revenge. Plato himself, after he had compared the soul to a pair of
horses and a charioteer, likened (as every one knows) the rational
faculty to the charioteer, and the concupiscent to one of the horses,
which was resty and unmanageable altogether, bristly about the ears,
deaf and disobedient both to whip and spur; and the irascible he makes
for the most part very obsequious to the bridle of reason, and assistant
to it. As therefore in a chariot, the middling one in virtue and power
is not the charioteer, but that one of the horses which is worse than
his guider and yet better than his fellow; so in the soul, Plato gives
the middle place not to the principal part, but to that faculty which
has less of reason than the principal part and more than the third. This
order also keeps the analogy of the symphonies, i.e. the proportion of
the irascible to the rational (which is placed as hypate) making the
diatessaron (or fourth), that of the irascible to the concupiscent (or
nete) making the diapente (or fifth), and that of the rational to the
concupiscent (as hypate to nete) making an octave or diapason. But
should you place the rational in the middle, you would make the
irascible farther from the concupiscent; though some of the philosophers
have taken the irascible and the concupiscent faculty for the selfsame,
by reason of their likeness.

But it may be ridiculous to describe the first, middle, and last by
their place; since we see hypate highest in the harp, lowest in the
pipe; and wheresoever you place the mese in the harp, provided it is
tunable, it sounds more acute than hypate, and more grave than nete. Nor
does the eye possess the same place in all animals; but whereever it is
placed, it is natural for it to see. So a pedagogue, though he goes not
foremost but follows behind, is said to lead ([Greek omitted]), as the
general of the Trojan army,

     Now in the front, now in the rear was seen,
     And kept command;
     ("Iliad," xi. 64.)

but wherever he was, he was first and chief in power. So the faculties
of the soul are not to be ranged by mere force in order of place or
name, but according to their power and analogy. For that in the body
of man reason is in the highest place, is accidental. But it holds
the chief and highest power, as mese to hypate, in respect of the
concupiscent; as mese to nete, in respect of the irascible; insomuch as
it depresses and heightens,--and in fine makes a harmony,--by abating
what is too much and by not suffering them to flatten and grow dull. For
what is moderate and symmetrous is defined by mediocrity. Still more is
it the end of the rational faculty to bring the passions to moderation,
which is called sacred, as making a harmony of the extremes with reason,
and through reason with each other. For in chariots the best of the team
is not in the middle; nor is the skill of driving to be placed as an
extreme, but it is a mean between the inequality of the swiftness and
the slowness of the horses. So the force of reason takes up the passions
irrationally moved, and reducing them to measure, constitutes a mean
betwixt too much and too little.



QUESTION X. WHY SAID PLATO, THAT SPEECH WAS COMPOSED OF NOUNS AND VERBS?
(Plato's "Sophist," p. 262 A.)

For he seems to make no other parts of speech but them. But Homer in a
playful humor has comprehended them all in one verse:--

[Greek omitted] ("Iliad", i. 185.)

For in it there is pronoun, participle, noun, preposition, article,
conjunction, adverb, and verb, the particle--[Greek omitted] being put
instead of the preposition [Greek omitted]; for [Greek omitted], TO THE
TENT, is said in the same sense as [Greek omitted], TO ATHENS. What then
shall we say for Plato?

Is it that at first the ancients called that [Greek omitted], or
speech, which once was called protasis and now is called axiom or
proposition,--which as soon as a man speaks, he speaks either true
or false? This consists of a noun and verb, which logicians call
the subject and predicate. For when we hear this said, "Socrates
philosphizeth" or "Socrates is changed," requiring nothing more, we say
the one is true, the other false. For very likely in the beginning men
wanted speech and articulate voice, to enable them to express clearly
at once the passions and the patients, the actions and the agents. Now,
since actions and affections are adequately expressed by verbs, and they
that act and are affected by nouns, as he says, these seem to signify.
And one may say, the rest signify not. For instance, the groans and
shrieks of stage players, and even their smiles and silence, make their
discourse more emphatic. But they have no absolute power to signify
anything, as a noun and verb have, but only an ascititious power to vary
speech; just as they vary letters who mark spirits and quantities upon
letters, these being the accidents and differences of letters. This the
ancients have made manifest, whom sixteen letters sufficed to speak and
write anything.

Besides, we must not fail to observe, that Plato says that speech is
composed OF these, not BY these; nor must we find fault with Plato for
omitting conjunctions, prepositions, and the rest, any more than we
should criticise a man who should say such a medicine is composed of wax
and galbanum, because fire and utensils are omitted, without which it
cannot be produced. For speech is not composed of these; yet by their
means, and not without them, speech must be composed. As, if a man says
BEATS or IS BEATEN, and adds Socrates and Pythagoras to the same, he
gives us something to conceive and understand. But if a man pronounce
INDEED or FOR or ABOUT and no more, none can conceive any notion of a
body or matter; and unless such words as these be uttered with verbs and
nouns, they are but empty noise and chattering. For neither alone nor
joined one with another do they signify anything. And join and confound
together conjunctions, articles, and prepositions, supposing you would
make something of them; yet you will be taken to babble, and not to
speak sense. But when there is a verb in construction with a noun, the
result is speech and sense. Therefore some do with justice make only
these two parts of speech; and perhaps Homer is willing to declare
himself of this mind, when he says so often,

     [Greek omitted]

For by [Greek omitted] he usually means a verb, as in these verses.

     [Greek omitted],

and,

     [Greek omitted] ("Odyssey," xxiii. 183; viii. 408.)

For neither conjunction, article, nor preposition could be said to be
[Greek omitted] (TERRIBLE) or [Greek omitted] (SOUL GRIEVING), but
only a verb signifying a base action or a foolish passion of the mind.
Therefore, when we would praise or dispraise poets or writers, we are
wont to say, such a man uses Attic nouns and good verbs, or else common
nouns and verbs; but none can say that Thucydides or Euripides used
Attic or common articles.

What then? May some say, do the rest of the parts conduce nothing to
speech? I answer, They conduce, as salt does to victuals; or water to
barley cakes. And Euenus calls fire the best sauce. Though sometimes
there is neither occasion for fire to boil, nor for salt to season our
food, which we have always occasion for. Nor has speech always occasion
for articles. I think I may say this of the Latin tongue, which is now
the universal language; for it has taken away all prepositions, saving
a few, nor does it use any articles, but its nouns are (as it were)
without skirts and borders. Nor is it any wonder, since Homer, who
in fineness of epic surpasses all men, has put articles only to a few
nouns, like handles to cans, or crests to helmets. Therefore these
verses are remarkable wherein the articles are suppressed.--

     [Greek omitted] ("Iliad," xiv. 459.)

and,

     [Greek omitted] (Ibid. xx. 147.)

and some few besides. But in a thousand others, the omission of the
articles hinders neither perspicuity nor elegance of phrase.

Now neither an animal nor an instrument nor arms nor anything else
is more fine, efficacious, or pleasanter, for the loss of a part. Yet
speech, by taking away conjunctions, often becomes more persuasive, as
here:--

     One rear'd a dagger at a captive's breast;
     One held a living foe, that freshly bled
     With new-made wounds, another dragg'd a dead.
     (Ibid. xviii. 536.)

And this of Demosthenes:--

"A bully in an assault may do much which his victim cannot even report
to another person,--by his attitude, his look, his voice,--when he
insults, when he attacks as an enemy, when he smites with his fist,
when he strikes a blow on the face. These rouse a man; these make a man
beside himself who is unused to such foul abuse."

And again:--

"Not so with Midias; but from the very day, he talks, he abuses, he
shouts. Is there an election of magistrates? Midias the Anagyrrasian is
nominated. He is the advocate of Plutarchus; he knows state secrets; the
city cannot contain him." ("Demosthenes against Midias," p. 537,25, and
p. 578, 29.)

Therefore the figure asyndeton, whereby conjunctions are omitted, is
highly commended by writers of rhetoric. But such as keep overstrict to
the law, and (according to custom) omit not a conjunction, rhetoricians
blame for using a dull, flat, tedious style, without any variety in it.
And inasmuch as logicians mightily want conjunctions for the joining
together their axioms, as much as charioteers want yokes, and Ulysses
wanted withs to tie Cyclop's sheep; this shows they are not parts of
speech, but a conjunctive instrument thereof, as the word conjunction
imports. Nor do conjunctions join all, but only such as are not spoken
simply; unless you will make a cord part of the burthen, glue a part
of a book, or distribution of money part of the government. For Demades
says, that money which is given to the people out of the exchequer for
public shows is the glue of a democracy. Now what conjunction does so of
several propositions make one, by fitting and joining them together, as
marble joins iron that is incited with it in the fire? Yet the marble
neither is nor is said to be part of the iron; although in this case the
substances compose the mixture and are melted together, so as to make a
common substance from several and to be mutually affected. But there be
some who think that conjunctions do not make anything one, but that this
kind of speech is merely an enumeration, as when magistrates or days are
reckoned in order.

Moreover, as to the other parts of speech, a pronoun is manifestly a
sort of noun; not only because it has cases, but because some pronouns,
when they are used of objects already defined, by their mere utterance
give the most distinct designation of them. Nor do I know whether he
that says SOCRATES or he that says THIS ONE does more by name declare
the person.

The thing we call a participle, being a mixture of a verb and noun
is nothing of itself, as are not the common names of male and female
qualities (i.e, adjectives), but in construction it is put with others,
in regard of tenses belonging to verbs, in regard of cases to nouns.
Logicians call them [Greek omitted], (i.e., REFLECTED),--as [Greek
omitted], comes from [Greek omitted], and from [Greek omitted],--having
the force both of nouns and appellatives.

And prepositions are like to the crests of a helmet, or footstools and
pedestals, which (one may rather say) do belong to words than are words
themselves. See whether they rather be not pieces and scraps of words,
as they that are in haste write but dashes and points for letters. For
it is plain that [Greek omitted] and [Greek omitted] are abbreviations
of the whole words [Greek omitted] and [Greek omitted]. As undoubtedly
for haste and brevity's sake, instead of [Greek omitted] and [Greek
omitted] men first said [Greek omitted] and [Greek omitted].

Therefore every one of these is of some use in speech; but nothing is a
part or element of speech (as has been said) except a noun and a verb,
which make the first juncture allowing of truth or falsehood, which some
call a proposition or protasis, others an axiom, and which Plato called
speech.


END OF ELEVEN-----------




LITERARY ESSAYS.

THE LIFE AND POETRY OF HOMER

(Homeric quotations are almost all taken from Lord Derby's "Iliad" and
Butcher and Long's "Odyssey." The first is indicated by the letter I,
the second by O.)

Homer, who was in time first among most poets and by his power first of
all poets, we justly read first, thereby gaining the greatest advantages
for our language, for our intellect, and for practical knowledge. Let us
speak of his poetry, first having shortly recalled his origin.

Homer, Pindar says, was a Chian and of Smyrnae; Simonides says a Chian;
Antimachus and Nicander, a Colophonion; but the philosopher Aristotle
says he was of Iete; the historian Ephorus says he was from Kyme. Some
do not hesitate to say he was from Salamis in Cyprus; some, an Argive.
Aristarchus and Dionysius the Thracian say that he was an Athenian. By
some he is spoken of as the son of Maeon and Kritheus; by others, (a
son) of the river-god Meles.

Just as there is a difficulty about his origin, so there is about the
time in which he flourished. Aristarchus says he lived about the period
of the Ionian emigration; this happened sixty years after the return of
the Heraclidae. But the affair of the Heraclidae took place eighty years
after the destruction of Troy. Crates reports that he lived before the
return of the Heraclidae, so he was not altogether eighty years distant
from the Trojan War. But by very many it is believed that he was born
one hundred years after the Trojan War, not much before the foundation
of the Olympic games, from which the time according to the Olympics is
reckoned.

There are two poems of his, the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey," both, of
which are arranged according to the number of letters in the alphabet,
not by the poet himself, but by Aristarchus, the grammarian. Of these,
the "Iliad" records the deeds of the Greeks and Barbarians in Ilium on
account of the rape of Helen, and particularly the valor displayed
in the war by Achilles. In the "Odyssey" are described the return
of Ulysses home after the Trojan War, and his experiences in his
wanderings, and how he took vengeance on those who plotted against his
house. From this it is evident that Homer sets before us, through the
"Iliad," bodily courage; in the "Odyssey," nobility of soul.

But the poet is not to be blamed because in his poetry he sets forth not
only the virtues but the evils of the soul, its sadness and its joys,
its fears and desires; for being a poet, it is necessary for him to
imitate not only good but evil characters. For without these the deeds
would not get the admiration of the hearer, who must pick out the better
characters. And he has made the gods associating with men not only for
the sake of interest and entertainment, but that he might declare by
this that the gods care for and do not neglect men.

To sum up, an extraordinary and mythical narration of events is employed
in order to stir his readers with wonder and to make his hearers
strongly impressed. Whence he seems to have said some things contrary to
what is likely. For the persuasive always follows where the remarkable
and elevated are previously conjoined. Therefore he not only elevates
actions, and turns them from their customary course, but words as well.
That he always handles novel things and things out of the common sphere,
and leads on his hearers, is evident to every one. And indeed in these
fabulous narratives, if one reads not unattentively but carefully each
element of what is said, Homer appears to have been at home in the whole
sphere and art of logic, and to have supplied many incentives, and as it
were seeds of all kinds of thought and action to his posterity, not to
poets alone, but to the authors of historical and scientific works. Let
us first look at his varied form of speech, and afterward at his sound
knowledge on matters of fact. All poetry grips the hearer by definite
order of coordinated expressions, by rhythm and metre, since the smooth
and flowing, by becoming at the same time grave and sweet, forces the
attention by its action on the senses. Whence it comes to pass also that
it delights not only by the striking and attractive parts, but easily
persuades by the parts tending to virtue.

The poems of Homer have the most perfect metre, the hexameter, which
is also called heroic. It is called hexameter because each line has six
feet: one of these is of two long syllables, called spondee; the other,
of three syllables, one long and two short, which is called dactyl. Both
are isochronic. These in interchangeable order fill out the hexameter
verse. It is called heroic because in it the deeds of the heroes are
recounted.

He makes use of a sound diction, combining the characteristics of every
Greek dialect, from which it is plain that he travelled over the whole
of Greece and among every people in it. He uses the ellipse of the
Dorians, due to their practice of shortening their speech, saying for
[Greek omitted], as (O. i. 392): "Immediately a beautiful horse ([Greek
omitted]) was his," and for [Greek omitted] he uses [Greek omitted], as
(O. xix. 543): "Because ([Greek omitted]) an eagle killed my geese"; and
for [Greek omitted], "back," [Greek omitted], changing the o into a, the
[Greek letter omitted] and the [Greek letter omitted] into its related
letter. And [Greek omitted] he changes to [Greek omitted](I. xiv. 249):
"For before at another time ([Greek omitted]) your precepts made me
modest," and similar cases. Likewise, dropping the middle syllable, he
says for [Greek omitted], "of like hair," and [Greek omitted], "of the
same years," [Greek omitted]; and for [Greek omitted], that is, "of the
same father," [Greek omitted]; for [Greek omitted]; "to tremble," [Greek
omitted] for [Greek omitted], "I honour," [Greek omitted]. It is a
characteristic of the Dorians also to transpose letters, as when they
say for [Greek omitted], [Greek omitted].

In composite words he makes use of the syncope of the Aeolians, saying
[Greek omitted] instead of [Greek omitted], "they went to sleep," and
[Greek omitted], for [Greek omitted], "to subject."

Then when the third person of the imperfect among other Greek peoples
ends in the diphthong [Greek letter], the Eolians end in [Greek letter],
as when they say for [Greek omitted], "he was loving," [Greek omitted],
and for [Greek omitted], "he was thinking," [Greek omitted]. This custom
Homer followed, saying (I. xi. 105): "He bound ([Greek omitted]) in
tender twigs," instead of [Greek omitted], and (O. v. 478): "Which
neither any humid power of the wind penetrates" [Greek omitted]. Besides
this they change [Greek letter] into [Greek letter], as they say [Greek
omitted] for [Greek omitted], "odor," and [Greek Omitted] for [Greek
omitted], "we knew."

Besides, they use pleonasm in some expressions, as when they put for
[Greek omitted], "calm," [Greek omitted], [Greek omitted] for [Greek
omitted], "but," [Greek omitted] got [Greek omitted], "having cried."
And when to the second person of verbs they add [Greek omitted],
for [Greek omitted] "thou speakest," [Greek omitted], and for [Greek
omitted], "thou hast spoken," [Greek omitted]. Some attribute the
doubling of the consonant to the Dorians, some to the Aeolians. Such
as we find in I. v. 83: "Black death laid hold on [Greek omitted] him,"
[Greek omitted]; for [Greek omitted] as I. iii. 321: "Each did these
deeds."

He preserves the peculiarity of the Ionians for the preterite tenses
of verbs the aphaeresis, as where he says [Greek omitted] for [Greek
omitted]. So in past tenses they are want to begin with the same letter
as in present tenses and to leave off the [Greek letter] in the word
[Greek omitted], "priest" and [Greek omitted], "hawk." Besides, they
add [Greek letter] to the third persons of the subjunctive mood, as when
they say for [Greek omitted] "may have come," [Greek omitted], and for
[Greek omitted], "may have taken," [Greek omitted]. This participle
they add to the dative, [Greek omitted], "to the gates," "to the woods."
Besides, they say [Greek omitted] for "name", and [Greek omitted] for
[Greek omitted], "disease" and [Greek omitted] for [Greek omitted],
"empty," and [Greek omitted] for [Greek omitted], "black." And then they
change long [Greek letter] into [Greek letter], as[Greek omitted] for
[Greek omitted], "Juno," and for [Greek omitted], Minerva. And sometimes
they change [Greek letter] into [Greek letter], saying for [Greek
omitted], "having forgotten." Moreover, they write in full by diaeresis
words which are circumflexed, for [Greek omitted], "intelligent," [Greek
omitted]. In the same way they lengthen genitive singulars in [Greek
omitted], as [Greek omitted], and genitive feminines in [Greek omitted],
as [Greek omitted], "of gates," [Greek omitted], "of nymphs," and
finally regular plurals of nouns in the neuter gender ending in [Greek
letter] as [Greek omitted], [Greek omitted], "breasts," "darts," and
their genitives likewise. They say in their way [Greek omitted] for
[Greek omitted].

But he most largely used the Attic dialect for it was combined with
others. For just as in Attic they say [Greek omitted] for [Greek
omitted], "people," so he did, as [Greek omitted] and [Greek omitted],
"debt." It is a custom with them sometimes to use contractions and
to put one syllable for two, as for [Greek omitted], "word," [Greek
omitted], and for [Greek omitted], "clothes," [Greek omitted]. Related
to these is that Homeric expression, "the Trojans in crowds bent over"
[Greek omitted], and another case, "fields bearing the lotos" [Greek
omitted], instead of [Greek omitted]. Besides they take [Greek letter]
from that type of optative, saying for [Greek omitted], "it might seem
good to thee," [Greek omitted], for [Greek omitted], "mightiest thou be
honored," [Greek omitted]. There is also an Atticism [Greek omitted] for
[Greek omitted] in his verse (I. iii. 102):--

     But you others discerned most quickly.

Likewise this, too, is Attic, "the more were worse [Greek omitted], the
few better [Greek omitted], than their fathers;" we say [Greek omitted]
or [Greek omitted]. And they do not prolong these by diaeresis, [Greek
omitted], as "oxen [Greek omitted] falling down," and, "fishes [Greek
omitted] and birds." And that, too, is said in the Attic fashion (O.
xii. 331):--

     Nor flowing do they break ([Greek omitted] for
     [Greek omitted]) by their violence.

In the same way as [Greek omitted], [Greek omitted].

And the taking away short vowels is Attic: [Greek omitted], "he is
washed," [Greek omitted], "I think," [Greek omitted]; in the same way
for [Greek omitted], "he is loosed," he says [Greek omitted]. The Attics
say [Greek omitted], adding an unnecessary [Greek letter], whence also
comes [Greek omitted], "he was pouring out wine." They contract the
iota in words of this sort, as for [Greek omitted], "shores," [Greek
omitted], "shores," and for [Greek omitted], [Greek omitted]. So also
(I. xi. 782):--

     You two [Greek omitted] wished it very much.

Finally in datives ending in pure iota with a penultimate of alpha the
same is done, as [Greek omitted], "horn," [Greek omitted], "old age,"
[Greek omitted], "ray." And this, too, is Attic, where it is said [Greek
omitted], "let them be," and [Greek omitted], "let them follow," for
[Greek omitted] and [Greek omitted]. The use of the dual which Homer
repeatedly employs is of the same type. Also with feminine substantives
he joins masculine articles, participles, and adjectives, as [Greek
omitted]. This is a practice with Plato, as when he uses [Greek omitted]
"pillaging," and [Greek omitted], "the wise just woman." So, too, Homer
(I. viii. 455), speaking of Here and Athene, says:--

     In vain smitten [Greek omitted] with a thunderbolt on
     our chariots,--

and (I. iv. 22):--

     Athene was indeed unwilling [Greek omitted],--

and (I. ii. 742):--

     Famous [Greek omitted] Hippodamea.

Moreover the dialects have many peculiarities of construction. When the
poet says (I. iv. 100):--

     But seek with your javelins of divine Menelaos,--

instead of the accusative, he presents an Attic usage. But when he says
(I. ii. 186):--

     He took for him the sceptre and he took the cup for
     fair-cheeked Themis--

instead of "from him" and "from Themis," he is employing a Dorian usage.

Accordingly it appears how he makes his diction varied by throwing
together words of all the Greek dialects, and sometimes he makes use of
foreign words as are the aforesaid, sometimes archaic words, as when
he says [Greek omitted], "falchion," and [Greek omitted], "sword,"
sometimes common and ordinary words, as when he says [Greek omitted],
"sword and shield"; one might wonder how well common words in his poetry
preserve dignity of speech.

But an artificially wrought style cultivates variation from the
customary, by which it becomes clever, more dignified, and altogether
more attractive. The turn of expression is called a Trope, and change
of construction is called a Schema. The forms of these are described in
technical treatises. Let us examine if any of these is omitted by Homer
or whether anything else was discovered by his successors which he
himself did not use first.

Among Tropes, Onomatopoeia is very common. For he knew the early origin
of words. The first who gave names to things called many of them from
what had taken place, and therefore introduced inarticulate sounds into
writing. As when they said [Greek omitted], "to blow," [Greek omitted],
"to cut," [Greek omitted], "to woo," [Greek omitted], "to thunder,"
and others like these. Whence he himself created certain words not
previously existing, copying the things they signified, as [Greek
omitted], "sound," and other things also indicating sounds, [Greek
omitted], and others of the same kind. None could be found more
significant. And again where some words pertaining to certain things he
attributes to others, as when he says (I. xxi. 337):--

     Bearing an evil fire,--

which signifies its power in burning, and "fever" he uses for "fire."
Like these is the expression (I. xix. 25):--

     Brass striking wounds,--

he writes to express wounds inflicted by brass. And to sum up he uses
much novelty of speech, with great freedom, changing some from their
customary use, giving distinction to others for the sake of infusing in
his language beauty and grandeur.

He has also much fertility in epithets; these being fitted to their
objects properly and naturally have the force of proper names, as when
he gives to the several gods each some proper designation, so he
calls Zeus the "all-wise and high thundering," and the Sun, Hyperion,
"advancing aloft," and Apollo, Phoebus, that is, shining. But after the
Onomatopoeia let us examine other Tropes.

Catechresis, which changes a word from a customary signification to
another not recognized. This is to be found in the poet when he says
golden chain [Greek omitted], but [Greek omitted] properly means a rope,
and when he says a goat helmet [Greek omitted]; now a helmet is [Greek
omitted] in Homer, because it used to be made of dog's skin, not of
goat's skin.

Metaphor, so-called because it transfers a thing from its proper
significance to another with an analogous likeness to both, occurs in
many and varied forms in verse, as is the line (O. ix. 481):--

     He comes, having broken off the crown of a great mountain,--

and (O. x. 195):

     An island which the sea laves and crowns.

For the relation a crown has to him whom it encircles, the same the sea
has to an island. By making use of related but not usual words he makes
his speech not only more beautiful but more picturesque.

There are in Homer various kinds of metaphors; some applied from animate
things to animate, as, "the driver of the caerulean ship spoke" instead
of the sailor, and "he went to Agamemnon the son of Atreus, the shepherd
of the people" instead of king. Some are applied from animate to
inanimate, as (I. ii. 824):--

     Under the extreme foot of Ida,--

that is, the rising ground. Also (I. ix. 141):--

     The breast of the field,--

that is, the fertility. Others, on the contrary, from inanimate to
animate, as (I. xxiv. 205):--

     The iron breast.

From inanimate to animate, as (O. v. 490):--

     Preserving the seed of fire,--

instead of the generating origin. Then he has metaphors of verbs as well
as substantives (I. xvii. 265):--

     As the shores bellow with the smiting salt and gale,--

instead of "resound."

Another Trope which is called Metalepsis, signifying a different thing
by a synonym (O. xv. 299):--

     I beached the ship in the sharp islands,--

for he wishes to signify islands properly called jagged. Both words in
Greek are synonyms. For in Greek sharp not only signifies swiftness of
motion, but also in a figure that which rises into a slender shape. Such
is the quotation (O. ix. 327):--

     accompanied him and sharpened my pace.

Another Trope is named Synecdoche, called from this reason; that from
what is properly meant, another of the like kind is understood. This
Trope has also many varieties. For either we perceive the part from the
whole, as (I. xii. 137):--

     They advanced straight to the walls the burning bulls,--

for he wishes to indicate by the appellation "bulls" the leather out
of which shields are wont to be made. Or from a part the whole (O. i.
343):--

     I long for such a head,--

for from the head he signifies the man. And when for beautiful he
says "endowed with beautiful cheeks," and for well armed he says "well
greaved." Or from one the many, as when he speaks of Odysseus (O. i.
2):--

     When he wasted the sacred citadel of Troy.

Not he by himself took Troy, but along with the rest of the Greeks. From
the many one, as (I. iii. 397), "happy breasts," i.e. breast. From the
species the genus, as (I. xii. 380):--

     Casting on the hard marble,--

for marble is a species of rock. From the genus the species (O. ii.
159).--

     To know the birds and to say many fitting things.

He wishes to say not all birds, but only the birds of auspices. From the
instruments the action, as (I. ii. 827):--

     Pandorus to whom he gave the bow of Apollo.

By the bow he indicates the skill in using it. And (O. xii. 172):--

     Sitting they made the water white,--

and (O. iii. 486):--

     Now others moved the whole day the thong of their sandal.

This comes from an accidental feature; in the first case "they were
rowing," in the next "they were running," is to be implied. Besides
there is the consequent to the precedent, as (O. xi. 245):--

     She loosed the virgin zone.

It follows that she defiled it. From the consequent the precedent, as
when instead of saying "to kill" he says "to disarm," that is, to spoil.

There is another Trope called Metonymy, i.e. when an expression applied
properly to one thing indicates another related to it, such as (I. ii.
426):--

     But the young men proceed to grind Demeter,--

for he means the crop of grain named from its inventor, Demeter. And
when he says (O. xix. 28):--

     They held the transfixed entrails over Hephaestus.

By the name Hephaestus he signifies fire. Like what has previously been
mentioned is this (I. i. 223).--

     Whoever shall touch my choenix,--

for what is contained in the choenix is intended.

There is besides another Trope, Autonomasia, when an epithet or co-title
is used for a proper name, as in this example (I. viii. 39):--

     The son of Peleus again attacked the son of Atreus
     with petulant words.

By this he indicates Achilles and Agamemnon respectively. And again (I.
xxii. 183):--

     Be of good cheer, Tritonia, dear daughter,--

and in other places (I. xx. 39):--

     Shorn Phoebus.

In the one case he means Athene and in the other Apollo.

There is, too, Antiphrasis, or an expression signifying the opposite
from what it appears to do (I. i. 330):--

     Seeing these Achilles did not rejoice.

He wishes to say the contrary, that seeing them he was disgusted.

There is also Emphasis, which through reflection adds vigor to what is
said (O. xi. 523):--

     But descending into the home which Epeus constructed.

In the word "descending" he reveals the great size of the house. Of the
same kind is the line (I. xvi. 333):--

     The whole sand was hot with blood,--

for in this he furnishes a more intense description, as if the sand was
so bathed with blood that it was hot. These kind of Tropes were invented
by Homer first of all.

Let us look at the changes of construction which are called figures to
see if Homer also first invented these. Figure is a method of expression
divergent from ordinary custom for the sake of ornament or utility,
altered by a kind of fiction. For beauty is added to narrative by
variety and change of expression, and these make the style more
impressive. They are also useful because they exalt and intensify innate
qualities and powers.

Among the figures Pleonasm is sometimes used for the sake of the metre;
as in (I. xix. 247):--

     Odysseus adding all ten talents of gold,--

for the word "all" is added without contributing to the sense. It is
done for the sake of ornament, cf. (I. xviii. 12).--

     Certainly the strenuous son of Menoetius is quite dead,--

for the word "quite" is pleonastic after the Attic fashion.

Sometimes by several forms of speech he unfolds his meaning. This is
called Periphrasis. As when he says "Sons of the Achaeans" for Achaeans,
and the "Herculean might" for Hercules.

Things are said figuratively by Mutation when the ordinary order is
inverted. But he puts in an expression in the midst which is called
Hyperbaton, as in this (I. xvii. 542):--

     Just as a lion feeds on an eaten bull,--

instead of saying the lion eats up the bull. And so he passes the limits
of the sentence (I. ii. 333):--

     He said, and loudly cheered the Greeks--and loud
     From all the hollow ships came back the cheers--
     In admiration of Ulysses' speech.

The order is the Argives applauded with a great shout the speech of
divine Odysseus.

Of the same kind is the figure called Parembole, or interposition, when
something outside having nothing to do with the subject is introduced.
If it is removed, the construction is not affected (I. i. 234):--

     By this I say and with an oath confirm
     By this my royal staff, which never more
     Shall put forth leaf nor spray, since first it left
     Upon the mountain side its parent stem
     Nor blossom more; since all around the axe
     Hath lopped both leaf and bark--...

and the rest as much as he has said about the sceptre, then joining what
follows with the beginning (I. i. 340):--

     The time shall come when all the sons of Greece
     Shall mourn Achilles' loss.

He uses also Palillogia--that is the repetition of some part of
a sentence, or several parts are repeated. This figure is called
Reduplication, such as (I. xx. 371):--

     Encounter him well!  Though his hands were hands of fire,
     Of fire, his hands, his strength as burnished steel.

Sometimes certain insertions are made and they are repeated, as in (O.
i. 22):--

     Howbeit Poseidon had now departed for the distant Ethiopians,
     the Ethiopians that are sundered in twain, the uttermost
     of men.

This is a figure revealing the feeling of the speaker and at the same
time affecting the hearer.

Of the same kind is Relation; when at the commencement of several
members of a sentence the same part is repeated. An example of this from
the poet is (I. ii. 671):--

     Nireus three well-trimmed ships from Syme brought.
     Nireus to Charops whom Aglaia bore.
     Nireus the goodliest man of all the Greeks.

This figure is likewise adapted to excite the emotions and give
sweetness to the expression.

He has also Regression. This is when one puts forward two names of
objects. When the sense is not yet complete, the poet returns to both of
the names, completing what is lacking in the sense, as (I. v. 518).--

     Followed the thronging bands of Troy, by Mars and fierce
     Bellona led: she by the hand wild uproar held; while Mars
     a giant spear brandished aloft.

The characteristic of this figure is variety and perspicuity.

He has also the figure called Homoioteleuton in which the parts of the
sentence have endings similar in sound and have the same syllables at
the end (O. xv. 74):--

     Men should love a guest while he is with them, and send
     him on his way when he would depart,--

and in the following (O. vi. 42):--

And she departed to Olympus, where they say is the seat of the gods that
standeth fast forever. Not by the wind is it shaken nor ever wet with
rain nor doth the snow come nigh thereto, but most clear air is spread
about it cloudless and the white light floats over it.

When periods or their members end in nouns which are of the same
declension this is properly called Homoioptolon, as the following (I.
ii. 87):--

     [Greek omitted]

     As swarms of bees, that pour in ceaseless stream
     From out the crevice of some hollow rock.

The above and others like them add grace and attractiveness to the
narrative.

As a proof of his care in composition we often see he employs two
figures in the same verses, as Epanaphora and Homoioteleuton (I. ii.
382):--

     Each sharpen well his spear, his shield prepare
     Each to his fiery steeds their forage give.

Belonging to these is the figure called Parison, which is formed out
of two or more numbers having an equal number of words (I. vii. 93):--

     Shamed to refuse, but fearful to accept.--

and again (I. xvi. 282):--

     Had cast away difference, had resumed friendship,--

That this figure gives much ornament of style is very clear.

The like grace comes from Paranomasia, when besides the name in question
another similar one is added at a slight interval (I. vi. 130):--

     Not long did Dryas' son, Lycurgus brave,--

and in another (I. ii. 758):--

     Swift-footed Protheus led.

But the above examples are arranged either by Pleonasm or by some such
like artifice. But there is another due to absence of a word. Of
thes omitted the sense is plain from what has gone before, as in the
following (I. ix. 328):--

     Twelve cities have I taken with my ships,
     Eleven more by land on Trojan soil,--

where the words "have I taken" are wanting in last line, but are
supplied from the preceding one. This is said to be by Ellipse (I. xii.
243):--

     One bird best to defend the fatherland,--

where the word "is" is lacking. And (I. xx. 293):--

     Alas I the grief to me of great-hearted Aeneas,--

when the words "is present," "comes," or something of the kind, are
understood.

There are many kinds of Ellipses in Homer; the effect of the figure is
quickness.

Of this sort is Asyndeton when the conjunctions uniting sentences are
removed. This is done not only for the sake of celerity, but also of the
sake of emotional emphasis. Such as is the following (O. x. 251):--

     We went on our way, noble Odysseus, up through the coppice
     even as thou didst command; we found within the forest glades
     the fair halls builded of polished stone of Circe.

In these the conjunction is dropped since the speaker seeks the quickest
method of expressing his message. There is among the figures what is
called the Incongruous or the Variation. It is used when the ordinary
arrangement is made different. And the variety is due either to
impressing grace and elegance to the words; the ordinary movements not
seeming to be followed, but the alteration has an arrangement of its
own.

It often takes place when the genders of nouns are changed as [Greek
omitted] instead of [Greek omitted] and [Greek omitted]. It was not
unusual for the ancients, and especially among the people of Attica, to
use masculine for feminine as superior and more vigorous. Nor did they
do this without rhyme and reason, but when they made use of a word,
as an epithet apart from the body which was spoken of. For the words
concerned with the body are "great, beautiful," those not connected with
it, "glorious, fortunate." Besides, they are ambiguous on account of
their composition. For in general all compound things are common
to either gender. And wherever a verb or participle is used with a
masculine and feminine noun, the masculine prevails (I. vi. 567):--

     The virgins and the youths minding childish things,--

where the participle is masculine.

Certain things, owing to the peculiarity of the dialect or the custom
of that time, are said differently, [Greek omitted] feminine instead of
[Greek omitted] (O. i. 53):--

     And himself upholds the tall pillars which keep earth
     and sky asunder.

Often as the narrative proceeds he changes the genders, as in (O, xv.
125):--

     I give to you the gift, my dear son.

Son is a neuter substantive to which the adjective agrees; the poet
refers it to the person. Of the same kind is that which is said by Dione
to Venus (I. v. 382):--

     Have patience, dearest child; though much enforced.

Analogous to it is that (O. xi. 90):--

     Anon came the soul of Theban Teiresias, with a golden sceptre
     in his hand,--

for he made the participle [Greek omitted] agree not with the gender of
soul [Greek omitted], but the gender of the body, that is, Teiresias.
For often he looks not to the word but to the sense, as in this passage
(I. xvi. 280):--

     In all their spirit stirred, and the phalanxes moved hoping
     for the idle son of Peleus from the ships,--

for the participle [Greek omitted] does not agree with the word
"phalanxes," but with the men composing them.

In another way he changes genders, as when he says (O. xii. 75):--

     And a dark cloud encompasses it; this never streams away,--

since [Greek omitted] and [Greek omitted], "cloud," are synonyms, using
first [Greek omitted] he afterward makes his adjectives agree with
[Greek omitted] understood. Like this are these verses (I. ii. 459):--

     As various tribes of winged fowl or geese
     Or cranes or long necked swans
     Besides Coysters stream, now here, now there,
     Disporting, ply their wings.

For having first set down generically the kinds of birds, which are
neuter, then after speaking of the species in the masculine he comes
back again to the neuter--settling down with a noise giving the proper
agreement to the general word of the species.

The poet often changes the number as well as the gender (I. xv. 305):--

     The crowd approach the ships of the Achaeans.

First comes a singular then a plural verb, plainly looking to the sense,
for although the word "crowd" is called singular, yet it embraces many
individuals.

Like it in the opposite way is when the plural precedes the singular
follows (I. xvi. 264):--

     They having a martial heart each one rushes on.

The word [Greek omitted] is singular, being applied to a multitude has
the same effect as all ([Greek omitted]). The same kind of figure is the
following (O. iii. 4):--

     And they reached Pylas, the stablished castle of Neleus, and
     the people were doing sacrifice on the seashore.

The people of Pylas are meant.

He has changes of cases, the nominative and the vocative being
interchanged in the following verse (I. ii. 107):--

     To Agamemnon last Thyestis left it,--

and (I. i. 411):--

     Cloud-compelling Zeus,--

and (0. xvii. 415):--

     Friend [Greek omitted] give me for thou dost not seem to me
     to be the worst of the Greeks.

The genitive and dative are changed in the next example (I. iii. 16):--

     Godlike Paris fights in front for the Trojans,--

instead of "in front of." And the contrary in the next (O. v. 68):--

     There about the hollow cave trailed a gadding vine.

Where in the original the Greek word "cave" is in the genitive case,
not as it should be, dative. And the cause of the mutation is that the
nominative accusative and vocative seem to have a certain relation
to one another. On which account nouns of the neuter gender and many
masculine and feminine ones have these three cases alike. Likewise the
genitive has a certain affinity with the dative. This is found in the
dual number of all words. Hence the cases are changed contrary to
what is usual. Sometimes it is possible to discover the reason for the
change, as in the expression (I. v. 222):--

     Understanding of the field,--

and (I. ii. 785):--

     They crossed the field,--

just as if he had used the preposition "through."

A fine example of change of case is found in the beginning of both his
poems:--

     Sing, O Muse, the vengeance, etc., whence to Greece unnumbered
     ills arose.

     Tell me, Muse, of that man, of many a shift and many the woes
     he suffered.

Sometimes after the genitive he brings in the nominative, as in this (I.
i. 272):--

     Of others who are now mortal.

He arranges many things in figures in various ways, as the following
passage (I. ii. 350):--

     For well I ween, that on the day when first
     We Grecians hitherward our course address'd
     To Troy the messengers of blood and death
     Th' o'erruling son of Saturn, on our right
     His lightning flashing, with auspicious sign
     Assur'd us of his favor.

And the following is not unlike it (I. vi. 510):--

     His bright arms flashing like the gorgeous sun
     Hasten'd with boastful mien and rapid step.

And these things, according to the ancient fashion, he exalts not
unreasonably. If any one changes the participles into verbs, he will
discover the sequence, for the word "lightning" has the same value as
"when it was lightning," and "relying" "since he relied." Like these
cases are the following (O. xii. 73):--

     There are two crags, one reaches the broad sky,

and (I. vii. 306):--

     They parted: Ajax to the Grecian camp
     And Hector to the ranks of Troy returned.

And others of the same kind. For it is reasonable when one is about to
speak of two individuals to put first what is common to the two, keeping
the nominative in both cases. It is plain that this common use displays
much grace. Sometimes employing a common case he signifies only one, as
in the following (I. iii. 211):--

     Both sat down, Ulysses was the higher in honor.

The form of words he often changes, sometimes putting the comparative
instead of the absolute (I. i. 32):--

     That you may return a more sane being.

Sometimes the superlative for the positive, as (I. xi. 832);--

     Most just of Centaurs.

Such is the change in nouns. But in verbs there is a change in moods, as
when the infinitive is used for the imperative, as (I. v. 124):--

     Go fearless onward, Diomed, to meet the Trojan darts,--

where the imperative "meet" might be expected.

Or the indicative in place of the optative, as (I. ii. 488):--

     The crowd I shall not relate nor name,--

where one would expect "I could not relate nor name." And, on the
contrary, the optative for the indicative, as (I. v. 388):--

     Mars would then be lost,--for "was lost."

There is a variation of tenses when the present is used for the future
(I. l. 29)--

     Her I release not till her youth be fled,--

instead of "shall flee." Or for the imperfect (O. vi. 86):--

     Where truly were the unfailing cisterns, and bright water
     wells up free from beneath,--

instead of "welled up." And the future for the present (O. i. 24):--

     Abiding some, where Hyperion will sink; and some, where
     he rises.

Or in place of the past (O. v. 300):--

     I fear that indeed the goddess may spake all things truly.

And the voices are often changed. Instead of the active, the passive and
middle are often used, as (I. i. 194):--

     A great sword is drawn from its sheath,--

instead of "he drew." And (I. xiii. 4):--

     His keen glance turning to view,--instead of "seeing."

And, on the other hand, the active instead of the passive:--

     I shall give a tripod with a golden handle,--instead of
     "shall be given."

It can be seen how he changes numbers, putting the plural for the
singular as often happens in common speech when one speaks of himself as
if of several, as in the following (O. i. 10):--

     Of these things, goddess daughter of Zeus, from whatsoever
     source thou wilt declare even to us,--

instead of "to me."

We find with him a change of persons of one sort, as (I. v. 877):--

     The other gods, who in Olympus dwell,
     Are to thee obedient and we are submissive.

For since there are many gods, among whom is the person speaking, both
classes are well indicated by saying, "they are obedient" and "we are
submissive." In another way leaving the person who is spoken of, he
changes from one to another. This is called specifically Apostrophe, and
affects us by its emotional character and stimulates the hearer, as in
the following stanza (I. xv. 346):--

     While loudly Hector to the Trojans called
     To assail the ships and leave the bloody spoils
     Whom I elsewhere and from the ships aloof
     Shall find,--

changing from the narrative to direct discourse. In the narration itself
he often uses Apostrophe (I. xx. 2.):

     Round thee eager for the fray stood the sons of Greece.

But he makes use of direct narrative and change of persons, as in the
following passage (I. ii. 337):--

     Like children, Grecian warriors, ye debate
     Like babes to whom unknown are feats of arms.
     Atrides thou, as is thy wont, maintain
     Unchang'd thy counsel; for the stubborn fight
     Array the Greeks.

There is another kind of this Apostrophe (I. ii. 344):--

     Thou wouldst not know to whom Tydides may join himself,--

instead of "no one can know."

And again (O. ix. 210):--

     And a marvellous sweet smell went up from the mixing bowl:
     then truly it was no pleasure to refrain.

58. He uses participles in the place of verbs, as in these words (I.
viii. 306):--

     Weighed down in a garden by this fruit,--

instead of "it is weighed," and (O. xiii. 113):--

     Thither they as having knowledge of that place drive
     their ships,--

instead of "before they knew."

And articles he often changes, setting demonstrative instead of
relatives (I. xvi. 150):--

     Whom Podarge, swift of foot, to Zephyr bore,--and the contrary
     (I. xvii. 460):--

     And breastplate: for his own his faithful friend hath lost.

So he was wont to change prepositions (I. i. 424):--

     Yesterday he went through the banquet,--instead of "to the banquet."

And (I. i. 10):--

     And he stirred up an evil plague through the army.

Likewise he joins with a preposition a noun improperly, as in the verse
(I. x. 101):--

     Lest perchance they wish to decide the contest in the night,--

where the preposition is followed by, the accusative, not the
genitive. And as to other prepositions, some he changes, some he omits
(I. ii. 696):--

     Of whom he lies lamenting,--instead of "concerning whom."

And (O. xxiii. 91):--

     Expecting whether he would bespeak him,--instead of
     "speak to him."

And other prepositions he in the same fashion changes or leaves out. And
adverbs he changes, using indifferently motion towards, rest in, and
motion from a place (I. xx. 151):--

     His grandchildren were setting down from elsewhere,--instead of
     "elsewhere" (I. vii. 219):--

     And Ajax came from near,--instead of "near."

Finally he has changes of conjunctions, as (O. i. 433):--

     He never lay with her and he shunned the wrath of his lady,--
     instead of "for he shunned," etc.  And these are the figures of
     speech which not only all poets but the writers of prose have
     employed.

But significance is given by him in many ways. One of which is
Proanaphonesis, which is used when any one in the midst of a narration
uses an order proper to other things, as in the following line (O. xxi,
98):--

     He was to be the first that should taste the arrow,--
     and Epiphonesis (I. xvii. 32):--

     After the event may e'en a fool be wise.

The use of Prosopopoiia is frequent and varied with him. For he
introduces many different people speaking together, to whom he
attributes various characteristics. Sometimes he re-creates characters
no longer living, as when he says (I. vii. 125):--

     What grief would fill the aged Pellus's soul.

There is, too, Diatyposis, which is the working out of things coming
into being or actually existent or that have come to pass, brought in to
make what is said clearer, as in the following (I. ix. 593):--

     The slaughtered men, the city burnt with fire,
     The helpless children and deep-bosomed dames.

Or, to produce pity (I. xxii. 60):--

     Look, too, on me with pity: me on whom
     E'en on the threshold of mine age, hath Jove
     A bitter burthen cast, condemned to see
     My sons struck down, my daughters dragged away
     In servile bonds: our chamber's sanctity
     Invaded; and our babes by hostile hands
     Dashed to the ground.

There is also to be found in him Irony, i.e. an expression revealing
the opposite of what is said with a certain ethical artifice; as in the
speech of Achilles (I. ix. 391):--

     Let him choose among the Greeks a fitter King.

For he hints that he would not find one of more royal temper. And this
is the same Trope used when one speaks about himself in extenuation and
gives a judgment contrary to one's own. There is another form when any
one pretends to praise another and really censures him. As the verse in
Homer, put in the mouth of Telemachus (O. xvii. 397):--

     Antinous--verily thou hast good care of me, as it were a
     father for his son.

For he says to an enemy that he cares as a father for his son, and,
again, when any one by way of jest extolls his neighbor, as the suitors
(O. ii. 325):--

     In my truth Telemachus planneth our destruction.  He will
     bring a rescue either from sandy Pylos, or it may be from
     Sparta, so terribly is he set on slaying us.

Sarcasm is a species of Irony used when any one jibes at another with
a pretence of smiling. As Achilles, in the following passage (I. ix.
335):--

     He meted out
     Their several portions, and they hold them still.
     From me, from me alone of all the Greeks,
     He bore away and keeps my cherished wife.
     Well! let him keep her, solace of his bed.

Like this in kind is Allegory, which exhibits one thing by another, as
in the following (O. xxii. 195):--

     Now in good truth Melanthiusi shalt thou watch all night,
     lying on, a soft bed as beseems thee.

For being in chains and hanging, he says he can rest on a soft bed.

Often, too, he makes use of Hyperbole, which, by exaggerating the truth,
indicates emphasis, as (I. x. 437):--

     These surpass in brilliancy the snow, in speed the eagle.

Homer used Tropes and figures of this sort and handed them down to
posterity, and justly obtains glory beyond all others.

Since there are also Characters of speech called Forms, of which one is
Copiousness, the other Gracefulness, and the third Restraint, let us see
if Homer has all these separate classes, on which poets and orators
have worked after him. There are examples of these--copiousness in
Thucydides, gracefulness in Lysias, restraint in Demosthenes. That is
copious which by combination of words and sentences has great emphasis.
An example of this is (O. v. 291):--

     With that he gathered the clouds and troubled the waters of
     the deep, rasping his trident in his hands: and he roused all
     storms of all manner of winds and shrouded in clouds the land
     and sea: and down sped night from heaven.

The graceful is delicate by the character of the matter. It is drawn out
by the way it is expressed (I. vi. 466).--

     Thus he spake, great Hector stretch'd his arms
     To take the child: but back the infant shrank,
     Crying, and sought his nurse's sheltering breast,
     Scar'd by the brazen helm and horse-hair plume.

The restrained is between the two, the copious and the graceful, as (O.
xxii. 291):--

     Then Odysseus, rich in counsel, stripped him of his rags and
     leaped on the great threshold with his bow and quiver full of
     arrows, and poured forth all the swift shafts there before his
     feet, and spake among the wooers.

But the florid style of speech, which has beauty and capacity for
creating delight and pleasure, like a flower, is frequent in our poet;
his poetry is full of such examples. The kinds of phrasing have much
novelty in Homer, as we shall go on to show, by giving a few examples
from which the rest may be gathered.

Every type of style practised among men is either historical, theoretic,
or political. Let us examine whether the beginnings of these are to
be found in him. Historical style contains a narration of facts.
The elements of such a narration are character, cause, place, time,
instrument, action, feeling, manner. There is no historical narration
without some of these. So it is with our poet, who relates many things
in their development and happening. Sometimes in single passages can be
found relations of this kind.

Of character, as the following (I. v. 9):--

     There was one Dores 'mid the Trojan host,
     The priest of Vulcan, rich, of blameless life;
     Two gallant sons he had, Idaeus named
     And Phegeus, skilled in all the points of war.

He describes features, also, as in the case of Thersites (I. ii. 217):--

     With squinting eyes, and one distorted foot,
     His shoulders round, and buried in his breast
     His narrow head, with scanty growth of hair.

And many other things, in which he often pictures the type or appearance
or character, or action or fortune of a person, as in this verse (I. xx.
215):--

     Dardanus first, cloud-compelling
     Zeus begot,--and the rest.

There is in his poetry description of locality; where he speaks about
the island near that of the Cyclops, in which he describes the look of
the place, its size, its quality, and the things in it, and what is near
it. Also, when he describes the things adjacent to the island of Calypso
(O. v. 63):--

     And round about the cave there was a wood-blossoming alder
     and poplar, and sweet-smelling cypress.

And what follows. And innumerable other things of the same kind.

Time narratives are found as follows (I. ii. 134):--

     Already now nine weary years have passed.

And (I. ii. 303):--

     Not long ago, when ships of Greece were met at Aulis charged
     with evil freight for Troy.

Then there are the causes, in which he shows why something is coming to
pass or has come to pass. Such are the things said at the beginning of
the "Iliad" (I. i. 8):--

     Say then, what god the fatal strife provoked
     Jove's and Latona's son; he filled with wrath
     Against the King, with deadly pestilence
     The Camp afflicted--and the people died
     For Chryses' sake, his priest, whom Atreus' son
     With scorn dismissed,

--and the rest.  In this passage he says the cause of the difference
between Achilles and Agamemnon was the plague; but the plague was caused
by Apollo, and his wrath was due to the insult put upon his priest.

Description of the instrument he gives, as when he tells of the shield
made by Vulcan for Achilles. And there is a briefer one on the spear of
Hector (I. viii. 493):--

                       In his hand
     His massive spear he held twelve cubits long,
     Whose glittering point flash'd bright with hoop of gold
     Encircled round.

Narrations of fact are of several kinds, some like the following (I.
vii. 60):--

     When in the midst they met, together rush'd
     Bucklers and lances, and the furious might
     Of mail-clad warriors; bossy shield on shield
     Clattered in conflict; loud the clamor rose.

The emotional narrative is where the incident is connected with some
personal cause or energy, as when he speaks about things arising from
anger or fear or sorrow, or when people are wounded, killed, or any
other such thing happens to them. As a specimen of cause, take the
following (I. i. 103):--

     His dark soul filled with fury, and his eyes
     Flashed like flames of fire.

Of an action (I. xvii. 51):--

     Those locks, that with the Graces hair might vie,
     Those tresses bright, with gold and silver bound,
     Were dabbled all with blood.

A Trope is constructive of action, or experience, or form, according as
one acts in a special way or is acted upon. He follows the whole scene
in this sort of narrative. An example of it would be as follows (O.
xxii. 15):--

     But Odysseus aimed and smote him with the arrow in his throat,
     and the point passed clean out through his delicate neck and
     he fell back, and the cup dropped from his hand as he was
     smitten, and at once through his nostrils there came up a
     thick jet of slain man's blood.

There is also in Homer narration which has for the most part copious
expression, a method of working in full, fitting the subject. Sometimes,
however, it is concise, as in the following (I. xviii. 20):--

     Patroclus lies in death,
     And o'er his body now the war is waged,
     His naked body, for his arms are now
     The prize of Hector of the glancing helmet.

This type is often useful, for the quickness of the words make the
reader and speaker more intent, and he immediately takes in the subject.

Sometimes he tells his story lightly; sometimes by an image or likeness
or simile. An image, as when he says (O. xix. 53):--

     Now forth from her chamber came the wise Penelope like
     Artemis or golden Aphrodite.

A likeness as (I. iii. 196):--

     He like a goat crossed the serried lines first.

A simile, when he makes a comparison of closely related things that has
a connection with subject narrated. There are in Homer various kinds of
similes. Constantly and in many ways he compares the behavior and nature
of animals to the arts and habits of men.

Sometimes he takes a similitude from very small things, not considering
the size of the body, but the nature of each; whence he likens boldness
to a fly (I. xvii. 570):--

     And she breathed in his breast the courage of the fly.

And he compares assiduity to the same creature (I. ii. 469):--

     As the many generations of numberless flies.

The packing together and orderly moving crowd to bees (I. ii. 87):--

     As are the crowds of countless bees.

So he shows anger and irritation (I. xvi. 259):--

     Like skilful wasps.

And he adds in the same place "when boys are wont to tease," in order
that he might heighten their passionate temper by being stirred up by
children. Of a continuous sound, he says (I. iii. 151):--

     Abundant as the cricket.

For it is a most chattering creature and incessant in it.

But those that produce with no order all kinds of sounds, he likens to
(I. iii. 3):--

     Just as the clamor of geese strikes to heaven.

But the multitudes resting in order, he likens to birds settling down
(I. ii. 493):--

     Sitting down with clamor.

Sharpness of sight and act he sometimes likens to the falcon (I. xv.
238):--

     Like to a falcon, swooping on a dove, swiftest of birds.

But sometimes to an eagle (I. xvii. 676):--

     Like to an eagle, famed of sharpest sight
     Of all that fly beneath the vault of Heav'n
     Whom, soaring in the clouds, the crouching dove
     Eludes not.

He declares its sharpness by its seeing from afar off; its swiftness,
by its seizing a very active animal. A man, overcome by the sight of an
enemy he compares to one who sees a snake, for he does not hesitate to
take examples from reptiles (I. iii. 33):--

     As when some traveller spies, could in his path upon the
     mountain side, a deadly snake.

From the other animals he takes examples; of timidity from the hare and
also from the stag (I. iv. 243):--

     Why stand ye thus like timid fawns?

From dogs sometimes he takes daring (I. x. 360):--

     And as the hounds, well practis'd in the chase.

Sometimes love for their offspring (I. x. 14):--

     As a dog loves and defends its pups.

But sometimes their readiness in watching (I. x. 183):--

     As round a sheepfold keep their anxious watch
     The dogs.

A capture done with passion and boldness he is wont to compare to wolves
(I. xvi. 352):--

     As rav'ning wolves that lambs or kids assail.

Bravery and constancy he shows by wild boars, panthers, and lions,
dividing to each one what belongs to its nature. From boars, the
onslaught they have, in fighting, making it irresistible (I. iv. 253):--

     Idomeneus of courage stubborn as the forest boar.

From panthers, inexhaustible daring (I. xxi. 577):--

     As when a panther by the spear transfixed does not remit
     her rage.

From lions, hesitation, finally bravery, as (I. xx. 171):--

     And with his tail he lashes both his flanks and limbs.

Again the rush of a valiant man he likens to a horse which has had a
full meal (I. vi. 506):--

     As some proud steed, at well-fill'd manger fed.

And, on the contrary, one slow to move; but in endurance not easily
overcome, he shows in this way (I. xi. 558):--

     As near a field of corn, a stubborn ass o'powers his
     boyish guides.

The kingly temper and dignity he expresses in the following (I. ii.
480):--

     As 'mid the thronging heifers in a herd
     Stands, proudly eminent, the lordly bull.

He does not omit similes taken from marine creatures, the perseverance
of a polypus and the difficulty of removing it from a rock (O. v.
432):--

     As when the cuttlefish is dragged forth from his chamber.

The leadership and prominence of the dolphin over the rest (I. xxi.
22):--

     As fishes flying from a dolphin.

Oftentimes things made by men he compares to others similarly made, as
in this (I. xi. 67):--

     The rival bands of reapers mow the swathe.

Showing the resistance and bravery of men. But one lamenting ignobly, he
blames in a clear comparison (I. xvi. 7):--

     Why weeps Patroelus like an infant girl?

He dared to compare human actions to the elements of nature, as in the
following passage (I. ii. 394):--

       From th' applauding ranks of Greece
       Rose a loud sound, as when the ocean wave,
       Driv'n by the south wind on some lofty beach,
       Dashes against a prominent crag expos'd
       To blasts from every storm that wars around.

In these it is plain he used Hyperbola and Amplification, for he was not
satisfied with comparing the clamor to the sound of the wind, but to
the waves beating on a craggy shore, where the high sea makes the noise
greater. Nor is the tempest an ordinary one, but it comes from the
south, which especially stirs up the billows, and it is driven against
a projecting crag stretching out into the sea, and surrounded by it, and
it has the sea over it constantly, and from every side the winds blow
and fall upon it. Such things as these are worked out by him in his
descriptions. From a few examples we can become acquainted with many.

Let us see if the other forms of narrative are to be found in our author
and how he took cognizance of them and clearly prepared them. We will
give a few examples and so facilitate acquaintance with the rest.

There is the theoretic style, which embraces what is called speculative
matter, which is a knowledge of the truth conceived in art. By these it
is possible to know the nature of reality, both divine and human things,
and to discriminate virtues and vices in morals and to learn how to
attain truth by logical skill. These things are the province of those
who are occupied in philosophy, which is divided into natural, ethical,
and dialectical. If we find out Homer supplying the beginnings and the
seeds of all these, is he not, beyond all others, worthy of admiration?
Because he shows matters of intelligence by dark sayings and mythical
expressions, it ought not to be considered strange. The reason is to be
found in poetic art and ancient custom. So those who desired to learn,
being led by a certain intellectual pleasure, might the easier seek and
find the truth, and that the unlearned might not despise what they are
not able to understand. For what is indicated indirectly is stimulating,
while what is said clearly is valued more moderately.

Let us begin with the beginning and creation of the whole universe,
which Thales the Milesian refers to the substance water, and let us see
whether Homer first discovered this when he said (I. xiv. 246):--

     Even to the stream of old Oceanus Prime origin of all.

After him Xenophanes of Colophon, laying down that the first elements
were water and land, seems to have taken this conception from the
Homeric poems (I. vii. 99):--

    To dust and water turn all ye who here inglorious sit.

For he indicates their dissolution into the original elements of the
universe. But the most likely opinion makes four elements,--fire, air,
water, earth. These Homer shows he knows, as in many places he makes
mention of them.

He knew, too, the order of their arrangement. We shall see that the land
is the lowest of them all, for as the world is spherical, the sky,
which contains all things, can reasonably be said to have the highest
position. The earth being in the midst everywhere is below what
surrounds it. This the poet declares chiefly in the lines where he says
if Zeus let a chain down from Olympus, he could turn over the land and
sea so that everything would be in the air (I. viii. 23):--

     But if I choose to make my pow'r be known,
     The earth itself and ocean I could raise,
     And binding round Olympus' ridge the cord
     Leave them suspended so in middle air.

Although the air is around the earth, he says the ether is higher in the
following lines (I. xiv. 287):--

     And going up on a lofty pine, which then grew on the summit
     of Ida and through the air reached into the ether.

But higher than the ether is heaven (I. xvii. 424):--

     And thus they fought: the iron clangor pierc'd
     The airless ether and brazen vault of Heaven.

And, besides, in the following (I. i. 497):--

     The vapor ascended to the great heaven and to Olympus.

The top part of the air is finer and more distant from the earth and its
exhalations. Therefore it is said Olympus is called "wholly shining."
Where the poet says Hera is the wife of Zeus, although she is his
sister, he seems to speak in an allegory, since Hera stands for the air,
which is a humid substance. Therefore he says (I. xxi. 6):--

     Hera spread before their path clouds of thick darkness.

By Zeus is signified the ether, that is the fiery and heated substance
(I. xv. 192):--

    Broad Heav'n amid the sky and clouds, to Jove.

They seem brother and sister on account of a certain likeness and
relationship, because both are light and mobile; they dwell together and
are intimate, because from their intercourse all things are generated.
Therefore they meet in Ida, and the land produces for them plants and
flowers.

The same explanation have those words in which Zeus says he will, hang
Hera and fasten two weights to her feet, namely, the land and the sea.
He works out especially the principles of the elements in what Poseidon
says to him (I. xv. 187):--

     We were brethren, all of Rhaea born
     To Saturn: Jove and I and Pluto third,
     Who o'er the nether regions holds his sway,

and (I. xv. 189):--

     Threefold was our partition: each obtain'd
     His meed of honor due.

And in the division of the whole, Zeus obtained the element fire,
Poseidon water, and Hades that of air. Him he also calls "aerial
darkness," because the air has no proper light, but is lightened by the
sun, moon, and other planets.

The fourth part was left common to all, for the primal essence of the
three elements is always in motion. The earth alone remains unmoved, to
which he added also Olympus; it may have been because it is a mountain,
being a part of the earth. If it belongs to heaven, as being the most
brilliant and purest part of it, this may be the fifth essence in the
elements, as certain distinguished philosophers think. So he, with
reason, has conjectured it was common, the lowest part belonging to the
earth by its weight, and the top parts to Olympus by their lightness.
The natures between the two are borne upward to the one and downward to
the other.

Since the nature of the elements is a combination of contraries, of
dryness and moisture, hot and cold, and since by their relation and
combination all things are constructed and undergo partial changes,--the
whole not admitting of dissolution,--Empedocles says all things exist
in this manner: "Sometimes in love all things meeting together in one.
Sometimes, again, each being carried away by animosity of hate." The
concord and unity of the elements he calls love, their opposition, hate.

Before his time Homer foreshadowed love and hate in what he says in his
poetry (I. xiv. 200):--

     I go to visit old Oceanus
     The sire of gods, and Tethys,
     I go to visit them and reconcile a lengthen'd feud.

A similar meaning has the myth about, Aphrodite and Ares, the one having
the same force as Empedocles's love, the other his hate. When they
sometimes come together, and again separate, the sun reveals them,
Hephaestus binds them, and Poseidon releases them. Whence it is evident
that the warm and dry essence, and the contrary of these, the cold and
wet, sometimes combine all things and again dissolve them.

Related to these is what is said by other poets that by the intercourse
of Ares and Aphrodite arises Harmony; a combination of contraries grave
and acute analogously accommodating themselves to one another. By which
arrangement things which are endowed with a contrary nature are all
mutually opposed. The poet seems to have signified this enigmatically
in the conflict of the gods, in which he makes some help the Greeks and
some the Trojans, showing allegorically the character of each. And he
set over against Poseidon Phoebus, the cold and wet against the hot and
dry: Athene to Ares, the rational to the irrational, that is, the good
to the bad. Hera to Artemis, that is, the air to the moon, because the
one is stable and the other unstable. Hermes to Latona, because
speech investigates and remembers, but oblivion is contrary to these.
Hephaestus to the River God, for the same reason that the sun is opposed
to the sea. The spectator of the fight was the primary god, and he is
made taking joy in it.

From the afore-mentioned matter Homer seems to show this: that the world
is one and finite. For if it had been infinite, it would never have been
divided in a number having a limit. By the name "all" he signifies the
collective whole. For in many other cases he uses the plural for the
singular. He signifies the same thing more clearly in saying (I. xiv.
200):--

     The ends of the earth,--and again where he says (I. vii. 478):--

                  Nor should I care
     Though thou wert thrust beneath the lowest deep
     Of earth and ocean,--and in

     On the very top of many-peaked Olympus where there is a top,
     there, too, is a limit.

His opinions about the sun are plain. That it has an orbicular energy
sometimes appearing over the earth, sometimes going under it, this he
makes evident by saying (O. x. 190):--

     My friends, lo we know not where is the place of darkness or
     of dawning, nor where the sun that gives light to men goes
     beneath the earth, nor where he rises.

And that he is always preceding over us and on this account is called
Hyperion by our poet; that he makes the sun rising from the water which
surrounds the earth the ocean, that the sun descends into it, is clearly
expressed. First, as to the rising (O. iii. l):--

     Now the sun arose and left the lovely mere speeding to the
     brazen heaven, to give light to the immortals and to mortal
     men on the earth.

Its setting (I. vii. 486):--

     The sun, now sunk beneath the ocean wave,
     Drew o'er the teeming earth the veil of night.

And he declares its form (O. xix. 234):--

     He was brilliant as the sun,

and its size (I. xi. 735):--

     We as sunlight overspread the earth.

and more in the following (O. iv. 400):--

     So often as the sun in his course has reached the
     mid-heaven,--and its power (O. ii. log):--

     Of Helios, who overseeth all and ordereth all things.

Finally that it has a soul, and in its movement is guided by choice in
certain menaces it makes (O. xii. 383):--

     I will go down to Hades and shine among the dead.

And on this thus Zeus exhorts him:--

     Helios, see that thou shine on amidst the deathless gods amid
     mortal men upon the earth, the grain giver.

From which it is plain that the sun is not a fire, but some more potent
being, as Aristotle conjectured. Assuredly, fire is borne aloft, is
without a soul, is easily quenchable and corruptible; but the sun is
orbicular and animate, eternal and imperishable.

And as to the other planets scattered through the heavens, that Homer is
not ignorant is evident in his poems (I. xviii. 480):--

     Pleiads and Hyads and Orions might.

The Bear which always encircles the North Pole is visible to us. By
reason of its height it never touches the horizon, because in an equal
time, the smallest circle in which the Bear is, and the largest in which
Orion is, revolves in the periphery of the world. And Bootes, slowly
sinking because it makes a frequent setting, has that kind of position,
that is carried along in a straight line. It sinks with the four signs
of Zodiac, there being six zodiacal signs divided in the whole night.
That he has not gone through all observations of the stars, as Aratus or
some of the others, need be surprising to no one. For this was not his
purpose.

He is not ignorant of the causes of disturbances to the elements as
earthquakes and eclipses, since the whole earth shares in itself air,
fire, and water, by which it is surrounded. Reasonably, in its depths
are found vapors full of spirit, which they say being borne outward move
the air; when they are restrained, they swell up and break violently
forth. That the spirit is held within the earth they consider is caused
by the sea, which sometimes obstructs the channels going outward, and
sometimes by withdrawing, overturns parts of the earth. This Homer knew,
laying the cause of earthquakes on Poseidon, calling him Earth Container
and Earth Shaker.

Now, then, when these volatile movements are kept within the earth, the
winds cease to blow, then arises the darkness and obscurity of the sun.
Let us see whether he was aware also of this. He made Poseidon moving
the earth after Achilles issued forth to fight. For he had previously
mentioned on the day before what the state of the air was. In the
incident of Sarpedon (I. xvi. 567):--

     Zeus extended opaque shadows over the fight,--

and again in the case of Patroclus (I. xvii. 366):--

     Now might ye deem the glorious sun himself nor moon was safe,
     for darkest clouds of night overspread the warriors.

And a little while afterward Ajax prays (I. xvii. 645):--

     O Father Jove, from o'er the sons of Greece,
     Remove this cloudy darkness; clear the sky
     That we may see our fate.

But after the earthquake, the vapor issuing forth, there are violent
winds, whence Hera says (I. xxi. 334):--

     While from the sea I call the strong blast
     Of Zephyr and brisk Notus who shall drive
     The raging flames ahead.

On the following day Iris calls the winds to the pyre of Patroclus (I.
xxiii. 212):--

     They with rushing sound rose and before them drove the
     hurrying clouds.

So the eclipse of the sun takes place in a natural manner, when the moon
on its passage by it goes under it perpendicularly and is darkened. This
he seems to have known. For he said before that Odysseus was about to
come (O. xiv. 162):--

     As the old moon wanes, and the new is born;--

that is, when the month ends and begins, the sun being conjoined
with the moon at the time of his coming. The seer says to the suitors
(O. xiv. 353):--

     Ah, wretched men, what woe is this ye suffer, shrouded in
     night are your heads and your faces and knees, and kindled is
     the voice of wailing and the path is full of phantoms and full
     is the court, the shadows of men hasting hellwards beneath the
     gloom, and the sun is perished out of heaven, and an evil mist
     has overspread the world.

He closely observed the nature of the winds, how they arise from the
moist element. For the water transformed goes into air. The wind is air
in motion. This he shows in very many places, and where he says (O. v.
478):--

     The force of the wet winds blew,--

he arranged the order of their series (O. v. 295):--

     The East wind and the South wind clashed and the stormy West
     and the North that is born in the bright air, welling onwards
     a great wave.

Of these one comes from the rising, one from the midday quarter, one
from the setting, one from the north.

And Subsolanus, being humid, changes into the South, which is warm. And
the South, rarefying, is changed into the East; but the East, becoming
further rarefied, is purified into the North wind, therefore (O. v.
385):--

     She roused the swift North and brake the waves before him.

Their contention he explains naturally (O. v. 331):--

     Now the South would toss it to the North to carry, and now
     again the East would yield it to the West.

He knew besides that the North Pole is suspended over the earth, and how
it weighs on the men who dwell in that climate. But the South Pole,
on the contrary, is profound; as when he says of the North Pole (O. v.
296):--

     And the North that is born in the bright air rolling on a
     great wave on the Southwest wind.

(O. iii. 295):--

     Where the Southwest wind drives a great wave against the
     left headland."

For by saying "rolling" he notes the force of the wave rushing on from
above, but the wind "driving" signifies a force applied to what is
higher, coming from what is lower.

That the generation of rains comes from the evaporation of the humid, he
demonstrates, saying (I. xi. 54):--

     Who sent from Heav'n a show'r of blood-stained rain,--

and (I. xvi. 459):--

     But to the ground some drops of blood let fall,--

for he had previously said (I. vii. 329):--

     Whose blood, beside Scamander's flowing stream,
     Fierce Mars has shed, while to the viewless shade
     Their spirits are gone,--

where it is evident that humors of this sort exhaled from the
waters about the earth, mixed with blood, are borne upward. The same
argument is found in the following (I. xvi. 385):--

As in the autumnal season when the earth with weight of rain is
saturate,--for then the sun on account of the dryness of the ground
draws out humors from below and brings from above terrestrial
disturbances. The humid exhalations produce rains, the dry ones, winds.
When the wind is in impact with a cloud and by its force rends the
cloud, it generates thunder and lightning. If the lightning falls, it
sends a thunderbolt. Knowing this our poet speaks as follows (I. xvii.
595):--

     His lightnings flash, his rolling thunders roar.

And in another place (O. xii. 415):--

     In that same hour Zeus thundered and cast his bolt upon
     the ship.

Justly thinking men consider that gods exist, and first of all Homer.
For he is always recalling the gods (I. i. 406):--

     The blessed gods living a happy life.

For being immortal they have an easy existence and an inexhaustible
abundance of life. And they do not need food of which the bodies of
mortal men have need (I. v. 341):--

     They eat no bread, they drink no ruddy wine,
     And bloodless and deathless they become.

But poetry requires gods who are active; that he may bring the notion of
them to the intelligence of his readers he gives bodies to the gods. But
there is no other form of bodies than man's capable of understanding
and reason. Therefore he gives the likeness of each one of the gods the
greatest beauty and adornment. He has shown also that images and statues
of the gods must be fashioned accurately after the pattern of a man to
furnish the suggestion to those less intelligent, that the gods exist.

But the leader and head of all these, the chief god the best
philosophers think, is without a body, and is rather comprehensible by
the intelligence. Homer seems to assume this; by him Zeus is called (I.
iv. 68):--

     The Sire of gods and men. O father ours, son of Kronos, chief
     of the greater beings.

And Zeus himself says (I. viii. 27):--

     As much as I am better than gods and men.

And Athene says of him (I. viii. 32):--

     Well do we know thy power invincible.

If it is necessary to ask how he knew that God was an object of the
intelligence, it was not directly shown, as he was using poetic form
combined with myth. Yet we can gather it from the things he says (I. i.
498):--

     The all-seeing son of Saturn there she found sitting apart.

And where he himself says (I. xx. 22):--

     Yet he will upon Olympus' lofty ridge remain and view serene
     the combat."

That solitude and the not mingling with the other gods, but being gladly
by himself and using leisure for one directing and ordering all things,
these constitute the character of an "intelligible" God. He knew besides
that God is mind and understands all things, and governs all. For
censuring Poseidon, he says (I. xiii. 354):--

     Equal the rank of both, their birth the same,
     But Jupiter in wisdom as in years the first.

And this expression frequently is used "when he again thought over other
things." This shows that he was ever in thought.

But to the mind of God pertain Providence and Fate, concerning which
the philosophers have spoken much. The stimulus to this came from
Homer,--why should any one insist on the providence of the gods? Since
in all his poetry not only do they speak to one another on behalf of
men, but descending on the earth they associate with men. A few things
we shall look at for the sake of illustrations; among these is Zeus
speaking to his brother (I. xx. 20):--

     The purpose, Neptune, well thou know'st thyself
     For which I called thee; true, they needs must die,
     But still they claim my care.

And in other places (I. xxii. 168):--

     A woful sight mine eyes behold: a man
     I love in plight around the walls! my heart
     For Hector grieves.

He refers to the royal dignity of the gods and their loving care of men,
saying (O. i. 65):--

     How should I forget divine Odysseus, who in understanding is
     beyond mortals, and beyond all men hath done sacrifice to the
     deathless gods who keep the wide heaven?

How he makes the gods mingling with and working with men themselves
it is possible to learn completely in many passages for just as he
represents Athene once helping Achilles and always aiding Odysseus, so
he represents Hermes helping Priam, and again Odysseus, for he says (O.
xvii. 485):--

     Yea even the gods, in the likeness of strangers from far
     countries, put on all manner of shapes, and wander through
     cities to watch the violence and the righteousness of men.

It is the characteristic of divine providence to wish men to live
justly. This the poet indicates very clearly (O. xiv. 83):--

     Verily it is not forward deeds the gods love, but they
     reverence justice and the righteous acts of men.

And (O. xvi. 386):--

                          When Jove
     Pours down his fiercest storms in wrath to men,
     Who in their courts unrighteous judgments pass.

Then just as he introduces the gods caring for men, so he represents
men as mindful of them in every crisis. As the leader, succeeding in an
action, says (I. viii. 526):--

     Hopeful to Jove I pray, and all the gods
     To chase from hence these fate-inflicted hounds.

And in danger (I. xvii. 646):--

     Father Jove, from o'er the sons of Greece,
     Remove this cloudy darkness.

And again when one has slayed another (I. xxii. 379):--

     Since heaven has granted us this man to slay.

And dying (I. xxii. 358):--

     But see I bring not down upon thy head the wrath of heaven.

From what other place than here did originate that doctrine of the
Stoics? I mean this, that the world is one and in it both gods and men
minister, sharing in justice by their nature. For when he says (I. xx.
4):--

     Then Jove to Themis gave command to call
     The gods to council from the lofty height
     Of many ridg'd Olympus.
     Why, Lord of lightning, hast thou summoned here
     The gods of council, dost thou aught desire
     Touching the Greeks and Trojans?

What does this mean except that the world is conducted by civilized laws
and the gods consult under the presidency of the father of gods and men?

His opinion on fate he shows clearly in his poems (I. vi. 488):--

     Dearest, wring not thus my heart,
     For till my day of destiny is come
     No man may take my life, and when it comes
     Nor brave, nor coward can escape that day.

But among the other things in which he confirms the power of fate, he
thinks as the most-approved philosophers have thought after him,--Plato,
Aristotle, and Theophrastus,--that not all things happen by fate, but
some things are in the power of men, the choice of whom is free. The
same man in a way acts as he desires and falls into what he does not
desire. And this point of view he has clearly expounded in many places,
as in the beginning of each of his poems: in the "Iliad" saying the
wrath of Achilles was the cause of the destruction of the Greeks and
that the will of Zeus was fulfilled; in the "Odyssey" that the comrades
of Odysseus went to their destruction by their own folly. For they had
offended by touching the sacred oxen of the Sun, although they could
have abstained from doing so. Yet it was foreordained (O. xi. 110):--

     But if thou hurtest them, I signify ruin for thy ships, and
     for thy men, and even though thou shalt thyself escape.
     If thou doest them no hurt and art careful to return, so may
     ye yet reach Ithaca, albeit in evil case.

So not to violate them depended on themselves, but that those who had
done the evil should perish follows from fate.

It is possible to avoid what happens accidentally by foresight as he
shows in the following (O. v. 436):--

     Then of a truth would luckless Odysseus have perished beyond
     what was ordained had not gray-eyed Athene given him some
     counsel. He rushed in and with both his hands clutched the
     rock whereto he clung till the great wave went by.

Then on the other hand running a great danger as he was, he had perished
by fortune; yet by prudence he was saved.

Just as about divine things there are many divine reasonings in the
philosophers taking their origin from Homer, so also with human affairs
it is the same. First we will take up the subject of the soul. The
most noble of the doctrines of Pythagoras and Plato is that the soul
is immortal. To it in his argument Plato affixed wings. Who first
determined this? Homer says this among other things (I. xvi. 856):--

But the soul flying on its members came to Hades,--i.e. into a formless
and invisible place, whether you think it in the air or under the earth.
But in the "Iliad" he makes the soul of Patroclus stand by the side of
Achilles (I. xxiii. 65):--

     The soul of wretched Patroclus came.

He makes a small speech for him in which he says this (I. xxiii. 72):--

     The spirits and spectres of departed men
     Drove me from them, nor allow to
     Cross the abhorred river.

In the "Odyssey" through the whole account of the descent to Hades what
else does he show but that souls survive after death, and when they
drink blood can speak. For he knows that blood is the food and drink of
the spirit, but spirit is the same thing as soul or the vehicle of the
soul.

123. Most clearly he reveals that he considers man is nothing else but
soul, where he says (O. xi. 90):--

     There came up the soul of the Theban
     Tiresias having a golden sceptre.

Purposely he changes the word for soul to the masculine, to show that it
was Tiresias. And afterward (O. xi. 601):--

     And after him I described the mighty Heracles, his phantom
     I say; but as for himself he hath joy at the banquet among the
     deathless gods.

For here again he showed that the semblance thrown off from the body
appeared, but no longer connected with its matter. The purest part of
the soul had gone away; this was Heracles himself.

124. Whence that seems to philosophers a probable theory that the body
is in a way the prison house of the soul. And this Homer first revealed;
that which belongs to the living he calls [Greek omitted] (from
"binding") as in this line (I. i. 115):--

     Not the body nor the nature.

O. iv. 196:--

     A body came to the woman.

O. xvi. 251:--

     By my form, my virtue, my body.

But that which has put off the soul he calls nothing else but body as in
these lines (I. vii. 79):--

     To bring home my body again.

And (O. xxiv. 187):--

     The bodies lie uncared for in the hall of Odysseus.

O. xi. 53:--

     And we left the body in the house of Circe.

For the same thing, while a man lives, was the bond of the soul; when he
dies it is left, as it were, his monument.

To this is related also another doctrine of Pythagoras, namely, that the
souls of the dead pass into other forms of bodies. This did not escape
Homer's notice, for he made Hector talking with horses, and Antilochus
and Achilles himself not only talking with them but listening to them,
and a dog recognizing Odysseus before men, even before his intimates.
What other thing is he establishing but a community of speech and a
relation of soul between men and beasts? Besides, there are those who
ate up the oxen of the Sun and after this fell into destruction. Does he
not show that not only oxen but all other living creatures, as sharers
of the same common nature, are beloved by the gods?

The change of the comrades of Odysseus into swine and that type of
animal signifies this, that the souls of undeserving men are changed
into the likeness of brute beasts; they fall into the circular periphery
of the whole, which he calls Circe; whereas she is justly represented
as the child of the Sun, dwelling in the island of Aeaea, for this word
[Greek omitted] is so called because men lament and wail by reason of
death. But the prudent man Odysseus did not suffer the change, because
from Hermes, i.e. reason, he had received immortality. He went down into
Hades, as it were, dissolving and separating the soul from the body, and
became a spectator of souls both good and bad.

The Stoics define the soul as a cognate spirit, sensible to exhalations.
It has its origin from the humid portions of the body. In this they
follow Homer, who says (I. ix. 609).--

     While the breath abides in the breast.

And again (I. xxiii. 100):--

     Vanish'd like smoke, the spirit beneath the earth.

Here he makes the vital spirit, being humid, a breath; when it is
extinguished he likens it to smoke. And the word "spirit" itself he uses
for soul (I. xv. 262):--

     His words fresh vigor in the chief infus'd.

And (I. iv. 524):--

     Breathing away his spirit.

And (I. xxii. 475):--

     But when her breath and spirit returned again.

That is, she collected her distracted spirit (I. v. 697):--

     But soon revived, as on his forehead blew,
     While yet he gasped for breath, the cooling breeze.

While his spirit was failing him in a faint, the outside breeze having
a natural affinity to it brought him back to life. This argument is
strengthened because for the external spirit he uses the word "soul,"
saying (I. xxiii. 440):--

     He turned aside with lightest breath.

He wishes to say: "Having got back his breath."

Plato and Aristotle considered the soul incorporeal, but always
associating with the body and needing it as a vehicle. On this account,
then, it drew along the spiritual matter with it, oftentimes as an
image, which had the shape of the body impressed upon it. So therefore
Homer is never in his poetry found calling the soul body, but to what is
deprived of soul he always gives the name, as we have mentioned in what
has gone before.

The soul has, according to the views of the philosophers, a rational
part, seated in the head, and an irrational part of which one element,
the passionate, dwells in the heart and another, the appetitive, in the
intestines. Did not Homer see this distinction when he made in the case
of Achilles, the rational struggling with the passionate, deliberating
in the same moment whether he should drive off the one who had filled
him with grief or should stay his anger (I. i. 193):--

     Up to this time he revolved these things in his mind
     and heart,

that is, the intelligent part and what is opposed to it? The emotional
anger is represented by him as overcome by prudence. For the appearance
of Athene signifies this. And in these places he makes reason admonish
the emotions, as a ruler giving orders to a subject (O. xx. 18):--

     Endure my heart; yea, a baser thing thou once didst bear.

And often the passionate element gives way to reason (I. xx. 22):--

     Pallas indeed sat silent and though inly wroth with Jove,
     yet answered not a word.

Likewise injury (I. xviii. 112):--

     Though still my heart be sore,
     Yet will I school my angry spirit down.

Sometimes he shows the passionate element getting the better of reason.
This he does not praise, but openly blames; as when Nestor speaks
upbraiding the insult offered by Agamemnon to Achilles (I. ix. 108):--

                   Not by my advice
     I fain would have dissuaded thee; but thou,
     Swayed by the promptings of a lofty soul,
     Didst to our bravest wrong dishonoring him
     Whom ev'n the Immortals honor'd.

Achilles speaks like things to Ajax (I. ix. 645):--

     All thou hast said hath semblance just and fair,
     But swells my heart with fury at the thought of him,
     Of Agamemnon, who, amid the Greeks
     Assembled, held me forth to scorn.

So, too, reason is paralysed by fear, where Hector deliberates whether
he will abide the conflict with Achilles (I. xxii. 129):--

     Better to dare the fight and know at once
     To whom Olympian Jove the triumph wills,

Then he withdraws when he gets near Achilles (I. xxii. 136):--

     Nor dared he there await th' attack, but left
     The gates behind, and terror-stricken fled.

It is also plain that he places the emotions about the heart. Anger as
(O. xx. 13):--

     The heart within barked for him.

Grief (I. xiv. 128):--

     How long, my son, wilt thou thy soul consume with grief
     an mourning?

Then fear (I. x. 95):--

     And leaps my troubled heart as tho' it would burst
     My bosom's bounds; my limbs beneath me shake.

In the same way just as fear, so he declares daring to be about the
heart (I. xvi. 11):--

              And fix'd in every breast
     The fierce resolve to wage unwearied war.

From these passages the Stoics took the opinion that the leading
element is about the heart. That the appetitive element is placed in the
intestines in many places he declares; in these verses, for example (O.
xviii. 54):--

     But my belly's call is urgent on me, that evil worker,--

and (O. xvii. 286):--

     But now may conceal a ravening belly, a thing accursed.

And the causes which belong to the passionate element of the soul he
says happen by nature. For wrath created by grief he shows is a kind of
effervescence of the blood and the spirit in it as in the following (I.
i. 103):--

     His dark soul filled with fury, and his eyes flashing like
     flames of fire.

For he seemed to call spirit [Greek omitted], i.e. wrath, and this in
the case of those who are angry he thinks is extended and inflamed.
Again the spirit, if there is fear, is perturbed and made cold,
generates tremors and terrors and pallors in the body. Pallor, by the
heat coursing into the interior ruddiness leaves the surface. Tremor,
because being, confined within the spirit it shakes the body. Terror,
because when the moisture is congealed the hairs are contracted and
stand on end. All of these Homer clearly indicates when he says (I. xv.
4):--

     Pallid from fear.

And (I. vii. 479):--

     Pallid fear lay hold on him.

(I. x. 95):--

     My valiant members tremble.

And (I. xxiv. 358):--

     The old man heard, his mind confus'd with dread,
     So grievously he fear'd that every hair
     Upon his bended head did stand on end.

According to these passages for "feared" he says "frozen" and "fear" he
calls "freezing." On the other hand, for "daring" and "courage" he uses
[Greek omitted], "heat." Evil effects, he distinguishes in these ways.

Again when Aristotle considers indignation a mercy among the generous
emotions (for when good men are stirred because their neighors seem to
succeed beyond their worth, it is called indignation. When they, beyond
their desert, have misfortunes, it is called pity.) These two Homer
considers to belong, to the good, for he reckons them as belonging to
Zeus. Other passages he has as well as the following (I. xi. 542):--

     But Jove, high-throned, the soul of Ajax filled with fear.

And in other places he pities him being chased about the wall.

What opinion the poet had about virtue and vice he shows in many places.
For since one part of the soul is intelligent and rational, and the
other devoid of reason and open to emotions, and on this account man has
a middle position between God and brute, he thinks the highest, virtue,
is divine, and the other extremity, evil, is brutelike. Just as later on
Aristotle thought, he adopts these principles in his companions. For
he always considers good men to be like gods, and as he says (I. ii.
167):--

     By a counsel not, unworthy of Zeus.

Among the evil ones he names cowards (I. xiii. 102):--

     Like to timid stags,--

and to sheep without a shepherd and to hares in flight. About those
borne headlong and heedlessly to anger (I. xvii. 20):--

     Nor pard, nor lion, nor the forest boar,
     Fiercest of beasts, and provident of his strength
     In their own esteem
     With Panthous' sons for courage nor may vie.

The laments of those grieving to no purpose he compares to the sounds of
birds (O. xvi. 218):--

     Where Younglings the country folk have taken from the nest
     ere yet they are fledged.

The Stoics who place virtue in apathy follow the passages in which he
takes up every feeling, saying about grief (I. xix. 218):--

     Behoves us bury out of sight our dead,
     Steeling our heart and weeping but a day.

And (I. xvi. 7):--

     Why weep over Patroclus as a girl?

About anger (I. xviii. 107):--

     May strife perish from gods and men.

About fear (I. v. 252):--

     Do not speak of fear, if thou thinkest to persuade me.

And (O. xv. 494):--

     Struck and smitten seeing fate and death, he fell heroicly
     from the sword.  So those challenged to single combat obey
     fearlessly, and several arise to take the place of one.
     And the wounded man has none the less abiding courage.

(I. xi. 388):--

     And now because thy shaft has grazed my foot, thou mak'st
     thy empty boast.

And every valiant person is likened to a lion, boar, to a torrent and
whirlwind.

Now the Peripatetics think that freedom from emotion is unattainable
by men. They bring in a certain mean; by taking away excess of feeling,
they define virtue by moderation. And Homer brings in the best men
neither feeble nor altogether fearless nor devoid of pain, but yet
differing from the worst in not being overcome extravagantly by their
feelings. For he says (I. xiii. 279):--

     The cowards color changes, nor his soul
     Within his heart its even balance keeps
     But changing still, from foot to foot he shifts,
     And in his bosom loudly beats his heart
     Expecting death; and chatter all his teeth.
     The brave man's color changes not with fear,
     He knows the ambush ent'ring.

For it is evident that by taking away excessive fear from the good man
he leaves the mean between the two. The same must be thought about the
like emotions, pain and anger. To this effect is that verse of his (I.
vii. 215):--

    The Trojans' limbs beneath them shrank with fear,
    E'en Hector's heart beat quicker in his breast,
    The others, even at the sight, trembled.

But he, in the midst of dangers being brave, was only troubled. So
he makes Dolon and Lycaon feeling fear; Ajax and Menelaus, turning
gradually and going away step by step, as lions driven from their
quarry. In the same way he shows the differences of those who grieve and
also of those who rejoice. As Odysseus, relating the way he deceived the
Cyclops, says (O. ix. 413):--

     My heart within me laughed.

The suitors seeing the beggar laying on the ground (O. xviii. 100):--

     But the proud wooers threw up their hands, and cried outright
     for laughter.

But in more trivial matters the difference of moderation appears.
Odysseus though loving his wife, and seeing her lamenting on his
account, contains himself (O. xix. 211):--

     His eyes kept steadfast between his eyelids as it were
     horn or iron.

But the suitors who were in love with her when they saw her (O. xviii.
212):--

     And straightways the knees of the wooers were loosened, and
     their hearts were enchanted with love, and each one uttered
     a prayer that he might be her bedfellow.

Such is the poet's treatment of the powers and passions of the soul.

Although there are various things said by the philosophers about the
chief end of virtue and happiness, it is agreed by all that virtue of
the soul is the greatest of goods. But the Stoics consider that virtue
by itself is sufficient for happiness, taking the cue from the Homeric
poems in which he has made the wisest and most prudent man on account
of virtue despising trouble and disregarding pleasure. As to the first
point in this way (O. iv. 242):--

     Now all of them I could not tell or number, so many as were
     the adventures of the patient Odysseus.  He bruised himself
     with unseemly stripes and cast a sorry covering over his
     shoulders, and in the fashion of a servant he went into the
     wide-wayed city of the foemen.

And as to the second, i.e. (O. ix. 29):--

     Vainly Calypso, the fair goddess, would fain have kept me
     with her in her hollow caves longing to have me for her lord.
     Circe of Aia would have stayed me in her halls, longing to
     have me for her lord.  But never did they prevail upon my
     heart within my breast.

Especially does he expound his opinion of virtue in the passages in
which he makes Achilles not only brave but most beautiful in form, and
swiftest of foot, and most illustrious in birth and distinguished in
race and aided by the chiefest of the gods; and Odysseus understanding
and firm in soul--in other respects not enjoying an equal fortune.
His stature and aspect not conspicuous, his parentage not altogether
noteworthy, his country obscure, hated by a god who was all but first.
None of these things prevented him from being famous, from gaining the
chief good of the soul.

But the Peripatetic School think the goods of the soul have the
pre-eminence, such as prudence, fortitude, temperance, justice.
Afterward are those of the body, such as health, strength, beauty,
swiftness; and there are besides external goods such as reputation,
nobility, wealth. For they think any one worthy of praise and admiration
if he, fortified by the protective virtues of the soul, holds out
against evils in the midst of sufferings, disease, want, unforeseen
accidents, but that this situation is not a desirable nor a happy one.
For not only the possession of virtue do they think good, but its use
and its activity. And these distinctions Homer directly showed, for he
always makes the gods (O. viii. 325):--

     The givers of good things,--

these things also men pray the gods to furnish them, as being plainly
neither useless to them nor indifferent, but advantageous to happiness.

What the goods are men aim at, and through which they are called happy,
he declares in many places. But all of them together were centred in
Hermes (I. xxiv. 376):--

     Blessed are thy parents in a son so grac'd,
     In face and presence, and of mind so wise.

He bears witness to his beauty of body, his intelligence, and his
lineage. Separately he takes them up (I. vi. 156):--

     On whom the gods bestowed
     The gifts of beauty and of manly grace,
     And Zeus poured out lordly wealth,--

for this, too, is a gift of God (O. vi. 188):--

     For Zeus himself gives prosperity to mortals.

Sometimes he esteems honor a good (I. viii. 540):--

     Would that I might be adored as Athene and Apollo.

Sometimes good fortune in children (O. iii. 196):--

     So good a thing it is that a son of the dead should be left.

Sometimes, too, the benefit of one's family (O. xiii. 39):--

     Pour ye the drink offering, and send me safe on my way, and
     as for you, fare ye well.  For now I have all my heart's
     desire,--an escort and loving gifts.  May the gods of heaven
     give me good fortune with them and may I find my noble wife
     in my home, and my friends unharmed while ye, for your part,
     abide here, and make glad your gentle wives and children, and
     may the gods vouchsafe all manner of good and may no evil
     come, nigh the people.

That in a comparison of goods valor is better than wealth, he shows in
the following (I. ii. 872):--

     With childish folly to the war he came,
     Laden with stress of gold; yet naught availed
     His gold to save him from the doom of death.

And (O. iv. 93):--

     I have no joy of my lordship among these my possessions.

And that intelligence is better than beauty of form (O. viii. 169):--

     For one man is feebler than another in presence, yet the
     gods crown his words with beauty.

It is evident that bodily excellence and external things he considers
as good, and that without these virtue alone is not sufficient for
happiness he declares in the following way. He created two men who
attained to the height of virtue, Nestor and Odysseus, different indeed
from one another, but like one another in prudence and valor and power
of eloquence. He has made them not at all equal in fortune, but on the
side of Nestor he has placed the gods (O. iv. 208):--

     Right easily is known that man's seed for whom Cronion
     weaves the skein of luck at bridal and at birth, even as now
     hath he granted prosperity to Nestor forever, for all his
     days, that he himself should grow into smooth old age in his
     halls, and his sons moreover should be wise and the best
     of spearsmen.

But Odysseus, though shrewd and clever and prudent, he often calls
unfortunate. For Nestor goes back home quickly and safely, but Odysseus
wanders about for a long time and endures constantly innumerable
sufferings and dangers. So it is a desirable and blessed thing if
fortune is at hand helping and not opposing virtue.

How the possession of virtue is of no use unless it accomplishes
something, is evident from the passages where Patroclus complains to
Achilles and says (I. xvi. 31):--

     Whoe'er may hope in future days by thee
     To profit, if thou now forbear to save
     The Greeks from shame and loss.

So he speaks to him because he makes his virtue useless by inactivity.
Achilles himself deplores his inactivity (I. xviii. 104:):--

     But idly here I sit cumb'ring the ground,
     I, who amid the Greeks no equal own
     In fight,--

for he laments because though possessing virtue he does not make use of
it; but being indignant with the Greeks (I. i. 490):--

                 No more he sought
     The learned council, nor the battlefield;
     But wore his soul away, and only pined
     For the fierce joy and tumult of the fight.

And so Phoenix admonished him (I, ix. 433):--

     To teach thee how to frame
     Befitting speech, and mighty deeds achieve.

After his death he is indignant at that inertia, saying (O. xi. 489):--

     Rather would I live upon the soil as the hireling of another
     with a lordless man who had no great livelihood, than bear
     sway among the dead that are no more.

And he adds the cause (O. xi. 498):--

     For I am no longer his champion under the sun, so mighty a
     man as once I was, when in wide Troy I slew the best of the
     host, succoring the Argives.

That saying of the Stoics, that good men are friends of the gods, is
taken from Homer, who says about Amphiaerus (O. xv. 245):--

     Whom Zeus, lord of the ages, and Apollo loved with all
     manner  of love.

And of Odysseus (O. iii. 52):--

     And Athene rejoiced in the wisdom and judgment of the man.

There is, too, an opinion of the same philosophic school that virtue is
teachable, and has for its beginning good birth. For Homer says (O. iv.
206):--

     And from such a sire thou too art sprung, wherefore thou dost
     even speak wisely.

And by training it is brought to perfection. For virtue is the knowledge
of living rightly, i.e. of doing the things which it is necessary for
those who live well to do. These principles can also be found in Homer,
for he says (I. ix. 440):--

     Inexperienced yet in war, that sorrow brings alike on all
     And sage debate in which attends renown.

And in other places (I. vi. 446):--

     Nor did my heart compel me, since I had learnt to be good,

And Phoenix says of Achilles (I. ix. 442):--

     Me then he sent, to teach thee how to frame
     Befitting speech, and mighty deeds achieve.

For since life is made up of acts and speech, therefore he says he was
the young man's teacher in these things. From what has been said it is
plain that he declares the whole of virtue to be teachable. So, then,
Homer is the first philosopher in ethics and in philosophy.

Now to the same science belongs arithmetic and music, which Pythagoras
especially honored. Let us see whether these are mentioned by our poet.
Very often. A few examples from very many will suffice. For Pythagoras
thought number had the greatest power and reduced everything to
numbers--both the motions of the stars and the creation of living
beings. And he established two supreme principles,--one finite unity,
the other infinite duality. The one the principle of good, the other of
evil. For the nature of unity being innate in what surrounds the whole
creation gives order to it, to souls virtue, to bodies health, to cities
and dwellings peace and harmony, for every good thing is conversant
with concord. The nature of duality is just the contrary,--to the air
disturbance, to souls evil, to bodies disease, to cities and dwellings
factions and hostilities. For every evil comes from discord and
disagreement. So he demonstrates of all the successive numbers that
the even are imperfect and barren; but the odd are full and complete,
because joined to the even they preserve their own character. Nor in
this way alone is the odd number superior, but also added to itself
it generates an even number. For it is creative, it keeps its original
force and does not allow of division, since PER SE the mind is
superior. But the even added to itself neither produces the odd nor
is indivisible. And Homer seems to place the nature of the one in the
sphere of the good, and the nature of the dual in the opposite many
times. Often he declares a good man to be [Greek omitted] "kind" and the
adjective from it is "benignity"; as follows (I. ii. 204):--

     It is not good for many to reign, let there be but one ruler.

And (O. iii. 127):--

     We never spake diversely either in the assembly or in the
     council, but always were of one mind.

He always makes use of the uneven number as the better. For making
the whole world to have five parts, three of these being the mean, he
divides it (I. xv. 189):--

     Threefold was our portion each obtained,
     His need of honor due.

Therefore, too, Aristotle thought there were five elements, since the
uneven and perfect number had everywhere the predominance. And to the
heavenly gods he gives the uneven shares. For Nestor nine times to
Poseidon sacrificed nine bulls; and Tiresias bids Odysseus sacrifice (O.
xi. 131):--

     A ram and a bull and a boar, the mate of swine.

But Achilles immolated for Patroclus, all in even numbers, four horses
and (I. xxiii. 175):--

     Twelve noble sons he slew, the sons of Troy,--

and of nine dogs he casts two on the pyre, in order to leave for himself
seven. And in many places he uses the ternary, quinary, and septenary
number, especially the number nine (I. vii. 161):--

     The old man spoke reproachfully; at his words
                Uprose nine warriors.

And (O. xi. 311):--

     At nine seasons old they were of breadth nine cubits, and
     nine fathoms in height.

(I. i. 53):--

     Nine days the heavenly Archer on the troops hurl'd his
     dread shafts.

And (I. vi 174):--

     Nine days he feasted him, nine oxen slew.

Why pray, is the number nine the most perfect? Because it is the square
of the first odd number, and unevenly odd since it is divided into three
triads, of which again each is divided into three units.

But not only the virtue of numbers but a natural way of counting he
showed, as in the catalogue of ships he made (I. ii. 509):--

     With these came fifty ships; and in each
     Were sixscore youths, Boeotia's noblest flow'r.

And again (I. xvi. 170):--

     They were fifty men.

Whence it is possible to compute that as all the ships were near 1200,
and each had 100 men, the whole number is 12 myriads--120,000.

Again speaking. of the Trojans (I. viii. 563):--

     A thousand fires burnt brightly; and round each
     Sat fifty warriors in the ruddy glare.

He enables one to compute that without counting allies they were 50,000
men.

Now music being closest to the soul, since it is a harmony produced by
different elements, by melodies, and by rhythms, intensifies what is
relaxed and relaxes the intense. The Pythagoreans have clearly proved
this, and before them Homer. For he gives praise to music, in the case
of the Sirens, to which he adds the following (O. xii. 188)

     And had joy thereof and gone on his way the wiser.

In another place he introduces in banquets the lyre, as among the
suitors (O. xvii. 271):--

     And the voice of the lyre is heard there which the gods made
     to be mate of the feast.

And at the house of Alcinous the player on the lyre (O. vii. 266):--

     Was composing a beautiful song.

And at marriages (I. xviii. 495):--

     The pipes and lyres were sounding.

And in the works of the vintage (I. xvii. 569):--

     A boy amid them, from a clear-ton'd pipe
     Drew lovely music; well his liquid voice
     The strings accompanied.

Besides in war (I. x. 13):--

     Of pipes and flutes he heard the sound.

Also he uses music to express grief (I. xxiv. 721):--

     Poured forth the music of the mournful dirge,

by the sweetness of melodies softening the bitterness of the soul.

It is clear that melody is twofold,--one of the voice, the other of
instruments, partly wind, partly string. Of sound some are bass, some
treble. These differences Homer knew, since he represents women and boys
with treble voices, by reason of the tenuity of their breath; men, he
makes with bass voices. As in the following (I. xviii. 70):--

              She with bitter cry
     Clasped in her hands his head, and
     Sorrowing spoke.

And again (I. ix. 16):--

     So with deep groans he thus addressed the Greeks.

But old men like the locusts (I. iii. 151) he compares to shrill-voiced
creatures. Instruments whose strings are thin and vibrate quickly,
easily cut the air, and give an acute sound. Those with thick ones,
through the slow movement, have a deep sound. Homer calls the pipe
acute--acute because being thin it gives an acute sound. Homer has this
information about music.

Since we are speaking here about Pythagoras, to whom taciturnity and
not expressing those things which it is wrong to speak were especially
pleasing, let us see whether Homer had also this opinion. For about
those drunken with wine he says (O. xiv. 466):--

     And makes him speak out a word which were better unsaid.

And Odysseus upbraids Thersites (I. ii. 246):--

     Thou babbling fool Therites, prompt of speech,
     Restrain thy tongue.

And Ajax speaks, blaming Idomeneus (I. xxiii. 478):--

     But thou art ever hasty in thy speech.
     And ill becomes thee this precipitance

And while the armies are entering the fight (I. iii. 2-8):--

     With noise and clarmor, as a flight of birds,
         The men of Troy advanced,
     On th'other side the Greeks in silence mov'd.

Clamor is barbaric, silence is Greek. Therefore he has represented the
most prudent man as restrained, in speech. And Odysseus exhorts his son
(O. xvi. 300):--

     If in very truth thou art my son and of our blood, then let
     no man hear that Odysseus is come home; neither let Laertes
     know it nor the swineherd nor any of the household nor
     Penelope herself.

And again he exhorts him (O. xix. 42):--

     Hold thy peace and keep all this in thine heart and ask
     not thereof.

So the opinions of famous philosophers have their origin in Homer.

If it is necessary to mention those who elected for themselves certain
individual views, we could find them taking their source in Homer.
Democritus in constructing his "idola," or representative forms, takes
the thought from the following passage (I. v. 449):--

     Meanwhile Apollo of the silver bow
     A phantom form prepar'd, the counterpart
     Of great Aeneas and alike in arms.

Others deviated into error in ways he would not approve of, but he
represented them as fitting to the special time. For when Odysseus was
detained with Alcinous, who lived in pleasure and luxury, he speaks to
him in a complimentary way (O. ix. 5):--

     Nay, as for me I say that there is no more gracious or perfect
     delight than when a whole people make merry, and the men sit
     orderly at feasts in the halls and listen to the singer, and
     the tables by them laden with food and flesh, and a winebearer
     drawing the wine serves it into the cups.  The fashion seems
     to me the fairest thing in the world.

Led by these words, Epicurus took up the opinion that pleasure was
the SUMMUM BONUM. And Odysseus himself is at one time covered with a
precious and thin woven garment, sometimes represented in rags with
a wallet. Now he is resting with Calypso, now insulted by Iros and
Melantheus. Aristippus taking the model of this life not only struggled
valiantly with poverty and toil, but also intemperately made use of
pleasure.

But it is possible to take these as specimens of Homer's wisdom, because
he first enunciated the many excellent sayings of the Wise Men, as
"follow God" (I. i. 218):--

     Who hears the gods, of them his prayers are heard,

And "nothing too much" (O. xv. 70):--

     I think it shame even in another heart, who loves overmuch
     or hates overmuch; measure is in all things best.

And the expression (O. viii. 351):--

     A pledge is near to evil,
     Evil are evil folks' pledges to hold.

And that saying of Pythagoras to one who asked who is a friend said "an
ALTER EGO."

Homer's parallel saying is (O. xviii. 82):--

     The equal to my head.

Belonging to the same species of Apothegm is what is called the Gnome,
a universal expression about life stated briefly. All poets and
philosophers and orators have used it and have attempted to explain
things gnomically. Homer was the first to introduce in his poetry many
excellent Gnomes stating a principle he wishes to lay down; as when he
says (I. i. 80):--

     And terrible to men of low estate the anger of a king.

And again what must needs be done or not done (I. ii 24):--

     To sleep all night but ill becomes a chief.

Of Homer's many good sayings and admonitions not a few afterward have
been paraphrased. Some examples of these should find a place here; as
the following passage of Homer (I. xv. 104):--

     Fools are we all, who madly strive with Jove,
     Or hope, by access to his throne, to sway
     By word or deed his course!  From all apart,
     He all our counsels heeds not, but derides!
     And boasts o'er all the immortal gods to reign.
     Prepare, then, each his several woes to bear.

Like this is a saying of Pythagoras:--

     Whatever pains mortals have from the gods, whatever fate
     thou hast, bear it nor murmur.

And also these words of Euripides:--

     Nor is it fitting to be indignant at events, no good comes
     of it; but when things go wrong, if one bears them right,
     they do go well.

Again Homer says (I. xxiv. 128):--

     How long, my son, wilt thou thy soul consume with grief
     and mourning?

So Pythagoras:--

     Spare thy life, do not wear out thy soul.

Then Homer says (O. xviii. 136):--

     For the spirit of men upon the earth is even as their day,
     that comes upon them from the father of gods and men.

Archilochus, who imitates other things of Homer, has paraphrased this
too, saying:--

     Such for mortal men, O Glaucus, son of Leptineus, is their
     mind, as Zeus directs for a day.

And in other words, Homer says (I. xiii. 730):--

     To one the gods have granted warlike might,
     While in another's breast all-seeing Jove
     Hath plac'd the spirit of wisdom and mind
     Discerning for the common good of all.
     By him are states preserved! and he himself
     Best knows the value of the precious gift.

Euripides has followed this original:--

     Cities are well ordered by the instructions of one man.
     So, too, a house.  One again is mighty in war.  For one wise
     judgment conquers many hands, but ignorance with a crowd
     brings the most evil.

Where he makes Idomeneus exhorting his comrade, he says (I. xii. 322):--

     O friend, if we survivors of this war
     Could live from age and death forever free,
     Thou shouldst not see me foremost in the fight,
     Nor would I urge thee to the glorious field;
     But since in man ten thousand forms of death
     Attend, which none may 'scape, then on that we
     May glory in others' gain, or they on us!

Aeschylus saying after him:--

     Nor receiving many wounds in his heart does any one die,
     unless the goal of life is run.  Nor does any one sitting by
     the hearth flee any better the decreed fate.

In prose, Demosthenes speaks as follows (O. xviii. 9):--

     For all mortals, death is the end of life even if one keeps
     himself shut up in a cell; it is necessary ever for good men
     to attempt noble things and bravely to bear whatever God
     may give.

Again take Homer (I. iii. 65):--

     The gifts of Heav'n are not to be despis'd.

Sophocles paraphrases this, saying:--

     This is God's gift; whatever the gods may give, one must never
     avoid anything, my son.

In Homer there are the words (I. i. 249):--

     From whose persuasive lips.  Sweeter than
     Honey flowed the stream of speech.

Theocritus said (I. vii. 82):--

     Therefore the Muse poured in his mouth
       Sweet nectar.

How, also, Aratus paraphrased this (I. xviii. 489):--

     Sole star that never bathes in th' ocean wave,--

saying:--

     The Bears protected from cerulean ocean.

(I. xv. 628):--

     They win their soul from death,

is paraphrased:--

     He escaped Hades by a small peg.

Let this be enough on this subject.

But civil discourse belongs to the rhetorical art, with which it seems
Homer was first to be familiar. If Rhetoric is the power of persuasive
speaking, who more than Homer depended on this power? He excels all in
eloquence; also in the grasp of his subject he reveals an equal literary
power.

And the first part of this art is Arrangement, which he exhibits in all
his poetry, and especially at the beginning of his narratives. For he
did not make the beginning of the "Iliad" at a distant period, but at
the time when affairs were developing with energy and had come to a
head. The more inactive periods, which came into past time, he goes over
in other places succinctly. The same he did in the "Odyssey," beginning
from the close of the times of Odysseus's wanderings, in which it was
clearly time to bring in Telemachus and to show the haughty conduct of
the suitors. Whatever happened to Odysseus in his wanderings before this
he introduces into Odysseus's narrative. These things he prefers to
show as more probable and more effective, when said by the one who
experienced them.

As therefore all orators make use of introductory remarks to get
the benevolent attention of their audience, so our poet makes use of
exordiums fitted to move and reach the hearer. In the "Iliad" he first
declares that he is about to say how many evils happened to the Achaeans
through the wrath of Achilles and the high-handed conduct of Agamemnon;
and in the "Odyssey" how many labors and dangers Odysseus encountered
and surmounted all of them by the judgment and perseverance of his soul.
And in each one of the exordiums he invokes the Muse that she may make
the value of what is said greater and more divine.

While the characters introduced by him are made to say many things
either to their relatives or friends or enemies or the people, yet to
each he assigns a fitting type of speech, as in the beginning he makes
Chryseis in his words to the Greeks use a most appropriate exordium.
First he desires for them that they may be superior to their enemies and
may return home, in order that he might gain their kindly feeling. Then
he demands his daughter. But Achilles being angered by the threat of
Agamemnon combines a speech for the Greeks and for himself, in order to
make them more friendly disposed. For, he says, all had proceeded to
the war, not on account Of some private enmity, but to please Agamemnon
himself and his brother, and he went on to say he had done many things
himself and had received a present not from Agamemnon and Menelaus,
but from the whole body of the Greeks. Agamemnon replying to him has no
difficulty in winning the crowd. For when Achilles says he means to sail
back home, on account of the insult he has received, he does not say
"go" but "flee," changing what is said abruptly into an attack on
Achilles reputation. And his words are:--

     I do not exhort you to remain; there are here who value me.

And this was agreeable to his hearers.

And afterward he introduces Nestor, whom he had previously called sweet
in speech and a shrewd orator (I. i. 249):--

     Whose voice flowed from his tongue sweeter than honey.

There could be no greater praise for an orator. He starts off with an
exordium by which he tries to change the minds of the contesting chiefs,
bidding them consider by opposing one another they give occasion of joy
to their enemies. He goes on to admonish both and to exhort them to give
heed to him as their elder. And by telling one to be prudent, he says
what gratifies the other. He advises Agamemnon not to take away what has
been given to a man who has labored much; Achilles, not to strive with
the king who is his superior. And he gives suitable praise to both:
to the one as ruling over more people; to the other, as having more
prowess. In this way he seeks to moderate them.

Again, in what follows, when Agamemnon saw the dream bearing good hopes
to him from Zeus, and exhorting him to arm the Greeks, did he not use
rhetorical art speaking to the multitude, saying the contrary of what
he wishes, to try their feeling and to see if they will be disgusted
by being compelled to do battle for him. But he speaks to please them.
Another of the men able to influence them bids them stay in their
tents, as if the king really wished this. For to those he speaks to he
indicates that he desires the contrary. Odysseus taking up these words,
and making use of a convenient freedom, persuades the leaders by his
mild language; the common people he compels by threats to heed their
superiors. Stopping the mutiny and agitation of the crowd, he persuades
all by his shrewd words, moderately blaming them for not carrying out
what they promised, and at the same time excusing them on the ground
that they have been idle for some time and have been deprived of what is
dearest to them. He persuades them to remain by the hope of the seer's
prophecy.

Likewise Nestor, using arguments unchanged indeed but tending to the
same end, and also using greater freedom to those who have been spoilt
by inaction, brings over the crowd. He places the blame of their
negligence on a few unworthy people and advises the rest. He threatens
the disobedient and immediately takes counsel with the king as to how
the forces are to be drawn up.

Again, when in the deeds of war the Greeks have partly succeeded and
partly failed and been reduced to terror, Diomed, since he has the
audacity of youth and freedom of speech by reason of his success,
before he had shown his valor, took the king's reproof in silence, but
afterward he turns on Agamemnon as if he had counselled flight through
cowardice. For he says (I. ix. 32):--

     Atrides I thy folly must confront,
     As is my right in council! thou, O King,
     Be not offended.

In his speech he tries to advise him and at the same time deprecate his
anger. He then recites the things just performed by him, without envy,
saying (I. ix. 36):--

                             How justly so
     Is known to all the Greeks both young and old.

Afterward he exhorts the Greeks, giving them indirect praise (I. ix.
40):--

     How canst thou hope the sons of Greece shall prove
     Such heartless cowards as thy words suppose?

And he shames Agamemnon, excusing him if he wishes to depart, saying the
others will be sufficient, or if all flee, he will remain alone with his
comrade and fight (I. ix. 48):--

     Yet I and Sthenelaus, we two, will fight.

Nestor commends the excellence of his judgment and his actions. As to
the aim of the council he considers that, as the eldest, he has the
right to offer advice. And he continues endeavoring to arrange for
sending ambassadors to Achilles.

And in the embassy itself he makes the speakers employ different devices
of arguments. For Odysseus, at the opening of his speech, did not say
immediately that Agamemnon repented the taking away of Briseis, and
would give the girl back, and that he was giving some gifts immediately
and promised the rest later. For it was not useful, while his feelings
were excited, to remember these things. But first he wished to provoke
Achilles to sympathize with the misfortunes of the Greeks. Then he
suggests that later on he will want to remedy these disasters and will
not be able to. After this he recalls to him the advice of Peleus;
removing any resentment toward himself, he attributes it to the
character of his father as being more able to move him. And when he
seemed mollified, then he mentioned the gifts of Agamemnon and again
goes back to entreaties on behalf of the Greeks, saying that if
Agamemnon is justly blamed, at least it was a good thing to save those
who had never injured him.

It was necessary to have a peroration of this kind containing nothing to
irritate the hearer. He specifically recalls the purpose of the speech.
The final exhortation has something to stir him against the enemy, for
they are represented as despising him. "For now you can take Hector
if he stands opposed to you! Since he says none of the Greeks is his
equal." But Phoenix, fearing that he has used less entreaties than were
befitting, sheds tears. And first he agrees with his impulse, saying he
will not leave him if he sails away. This was pleasant for him to hear.
And he tells Achilles how Peleus intrusted Phoenix to bring Achilles up,
taking him as a child, and how he was thought worthy to be his teacher
in words and deeds. In passing he relates Achilles' youthful errors,
showing how this period of life is inconsiderate. And proceeding he
omits no exhortation, using briefly all rhetorical forms, saying that
it is a good thing to be reconciled with a suppliant, a man who has sent
gifts, and has despatched the best and most honored ambassadors; that he
himself was worthy to be heard, being his tutor and teacher; that if
he let the present occasion go, he would repent. He makes use of the
example of Meleager who, when called upon to help his fatherland, did
not heed until by the necessity of the calamities that overtook the city
he turned to defend, it. But Ajax used neither entreaty nor pity, but
freedom of speech. He determined to remove Achilles' haughtiness partly
by blaming him seasonably, partly by exhorting him genially not to
be completely embittered. For it befitted his excellency in virtue.
Replying to each of these Achilles shows nobility and simplicity. The
others he refutes cleverly and generously by bringing out worthy causes
of his anger; to Ajax he excuses himself. And to Odysseus he says
that he will sail away on the following day; then being stirred by the
entreaties of Phoenix, he says he will take counsel about leaving. Moved
by the free speech of Ajax, he confesses all that he intends to do: that
he will not go forth to fight until Hector gets as far as his tents and
the ships, after killing many of the Greeks. Then he says, "I think I
shall stop Hector no matter how earnestly he fights." And this argument
he offers in rebuttal to Odysseus about resisting the onslaught of
Hector.

In the words of Phoenix he shows that there is such a thing as the art
of Rhetoric. For he says to Achilles that he had taken him over (I. ix.
440):--

     Inexperienced yet in war that sorrow brings alike on all
     And sage debate, on which attends renown
     Me then he sent, to teach thee how to frame
     Befitting speech and mighty deeds achieve.

These words show that the power of speech especially makes men renowned.

It is besides possible to find in many other parts of his poems passages
pertaining to the art of Rhetoric. For he shows the method of accusation
and purgation elsewhere and in the place where Hector taxes his brother,
accusing him of cowardice and dissoluteness. Because he had this
character, he had injured those who were far different from him; so he
had become the cause of evil to his family. And Alexander softens his
brothers' temper by confessing he was rightly blamed; he wipes off the
charge of cowardice by promising to meet Menelaus in combat. And that
Homer was a skilful speaker, no one in his right mind would deny, for it
is all clear from reading his poems.

He did not overlook to give certain types to his speakers. He introduces
Nestor as agreeable and attractive to his hearers; Menelaus, fond of
brevity, attractive, and sticking to his subject; Odysseus, abundant
subtility of speech. These things Antenor testifies about the two
heroes; he had heard them when they came to Ilium as ambassadors. And
these characteristics of speech Homer himself introduces, displaying
them in all his poetry.

He was acquainted with Antithesis in eloquence. This in every subject
introduces the contrary, and proves and disproves the same thing by
clever handling of the art of logic. For he says (I. xx. 248):--

     For glibly runs the tongue, and can at will
     Give utt'rance to discourse in every vein;
     Wide is the range of language, and such words
     As one may speak, another may return.

He knew how to say the same things at length, and to repeat them
briefly, which is called Recapitulation, and is used by orators whenever
it is necessary to recall briefly the numerous things which have been
said. For what Odysseus related in four books in the Phaeacians, these
he goes over again shortly in the passage beginning (O. xxiii. 310):--

     He began by setting forth how he overcame the Cicones, etc.

But civil discourse embraces also knowledge of laws. No one can really
say whether the word "law" was used in his time. Some say that he
certainly knew it, for he said (O. xvii. 487):--

     To watch the violence and righteousness of men.

Aristachus says the word "righteousness" ([Greek omitted]) comes from
the words "to distribute well." Hence law ([Greek omitted]) seems to be
called, because it distributes ([Greek omitted]) equal parts to all or
to each according to his worth. But that he knew the force of law was
conserved, if not in writing at least in the opinion of men, he shows
in many ways. For he makes Achilles talking about the sceptre say (I. i.
237):--

                   And now 'tis borne,
     Emblem of justice, by the sons of Greece,
     Who guard the sacred ministry of law
     Before the face of Jove.

For usages and customs, the laws of which Zeus is reported as the
lawgiver, with whom Minos the king of the Cretans had converse men say;
which converse is, as Plato bears witness, the learning of the laws.
Clearly in his poems he reveals that it is necessary to follow the laws
and not to do wrong (O. xviii. 141):--

     Wherefore let no man forever be lawless any more, but keep
     quietly the gifts of the gods, whatsoever they may give.

Homer first of all divided into different parts civil polity. For in
the shield which was made in imitation of the whole world by Hephaestus
(that is, spiritual power) he imagined two cities to be contained:
one enjoying peace and happiness; the other at war, and exposing the
advantages of each he shows that the one life is civil and the other
military. Neither did he pass over even the agricultural. But he showed
this, too, making it clear and beautiful in his language.

In every city it is sanctioned by the law that there is to be a meeting
of a council to consider before the popular assembly is called together.
This is evident from the words of Homer (I. ii. 53):--

            But first of all the Elders
     A secret conclave Agamemnon called.

Agamemnon collects the Elders, and examines with them how to arm the
people for the fight.

And that it is necessary for the leader before all things to care for
the salvation of the whole, he teaches in his characters by the advice
he gives (I. ii. 24):--

     To sleep all night but ill becomes a chief.

And how it is necessary for subjects to obey their leader, and how the
commander should bear himself toward each class; Odysseus shows this,
persuading the superior class by soft words, but using toward the crowd
bitter words of rebuke.

To rise up for one's superiors is sanctioned in all laws. This the gods
themselves do in the case of Zeus (I. i. 535):--

                          At his entrance all
     Rose from their seats at once; not one presumed
     To wait his coming.

There is a rule among most that the eldest shall speak. Diomed by
necessity of the war having dared to speak first, requests to be
pardoned (I. xiv. 111):--

              Nor take offence that I,
     The youngest of all, presume to speak.

And it is an universal rule that voluntary offences are punished and
involuntary ones are excused. This, too, the poet shows, in what the
minstrel says (O. xxii. 350):--

     And Telemachus will testify of this, thine own dear son, that
     not by mine own will or desire did I resort to thy house to
     sing to the wooers after their feasts; but being so many and
     stronger than I, they led me by constraint.

There are three forms of polity intended to attain justice and good
laws,--Royalty, Aristocracy, and Democracy. To these are opposed three
which end in injustice and lawlessness,--Tyranny, Oligarchy, and Mob
Rule. Homer does not seem ignorant of these. Throughout his whole poem
he names kingly rule and praises it; for example (I. ii. 196):--

     For fierce his anger, and the Lord of counsel, Jove,
     From whom proceeds all honor, loves him well.

And what sort of a man a king must be, he plainly reveals (O. ii.
236):--

     Be kind and gentle with all his heart.

And (O. iv. 690):--

     One that wrought no iniquity toward any man, nor spake aught
     unrighteous in the township, as is the wont of divine kings.

And severally where he enumerates five kings of the Boeotians, and among
the Phaeacians (O. viii. 390):--

     Behold there are twelve glorious princes who rule among this
     people and bear sway, and I myself am the thirteenth.

The image of democracy he shows clearly on the shield, in which he makes
two cities. The one he says is ruled democratically, since they have no
leader, yet all by their own will conduct themselves according to the
laws; then, too, he introduces a trial proceeding. And he exhibits a
democracy when he says (O. xvi. 425):--

     In fear of the people, for they were exceedingly wroth against
     him, because he had followed with Topheon sea-robbers and
     harried  the Thesprotians, who were at peace with us.

A man ruling with violence and contrary to the laws he does not call a
tyrant, for the name is of more recent date. But his nature he exhibits
in his deeds (O. vxiii. 85):--

     And send thee to the mainland to Echetus the king, the maimer
     of all mankind, who will cut off thy nose and ears with the
     pitiless steel.

And he shows Aegisthus tyrannical, who killed Agamemnon and lorded over
Mycenae. And when he was killed he says he would have had no sepulchre
if Menelaus had been there. For this was the custom with tyrants (O.
iii. 258):--

     Then even in his death would they not have heaped the piled
     earth over him, but dogs and fowls of the air would have
     devoured him as he lay on the plain far from the town:
     so dread was the deed he contrived.

Oligarchy he seems to show in the ambition of the suitors, about whom he
says (O. i. 247):--

     As many as lord it in rocky Ithaca.

He describes the mob rule in the Trojan government in which all are
accomplices of Alexander and all are involved in misfortunes. Priam
accuses his sons of being the cause (I. xxiv. 253):--

     Haste, worthless sons, my scandal and my shame!

And also another Trojan, Antimachus (I. xi. 124):--

                'Twas he who chief
     Seduc'd by Paris' gold and splendid gifts
     Advis'd the restitution to refuse
     Of Helen to her lord.



It is esteemed just among men to distribute to each according to his
worth. This principle concerns especially reverencing the gods, and
honoring parents and relations. Piety toward the gods he teaches in many
passages, introducing the heroes sacrificing, praying, offering gifts to
the gods, and celebrating them in hymns, and as a reward for their piety
they receive from the gods.

Honor to parents he shows especially, in the character of Telemachus,
and in his praise of Orestes (O. i. 298):---

     Or hast thou not heard what renown the goodly Orestes got
     among all men in that he slew the slayer of his father?

For parents to be cared for in their old age by their children is just
by nature and a debt of retribution; this he showed in one passage where
he says (I. xvii. 302):--

     Not destin'd he his parents to repay their early care.

The good will and good faith of brothers to one another he shows in
Agamemnon and Menelaus, of friends in Achilles and Patroclus, prudence
and wifely love in Penelope, the longing of a man for his wife in
Odysseus.

How we should act toward our country he showed especially in these words
(I. xii. 243):--

     The best of omens is our country's cause.

And how citizens should share a common friendship (I. ix. 63):--

     Outcast from kindred, law, and hearth is he
     Whose soul delights in fierce, internal strife.

That truthfulness is honorable and the contrary to be avoided (I. ix.
312):--

     Him as the gates of hell my soul abhors
     Where outward speech his secret thought belies.

And (O. xviii. 168):--

     Who speak friendly with their lips, but imagine evil in the
     latter end.

Households are chiefly well ordered when the wife does not make a
fuss over the undeclared plans of her husband nor without his counsel
undertakes to do any thing. Both he shows in the person of Hera; the
former he attributes to Zeus as speaker (I. i. 545):--

     Expect not Juno, all my mind to know.

And the latter Hera herself speaks (I. xiv. 310):--

     Lest it displease thee, if, to thee unknown,
     I sought the Ocean's deeply flowing stream,

There is a custom among all people for those who go to a war or who are
in danger to send some message to their families. Our poet was familiar
with this custom. For Andromache, bewailing Hector, says (I. xxiv.
743):--

     For not to me was giv'n to clasp the hand extended from thy
        dying bed,
     Nor words of wisdom catch, which night and day,
     With tears, I might have treasur'd in my heart.

Penelope recalls the commands of Odysseus when he set forth (O. xviii.
265):--

     Wherefore I know not if the gods will suffer me to return, or
     whether I shall be cut off there in Troy; so do thou have a
     care for all these things.  Be mindful of my father and my
     mother in the halls, even as thou art or yet more than now,
     while I am far away.  But when thou see'st thy son a bearded
     man, marry whom thou wilt and leave thine own house.

He knew also the custom of having stewards (O. ii. 226):--

     He it was to whom Odysseus, as he departed in the fleet, had
     given the charge over all his house that it should obey the
     old man, and that he should keep all things safe.

Grief at the death in one's household he thinks should not be
unmeasured; for this is unworthy, nor does he allow it altogether to
be repressed; for apathy is impossible for mankind, whence he says the
following (I. xxiv. 48):--

     He mourns and weeps, but time his grief allays,
     For fate to man a patient mind hath given.

Other places he says (I. xix. 228):--

     Behooves us bury out of sight our dead
     Steeling our hearts and weeping but a day.

He also knew the customs used now at funerals, in other passages and in
the following (I. xvi. 456):--

     There shall his brethren and his friends perform
     His fun'ral rites, and mound and column raise
     The fitting tribute to the mighty dead

And as Andromache says (before) the naked and prostrate body of Hector
(I. xxii. 509):--

     But now on thee, beside the beaked ships
     Far from thy parents, when the rav'ning dogs
     Have had their fill, the wriggling worms shall feed
     In thee all naked; while within thy house
     Lies store of raiment, rich and rare, the work
     Of women's hands: these I will burn with fire
     Not for thy need--thou ne'er shalt wear them more
     But for thine honor in the sight of Troy.

So, too, Penelope prepares the shroud (O. ii. 99):--

     Even this shroud for the hero Laertes.

But these are examples of moderation. But exceeding these are the living
creatures and men Achilles burns on the pyre of Patroclus. He tells us
of them, but does not do so in words of praise. Therefore he exclaims
(I. xxi. 19):--

     On savage deeds intent.

And he first of all mentions monuments to the slain (I. vii. 336):--

                And on the plains erect
     Around the pyre one common pyre for all.

And he gave the first example of funeral games. These are common to
times of peace and war.

Experience in warlike affairs, which some authorities call Tactics, his
poetry being varied by infantry, siege, and naval engagements, and also
by individual contests, covers many types of strategy. Some of these are
worth mentioning. In drawing up armies it is necessary always to put the
cavalry in front, and after it the infantry. This he indicates in the
following verses (I. ii. 297):--

     In the front rank, with chariot and with horse,
     He plac'd the car-borne warriors; in the rear,
     Num'rous and brave, a cloud of infantry!

And as to placing leaders among the soldiers as they are arranged in
files (I. ix. 86):--

     Seven were the leaders; and with each went forth,
     A hundred gallant youths, with lances armed.

Some of the leaders fight in the front rank; some in the rear exhort the
rest to fight (I. iv. 252):--

     And come where round their chief
     Idomeneus, the warlike bards of Crete
     Were coming for the fight; Idomeneus
     Of courage stubborn as the forest boar
     The foremost ranks array'd; Meriones
     The rearmost squadrons had in charge.

It is necessary for those who are valiant to camp in the extreme limits,
making as it were a wall for the rest; but for the king is pitched his
tent in the safest place, that is, in the midst. He shows this by making
the most valorous men, Achilles and Ajax, encamp in the most exposed
spaces of the fleet, but Agamemnon and the rest in the middle.

The custom of surrounding the camp with earth-works, and digging around
it a deep and wide ditch and planting it in a circle with stakes so that
no one can jump over it by reason of its breadth, nor go down into it
because of its depth, is found in the warlike operations of Homer (I.
xii. 52):--

                    In vain we seek to drive
     Our horses o'er the ditch: it is hard to cross,
     'Tis crowned with pointed stakes, and then behind
     Is built the Grecian wall; these to descend,
     And from our cars in narrow space to fight,
     Were certain ruin.

And in battle those who follow the example of Homer's heroes die bravely
(I. xxii. 304):--

     Yet not without a struggle let me die,
     Nor all inglorious; but let some great act,
     Which future days may hear of, mark my fall.

And another time (O. xv. 494):--

     And if there be among you who this day shall meet his doom by
     sword or arrow slain, e'en let him die! a glorious death is
     his who for his country falls.

To those who distinguish themselves he distributes gifts (I. ix. 334):--

     To other chiefs and kings he meted out their several portions.

And he threatens deserters (I. xv. 348):--

     Whom I elsewhere, and from the ships aloof
     Shall find, my hand shall down him on the spot.

Why is it necessary to speak of the heroes in battle? How differently
and variously he makes them give and receive wounds. One he thinks
worthy of mention, because he thinks those wounded in front are the more
honorable because they prove steadfastness and a desire to abide the
shock. Those who are struck in the back or neck were less honorable,
since these blows they received in flight. Both of these are mentioned
in Homer (I. xii. 288):--

     Not in the neck behind, nor in thy back
     Should fall the blow, but in thy breast in front,
     Thy courage none might call in doubt
     Shouldst thou from spear or sword receive a wound.

And again (I. xxii. 213):--

     Not in my back will I receive thy spear,
     But through my heart.

In putting enemies to flight he gives useful advice, not to be busied
with the spoil, nor give time for flight, but to press on and pursue (I.
vi. 68):--

    Loiter not now behind, to throw yourselves
    Upon the prey, and bear it to the ships;
    Let all your aim be now to kill, then
    Ye may at leisure spoil your slaughtered foe.

There are in his poetry successful deeds achieved by every age, by which
every one, no matter who he may be, can be encouraged: the man in the
flower of his strength by Achilles, Ajax, and Diomed; by younger ones
Antilochus and Meriones; the mature by Idomeneus and Odysseus; the old
men by Nestor; and every king by all of these named and by Agamemnon.
Such are in Homer the examples of the discourse and action of civilized
life.

Let us see now whether Homer had any familiarity with medicine. That he
held the art in high regard is clear from the following (I. xi. 514):--

     Worth many a life is his, the skilful leech.

Medical science appears to be the science of disease and health. That it
is a science any one can learn from this (O. iv. 23):--

     There each one is a leech skilled beyond all men.

That it deals with disease and health (O. iv. 230):--

     Many that are healing in the cup, and many baneful,--

he indicates with these things.

Medicine has, too, a theoretical side which reaches the knowledge of
particulars by universal reasoning and by inductive method. The parts
of this are the study of symptoms and the knowledge of the courses of
disease. The active part treating of action and effect; the parts of
it diatetic, surgical, medicinal. How did Homer appraise each of these?
That he knew the theoretical side is evident from this (O. iv. 227):--

     Medicines of such virtue and so helpful had the daughters
     of Zeus.

He calls them "of such virtue" because they were prepared by theoretic
art.

But the study of symptoms he goes over in the case of Achilles. For he
was a disciple of Charon. He first observed, then, the causes of the
pestilence which was attacking the Greeks. For he knew that the causes
of common diseases were from Apollo, who seems to be the same as the
Sun. For he notices the seasons of the year. If these are intemperate,
they become the causes of disease. For, in general, the safety and
destruction of men are to be ascribed to Apollo, of women to Artemis,
i.e. to the Sun and Moon, making them the casters of arrows by reason
of the rays they throw out. So dividing the male and female he makes the
male of the warmer temperament. On this account, at any rate, he
says Telemachus is of this type, "by the guidance of Apollo"; but the
daughters of Tyndarus grew up, he says, under the protection of Artemis.
Moreover, to these gods he attributes death in many places, and among
others in the following (I. xxiv. 605):--

     The youths, Apollo with his silver bow;
     The maids, the Archer Queen Diana slew.

Where he relates the rising of the Dog Star, the same is a sign and
cause of fever and disease (I. xxii. 30):--

     The highest he but sign to mortal man
     Of evil augury and fiery heat.

He gives the causes of disease where he speaks about the gods (I. v.
341):--

     They eat no bread, they drink no ruddy wine,
     Thence are they bloodless and exempt from death.

For food, whether dry or humid, is generative of blood. And this
nourishes the body; if it is excessive or corrupt, it becomes the cause
of disease.

The practical part of medicine he carefully distinguishes. In this is
the dietetic. First, he knew the periods and cures of diseases, as when
he says (O. xi. 171):--

     What doom overcame thee of death that lays men at their
     length? Was it a slow disease, or did Artemis the archer slay
     them with the visitation of her gentle shafts?

It is evident that he thinks a light diet is healthful. For he pictures
his heroes making use of cooked food and so removes extravagant
attention about things to eat. And since the stomach needs constant
repletion, when cooked food, which has the closest relation to the body,
is digested in the heart and veins, and the surfeit is cast forth, he
says words like the following (O. vii. 215):--

     But as for me suffer me to sup afflicted as I am; for naught
     is there more shameless than a ravening belly, which biddeth a
     man perforce be mindful of him.

And again (O. vii. 219):--

     Yet ever more he biddeth me eat and drink, and maketh utterly
     to forget all my sufferings and commandeth me to take my fill.

He knew, too, the difference in the use of wine: that immoderate
drinking is harmful but moderate profitable; as follows (O. xxi.
294):--

     Honey sweet wine, that is the bane of others too, even of all
     who take great draughts and drink out of measure.

The other so (I. vi. 261):--

              But great the strength,
     Which gen'rous wine imparts to men who toil
     And that gives additional force.

and (I. xix. 167):--

     But he who first with food and wine refreshed
     All day maintains the combat with the foe.
     His spirit retains unbroken, and his limbs
     Unwearied till both armies quit the field.

And he thinks the agreeable taste contributes to good fellowship (O.
vii. 182):--

     So spake he, and Pontonous mixed the gladdening wine.

The strong and heady kind Odysseus gives to the Cyclops, the sharp
kind for a medicine, for such is the Promneon brand, which he gives to
wounded Machaon.

That he advises the use of gymnastics is evident in many places, for he
makes his characters always at work, some in appropriate occupations,
some for the sake of exercise. Although the Phaeacians are externally
given to softness, and the suitors are dissolute, he introduces them
doing gymnastic feats. And moderate exercise he thinks is the cause of
health. For a tired body sleep is a remedy. For he says "sleep came upon
Odysseus" after he had been tired out by the sea (O. v. 493):--

     That so it might soon release him from his weary travail,
     overshadowing his eyelids.

Nature requires a tired body to take rest. And where there is too little
heat, as it is not able to penetrate everywhere, it remains at the
lowest level. Why does the body rest? Because the tension of the soul is
remitted and the members are dissolved and this he clearly says (O. iv.
794):--

     And she sank back in sleep, and all her joints were loosened.

As in other things, immoderation is not advantageous; so he declares the
same with regard to sleep, at one time saying (O, xiv. 394):--

Weariness and much sleep.

And another (O. xx. 52):--

     To wake and watch all night, this, too, is vexation of spirit.

He knew, too, that clearness of air contributes to health, where he says
(O. iv. 563):--

     But the deathless gods will convey thee to the Elysian plain
     and the World's end, where is Rhadamanthus of the fair hair,
     where life is easiest for men.  No snow is there, nor yet
     great storm, nor any rain; but always ocean sendeth forth the
     breeze of the shrill west to blow cool on men.

He knew remedies for sufferings; for cold revives those who are
fainting, as in the case of Sarpedon (I. v. 697):--

     He swooned, and giddy mists o'erspread his eyes,
     But soon revived as on his forehead blew
     While yet he gasped for breath the cooling breeze.

Heat is a remedy for cold, as in the case of storm-tossed Odysseus, who
bends down in the thicket, where there is a protection against winds and
rains, and he covers himself with the wood about him. And other places
he mentions baths and anointing, as in the case of Diomed and Odysseus
returning from their night expedition. The special usefulness of baths
he shows especially in the following (O. x. 362):--

     She bathed me with water from out a great caldron, pouring it
     over head and shoulders, where she had mixed it to a pleasant
     warmth till from my limbs she took away consuming weariness.

It is plain that the nerves have their origin in the head and shoulders.
So probably from this he makes the healing of fatigue to be taken. This
takes place by the wetting and warming; for labors are parching.

We have now to consider how he treated the function of surgery. Machaon
heals Menelaus by first removing the javelin; then he examines the wound
and presses out the blood, and scatters over it dry medicaments. And it
is evident that this is done by him in a technical fashion. Eurypalus,
who is wounded in the thigh, first treats it with a sharp knife, then he
washes it with clear water; afterward to diminish the pain, he employs
an herb. For there are many in existence that heal wounds. He knew this,
too, that bitter things are suitable; for to dry up wounds requires
exsiccation. After Patroclus has applied the healing art, he did not go
away immediately, but (I. xv. 393):--

     Remaining, with his converse soothed the chief.

For a sufferer needs sympathy. Machaon wounded not with a great or fatal
wound on the shoulder, he makes using intentionally a somewhat careless
diet. Perhaps here he shows his art. For he who takes care of himself at
ordinary times is able to heal himself.

This is noted, too, in Homer, that he knows the distinction of drugs.
Some are to be used as plasters, others as powders, as when he says (I.
iv. 218):--

     And applied with skilful hand the herbs of healing power.

But some are to be drunk, as where Helen mixes a medicine in a bowl (O.
iv. 221):--

     A drug to lull all pain and anger, and bring forgetfulness of
     every sorrow.

He knows, too, that some poisonous drugs are to be applied as ointments
(O. i. 261):--

     To seek a deadly drug, that he might have wherewithal to
     smear his bronze-shod arrows.

Others are to be drunk, as in these words (O. ii. 330):--

     To fetch a poisonous drug that he may cast it into the bowl
     and make an end of all of us.

So much for medicines in the Homeric poems.

Divination is useful to man like medicine. A part of this the Stoics
call artificial, as the inspection of entrails and birds' oracles, lots,
and signs. All of these they call in general artificial. But what is not
artificial, and is not acquired by learning, are trances and ecstasy,
Homer knew, too, of these phenomena. But he also knew of seers, priests,
interpreters of dreams, and augurs. A certain wise man in Ithaca he
tells of (O. ii 159):--

     He excelled his peers in knowledge of birds and in uttering
     words of fate.

And Odysseus, praying, says (O. xx. 100):--

     Let some one I pray of the folk that are waking show me a
     word of good omen within and without; let soon other sign be
     revealed to me from Zeus.

Snoring with him is a good sign. A divinely inspired seer is with the
suitors, telling the future by divine inspiration. Once, too, Helenus
says (I. vii. 53):--

     He was the recipient of a divine voice.
     By revelation from th' eternal gods.

He gives cause of believing that Socrates had actually communications
from the voice of the daemon.

What natural or scientific art is left untouched? Tragedy took its start
from Homer, and afterward was raised to supremacy in words and things.
He shows that there is every form of tragedy; great and extraordinary
deeds, appearances of the gods, speech full of wisdom, revealing all
sorts of natures. In a word, his poems are all dramas, serious and
sublime in expression, also in feeling and in subject. But they contain
no exhibition of unholy deeds, lawless marriages, or the murder of
parents and children, or the other marvels of more recent tragedy. But
when he mentions a thing of this kind, he seems to conceal rather than
to condemn the crime. As he does in the case of of Clytemnestra. For he
says (O. iii. 266):--

     That she was endowed with an excellent mind as she had with
     her a teacher appointed by Agamemnon, to give her the
     best advice.

Aegisthus got this tutor out of the way and persuaded her to sin.
He allows that Orestes justly avenged his father's death by killing
Aegisthus; but he passes over in silence the murder of his mother.
Many of the like examples are to be seen in the poet, as a writer of
majestic, but not inhuman, tragedy.

None the less, however, Comedy took from him its origin; for he
contains, although he relates the gravest and most serious things,
episodes which move to laughter, as in the "Iliad" Hephaestus is
introduced limping and pouring out wine for the gods (I. i. 599):--

     Rose laughter irrepressible, at sight
     Of Vulcan hobbling round the spacious hall.

Thersites is most contemptible in body and most evil in disposition,
from his raising a disturbance, and his slanderous speech and
boastfulness. Odysseus attacks him on this account and gives occasion to
all to laugh (I. ii. 270):--

     The Greeks, despite their anger, laugh'd aloud.

In the "Odyssey" among the pleasure-loving Phaeacians their bard sings
the adultery of Ares and Aphrodite. He tells how they fell into the
snares of Hepheastus, and were taken in the act, and caused all the gods
to laugh, and how they joked frequently with one another. And among the
dissolute suitors Irus the beggar is brought in, contesting for a prize
with the most noble Odysseus, and how he appeared ridiculous in the
action. Altogether it is the character of human nature, not only to be
intense, but to take "a moral holiday" so that the men may be equal to
the troubles of life. Such relaxation for the mind is to be found in our
poet. Those who in later days introduced Comedy to produce laughter made
use of bare and naked language, but they cannot claim to have invented
anything better. Of erotic feelings and expression, Homer makes but a
moderate use; as Zeus says (I. iii. 442):--

     For never did thy beauty so inflame my sense.

And what follows, and about Helen (I. iii. 156):--

     And 'tis no marvel, one to other said,
     The valiant Trojans and the well-greaved Greeks
     For beauty such as this should long endure
     The toils of war.

And other things of the same kind. Other poets have represented
men taken by this passion uncontrollably and immoderately. This is
sufficient for this subject.

Epigrams are a pleasing variety of speech; they are found on statues and
on monuments indicating succinctly to whom they are dedicated. And this,
too, is a mark of Homer where he says (I. vii. 89):--

     Lo! there a warrior's tomb of days gone by,
     A mighty chief whom glorious Hector slew.

And again (I. vi. 460):--

     Lo! this was Hector's wife, who, when they fought
     On plains of Troy, was Ilion's bravest chief.

But if any one should say that Homer was a master of painting, he would
make no mistake. For some of the wise men said that poetry was speaking
painting, and painting silent poetry. Who before or who more than Homer,
by the imagination of his thoughts or by the harmony of his verse,
showed and exalted gods, men, places, and different kinds of deeds? For
he showed by abundance of language all sorts of creatures and the most
notable things--lions, swine, leopards. Describing their forms and
characters and comparing them to human deeds, he showed the properties
of each. He dared to liken the forms of gods to those of men. Hephaestus
prepared Achilles' shield; he sculptured in gold, land, sky, sea, the
greatness of the Sun and the beauty of the Moon and the host of the
stars crowning all. He placed on it cities in different states and
fortunes, and animals moving and speaking. Who has more skill than the
artificer of such an art?

Let us see in another example out of many how poems resemble more those
things that are seen than those that are heard. As for example, in the
passage where he tells of the wound of Odysseus, he introduces what
Eurychleias did (O. xix. 468):--

     Now the old woman took the scarred limb and passed her hand
     down it, and knew it by the touch and let the foot drop
     suddenly, so that the knees fell into the bath, and the vessel
     broke, being turned over on the other side, and that water was
     spilled on the ground.  Then grief and joy came on her in one
     moment, and her eyes filled with tears, and the voice of her
     utterance was stayed, and touching the chin of Odysseus, she
     spake to him saying, "Yea, verily, thou art Odysseus, my dear
     child, and I knew thee not before till I had handled all the
     body of my lord."  Therewithal she looked toward Penelope, as
     minded to make a sign and the rest.

For here more things are shown than can be in a picture and those can be
weighed by the eyes. They are not to be taken in by the eyes, but by the
intelligence alone: such as the letting go of the foot through emotion,
the sound of the tears, the spilt water and the grief, and at the same
time the joy of the old women, her words to Odysseus, and what she
is about to say as she looks toward Penelope. Many other things are
graphically revealed in the poet which come out when he is read.

It is time to close a work which we have woven, like a crown from a
beflowered and variegated field, and which we offer to Muses. And we,
we shall not lay it to the heart if any one censures us, because the
Homeric poems contain the basis of evil things, if we ascribe to him
various political, ethical, and scientific discussions. Since good
things are by themselves simple, straightforward, and unprepared;
but what is mixed with evil has many different modes and all kinds of
combinations, from which the substance of the matter is derived. If evil
is added to the others, the knowledge and choice of the good is made
easier. And on the whole a subject of this sort gives occasion to the
poet for originating discourse of all kinds, some belonging to himself,
some proper to the characters he introduces. From this circumstance be
gives much profit to his readers. Why should we not ascribe to Homer
every excellence? Those things that he did not work up, they who came
after him have noticed. And some make use of his verses for divination,
like the oracles of God. Others setting forward other projects fit to
them for our use what he has said by changing or transposing it.


END OF TWELVE--------------




THE BANQUET OF THE SEVEN WISE MEN.

THE SEVEN,--SOLON, DIAS, THALES, ANACHARSIS, CLEOBULUS, PITTACUS, CHILO.

NILOXENUS, EUMETIS, ALEXIDEMUS PERIANDER, ARDALUS, AESOP, CLEODEMUS,
MNESIPHILUS, CHERSIAS, GORGIAS, DIOCLES.

DIOCLES TO NICARCHUS

No wonder, my friend Nicarchus, to find old truths so disguised, and
the words and actions of men so grossly and misrepresented and lamely
delivered, seeing people are so disposed to give ear and credit to
fictions of yesterday's standing. For there were not merely seven
present at that feast, as you were informed; there were more than double
the number. I was there myself in person familiarly acquainted with
Periander (my art had gained me his acquaintance); and Thales boarded
at my house, at the request and upon the recommendation of Periander.
Whoever then gave you that account of our feast did it very
inadequately; it is plain he did it upon hearsay and that he was not
there among us. Now, that we are together and at leisure, and possibly
we may not live to find an opportunity so convenient another time,
I will (as you wish it) give you a faithful account of the whole
proceedings at that meeting.

Periander had prepared a dinner for us, not in the town, but in a
dining-hall which stands close to the temple of Venus, to whom there
was a sacrifice that day. For having neglected the duty ever since his
mother died for love, he was resolved now to atone for the omission,
being warned so to do by the dreams of Melissa. In order thereunto,
there was provided a rich chariot for every one of the guests. It was
summer-time, and every part of the way quite to the seaside was hardly
passable, by reason of throngs of people and whole clouds of dust. As
soon as Thales espied the chariot waiting at the door, he smilingly
discharged it, and we walked through the fields to avoid the press and
noise. There was in our company a third person, Niloxenus a Naucratian,
an eminent man, who was very intimately acquainted with Solon and Thales
in Egypt; he had a message to deliver to Bias, and a letter sealed,
the contents whereof he knew not; only he guessed it contained a second
question to be resolved by Bias, and in case Bias undertook not to
answer it, he had in commission to impart it to the wisest men in
Greece. What a fortune is this (quoth Niloxenus) to find you all
together! This paper (showing it us) I am bringing to the banquet.
Thales replied, after his wonted smiling way, If it contains any hard
question, away with it to Priene. Bias will resolve it with the same
readiness he did your former problem. What problem was that? quoth he.
Why, saith Thales, a certain person sent him a beast for sacrifice with
this command, that he should return him that part of his flesh which was
best and worst; our philosopher very gravely and wisely pulled out
the tongue of the beast, and sent it to the donor;--which single act
procured him the name and reputation of a very wise man. It was not
this act alone that advanced him in the estimation of the world, quoth
Niloxenus; but he joyfully embraces what you so carefully shun, the
acquaintance and friendship of kings and great men; and whereas he
honors you for divers great accomplishments, he particularly admires
you for this invention, that with little labor and no help of any
mathematical instrument you took so truly the height of one of the
pyramids; for fixing your staff erect at the point of the shadow which
the pyramid cast, two triangles being thus made by the tangent rays of
the sun, you demonstrated that what proportion one shadow had to the
other, such the pyramid bore to the stick.

But, as I said, you are accused of being a hater of kings, and certain
false friends of yours have presented Amasis with a paper of yours
stuffed with sentences reproachful to majesty; as for instance, being
at a certain time asked by Molpagoras the Ionian, what the most absurd
thing was you had observed in your notice, you replied, An old king.
Another time, in a dispute that happened in your company about the
nature of beasts, you affirmed that of wild beasts, a king, of tame, a
flatterer, was the worst. Such apothegms must needs be unacceptable to
kings, who pretend there is vast difference between them and tyrants.
This was Pittacus's reply to Myrsilus, and it was spoken in jest, quoth
Thales; nor was it an old king I said I should marvel at, but an old
pilot. In this mistake however, I am much of the youth's mind who,
throwing a stone at a dog, hit his stepmother, adding, Not so bad. I
therefore esteemed Solon a very wise and good man, when I understood he
refused empire; and if Pittacus had not taken upon himself a monarchy,
he had never exclaimed, O ye gods! how hard a matter it is to be good!
And Periander, however he seems to be sick of his father's disease,
is yet to be commended that he gives ear to wholesome discourses
and converses only with wise and good men, rejecting the advice of
Thrasybulus my countryman who would have persuaded him to chop off the
heads of the leading men. For a prince that chooses rather to govern
slaves than freemen is like a foolish farmer, who throws his wheat and
barley in the streets, to fill his barns with swarms of locusts and
whole cages of birds. For government has one good thing to make amends
for its many evils, namely, honor and glory, provided one rules good men
as being better than they and great men because greater than they. But
he that having ascended the throne minds only his own interest and ease,
is fitter to tend sheep or to drive horses or to feed cattle than to
govern men.

But this stranger (continues he) has engaged us in a deal of impertinent
chat, for we have omitted to speak or offer any discourse suitable to
the occasion and end of our meeting; for doubtless it becomes the guest
as well as the host, to make preparation beforehand. It is reported that
the Sybarites used to invite their neighbors' wives a whole twelve-month
before to their entertainments, that they might have convenient time
to trim and adorn themselves; for my part, I am of opinion, that he
who would feast as he should ought to allow himself more time for
preparation than they, it being a more difficult matter to compose the
mind into an agreeable temper than to fit one's clothes for the outward
ornament of the body. For a prudent man comes not hither only to fill
his belly, as if he were to fill a bottle, but to be sometimes grave
and serious, sometimes pleasant, sometimes to listen to others, and
sometimes to speak himself what may benefit or divert the company, if
the meeting is intended for any good use or purpose. For if the victuals
be not good, men may let them alone, or if the wine be bad, men may
use water; but for a weak-brained, impertinent, unmannerly, shallow
fellow-commoner there is no cure; he mars all the mirth and music,
and spoils the best entertainment in the world. And it will be no easy
business to lay aside a sullen temper; since we find divers men, angered
in their debauches, have yet remembered the provocation to their dying
day, the spite remaining like a surfeit arising from wrong done or an
insult received in drinking. Wherefore Chilo did very well and wisely;
for when he invited yesterday, he would not promise to come till he had
a particular given him of all their names who were to meet him. For,
quoth he, if my business calls me to sea or I am pressed to serve my
prince in his wars, there is a necessity upon me to rest contented with
whatever company I fall into, though never so unsuitable to my quality
or disagreeable to my nature and humor; but voluntarily and needlessly
to associate myself with any riffraff rabble would ill become any man
pretending to but common discretion.

The Egyptian skeleton which they brought into their feasts and exposed
to the view of their guests, with this advice, that they should not in
their merriment forget they would shortly be themselves such as that
was,--though it was a sight not so acceptable (as may be supposed),--had
yet this conveniency and use, to incite the spectators not to luxury and
drunkenness but to mutual love and friendship, persuading them not to
protract a life in itself short and uncertain by a tedious course of
wickedness.

In discourses of this kind we spent our time by the way, and were now
come to the house. Here Thales would not be washed, for he had but a
while before anointed himself; wherefore he took a round to view the
horse-race and the wrestling-place, and the grove upon the water-side,
which was neatly trimmed and beautified by Periander; this he did, not
so much to satisfy his own curiosity (for he seldom or never admired
anything he saw), but that he might not disoblige Periander or seem to
overlook or despise the glory and magnificence of our host. Of the
rest every one, after he had anointed and washed himself, the servants
introduced into a particular room, purposely fitted and prepared for the
men; they were guided thither through a porch, in which Anacharsis sat,
and there was a certain young lady with him combing his hair. This lady
stepping forward to welcome Thales, he kissed her most courteously, and
smiling said: Madam, make our host fair and pleasant, so that, being (as
he is) the mildest man in the world, he may not be fearful and terrible
for us to look on. When I was curious to inquire who this lady was, he
said, Do you not yet know the wise and famous Eumetis? for so her father
calls her, though others call her after her father's name Cleobulina.
Doubtless, saith Niloxenus, they call her by this name to commend her
judgment and wit, and her reach into the more abstruse and recondite
part of learning; for I have myself in Egypt seen and read some problems
first started and discussed by her. Not so, saith Thales, for she plays
with these as with cockal-bones, and deals boldly with all she meets;
she is a person of an admirable understanding, of a shrewd capacious
mind, of a very obliging conversation, and one that prevails upon her
father to govern his subjects with the greatest mildness. How democratic
she is appears, saith Niloxenus, plainly to any that observes her simple
innocent garb. But pray, continues he, wherefore is it that she shows
such affection to Anacharsis? Because, replied Thales, he is a
temperate and learned man, who fully and freely makes known to her those
mysterious ways of dieting and physicing the sick which are now in use
among the Scythians; and I doubt not she now coaxes and courts the old
gentleman at the rate you see, taking this opportunity to discourse with
him and learn something of him.

As we were come near the dining-room, Alexidemus the Milesian, a bastard
son of Thrasybulus the Tyrant, met us. He seemed to be disturbed, and
in an angry tone muttered to himself some words which we could not
distinctly hear; but espying Thales, and recovering himself out of his
disorder, he complained how Periander had put an insufferable affront
upon him. He would not permit me, saith he, to go to sea, though I
earnestly importuned him, but he would press me to dine with him. And
when I came as invited, he assigned me a seat unbecoming my person and
character, Aeolians and islanders and others of inferior rank being
placed above me; whence it is easy to infer how meanly he thinks of
my father, and it is undeniable how this affront put upon me rebounds
disgracefully in my parent's face. Say you so? quoth Thales, are you
afraid lest the place lessen or diminish your honor and worth, as the
Egyptians commonly hold the stars are magnified or lessened according to
their higher or lower place and position? And are you more foolish than
that Spartan who, when the prefect of the music had appointed him to sit
in the lowest seat in the choir, replied, This is prudently done, for
this is the ready way to bring this seat into repute and esteem? It is
a frivolous consideration, where or below whom we sit; and it is a wiser
part to adapt ourselves to the judgment and humor of our right and left
hand man and the rest of the company, that we may approve ourselves
worthy of their friendship, when they find we take no pet at our
host, but are rather pleased to be placed near such good company. And
whosoever is disturbed upon the account of his place seems to be more
angry with his neighbor than with his host, but certainly is very
troublesome and nauseous to both.

These are fine words, and no more, quoth Alexidemus, for I observe you,
the wisest of men, as ambitious as other men; and having said thus, he
passed by us doggedly and trooped off. Thales, seeing us admiring the
insolence of the man, declared he was a fellow naturally of a blockish,
stupid disposition; for when he was a boy, he took a parcel of rich
perfume that was presented to Thrasybulus and poured it into a large
bowl and mixing it with a quantity of wine, drank it off and was ever
hated for it. As Thales was talking after this fashion, in comes a
servant and tells us it was Periander's pleasure we would come in
and inform him what we thought of a certain creature brought into his
presence that instant, whether it were so born by chance or were a
monster and omen;--himself seeming mightily affected and concerned,
for he judged his sacrifice polluted by it. At the same time he walked
before us into a certain house adjoining to his garden-wall, where we
found a young beardless shepherd, tolerably handsome, who having opened
a leathern bag produced and showed us a child born (as he averred) of
a mare. His upper parts as far as his neck and his hands, was of human
shape, and the rest of his body resembled a perfect horse; his cry was
like that of a child newly born. As soon as Niloxenus saw it, he cried
out. The gods deliver us; and away he fled as one sadly affrighted. But
Thales eyed the shepherd a considerable while, and then smiling (for it
was his way to jeer me perpetually about my art) says he, I doubt not,
Diocles, but you have been all this time seeking for some expiatory
sacrifice, and meaning to call to your aid those gods whose province and
work it is to avert evils from men, as if some greet and grievous thing
had happened. Why not? quoth I, for undoubtedly this prodigy portends
sedition and war, and I fear the dire portents thereof may extend to
myself, my wife, and my children, and prove all our ruin; since, before
I have atoned for my former fault, the goddess gives us this second
evidence and proof of her displeasure. Thales replied never a word,
but laughing went out of the house. Periander, meeting him at the door,
inquired what we thought of that creature; he dismissed me, and taking
Periander by the hand, said, Whatsoever Diocles shall persuade you to
do, do it at your best leisure; but I advise you either not to have such
youthful men to keep your mares, or to give them leave to marry. When
Periander heard him out, he seemed infinitely pleased, for he laughed
outright, and hugging Thales in his arms he kissed him; then saith he,
O Diocles, I am apt to think the worst is over, and what this prodigy
portended is now at an end; for do you not apprehend what a loss we have
sustained in the want of Alexidemus's good company at supper?

When we entered into the house, Thales raising his voice inquired where
it was his worship refused to be placed; which being shown him, he sat
himself in that very place, and prayed us to sit down by him, and said,
I would gladly give any money to have an opportunity to sit and eat
with Ardalus. This Ardalus was a Troezenian by birth, by profession a
minstrel, and a priest of the Ardalian Muses, whose temple old Ardalus
had founded and dedicated. Here Aesop, who was sent from Croesus to
visit Periander, and withal to consult the oracle at Delphi, sitting
by and beneath Solon upon a low stool, told the company this fable:
A Lydian mule, viewing his own picture in a river, and admiring the
bigness and beauty of his body, raises his crest; he waxes proud,
resolving to imitate the horse in his gait and running; but presently,
recollecting his extraction, how that his father was but an ass at best,
he stops his career and cheeks his own haughtiness and bravery. Chilo
replied, after his short concise way, You are slow and yet try to run,
in imitation of your mule.

Amidst these discourses in comes Melissa and sits her down by Periander;
Eumetis followed and came in as we were at supper; then Thales calls to
me (I sat me down above Bias), Why do you not make Bias acquainted with
the problems sent him from the King by Niloxenus this second time, that
he may soberly and warily weigh them? Bias answered, I have been already
scared with that news. I have known that Bacchus is otherwise a powerful
deity, and for his wisdom is termed [Greek omitted] that is, THE
INTERPRETER; therefore I shall undertake it when my belly is full of
wine. Thus they jested and reparteed and played one upon another all the
while they sat at table. Observing the unwonted frugality of Periander
at this time, I considered with myself that the entertainment of
wise and good men is a piece of good husbandry, and that so far from
enhancing a man's expenses in truth it serves to save charge, the charge
(to wit) of costly foreign unguents and junkets, and the waste of the
richest wines, which Periander's state and greatness required him
every day in his ordinary treats to expend. Such costly provisions
were useless here, and Periander's wisdom appeared in his frugality.
Moreover, his lady had laid aside her richer habit, and appeared in an
ordinary, but a very becoming dress.



Supper now ended, and Melissa having distributed the garlands, we
offered sacrifice; and when the minstrel had played us a tune or two,
she withdrew. Then Ardalus inquired of Anacharsis, if there were women
fiddlers at Scythia. He suddenly and smartly replied, There are no vines
there. Ardalus asked a second question, whether the Scythians had any
gods among them. Yes, quoth Anacharsis, and they understand what men
say to them; nor are the Scythians of the Grecian opinion (however these
last may be the better orators), that the gods are better pleased with
the sounds of flutes and pipes than with the voice of men. My friend,
saith Aesop, what would you say if you saw our present pipe-makers
throw away the bones of fawns and hind-calves, to use those of asses,
affirming they yield the sweeter and more melodious sound? Whereupon
Cleobulina made one of her riddles about the Phrygian flute,... in
regard to the sound, and wondered that an ass, a gross animal and so
alien from music should yet supply bones so fit for harmony. Therefore
it is doubtless, quoth Niloxenus, that the people of Busiris blame
us Naucratians for using pipes made of asses' bones it being an
insufferable crime in an of them to listen to the flute or cornet, the
sound thereof being (as they esteem it) so like the braying of an ass;
and you know an ass is hateful to the Egyptians on account of Typhon.

There happening here a short silence, Periander, observing Niloxenus
willing but not daring to speak, said: I cannot but commend the civility
of those magistrates who give audience first to strangers and afterwards
to their own citizens; wherefore I judge it convenient that we
inhabitants and neighbors should proceed no farther at present in our
discourse, and that now attention be given to those royal propositions
sent us from Egypt, which the worthy Niloxenus is commissioned to
deliver to Bias, who wishes that he and we may scan and examine them
together. And Bias said: For where or in what company would a man more
joyfully adventure to give his opinion than here in this? And since
it is his Majesty's pleasure that I should give my judgment first, in
obedience to his commands I will do so, and afterwards they shall come
to every one of you in order.

Then Niloxenus delivered the paper to Bias, who broke up the seal and
commanded it to be read in all their hearing. The contents were these:

Amasis the king of Egypt, to Bias, the wisest of the Grecians, greeting.
There is a contest between my brother of Ethiopia and myself about
wisdom; and being baffled in divers other particulars, he now demands of
me a thing absurd and impracticable; for he requires me to drink up the
ocean dry. If I be able to read this his riddle, divers cities and towns
now in his possession are to be annexed to my kingdom; but if I cannot
resolve this hard sentence, and give him the right meaning thereof, he
requires of me my right to all the towns bordering upon Elephantina.
Consider with speed the premises, and let me receive your thoughts by
Niloxenus. Pray lose no time. If in anything I can be serviceable to
your city or friends, you may command me. Farewell.

Bias, having perused and for a little time meditated upon the letter,
and whispering Cleobulus in the ear (he sat by him), exclaimed: What a
narration is here, O Niloxenus! Will Amasis, who governs so many men and
is seized of so many flourishing territories, drink up the ocean for the
gain of a few paltry, beggarly villages? Niloxenus replied with a smile:
Consider, good sir, what is to be done, if he will obey. Why then, said
Bias, let Amasis require the Ethopian king to stop the stream which from
all parts flow and empty themselves in the ocean, until he have drunk
out the whole remainder; for I conceive he means the present waters, not
those which shall flow into it hereafter. Niloxenus was so overjoyed at
this answer, that he could not contain himself. He hugged and kissed
the author, and the whole company liked his opinion admirably well; and
Chilo laughing desired Niloxenus to get aboard immediately before the
sea was consumed, and tell his master he should mind more how to render
his government sweet and potable to his people, than how to swallow
such a quantity of salt water. For Bias, he told him, understands these
things very well, and knows how to oblige your lord with very useful
instructions, which if he vouchsafe to attend, he shall no more need a
golden basin to wash his feet, to gain respect from his subjects; all
will love and honor him for his virtue, though he were ten thousand
times more hateful to them than he is. It were well and worthily done,
quoth Periander, if all of us did pay him our first-fruits in this kind
by the poll (as Homer said). Such a course would bring him an accession
of profit greater than the whole proceeds of the voyage, besides being
of great use to ourselves.

To this point it is fit that Solon should first speak, quoth Chilo,
not only because he is the eldest in the company and therefore sits
uppermost at table, but because he governs and gives laws to the amplest
and most complete and flourishing republic in the world, that of Athens.
Here Niloxenus whispered me in the ear: O Diocles, saith he, how many
reports fly about and are believed, and how some men delight in lies
which they either feign of their own heads or most greedily swallow
from the mouths of others. In Egypt I heard it reported how Chilo had
renounced all friendship and correspondence with Solon, because he
maintained the mutability of laws. A ridiculous fiction, quoth I, for
then he and we must have renounced Lycurgus, who changed the laws and
indeed the whole government of Sparta.

Solon, pausing awhile, gave his opinion in these words. I conceive that
monarch, whether king or tyrant, were infinitely to be commanded, who
would exchange his monarchy for a commonwealth. Bias subjoined, And who
would be first and foremost in conforming to the laws of his country.
Thales added, I reckon that prince happy, who, being old, dies in his
bed a natural death. Fourthly, Anacharsis, If he alone be a wise man.
Fifthly, Cleobulus said, If he trust none of his courtiers. Sixthly,
Pittacus spake thus, If he could so treat his subjects that they feared
not him but for him. Lastly, Chilo concluded thus, A magistrate ought to
meditate no mortal thing but everything immortal.

When all had given in their judgments upon this point, we requested
Periander to let us know his thoughts. Disorder and discontent appearing
in his countenance, he said, These opinions are enough to scare any
wise man from affecting, empire. These things, saith Aesop after his
reproving way, ought rather to have been discussed privately among
ourselves, lest we be accounted antimonarchical while we desire to be
esteemed friends and loyal counsellors. Solon, gently touching him on
the head and smiling, answered: Do you not perceive that any one would
make a king more moderate and a tyrant more favorable, who should
persuade him that it is better not to reign than to reign? Who would
believe you before the oracle delivered unto you, quoth Aesop which
pronounced that city happy that heard but one crier. Yes, quoth Solon,
and Athens, now a commonwealth, hath but one crier and one magistrate,
the law, though the government be democratical; but you, my friend, have
been so accustomed to the croaking of ravens and the prating of jays,
that you do not hear clearly your own voice. For you maintain it to
be the happiness of a city to be under the command of one man, and yet
account it the merit of a feast if liberty is allowed every man to
speak his mind freely upon what subject he pleases. But you have not
prohibited your servants' drunkenness at Athens, Aesop said, as you have
forbidden them to love or to use dry ointments. Solon laughed at this;
but Cleodorus the physician said: To use dry ointment is like talking
when a man is soaked with wine; both are very pleasant. Therefore, saith
Chilo, men ought the more carefully to avoid it. Aesop proceeds, Thales
seemed to imply that he should soon grow old.

Periander said laughing: We suffer deservedly, for, before we have
perfected any remarks upon the letter, we are fallen upon disputes
foreign to the matter under consideration; and therefore I pray,
Niloxenus, read out the remainder of your lord's letter, and slip not
this opportunity to receive what satisfaction all that are present
shall be able to give you. The command of the king of Ethiopia, says
Niloxenus, is no more and no less than (to use Archilochus's phrase) a
broken scytale; that is, the meaning is inscrutable and cannot be found
out. But your master Amasis was more mild and polite in his queries;
for he commanded him only to resolve him what was most ancient, most
beautiful, greatest, wisest, most common, and withal, what was most
profitable, most pernicious, most strong, and most easy. Did he resolve
and answer every one of these questions? He did, quoth Niloxenus, and
do you judge of his answers and the soundness thereof: and it is my
Prince's purpose not to misrepresent his responses and condemn unjustly
what he saith well, so, where he finds him under a mistake, not to
suffer that to pass without correction. His answers to the foresaid
questions I will read to you.--What is most ancient? Time. What is
greatest? The World. What is wisest? Truth. What is most beautiful? The
light. What is most common? Death. What is most profitable? God. What
is most Pernicious? An evil genius. What is strongest? Fortune. What is
most easy? That which is pleasant.

When Niloxenus had read out these answers, there was a short silence
among them; by and by Thales desires Niloxenus to inform him if Amasis
approved of these answers. Niloxenus said, he liked some and disliked
others. There is not one of them right and sound, quoth Thales, but all
are full of wretched folly and ignorance. As for instance, how can that
be most ancient whereof part is past, part is now present, and part
is yet to come; every man knows it is younger than ourselves and our
actions. As to his answer that truth is the most wise thing, it is as
incongruous as if he had affirmed the light to be an eye if he judged
the light to be the most beautiful how could he omit the sun; as to
his solutions concerning the gods and evil genuises, they are full of
presumption and peril. What he saith of Fortune is void of sense, for
her inconstancy and fickleness proceed from want of strength and power.
Nor is death the most common thing; the living are still at liberty,
it hath not arrested them. But lest we be blamed as having a faculty
to find fault only, we will lay down our opinions of these things, and
compare them with those of the Ethiopian; I offer my self first, if
Niloxenus pleases, to deliver my opinion on every one singly and I will
relate both questions and answers in that method and order in which
they were sent to Ethiopia and read to us. What is most ancient Thales
answered, God, for he had no beginning. What is greatest? Place; the
World contains all other things, this surrounds and contains the world.
What is most beautiful? The world; for whatever is framed artificially
and methodically is a part of it. What is most wise? Time; for it has
found out some things already, it will find out the rest in due time.
What is most common Hope; for they that want other things are masters of
this. What is most profitable? Virtue; for by a right managery of other
things she makes them all beneficial and advantageous. What is most
pernicious? Vice; for it depraves the best things we enjoy. What is most
strong? Necessity; for this alone is insuperable. What is most easy?
That which is most agreeable to nature; for pleasures themselves are
sometimes tedious and nauseating.

All the consult approved of Thale's solutions. Cleodemus said: My friend
Niloxenus, it becomes kings to propound and resolve such questions;
but the insolence of that barbarian who would have Amasis drink the sea
would have been better fitted by such a smart reprimand as Pittacus gave
Alyattes, who sent an imperious letter to the Lesbians. He made him no
other answer, but to bid him spend his time in eating his hot bread and
onions.

Periander, here assumed the discourse, and said: It was the manner of
the ancient Grecians heretofore, O Cleodemus, to propound doubts to
one another; and it hath been told us, that the most famous and
eminent poets used to meet at the grave of Amphidamas in Chalcis. This
Amphidamas was a leading commander, one that had perpetual wars with the
Eretrians, and at last lost his life in one of the battles fought for
the possession of the Lelantine plain. Now, because the writings of
those poets were set to verse and so made the argument more knotty and
the decision more arduous, and the great names of the antagonists,
Homer and Hesiod, whose excellence was so well known, made the umpires
timorous and shy to determine; they therefore betook themselves to these
sorts of questions, and Homer, says Lesches, propounded this riddle:--

     Tell me, O Muse, what never was
     And never yet shall be.

Hesiod answered readily and extempore in this wise:--

     When steeds with echoing hoof, to win
       The prize, shall run amain;
     And on the tomb of lofty Jove
       Their chariots break in twain.

For this reply he was infinitely commended and got the tripod. Pray tell
me, quoth Cleodemus, what difference there is between these riddles and
those of Eumetis, which she frames and invents to recreate herself with
as much pleasure as other virgins make nets and girdles? They may be fit
to offer and puzzle women withal; but for men to beat their brains to
find out their mystery would be mighty ridiculous. Eumetis looked like
one that had a great mind to reply; but her modesty would not permit
her, for her face was filled with blushes. But Aesop in her vindication
asked: Is it not much more ridiculous that all present cannot resolve
the riddle she propounded to us before supper? This was as follows:--

     A man I saw, who by his fire
       Did set a piece of brass
     Fast to a man, so that it seemed
       To him it welded was.

Can you tell me, said he, how to construe this, and what the sense of it
may be? No, said Cleodemus, it is no profit to know what it means. And
yet, quoth Aesop, no man understands this thing better and practises it
more judiciously and successfully than yourself. If you deny it, I
have my witnesses ready; for there are your cupping-glasses. Cleodemus
laughed outright; for of all the physicians in his time, none used
cupping-glasses like him, he being a person that by his frequent and
fortunate application thereof brought them first into request in the
world.

Mnesiphilus the Athenian, a friend and favorite of Solon's, said: O
Periander, our discourse, as our wine, ought to be distributed not
according to our power or priority, but freely and equally, as in a
popular state; for what hath been already discoursed concerning kingdoms
and empires signifies little to us who live in a democracy. Wherefore I
judge it convenient that every one of you, commencing with Solon, should
freely and impartially declare his sense of a popular state. The motion
pleased all the company; then saith Solon: My friend Mnesiphilus,
you heard, together with the rest of this good company, my opinion
concerning republics; but since you are willing to hear it again, I hold
that city or state happy and most likely to remain free, in which those
that are not personally injured are yet as forward to try and punish
wrongdoers as that person who is wronged. Bias added, Where all fear the
law as they fear a tyrant. Thirdly, Thales said, Where the citizens are
neither too rich nor too poor. Fourthly, Anacharsis said, Where, though
in all other respects they are equal, yet virtuous men are advanced and
vicious persons degraded. Fifthly, Cleobulus said, Where the rulers fear
reproof and shame more than the law. Sixthly, Pittacus said, Where evil
men are kept from ruling, and good men from not ruling. Chilo, pausing a
little while, determined that the best and most enduring state was
where the subject minded the law most and the lawyers least. Periander
concluded with his opinion, that all of them would best approve that
democracy which came next and was likest to an aristocracy.

After they had ended this discourse, I begged they would condescend to
direct me how to govern a house; for they were few who had cities and
kingdoms to govern, compared with those who had houses and families to
manage. Aesop laughed and said: I hope you except Anacharsis out of your
number; for having no house he glories because he can be contented with
a chariot only, as they say the sun is whirled about from one end of
the heavens to the other in his chariot. Therefore, saith Anacharsis, he
alone, or he principally, is most free among the gods, and ever at his
own liberty and dispose. He governs all, and is governed and subject
to none, but he rides and reigns; and you know not how magnificent
and broad his chariot is; if you did, you would not thus floutingly
depreciate our Scythian chariots. For you seem in my apprehension to
call these coverings made of wood and mud houses, as if you should call
the shell and not the living creature a snail. Therefore you laughed
when Solon told you how, when he viewed Croesus's palace and found it
richly and gloriously furnished, he yet could not yield he lived happily
until he had tried the inward and invisible state of his mind; for
a man's felicity consists not in the outward and visible favors and
blessings of fortune, but in the inward and unseen perfections and
riches of the mind. And you seem to have forgot your own fable of the
fox, who, contending with the leopard as to which possessed more
colors and spots, and having referred the matter in controversy to
the arbitration of an umpire, desired him to consider not so much the
outside as the inside; for, saith he, I have more various and different
fetches and tricks in my mind than he has marks or spots in his
body. You regard only the handiwork of carpenters and masons and
stone-cutters, and call this a house; not what one hath within, his
children, his wife, his friends and attendants, with whom if a man lived
in an emmet's bed or a bird's nest, enjoying in common the ordinary
comforts of life, this man may be affirmed to live a happy and a
fortunate life.

This is the answer I purpose to return Aesop, quoth Anacharsis, and I
tender it to Diocles as my share in this discourse; only let the rest
give in their opinions, if they please. Solon thought that house most
happy where the estate was got without injustice, kept without distrust,
and spent without repentance. Bias said, That house is happy where the
master does freely and voluntarily what the law would else compel him to
do. Thales held that house most happy where the master had most leisure
and respite from business. Cleobulus said, That in which the master
is more beloved than feared. Pittacus said, most that is happy where
superfluities are not required and necessaries are not wanting. Chilo
added, that house is most happy where one rules as a monarch in his
kingdom. And he proceeded, when a certain Lacedaemonian desired Lycurgus
to establish a democracy in the city. Go you, friend, replied he, and
try the experiment first in your own house.

When they had all given in their opinions upon this point, Eumetis and
Melissa withdrew. Then Periander called for a large bowl full of wine,
and drank to Chilo; and Chilo too drank to Bias. Ardalus then standing
up called to Aesop, and said: Will you not hand the cup to your friends
at this end of the table, when you behold those persons there swilling
up all that good liquor, and imparting none to us here as if the cup
were that of Bathycles. But this cup, quoth Aesop, is no public cup,
it hath stood so long by Solon's trenchard. Then Pittacus called
to Mnesiphilus: Why, saith he, does not Solon drink, but act in
contradiction to his own verses?--

     I love that ruby god, whose blessings flow
     In tides, to recreate my thirsty maw;
     Venus I court, the Muses I adore,
     Who give us wine and pleasures evermore.

Anacharsis subjoined: He fears your severe law, my friend Pittacus,
wherein you decreed the drunkard a double punishment. You seem, said
Pittacus, a little to fear the penalty, who have adventured heretofore,
and now again before my face, to break that law and to demand a crown
for the reward of your debauch. Why not, quoth Anacharsis, when there
is a reward promised to the hardest drinker? Why should I not demand my
reward, having drunk down all my fellows?--or inform me of any other end
men drive at in drinking much wine, but to be drunk. Pittacus laughed at
this reply, and Aesop told them this fable: The wolf seeing a parcel
of shepherds in their booth feeding upon a lamb, approaching near
them,--What a bustle and noise and uproar would there have been, saith
he, if I had but done what you do! Chilo said: Aesop hath very justly
revenged himself upon us, who awhile ago stopped his mouth; now he
observes how we prevented Mnesiphilus's discourse, when the question was
put why Solon did not drink up his wine.

Mnesiphilus then spake to this effect: I know this to be the opinion of
Solon, that in every art and faculty, divine and human, the work which
is done is more desired than the instrument wherewith it is done, and
the end than the means conducing to that end; as, for instance, a weaver
thinks a cloak or coat more properly his work than the ordering of his
shuttles or the divers motions of his beams. A smith minds the soldering
of his irons and the sharpening of the axe more than those little
things accessory to these main matters, as the kindling of the coals and
preparing the stone-dust. Yet farther, a carpenter would justly blame
us, if we should affirm it is not his work to build houses or ships
but to bore holes or to make mortar; and the Muses would be implacably
incensed with him that should say their business is only to make harps,
pipes and such musical instruments, not the institution and correcting
of manners and the government of those men's passions who are lovers of
singing and masters of music. And agreeably copulation is not the work
of Venus, nor is drunkenness that of Bacchus; but love and friendship,
affection and familiarity, which are begot and improved by and the means
of these. Solon terms these works divine, and he professes he loves and
now prosecutes them in his declining years as vigorously as ever in
his youthful days. That mutual love between man and wife is the work of
Venus, the greatness of the pleasure affecting their bodies mixes and
melts their very souls; divers others, having little or no acquaintance
before, have yet contracted a firm and lasting friendship over a glass
of wine, which like fire softened and melted their tempers, and disposed
them for a happy union. But in such a company, and of such men as
Periander hath invited, there is no need of can and chalice, but the
Muses themselves throwing a subject of discourse among you, as it were
a sober cup, wherein is contained much of delight and drollery and
seriousness too, do hereby provoke, nourish, and increase friendship
among you, allowing the cup to rest quietly upon the bowl, contrary to
the rule which Hesiod (Hesiod, "Works and Days," 744.) gives for those
who have more skill for carousing than for discoursing.

     Though all the rest with stated rules we bound
     Unmix'd, unmeasured are thy goblets crown'd
     ("Iliad" iv. 261.)

for it was the old Greek way, as Homer here tells us, to drink one to
another in course and order. So Ajax gave a share of his meat to his
next neighbor.

When Mnesiphilus had discoursed after this manner, in comes Chersias the
poet, whom Periander had lately pardoned and received into favor upon
Chilo's mediation. Saith Cherias: Does not Jupiter distribute to the
gods their proportion and share sparingly and severally, as Agamemnon
did to his commanders when his guests pledged one another? If, O
Chersias, quoth Cleodemus, as you narrate, certain pigeons bring him
ambrosia every meal, winging with a world of hardship through the rocks
called PLANCTAE (or WANDERING), can you blame him for his sparingness
and frugality and dealing out to his guests by measure?

I am satisfied, quoth Chersias, and since we are fallen upon our old
discourse of housekeeping, which of the company can remember what
remains to be said thereof? There remains, if I mistake not, to show
what that measure is which may content any man. Cleobulus answered: The
law has prescribed a measure for wise men; but as touching foolish ones
I will tell you a story I once heard my father relate to my brother. On
a certain time the moon begged of her mother a coat that would fit
her. How can that be done, quoth the mother, for sometime you are full,
sometimes the one half of you seems lost and perished, sometimes only
a pair of horns appear. So, my Chersias, to the desires of a foolish
immoderate man no certain measure can be fitted; for according to the
ebbing and flowing of his lust and appetite, and the frequent or seldom
casualties that befall him, accordingly his necessities ebb and flow,
not unlike Aesop's dog, who, being pinched and ready to starve with the
cold winter, was a mind to build himself a house; but when summer came
on, he lay all along upon the ground, and stretching himself in the sun
thought himself monstrous big, and thought it unnecessary and besides no
small labor to build him a house portionable to that bulk and bigness.
And do you not observe, O Chersias, continues he, many poor men,--how
one while they pinch their bellies, upon what short commons they live,
how sparing and niggardly and miserable they are; and another while you
may observe the same men as distrustful and covetous withal, as if the
plenty of the city and county, the riches of king and kingdom were not
sufficient to preserve them from want and beggary.

When Chersias had concluded this discourse, Cleodemus began thus: We see
you that are wise men possessing these outward goods after an unequal
manner. Good sweet sir, answered Cleobulus, the law weaver-like hath
distributed to every man a fitting, decent, adequate portion, and in
your profession your reason does what the law does here,--when you feed,
or diet, or physic your patient, you give not the quantity he desires,
but what you judge to be convenient for each in his circumstances.
Ardalus inquires: Epimenides, to abstain from all other victuals, and to
content himself with a little composition of his own, which the Greeks
call [Greek omitted] (HUNGER-RELIEVING)? This he takes into his mouth
and chews, and eats neither dinner nor supper. This instance obliged the
whole company to be a little while silent, until Thales in a jesting
way replied, that Epimenides did very wisely, for hereby he saved the
trouble and charge of grinding and boiling his meat, as Pittacus did. I
myself sojourning as Lesbos overheard my landlady, as she was very busy
at her hand-mill, singing as she used to do her work, "Grind mill; grind
mill; for even Pittacus the prince of great Mitylene, grinds" [Greek
footnote ommitted]. Quoth Solon: Ardalus, I wonder you have not read the
law of Epimenides's frugality in Hesiod's writings, who prescribes
him and others this spare diet; for he was the person that gratified
Epimenides with the seeds of this nutriment, when he directed him to
inquire how great benefit a man might receive by mallows and asphodel
(Hesiod, "Works and Days," 41.) Do you believe, said Periander, that
Hesiod meant this literally; or rather that, being himself a great
admirer of parsimony, he hereby intended to exhort men to use mean and
spare diet, as most healthful and pleasant? For the chewing of mallows
is very wholesome, and the stalk of asphodel is very luscious; but this
"expeller of hunger and thirst" I take to be rather physic than natural
food, consisting of honey and I know not what barbarian cheese, and of
many and costly drugs fetched from foreign parts. If to make up this
composition so many ingredients were requisite, and so difficult to
come by and so expensive, Hesiod might have kept his breath to cool
his pottage, and never blessed the world with the discovery. And yet I
admire how your landlord, when he went to perform the great purification
for the Delians not long since, could overlook the monuments and
patterns of the first aliment which the people brought into the
temple,--and, among other cheap fruits such as grow of themselves, the
mallows and the asphodel; the usefulness and innocency whereof Hesiod
seemed in his work to magnify. Moreover, quoth Anacharsis, he affirms
both plants to be great restoratives. You are in the right, quoth
Cleodemus; for it is evident Hesiod was no ordinary physician, who could
discourse so learnedly and judiciously of diet, of the nature of wines,
and of the virtue of waters and baths, and of women, the proper times
for procreation, and the site and position of infants in the womb;
insomuch, that (as I take it) Aesop deserves much more the name of
Hesiod's scholar and disciple than Epimenides, whose great and excellent
wisdom the fable of the nightingale and hawk demonstrates. But I would
gladly hear Solon's opinion in this matter; for having sojourned long at
Athens and being familiarly acquainted with Epimenides, it is more than
probable he might learn of him the grounds upon which he accustomed
himself to so spare a diet.

To what purpose, said Solon, should I trouble him or myself to make
inquiry in a matter so plain? For if it be a blessing next to the
greatest to need little victuals, then it is the greatest felicity
to need none at all. If I may have leave to deliver my opinion, quoth
Cleodemus, I must profess myself of a different judgment, especially now
we sit at table; for as soon as the meat is taken away, what belongs to
those gods that are the patrons of friendship and hospitality has been
removed. As upon the removal of the earth, quoth Thales, there must
needs follow an universal confusion of all things, so in forbidding
men meat, there must needs follow the dispersion and dissolution of the
family, the sacred fire, the cups, the feasts and entertainment's, which
are the principal and most innocent diversions of mankind; and so
all the comforts of society are at end. For to men of business some
recreation is necessary, and the preparation and use of victuals
conduces much thereunto. Again, to be without victuals would tend to
the destruction of husbandry, for want whereof the earth would soon
be overgrown with weeds, and through the sloth of men overflowed with
waters. And together with this, all arts would fail which are supported
and encouraged hereby; nay, more, take away hospitality and the use of
victuals and the worship and honor of the gods will sink and perish; the
sun will have but small and the moon yet smaller reverence if thy afford
men only light and heat. And who will build an altar or offer sacrifices
to Jupiter Pluvius, or to Ceres the patroness of husbandmen, or to
Neptune the preserver of plants and trees? Or how can Bacchus be any
longer termed the donor of all good things, if men make no further use
of the good things he gives? What shall men sacrifice? What first-fruits
shall they offer? In short, the subversion and confusion of the greatest
blessings attend this opinion. Promiscuously and indefatigable to pursue
all sorts of pleasures I own to be brutish, and to avoid all with a
suitable aversion equally blockish, let the mind then freely enjoy such
pleasures as are agreeable to its nature and temper. But for the body,
there is certainly no pleasure more harmless and commendable and fitting
than that which springs from a plentiful table,--which is granted by all
men, for, placing this in the middle, men converse with one another and
share in the provision. As to the pleasures of the bed, men use these in
the dark, reputing the use thereof shameful and beastly as well as the
total disuse of the pleasures of the table.

Cleodemus having finished this long harangue, I began to this effect.
You omit one thing, my friend, how they that decry food decry sleep too,
and they that declaim against sleep declaim against dreams in the same
breath, and so destroy the primitive and ancient way of divination. Add
to this, that our whole life will be of one form and fashion, and our
soul enclosed in a body to no purpose; many and those the principal
parts thereof are naturally so formed and fashioned as to be organs of
nutriment; so the tongue, the teeth, the stomach, and the liver, whereof
none are idle, none framed for other use, so that whosoever hath no need
of nutriment has no need of his body; that is, in other words, no man
hath any need of himself, for every man hath a body of his own. This I
have thought fit to offer in vindication of our bellies; if Solon or any
other has anything to object to what I have said, I am willing to hear
him.

Yea, doubtless, replies Solon, or we may be reputed more injudicious
than the Egyptians. For when any person dies among them, they open
him and show him so dissected to the sun; his guts they throw into the
river, to the remaining parts they allow a decent burial, for they think
the body now pure and clean; and to speak truly they are the foulest
parts of the body, and like that lower hell crammed with dead carcasses
and at the same time flowing with offensive rivers, such as flame
with fire and are disturbed with tempests. No live creature feeds upon
another living creature, but we first take away their lives, and in
that action we do them great wrong. Now the very plants have life in
them,--that is clear and manifest, for we perceive they grow and spread.
But to abstain from eating flesh (as they say Orpheus of old did) is
more a pretence than a real avoiding of an injury proceeding from the
just use of meat. One way there is, and but one way, whereby a man may
avoid offence, namely by being contented with his own, not coveting what
belongs to his neighbor. But if a man's circumstances be such and so
hard that he cannot subsist without wronging another man, the fault
is God's, not his. The case being such with some persons, I would
fain learn if it be not advisable to destroy, at the same time with
injustice, these instruments of injustice, the belly, stomach, and
liver, which have no sense of justice or appetite to honesty, and
therefore may be fitly compared to your cook's implements, his knives
and his caldrons, or to a baker's chimney and bins and kneading-tubs.
Verily one may observe the souls of some men confined to their bodies,
as to a house of correction, barely to do the drudgery and to serve the
necessities thereof. It was our own case but even now. While we minded
our meat and our bellies, we had neither eyes to see nor ears to
hear; but now the table is taken away, we are free to discourse among
ourselves and to enjoy one another; and now our bellies are full, we
have nothing else to do or care for. And if this condition and state
wherein we at present are would last our whole life, we having no wants
to fear nor riches to covet (for a desire of superfluities attends a
desire of necessaries), would not our lives be much more comfortable and
life itself much more desirable?

Yea, but Cleodemus stiffly maintains the necessity of eating and
drinking, else we shall need tables and cups, and shall not be able to
offer sacrifice to Ceres and Proserpina. By a parity of reason there
is a necessity there should be contentions and wars, that men may have
bulwarks and citadels and fortifications by land, fleets and navies
abroad at sea, and that having slain hundreds, we may offer Hecatombs
after the Messenian manner. By this reason we shall find men grudging
their own health, for (they will say) there will be no need of down
or feather beds unless they are sick; and so those healing gods,
and particularly Esculapius, will be vast sufferers, for they will
infallibly lose so many fat and rich sacrifices yearly. Nay, the art of
chirurgery will perish, and all those ingenious instruments that have
been invented for the cure of man will lie by useless and insignificant.
And what great difference is there between this and that? For meat is
a medicine against hunger, and such as use a constant diet are said
to cure themselves,--I mean such as use meat not for wantonness but of
necessity. For it is plain, the prejudices we receive by feeding far
surmount the pleasures. And the enjoyment of eating fills a very small
place in our bodies and very little time. But why should I trouble you
or myself with a catalogue of the many vexations which attend that man
who is necessitated to provide for a family, and the many difficulties
which distract him in his undertaking? For my part, I verily believe
Homer had an eye to this very thing, when, to prove the immortality of
the gods, he made use of this very argument, that they were such because
they used no victuals;

     For not the bread of man their life sustains,
     Nor wine's inflaming juice supplies their veins;
     ("Iliad," v. 341.)

intimating meat to be the cause of death as well as the means of
sustaining and supporting life. From hence proceed divers fatal
distempers caused much more by fulness than by fasting; and to digest
what we have eaten proves frequently a harder matter than to provide and
procure what we eat. And when we solicitously inquire beforehand what we
should do or how we should employ ourselves if we had not such care and
business to take up our time, this is as if Danaus's daughters should
trouble their heads to know what they should do if they had no sieves to
fill with water. We drudge and toil for necessaries, for want of better
and nobler occupation. As slaves then who have gained their freedom do
now and then those drudgeries and discharge those servile employments
and offices for their own benefit which they undertook heretofore
for their masters' advantage, so the mind of man, which at present is
enslaved to the body and the service thereof, when once it becomes
free from this slavery, will take care of itself, and spend its time in
contemplation of truth without distraction or disturbance. Such were our
discourses upon this head, O Nicarchus.

And before Solon had fully finished, in came Gorgias, Periander's
brother, who was just returned from Taenarum, whither he had been sent
by the advice of the oracle to sacrifice to Neptune and to conduct a
deputation. Upon his entrance we welcomed him home; and Periander having
among the rest saluted him, Gorgias sat by him upon a bed, and privately
whispered something to his brother which we could not hear. Periander
by his various gestures and motions discovered different affections;
sometimes he seemed sad and melancholic, by and by disturbed and angry;
frequently he looked as doubtful and distrustful men use to do; awhile
after he lifts up his eyes, as is usual with men in a maze. At last
recovering himself, saith he, I have a mind to impart to you the
contents of this embassy; but I scarce dare do it, remembering Thales's
aphorism, how things impossible or incredible are to be concealed and
only things credible and probable are to be related. Bias answered, I
crave leave to explain Thales's saying, We may distrust enemies, even
though they speak things credible, and trust friends, even though they
relate things incredible; and I suppose by enemies he meant vicious men
and foolish, and by friends, wise and good men. Then, brother Gorgias,
quoth Periander, I pray relate the whole story particularly.

Gorgias in obedience to his brother's command began his story thus:--

When we had fasted now for three days and offered sacrifice upon each of
those days, we were all resolved to sit up the third night and spend it
in pastime and dancing. The moon shone very bright upon the water,
and the sea was exceeding calm and still; this we saw, for we sported
ourselves upon the shore. Being thus taken up, all of a sudden we espied
a wonderful spectacle off at sea, making with incredible expedition to
the adjoining promontory. The violence of the motion made the sea foam
again, and the noise was so loud, that the whole company forsook their
sport and ran together toward the place, admiring what the matter should
be. Before we could make a full discovery of the whole, the motion
was so rapid, we perceived divers dolphins, some swimming in a ring or
circle, others hastening amain to that part of the shore which was most
shallow, and others following after and (as it were) bringing up the
rear. In the middle there was a certain heap which we could perceive
above the water; but we could not distinctly apprehend what it was, till
drawing near the shore we saw all the dolphins flocking together, and
having made near the land they safely surrendered their charge, and left
out of danger a man breathing and shaking himself. They returned to the
promontory, and there seemed to rejoice more than before for this their
fortunate undertaking. Divers in the company were affrighted and ran
away; myself and a few more took courage, and went on to see and
satisfy ourselves what this unusual matter might be; there we found and
instantly knew our old acquaintance Arion the musician, who told us his
name. He wore that very garment he used when he strove for mastery. We
brought him into our tent and found he had received no damage in his
passage, save only a little lassitude by the violence of the motion. He
told us the whole story of his adventure,--a story incredible to all but
such as saw it with their eyes. He told us how, when he had determined
to leave Italy, being hastened away by Periander's letters, he went
aboard a Corinthian merchantman then in port and ready to sail; being
off at sea with the winds favorable, he observed the seamen bent to
ruin him, and the master of the vessel told him as much, and that they
purposed to execute their design upon him that very night. In this
distress, the poor man (as if inspired by his good Genius) girds about
him his heretofore victorious, now his mourning cloak, with a brave
resolution to compose and sing his own epitaph, as the swans when
they apprehend the approaches of death are reported to do. Being thus
habited, he told the seamen he was minded to commit the protection of
himself and his fellow-passengers to the providence of the gods in a
Pythian song; then standing upon the poop near the side of the vessel,
and having invoked the help and assistance of all the sea gods, he
strikes up briskly and sings to his harp. Before he had half finished
his carol, the sun set, and he could discern Peloponnesus before him.
The seamen thought it tedious to tarry for the night, wherefore they
resolved to murder him immediately, to which purpose they unsheathed
their swords. Seeing this, and observing the steersman covering his
face, he leaped into the sea as far as he could; but before his body
sunk he found himself supported by dolphins. At first he was surprised
with care and trouble; but by and by, finding himself marching forward
with much ease and security, and observing a whole shoal of dolphins
flocking about him and joyfully contending which should appear most
forward and serviceable in his preservation, and discerning the vessel
at a considerable distance behind, he apprehended the nimbleness of
his porters; then, and not till then, his fears forsook him, and he
professed he was neither so fearful of death nor desirous of life as
he was full of ambitious desire, that he might show to all men that he
stood in the grace and favor of the gods, and that he might himself have
a firm belief in them. In his passage, as he lifted up his eyes toward
heaven, and beheld the stars glittering and twinkling and the moon full
and glorious, and the sea calm all about her as she seemed to rise out
of it, and yielding him (as it were) a beaten track; he declared,
he thought God's justice had more eyes than one, and that with these
innumerable eyes the gods beheld what was acted here below both by
sea and land. With such contemplations he performed his voyage less
anxiously, which much abated the tediousness thereof and was a comfort
and refreshment to him in his solitude and danger. At last, arriving
near the promontory which was both steep and high, and fearing danger
in a straight course and direct line, they unanimously veered about, and
making to shore with a little compass for security they delivered
Arion to us in safety, so that he plainly perceived and with thanks
acknowledged a Providence.

When Arion had finished this narrative of his escape, I asked him (quoth
Gorgias) whither the ship was bound; he told me for Corinth, but it
would not be there very suddenly, for when he leaped out of the ship and
was carried (as he conceived) about five hundred furlongs, he perceived
a calm, which must needs much retard their arrival who were aboard.
Gorgias added that, having learned the names of the pilot and master and
the colors of the ship, he immediately despatched out ships and soldier
to examine all the ports, all this while keeping Arion concealed, lest
the criminals should upon notice of His deliverance escape the pursuit
of justice. This action happened very luckily; for as soon as he arrived
at Corinth, news was brought him that the same ship was in port, and
that his party had seized it and secured all the men, merchants and
others. Whereupon Periander commanded Gorgias's discretion and zeal,
desiring him to proceed and lose no time, but immediately to clap them
in close prison, and to suffer none to come at them to give the least
notice of Arion's miraculous escape.

Gentlemen, quoth Aesop, I remember you derided my dialogue of the daws
and rooks; and now you can admire and believe as improbable a story of
dolphins. You are mightily out, said I, for this is no novel story which
we believe, but it is recorded in the annals of Ino and Athamas above
a thousand years ago. These passages are supernatural, quoth Solon and
much above our reason; what befell Hesiod is of a lower kind, and more
proper for our discourse, and if you have not heard of it before, it is
worth your hearing.

Hesiod once sojourned at the same house in Locris with a certain
Milesian. In this his sojourning time it happened the gentleman's
daughter was got with child by the Milesian which being discovered, the
whole family concluded Hesiod, if not guilty, must be privy to the
fact. His innocence was but a weak fence against their jealousy and
aspersions; and therefore, rashly censuring him guilty, the brothers of
the woman waylaid him in his return home, and slew him and his companion
Troilus near the shrine of Nemean Jove in Locris. Their carcasses they
threw into the sea; that of Troilus was carried into the river Daphnus,
and rested upon a certain rock compassed with waters, just above the
surface of the sea, which rock bears his name to this day. The body of
Hesiod was no sooner fallen upon the surface of the water, but a company
of dolphins received it, and conveyed it to Rhium and Molyeria. It
happened the Locrians were assembled at Rhium that day to feast and make
merry according to the custom which continues still among them. As soon
as they perceived a carcass floating or rather swimming towards them,
they hastened, not without admiration, to see what it was; and knowing
the body to be Hesiod's, they instantly resolved to find out the
murderers. It proved an easy discovery. After conviction they threw them
headlong alive into the sea, and ordered their houses to be demolished
to the very foundations. The body they buried in the grove of the temple
of Jove, that no foreigner might find it out; the reason of this act
was that the Orchomenians had searched far and near for it at the
instigation of the oracle, who promised them the greatest felicity if
they could get the bones of Hesiod and bury them in their city. Now if
dolphins are so favorable to dead men, it is very probable they have
a strong affection for the living, especially for such as delight in
music, whether vocal or instrumental. And this we know undoubtedly, that
these creatures delight infinitely in music; they love it, and if any
man sings or plays, they will quietly come by the side of the ship, and
listen till the music is ended. When children bathe in the water and
sport themselves, you shall have a parcel of them flock together and
sport and swim by them; and they may do it the more securely, since it
is a breach of the law of Nature to hurt them. You never heard of
any man that fishes for them purposely or hurts them wilfully, unless
falling into the nets they spoil the sport, and so, like bad children,
are corrected for their misdemeanors. I very well remember the Lesbians
told me how a maid of their town was preserved from drowning by them.

It was a very true story, quoth Pittacus, and there are divers still
alive who will attest it, if need be. The builders or founders of Lesbos
were commanded by the oracle to sail till they came to a haven called
Mesogaeum, there they should sacrifice a bull to Neptune, and for the
honor of Amphitrite and the sea-nymphs they should offer a virgin. The
principal persons in this colony were seven in number; the eighth was
one Echelaus by name, and appointed head of the rest by the oracle
himself; and he was a bachelor. A daughter of one of these seven was to
be sacrificed, but who it should be was to be decided by lot, and the
lot fell upon Smintheus's sister. Her they dressed most richly, and so
apparelled they conveyed her in abundance of state to the water-side,
and having composed a prayer for her, they were now ready to throw her
overboard. There was in the company a certain ingenuous young gentleman
whose name was Enalus; he was desperately in love with this young lady,
and his love prompted him to endeavor all he could for her preservation,
or at least to perish in the attempt. In the very moment she was to be
cast away, he clasps her in his arms and throws himself and her together
into the sea. Shortly after there was a flying report they were both
conveyed safe to land. A while after Enalus was seen at Lesbos, who
gave out they were preserved by dolphins. I could tell you stories more
incredible than these, such as would amuse some and please others; but
it is impossible to command men's faith. The sea was so tempestuous and
rough, the people were afraid to come too near the waters, when Enalus
arrived. A number of polypuses followed him even to Neptune's temple,
the biggest and strongest of which carried a great stone. This Enalus
dedicated, and this stone is therefore called Enalus to this day. To be
short and to speak all in a few words,--he that knows how to distinguish
between the impossible and the unusual, to make a difference between
the unlikely and the absurd, to be neither too credulous nor too
distrustful,--he hath learned your lesson, Do not overdo. ([Greek
omitted], NE QUID NIMIS.)

Anacharsis after all this discourse spake to this purpose: Since Thales
has asserted the being of a soul in all the principal and most noble
parts of the universe, it is no wonder that the most commendable acts
are governed by an overruling Power; for, as the body is the organ of
the soul, so the soul is an instrument in the hand of God. Now as the
body has many motions of its own proceeding from itself, but the best
and most from the soul, so the soul acts some things by its own power,
but in most things it is subordinate to the will and power of God, whose
glorious instrument it is. To me it seems highly unreasonable--and
I should be but too apt to censure the wisdom of the gods, if I were
convinced--that they use fire, and water, and wind, and clouds, and
rain for the preservation and welfare of some and for the detriment and
destruction of others, while at the same time they make no use of living
creatures that are doubtless more serviceable to their ends than bows
are to the Scythians or harps or pipes to the Greeks.

Chersias the poet broke off this discourse, and told the company of
divers that were miraculously preserved to his certain knowledge, and
more particularly of Cypselus, Periander's father, who being newly born,
his adversary sent a party of bloody fellows to murder him. They found
the child in his nurse's arms, and seeing him smile innocently upon
them, they had not the heart to hurt him, and so departed; but presently
recalling themselves and considering the peremptoriness of their orders,
they returned and searched for him, but could not find him, for his
mother had hid him very carefully in a chest. (Called [Greek omitted] in
Greek, whence the child was named Cypelus.(G.)) When he came to years
of discretion, and understood the greatness of his former danger and
deliverance, he consecrated a temple at Delphi to Apollo, by whose care
he conceived himself preserved from crying in that critical time, and
by his cries from betraying his own life. Pittacus, addressing his
discourse to Periander, said: It is well done of Chersias to make
mention of that shrine, for this brings to my mind a question I several
times purposed to ask you but still forgot, namely,--To what intent all
those frogs were carved upon the palm-tree before the door, and how
they affect either the deity or the dedicator? Periander remitted him to
Chersias for answer, as a person better versed in these matters for he
was present when Cypselus consecrated the shrine. But Chersias smiling
would not satisfy them, until they resolved him the meaning of these
aphorisms; "Do not overdo," "Know thyself," but particularly and
principally this,--which had scared divers from wedlock and others
from suretyship and others for speaking at all,--"promise, and you are
ruined." What need we to explain to you these, when you yourself have
so mightily magnified Aesop's comment upon each of them. Aesop replied:
When Chersias is disposed to jest with me upon these subjects, and to
jest seriously, he is pleased to father such sayings and sentences upon
Homer, who, bringing in Hector furiously flying upon others, yet
at another time represents him as flying from Ajax son of Telamon,
("Iliad," xi. 542.)--an argument that Hector knew himself. And Homer
made Ulysses use the saying "Do not overdo," when he besought his friend
Diomedes not to commend him, too much nor yet to censure him too
much. And for suretyship he exposes it as a matter unsafe, nay highly
dangerous, declaring that to be bound for idle and wicked men is full
of hazard. ("Iliad," x. 249; "Odyssey," viii. 351.) To confirm this,
Chersias reported how Jupiter had thrown Ate headlong out of heaven,
because she was by when he made the promise about the birth of Hercules
whereby he was circumvented.

Here Solon broke in: I advise, that we now give ear to Homer,--

     But now the night extends her awful shade:
     The Goddess parts you: be the night obeyed.
     ("Iliad," vii. 282.)

If it please the company then, let us sacrifice to the Muses, to
Neptune, and to Amphitrite, and so bid each adieu for this night.

This was the conclusion of that meeting, my dear Nicarchus.




END OF THIRTEEN----------


HOW A YOUNG MAN OUGHT TO HEAR POEMS.

Though it may be allowed to be a question fit for the determination of
those concerning whom Cato said, Their palates are more sensitive than
their minds, whether that saying of Philoxenus the poet be true or no,
The most savory flesh is that which is no flesh, and fish that is no
fish. Yet this to me, Marcus Sedatus, is out of question, that those
precepts of philosophy which seem not to be delivered with a designed
gravity, such as becomes philosophers, take most with persons that are
very young, and meet with a more ready acceptance and compliance from
them. Whence it is that they do not only read through Aesop's fables and
the fictions of poets and the Abaris of Heraclides and Ariston's Lyco;
but also such doctrines as relate to the souls of men, if something
fabulous be mixed with them, with an excess of pleasure that borders on
enthusiasm. Wherefore we are not only to govern their appetites in the
delights of eating and drinking, but also (and much more) to inure them
to a like temperance in reading and hearing, that, while they make use
of enjoyment as a sauce, they may pursue that which is wholesome and
profitable in those things which they read. For neither can a city be
secure if but one gate be left open to receive the enemy, though all the
rest be shut; nor a young man safe, though he be sufficiently fortified
against the assaults of all other pleasures, whilst he is without any
guard against those of the ear. Yea, the nearer the commerce is betwixt
the delights of that sense and those of the mind and reason, by so much
the more, when he lies open on that side, is he apt to be debauched and
corrupted thereby. Seeing therefore we cannot (and perhaps would not if
we could) debar young men of the size of my Soclarus and thy Cleander
altogether from the reading of poets, yet let us keep the stricter guard
upon them, as those who need a guide to direct them in their reading
more than on their journeys. Upon which consideration, I find myself
disposed to send thee at present in writing that discourse concerning
Poetry which I had lately an occasion to deliver by word of mouth; that,
when thou hast read it over thyself, thou mayst also make such use of
it, if thou judgest it may be serviceable to that purpose, as those
which are engaged to drink hard do of amulets (or preservatives against
drunkenness),--that is, that thou mayst communicate it to Cleander, to
prepossess him therewith; seeing he is naturally endowed with a brisk,
piercing, and daring wit, and therefore more prone to be inveigled by
that sort of study.

They say of the fish called polypus that

     His head in one respect is very good,
     But in another very naughty food;

because, though it be very luscious to eat, yet it is thought to disturb
the fancy with frightful and confused dreams. And the like observation
may be made concerning poetry, that it affords sweet and withal
wholesome nourishment to the minds of young men, but yet it contains
likewise no less matter of disturbance and emotion to them that want a
right conduct in the study thereof. For of it also, as well as of Egypt,
may it be said that (to those who will use it)

     Its over-fertile and luxuriant field
     Medicines and poisons intermixt doth yield;

for therein

     Love with soft passions and rich language drest
     Oft steals the heart out of th' ingenuous breast.
     ("Odyssey," iv. 230; "Iliad," xiv. 216.)

And indeed such only are endangered thereby, for the charms of that
art ordinarily affect not those that are downright sots and naturally
incapable of learning. Wherefore, when Simonides was asked why of all
men he could not deceive the Thessalians, his answer was, Because
they are not so well bred as to be capable of being cajoled by me. And
Gorgias used to call tragical poems cheats, wherein he that did cheat
was juster than he that did not cheat, and he that was cheated was wiser
than he that was not cheated.

It deserves therefore our consideration, whether we shall put young men
into Epicurus's boat,--wherein, having their ears stopped with wax, as
those of the men of Ithaca were, they shall be obliged to sail by and
not so much as touch at poetry,--or rather keep a guard on them, so
as to oblige their judgments by principles of right reason to use it
aright, and preserve them from being seduced to their hurt by that which
affords them so much delight. For neither did Lycurgus, the valiant
son of Dryas (as Homer calls him) ("Iliad," vi. 130.) act like a man of
sound reason in the course which he took to reform his people that were
much inclined to drunkenness, by travelling up and down to destroy all
the vines in the country; whereas he should have ordered that every vine
should have a well of water near it, that (as Plato saith) the drunken
deity might be reduced to temperance by a sober one. For water mixed
with wine takes away the hurtful spirits, while it leaves the useful
ones in it. Neither should we cut down or destroy the Muses' vine,
poetry; but where we perceive it luxuriates and grows wild through an
ungoverned appetite of applause, there ought we to prune away or keep
under the fabulous and theatrical branches thereof; and where we find
any of the Graces linked to any of the Muses,--that is, where the
lusciousness and tempting charms of language are not altogether barren
and unprofitable,--there let us make use of philosophy to incorporate
with it.

For as, where the mandrake grows near the vine and so communicates
something of its force thereto, the wine that is made of its grapes
makes the sleep of those that drink it more refreshing; so doth the
tempering poetry with the principles of philosophy and allaying their
roughness with its fictions render the study of them more easy and the
relish of them more grateful to young learners. Wherefore those that
would give their minds to philosophical studies are not obliged to avoid
poetry altogether, but rather to introduce themselves to philosophy by
poems, accustoming themselves to search for and embrace that which may
profit in that which pleaseth them, and rejecting and discarding that
wherein they find nothing of this nature. For this discrimination is the
first step to learning; and when this is attained, then, according to
what Sophocles saith,--

     To have begun well what we do intend
     Gives hope and prospect of as good an end.

Let us therefore in the first place possess those whom we initiate in
the study of poetry with this notion (as one which they ought always to
have at hand), that

     'Tis frequently the poet's guise
     To intermingle truth with lies;--

which they do sometimes with and sometimes against their wills. They do
it with their wills, because they find strict truth too rigid to comply
with that sweetness and gracefulness of expression, which most are taken
with, so readily as fiction doth. For real truth, though it disgust
never so much, must be told as it is, without alteration; but that which
is feigned in a discourse can easily yield and shift its garb from the
distasteful to that which is more pleasing. And indeed, neither the
measures nor the tropes nor the grandeur of words nor the aptness of
metaphors nor the harmony of the composition gives such a degree of
elegance and gracefulness to a poem as a well-ordered and artificial
fiction doth. But as in pictures the colors are more delightful to the
eye than the lines because those give them a nearer resemblance to the
persons they were made for, and render them the more apt to deceive the
beholder; so in poems we are more apt to be smitten and fall in love
with a probable fiction than with the greatest accuracy that can be
observed in measures and phrases, where there is nothing fabulous or
fictitious joined with it. Wherefore Socrates, being induced by some
dreams to attempt something in poetry, and finding himself unapt, by
reason that he had all his lifetime been the champion of severe truth,
to hammer out of his own invention a likely fiction, made choice of
Aesop's fables to turn into verse; as judging nothing to be true poetry
that had in it nothing of falsehood. For though we have known some
sacrifices performed without pipes and dances, yet we own no poetry
which is utterly destitute of fable and fiction. Whence the verses of
Empedocles and Parmenides, the Theriaca of Nicander, and the sentences
of Theognis, are rather to be accounted speeches than poems, which, that
they might not walk contemptibly on foot, have borrowed from poetry the
chariot of verse, to convey them the more creditably through the world.
Whensoever therefore anything is spoken in poems by any noted and
eminently famous man, concerning gods or daemons or virtue, that is
absurd or harsh, he that takes such sayings for truths is thereby misled
in his apprehension and corrupted with an erroneous opinion. But he that
constantly keeps in his mind and maintains as his principle that the
witchcraft of poetry consists in fiction, he that can at all turns
accost it in this language,--

     Riddle of art! like which no sphinx beguiles;
     Whose face on one side frowns while th' other smiles!
     Why cheat'st thou, with pretence to make us wise,
     And bid'st sage precepts in a fool's disguise?--

such a one, I say, will take no harm by it, nor admit from it any absurd
thing into his belief. But when he meets in poetry with expressions of
Neptune's rending the earth to pieces and dicovering infernal regions,
("See Iliad," xx. 57.) he will be able to check his fears of the reality
of any such accident; and he will blame himself for his anger against
Apollo for the chief commander of the Greeks,--

     Whom at a banquet, whiles he sings his praise
     And speaks him fair, yet treacherously he slays.
     ("From Aeschylus" The whole passage is quoted in Plato's
     "Republic," end of book II. (G.).)

Yea, he will repress his tears for Achilles and Agamemnon, while they
are resented as mourning after their death, and stretching forth their
limber and feeble hands to express their desire to live again. And if
at any time the charms of poetry transport him into any disquieting
passions, he will quickly say to himself, as Homer very elegantly
(considering the propension of that sex to listen after fables) says in
his Necyia, or relation of the state of the dead,--

     But from the dark dominions speed thy way,
     And climb the steep ascent to upper day;
     To thy chaste bride the wondrous story tell,
     The woes, the horrors, and the laws of hell.
     ("Odyssey," xi. 223.)



Such things as I have touched upon are those which the poets willingly
feign. But more there are which they do not feign, but believing
themselves as their own proper judgments, they put fictitious colors
upon them to ingratiate them to us. As when Homer says of Jupiter,--

     Jove lifts the golden balances, that show
     The faces of mortal men, and things below.
     Here each contending hero's lot he tries,
     And weighs with equal hand their destinies
     Low sinks the scale surcharged with Hector's fate;
     Heavy with death it sinks, and hell receives the weight.
     ("Iliad," xxii. 210.)

To this fable Aeschylus hath accommodated a whole tragedy which he
calls Psychostasia, wherein he introduceth Thetis and Aurora standing
by Jupiter's balances, and deprecating each of them the death of her
son engaged in a duel. Now there is no man but sees that this fable is
a creature of the poet's fancy, designed to delight or scare the reader.
But this other passage,--

     Great Jove is made the treasurer of wars;
     (Ibid. iv. 84.)

and this other also,--

     When a god means a noble house to raze,
     He frames one rather than he'll want a cause:
     (From the "Niobe" of Aeschylus, Frag. 151.)

these passages, I say, express their judgment and belief who thereby
discover and suggest to us the ignorant or mistaken apprehensions they
had of the Deities. Moreover, almost every one knows nowadays, that the
portentous fancies and contrivances of stories concerning the state of
the dead are accommodated to popular apprehensions,--that the spectres
and phantasms of burning rivers and horrid regions and terrible tortures
expressed by frightful names are all mixed with fable and fiction, as
poison with food; and that neither Homer nor Pindar nor Sophocles ever
believed themselves when they wrote at this rate:--

     There endless floods of shady darkness stream
     From the vast caves, where mother Night doth teem;

and,

     There ghosts o'er the vast ocean's waves did glide,
     By the Leucadian promontory's side;
     ("Odyssey," xxiv. 11.)

and,

     There from th' unfathomed gulf th' infernal lake
     Through narrow straits recurring tides doth make.

And yet, as many of them as deplore death as a lamentable thing, or the
want of burial after death as a calamitous condition, are wont to break
out into expressions of this nature:--

     O pass not by, my friend; nor leave me here
     Without a grave, and on that grave a tear;
     ("Odyssey," xi. 72.)

and,

     Then to the ghosts the mournful soul did fly,
     Sore grieved in midst of youth and strength to die;
     ("Iliad," xvi. 856.)

and again,

     'Tis sweet to see the light.  O spare me then,
     Till I arrive at th' usual age of men:
     Nor force my unfledged soul from hence, to know
     The doleful state of dismal shades below.
     (Euripides, "Iphigenia at Aulus," 1218.)

These, I say, are the speeches of men persuaded of these things, as
being possessed by erroneous opinions; and therefore they touch us the
more nearly and torment us inwardly, because we ourselves are full of
the same impotent passion from which they were uttered. To fortify
us therefore against expressions of this nature, let this principle
continually ring in our ears, that poetry is not at all solicitous to
keep to the strict measure of truth. And indeed, as to what that truth
in these matters is, even those men themselves who make it their only
study to learn and search it out confess that they can hardly discover
any certain footsteps to guide them in that inquiry. Let us therefore
have these verses of Empedocles, in this case, at hand:--

     No sight of man's so clear, no ear so quick,
     No mind so piercing, that's not here to seek;

as also those of Xenophanes:--

     The truth about the gods and ghosts, no man
     E'er was or shall be that determine can;

and lastly, that passage concerning Socrates, in Plato, where he by the
solemnity of an oath disclaims all knowledge of those things. For those
who perceive that the searching into such matters makes the heads of
philosophers themselves giddy cannot but be the less inclined to regard
what poets say concerning them.

And we shall fix our young men more if, when we enter him in the poets,
we first describe poetry to him and tell him that it is an imitating
art and is in many respects like unto painting; not only acquainting
him with that common saying, that poetry is vocal painting and painting
silent poetry, but showing him, moreover, that when we see a lizard or
an ape or the face of a Thersites in a picture, we are surprised with
pleasure and wonder at it, not because of any beauty in the things, but
for the likeness of the draught. For it is repugnant to the nature of
that which is itself foul to be at the same time fair; and therefore it
is the imitation--be the thing imitated beautiful or ugly--that, in case
it do express it to the life, is commanded; and on the contrary, if the
imitation make a foul thing to appear fair, it is dispraised because
it observes not decency and likeness. Now some painters there are that
paint uncomely actions; as Timotheus drew Medea killing her children;
Theon, Orestes murdering his mother; and Parrhasius, Ulysses
counterfeiting madness; yea, Chaerephanes expressed in picture the
unchaste converse of women with men. Now in such cases a young man is
to be familiarly acquainted with this notion, that, when men praise such
pictures, they praise not the actions represented but only the painter's
art which doth so lively express what was designed in them. Wherefore,
in like manner, seeing poetry many times describes by imitation foul
actions and unseemly passions and manners, the young student must not in
such descriptions (although performed never so cleverly and commendably)
believe all that is said as true or embrace it as good, but give its
due commendation so far only as it suits the subject treated of. For as,
when we hear the grunting of hogs and the shrieking of pulleys and the
rustling of wind and the roaring of seas, we are, it may be, disturbed
and displeased, and yet when we hear any one imitating these or the like
noises handsomely (as Parmenio did that of an hog, and Theodorus that
of a pulley), we are well pleased; and as we avoid (as an unpleasing
spectacle) the sight of sick persons and of a man full of ulcers, and
yet are delighted to be spectators of the Philoctetes of Aristophon and
the Jocasta of Silanion, wherein such wasting and dying persons are well
acted; so must the young scholar, when he reads in a poem of Thersites
the buffoon or Sisyphus the whoremaster or Batrachus the bawd speaking
or doing anything, so praise the artificial managery of the poet,
adapting the expressions to the persons, as withal to look on the
discourses and actions so expressed as odious and abominable. For the
goodness of things themselves differs much from the goodness of the
imitation of them; the goodness of the latter consisting only in
propriety and aptness to represent the former. Whence to foul acts foul
expressions are most suitable and proper. As the shoes of Demonides the
cripple (which, when he had lost them, he wished might suit the feet of
him that stole them) were but poor shoes, but yet fit for him; so we may
say of such expressions as these:--

     If t'is necessary an unjust act to do,
     It is best to do it for a throne;
     (Euripides, "Phoenissae," 524.)

     Get the repute of Just,
     And in it do all things whence gain may come;

     A talent dowry!  Could I
     Sleep, or live, if thee I should neglect?
     And should I not in hell tormented be,
     Could I be guilty of such sacrilege?
     (From Menander.)

These, it is true, are wicked as well as false speeches, but yet are
decent enough in the mouth of an Eteocles, an Ixion, and a griping
usurer. If therefore we mind our children that the poets write not such
things as praising and approving them, but do really account them base
and vicious and therefore accommodate such speeches to base and vicious
persons, they will never be damnified by them from the esteem they have
of the poets in whom they meet with them. But, on the contrary, the
suspicions insinuated into them of the persons will render the words
and actions ascribed to them suspected for evil, because proceeding from
such evil men. And of this nature is Homer's representation of Paris,
when he describes him running out of the battle into Helen's bed. For in
that he attributes no such indecent act to any other, but only to that
incontinent and adulterous person, he evidently declares that he intends
that relation to import a disgrace and reproach to such intemperance.

In such passages therefore we are carefully to observe whether or not
the poet himself do anywhere give any intimation that he dislikes the
things he makes such persons say; which, in the prologue to his Thais
Menander does, in these words:--

     Therefore, my Muse, describe me now a whore,
     Fair, bold, and furnished with a nimble tongue;
     One that ne'er scruples to do lovers wrong;
     That always craves, and denied shuts her door;
     That truly loves no man, yet, for her ends,
     Affection true to every man pretends.

But Homer of all the poets does it best. For he doth beforehand, as it
were, bespeak dislike of the evil things and approbation of the good
things he utters. Of the latter take these instances:--

     He readily did the occasion take,
     And sweet and comfortable words he spake;
     ("Odyssey," vi. 148.)

     By him he stood, and with soft speeches quelled
     The wrath which in his heated bosom swelled.
     ("Iliad," ii. 180.)

And for the former, he so performs it as in a manner solemnly to forbid
us to use or heed such speeches as those he mentions, as being foolish
and wicked. For example, being to tell us how uncivilly Agamemnon
treated the priest, he premises these words of his own,--

     Not so Atrides: he with kingly pride
     Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied;
     (Ibid. i. 24.)

intimating the insolency and unbecomingness of his answer. And when he
attributes this passionate speech to Achilles,--

     O monster, mix'd of insolence and fear,
     Thou dog in forehead, and in heart a deer!
     (Ibid. i. 225.)

he accompanies it with this censure,--

     Nor yet the rage his boiling breast forsook,
     Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke;
     (Ibid. i. 223.)

for it was unlikely that speaking in such anger he should observe any
rules of decency.

And he passeth like censures on actions. As on Achilles's foul usage of
Hector's carcass,--

     Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view)
     Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw.
     ("Iliad," xxiii. 24.)

And in like manner he doth very decently shut up relations of things
said or done, by adding some sentence wherein he declares his judgment
of them. As when he personates some of the gods saying, on the occasion
of the adultery of Mars and Venus discovered by Vulcan's artifice,--

     See the swift god o'ertaken by the lame!
     Thus ill acts prosper not, but end in shame.
     ("Odyssey," viii. 329.)

And thus concerning Hector's insolent boasting he says,--

     With such big words his mind proud Hector eased,
     But venerable Juno he displeased.
     ("Iliad," viii. 198.)

And when he speaks of Pandarus's shooting, he adds,--

     He heard, and madly at the motion pleased,
     His polish'd bow with hasty rashness seized.
     (Ibid. iv. 104.)

Now these verbal intimations of the minds and judgments of poets are not
difficult to be understood by any one that will heedfully observe them.
But besides these, they give us other hints from actions. As Euripides
is reported, when some blamed him for bringing such an impious and
flagitious villain as Ixion upon the stage, to have given this answer:
But yet I brought him not off till I had fastened him to a torturing
wheel. This same way of teaching by mute actions is to be found in Homer
also, affording us useful contemplations upon those very fables which
are usually most disliked in him. These some men offer force to, that
they may reduce them to allegories (which the ancients called [Greek
omitted]), and tell us that Venus committing adultery with Mars,
discovered by the Sun, is to be understood thus: that when the star
called Venus is in conjunction with that which hath the name of Mars,
bastardly births are produced, and by the Sun's rising and discovering
them they are not concealed. So will they have Juno's dressing herself
so accurately to tempt Jupiter, and her making use of the girdle of
Venus to inflame his love, to be nothing else but the purification of
that part of the air which draweth nearest to the nature of fire. As
if we were not told the meaning of those fables far better by the poet
himself. For he teacheth us in that of Venus, if we heed it, that light
music and wanton songs and discourses which suggest to men obscene
fancies debauch their manners, and incline them to an unmanly way of
living in luxury and wantonness, of continually haunting the company of
women, and of being

     Given to fashions, that their garb may please,
     Hot baths, and couches where they loll at case.

And therefore also he brings in Ulysses directing the musician thus,--

     Leave this, and sing the horse, out of whose womb
     The gallant knights that conquered Troy did come;
     ("Odyssey," viii. 249 and 492.)

evidently teaching us that poets and musicians ought to receive the
arguments of their songs from sober and understanding men. And in the
other fable of Juno he excellently shows that the conversation of women
with men, and the favors they receive from them procured by sorcery,
witchcraft, or other unlawful arts, are not only short, unstable,
and soon cloying, but also in the issue easily turned to loathing
and displeasure, when once the pleasure is over. For so Jupiter there
threatens Juno, when he tells her,--

     Hear this, remember, and our fury dread,
     Nor pull the unwilling vengeance on thy head;
     Lest arts and blandishments successless prove
     Thy soft deceits and well dissembled love.
     ("Iliad," xv. 32.)

For the fiction and representation of evil acts, when it withal
acquaints us with the shame and damage befalling the doers, hurts not
but rather profits him that reads them. For which end philosophers make
use of examples for our instruction and correction out of historical
collections; and poets do the very same thing, but with this difference,
that they invent fabulous examples themselves. There was one Melanthius,
who (whether in jest or earnest he said it, it matters not much)
affirmed that the city of Athens owed its preservation to the
dissensions and factions that were among the orators, giving withal this
reason for his assertion, that thereby they were kept from inclining
all of them to one side, so that by means of the differences among those
statesmen there were always some that drew the saw the right way for
the defeating of destructive counsels. And thus it is too in the
contradictions among poets, which, by lessening the credit of what they
say, render them the less powerful to do mischief; and therefore, when
comparing one saying with another we discover their contrariety, we
ought to adhere to the better side. As in these instances:--

      The gods, my son, deceive poor men oft-times.
ANS. 'Tis easy, sir, on God to lay our crimes.

      'Tis comfort to thee to be rich, is't not!
ANS. No, sir, 'tis bad to be a wealthy sot.

      Die rather than such toilsome pains to take.
ANS. To call God's service toil's a foul mistake.

Such contrarieties as these are easily solved, if (as I said) we teach
youth to judge aright and to give the better saying preference. But if
we chance to meet with any absurd passages without any others at their
heels to confute them, we are then to overthrow them with such others
as elsewhere are to be found in the same author. Nor must we be offended
with the poet or grieved at him, but only at the speeches themselves,
which he utters either according to the vulgar manner of speaking or, it
may be, but in drollery. So, when thou readest in Homer of gods thrown
out of heaven headlong one by another, or gods wounded by men and
quarrelling and brawling with each other, thou mayest readily, if thou
wilt, say to him,--

     Sure thy invention here was sorely out,
     Or thou hadst said far better things, no doubt;
     ("Iliad," viii. 358.)

yea, and thou dost so elsewhere, and according as thou thinkest, to wit,
in these passages of thine:--

     The gods, removed from all that men doth grieve,
     A quiet and contented life do live.

     Herein the immortal gods forever blest
     Feel endless joys and undisturbed rest.

     The gods, who have themselves no cause to grieve,
     For wretched man a web of sorrow weave.
     (Ibid. vi. 138; "Odyssey," vi. 46; "Iliad," xxiv, 526.)

For these argue sound and true opinions of the gods; but those other
were only feigned to raise passions in men. Again, when Euripides speaks
at this rate,--

     The gods are better than we men by far,
     And yet by them we oft deceived are,--

may do well to quote him elsewhere against himself where he says
better,--

     If gods do wrong, surely no gods there are.

So also, when Pindar, saith bitterly and keenly,

     No law forbids us anything to do,
     Whereby a mischief may befall a foe,

tell him: But, Pindar, thou thyself sayest elsewhere,

     The pleasure which injurious acts attends
     Always in bitter consequences ends.

And when Sophocles speaks thus,

     Sweet is the gain, wherein to lie and cheat
     Adds the repute of wit to what we get,

tell him: But we have heard thee say far otherwise,

     When the account's cast up, the gain's but poor
     Which by a lying tongue augments the store.

And as to what he saith of riches, to wit:--

     Wealth, where it minds to go, meets with no stay;
     For where it finds not, it can make a way;
     Many fair offers doth the poor let go,
     And lose his talent because his purse is low;
     The fair tongue makes, where wealth can purchase it,
     The foul face beautiful, the fool a wit:--

against this the reader may set in opposition divers other sayings of
the same author. For example,

     From honor poverty doth not debar,
     Where poor men virtuous and deserving are.

     Whate'er fools think, a man is ne'er the worse
     If he be wise, though with an empty purse.

     The comfort which he gets who wealth enjoys,
     The vexing care by which 'tis kept destroys.

And Menander also somewhere magnifies a voluptuous life, and inflames
the minds of vain persons with these amorous strains,

     The glorious sun no living thing doth see,
     But what's a slave to love as well as we.

But yet elsewhere, on the other side, he fastens on us and pulls us back
to the love of virtue, and checks the rage of lust, when he says thus,

     The life that is dishonorably spent,
     Be it ne'er so pleasant, yields no true content.

For these lines are contrary to the former, as they are also better and
more profitable; so that by comparing them considerately one cannot but
either be inclined to the better side, or at least flag in the belief of
the worse.

But now, supposing that any of the poets themselves afford no such
correcting passages to solve what they have said amiss, it will then
be advisable to confront them with the contrary sayings of other famous
men, and therewith to sway the scales of our judgment to the better
side. As, when Alexis tempts to debauchery in these verses,

     The wise man knows what of all things is best,
     Whilst choosing pleasure he slights all the rest.
     He thinks life's joys complete in these three sorts,
     To drink and eat, and follow wanton sports;
     And what besides seems to pretend to pleasure,
     If it betide him, counts it over measure,

we must remember that Socrates said the contrary, to wit: that they are
bad men who live that they may eat and drink, whereas good men eat and
drink that they may live. And against the man that wrote in this manner,

     He that designs to encounter with a knave,
     An equal stock of knavery must have,

seeing he herein advises us to follow other vicious examples, that of
Diogenes may well be returned, who being asked by what means a man might
revenge himself upon his enemy, answered, By becoming himself a good and
honest man. And the same Diogenes may be quoted also against Sophocles,
who, writing of the sacred mysteries, caused great grief and despair to
multitudes of men:--

     Most happy they whose eyes are blest to see
     The mysteries which here contained be,
     Before they die! For only they have joy.
     In th' other world; the rest all ills annoy.

This passage being read to Diogenes, What then! says he, shall the
condition of Pataecion, the notorious robber, after death be better than
that of Epaminondas, merely for his being initiated in these mysteries?
In like manner, when one Timotheus on the theatre, singing of the
Goddess Diana, called her furious, raging, possessed, mad, Cinesias
suddenly interrupted him, May thy daughter, Timotheus, be such a
goddess! And witty also was that of Bion to Theognis, who said,--

     One cannot say nor do, if poor he be;
     His tongue is bound to th' peace, as well as he.
     ("Theognis," vss. 177, 178.)

How comes it to pass then, said he, Theognis that thou thyself being so
poor pratest and gratest our ears in this manner?

Nor are we to omit, in our reading those hints which, from some other
words or phrases bordering on those that offend us, may help to rectify
our apprehensions. But as physicians use cantharides, believing that,
though their bodies be deadly poison, yet their feet and wings are
medicinal and are antidotes to the poison itself, so must we deal with
poems. If any noun or verb near at hand may assist to the correction of
any such saying, and preserve us from putting a bad construction upon
it, we should take hold of it and employ it to assist a more favorable
interpretation. As some do in reference to those verses of Homer,--

     Sorrows and tears most commonly are seen
     To be the gods' rewards to wretched men:--

     The gods, who have no cause themselves to grieve,
     For wretched man a web of sorrow weave.
     ("Odyssey," iv. 197; "Iliad," xxiv. 526.)

For, they say, he says not of men simply, or of all men, that the gods
weave for them the fatal web of a sorrowful life, but he affirms it only
of foolish and imprudent men, whom, because their vices make them such,
he therefore calls wretched and miserable.

Another way whereby those passages which are suspicious in poets maybe
transferred to a better sense may be taken from the ordinary use of
words, which a young man ought indeed to be more exercised in than
in the use of strange and obscure terms. For it will be a point of
philology which it will not be unprofitable to him to understand, that
when he meets with [Greek omitted] in a poet, that word means an EVIL
DEATH; for the Macedonians use the word [Greek omitted] to signify
DEATH. So the Aeolians call victory gotten by patient endurance
of hardships [Greek omitted] and the Dryopians call daemons [Greek
omitted].

But of all things it is most necessary, and no less profitable if we
design to receive profit and not hurt from the poets, that we understand
how they make use of the names of gods, as also of the terms of Evil and
Good; and what they mean by Soul and Fate; and whether these words be
always taken by them in one and the same sense or rather in various
senses, as also many other words are. For so the word [Greek omitted]
sometimes signifies a MATERIAL HOUSE, as, Into the high-roofed house;
and sometimes ESTATE, as, My house is devoured. So the word [Greek
omitted] sometimes signifies life, and sometimes wealth. And [Greek
omitted] is sometimes taken for being uneasy and disquieted in mind, as
in

[Greek omitted] ("Iliad," v. 352.)

and elsewhere for boasting and rejoicing, as in

[Greek omitted] ("Odyssey," xviii. 333.)

In like manner [Greek omitted] signifies either to MOVE, as in Euripides
when he saith,

[Greek omitted]--

or TO SIT, as in Sophocles when he writes thus,

[Greek omitted] (Sophocles, "Oedipus Tyranus," 2.)

It is elegant also when they fit to the present matter, as grammarians
teach, the use of words which have another signification. As here:--

[Greek omitted]

For here [Greek omitted] signifies TO PRAISE (instead of [Greek
omitted]), and TO PRAISE is used for TO REFUSE. So in conversation it
is common with us to say, [Greek omitted], IT IS WELL (i.e., NO, I THANK
YOU), and to bid anything FAREWELL [Greek omitted]; by which forms of
speech we refuse a thing which we do not want, or receive it not, but
still with a civil compliment. So also some say that Proserpina
is called [Greek omitted] in the notion of [Greek omitted], TO BE
DEPRECATED, because death is by all men shunned.

And the like distinction of words we ought to observe also in things
more weighty and serious. To begin with the gods, we should teach
our youth that poets, when they use the names of gods, sometimes mean
properly the Divine Beings so called, but otherwhiles understand by
those names certain powers of which the gods are the donors and authors,
they having first led us into the use of them by their own practice. As
when Archilochus prays,

     King Vulcan, hear thy suppliant, and grant
     That what thou'rt wont to give and I to want,

it is plain that he means the god himself whom he invokes. But when
elsewhere he bewails the drowning of his sister's husband, who had not
obtained lawful burial, and says,

     Had Vulcan his fair limbs to ashes turned,
     I for his loss had with less passion mourned,

he gives the name of Vulcan to the fire and not to the Deity. Again,
Euripides, when he says,

     No; by the glorious stars I swear,
     And bloody Mars and Jupiter,
     (Euripides, "Phoenissae," 1006.)

means the gods themselves who bare those names. But when Sophocles
saith,

     Blind Mars doth mortal men's affairs confound,
     As the swine's snout doth quite deface the ground,

we are to understand the word Mars to denote not the god so called,
but war. And by the same word we are to understand also weapons made of
hardened brass, in those verses of Homer,

     These, are the gallant men whose noble blood
     Keen Mars did shed near swift Scamander's flood.
     ("Iliad," vii. 329.)

Wherefore, in conformity to the instances given, we must conceive and
bear in mind that by the names of Jupiter also sometimes they mean the
god himself, sometimes Fortune, and oftentimes also Fate. For when they
say,--

     Great Jupiter, who from the lofty hill
     Of Ida govern'st all the world at will;
     ("Iliad," iii. 276.)

     That wrath which hurled to Pluto's gloomy realm
     The souls of mighty chiefs:--

     Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove;
     (Ibid. i. 3 and 5.)

     For who (but who himself too fondly loves)
     Dares lay his wisdom in the scale with Jove's?--

they understand Jupiter himself. But when they ascribe the event of all
things done to Jupiter as the cause, saying of him,--

     Many brave souls to hell Achilles sent,
     And Jove's design accomplished in th' event,--

they mean by Jove no more but Fate. For the poet doth not conceive that
God contrives mischief against mankind, but he soundly declares the mere
necessity of the things themselves, to wit, that prosperity and victory
are destined by Fate to cities and armies and commanders who govern
themselves with sobriety, but if they give way to passions and commit
errors, thereby dividing and crumbling themselves into factions, as
those of whom the poet speaks did, they do unhandsome actions, and
thereby create great disturbances, such as are attended with sad
consequences.

     For to all unadvised acts, in fine,
     The Fates unhappy issues do assign.
     (From Euripides.)

But when Hesiod brings in Prometheus thus counselling his brother
Epimetheus,

     Brother, if Jove to thee a present make,
     Take heed that from his hands thou nothing take,
     (Hesiod, "Works and Days," 86.)

he useth the name of Jove to express Fortune; for he calls the good
things which come by her (such as riches, and marriages, and empires,
and indeed all external things the enjoyment whereof is profitable
to only them who know how to use them well) the gifts of Jove. And
therefore he adviseth Epimetheus (an ill man, and a fool withal) to
stand in fear of and to guard himself from prosperity, as that which
would be hurtful and destructive to him.

Again, where he saith,

     Reproach thou not a man for being poor;
     His poverty's God's gift, as is thy store,
     (Hesiod "Works and Days," 717.)

he calls that which befalls men by Fortune God's gift, and intimates
that it is an unworthy thing to reproach any man for that poverty which
he falls into by Fortune, whereas poverty is then only a matter of
disgrace and reproach when it is attendant on sloth and idleness, or
wantonness and prodigality. For, before the name of Fortune was used,
they knew there was a powerful cause, which moved irregularly and
unlimitedly and with such a force that no human reason could avoid it;
and this cause they called by the names of gods. So we are wont to call
divers things and qualities and discourses, and even men themselves,
divine. And thus may we rectify many such sayings concerning Jupiter as
would otherwise seem very absurd. As these, for instance:--

     Before Jove's door two fatal hogsheads, filled
     With human fortunes, good and bad luck yield.--

     Of violated oaths Jove took no care,
     But spitefully both parties crushed by war:--

     To Greeks and Trojans both this was the rise
     Of Mischief, suitable to Jove's device.
     ("Iliad," xxiv. 527; vii. 69; "Odyssey," viii. 81.)

These passages we are to interpret as spoken concerning Fortune or Fate,
of the casuality of both which no account can be given by us, nor
do their effects fall under our power. But where anything is said
of Jupiter that is suitable, rational, and probable, there we are
to conceive that the names of that god is used properly. As in these
instances:--

     Through others' ranks he conquering did range,
     But shunned with Ajax any blows t' exchange;

     But Jove's displeasure on him he had brought,
     Had he with one so much his better fought.
     ("Iliad," xi. 540.)

     For though great matters are Jove's special care,
     Small things t' inferior daemons trusted are.

And other words there are which the poets remove and translate from
their proper sense by accommodation to various things, which deserve
also our serious notice. Such a one, for instance, is [Greek omitted],
VIRTUE. For because virtue does not only render men prudent, just, and
good, both in their words and deeds, but also oftentimes purchaseth to
them honor and power, therefore they call likewise these by that
name. So we are wont to call both the olive-tree and the fruit [Greek
omitted], and the oak-tree and its acorn [Greek omitted] communicating
the name of the one to the other. Therefore, when our young man reads in
the poets such passages as these,--

     This law th' immortal gods to us have set,
     That none arrive at virtue but by sweat;
     (Hesiod, "Works and Days," 289.)

     The adverse troops then did the Grecians stout
     By their mere virtue profligate and rout;
     ("Iliad," xi. 90.)

     If now the Fates determined have our death,
     To virtue we'll consign our parting breath;--

let him presently conceive that these things are spoken of that most
excellent and divine habit in us which we understand to be no other than
right reason, or the highest attainment of the reasonable nature, and
most agreeable to the constitution thereof. And again, when he reads
this,

     Of virtue Jupiter to one gives more,
     And lessens, when he lifts, another's store;

and this,

     Virtue and honor upon wealth attend;
     (Ibid. xx. 242; Hesiod "Works and Days," 313.)

let him not sit down in an astonishing admiration of rich men, as
if they were enabled by their wealth to purchase virtue, nor let him
imagine that it is in the power of Fortune to increase or lessen his own
wisdom; but let him conceive that the poet by virtue meant either glory
or power or prosperity or something of like import. For poets use the
same ambiguity also in the word [Greek omitted], EVIL, which sometimes
in them properly signifies a wicked and malicious disposition of mind,
as in that of Hesiod,

     Evil is soon acquired; for everywhere
     There's plenty on't and t'all men's dwellings near;
     (Hesiod, "Works and Days," 287.)

and sometimes some evil accident or misfortune, as when Homer says,

     Sore evils, when they haunt us in our prime,
     Hasten old age on us before our time.
     ("Odyessy," xix. 360.)

So also in the word [Greek omitted], he would be sorely deceived who
should imagine that, wheresoever he meets with it in poets, it means (as
it does in philosophy) a perfect habitual enjoyment of all good things
or the leading a life every way agreeable to Nature, and that they do
not withal by the abuse of such words call rich men happy or blessed,
and power or glory felicity. For, though Homer rightly useth terms of
that nature in this passage,--

     Though of such great estates I am possest,
     Yet with true inward joy I am not blest;
     (Ibid. iv. 93.)

and Menander in this,--

     So great's th' estate I am endowed withal:
     All say I'm rich, but none me happy call;--

yet Euripides discourseth more confusedly and perplexedly when he writes
after this manner,--

     I do not want a happy life that is tedious;
     And, man, why praisest thou
     Th' unjust beatitude of tyranny?
     (Euripides, "Medea," 598; "Phoenissae," 549.)

except, as I said, we allow him the use of these words in a metaphorical
and abusive meaning. But enough hath been spoken of these matters.

Nevertheless, this principle is not once only but often to be inculcated
and pressed on young men, that poetry when it undertakes a fictitious
argument by way of imitation, though it make use of such ornament and
illustration as suit the actions and manners treated of, yet disclaims
not all likelihood of truth, seeing the force of imitation, in order to
the persuading of men, lies in probability. Wherefore such imitation as
does not altogether shake hands with truth carries along with it certain
signs of virtue and vice mixed together in the actions which it doth
represent. And of this nature is Homer's poetry, which totally bids
adieu to Stoicism, the principles whereof will not admit any vice to
come near where virtue is, nor virtue to have anything to do where any
vice lodgeth, but affirms that he that is not a wise man can do nothing
well, and he that is so can do nothing amiss. Thus they determine in
the schools. But in human actions and the affairs of common life the
judgment of Euripides is verified, that

     Virtue and vice ne'er separately exist,
     But in the same acts with each other twist.
     (From the "Aeolus" of Euripides.)

Next, it is to be observed that poetry, waiving the truth of things,
does most labor to beautify its fictions with variety and multiplicity
of contrivance. For variety bestows upon fable all that is pathetical,
unusual, and surprising, and thereby makes it more taking and graceful;
whereas what is void of variety is unsuitable to the nature of fable,
and so raiseth no passions at all. Upon which design of variety it is,
that the poets never represent the same persons always victorious or
prosperous or acting with the same constant tenor of virtue;--yea,
even the gods themselves, when they engage in human actions, are not
represented as free from passions and errors;--lest, for the want of
some difficulties and cross passages, their poems should be destitute
of that briskness which is requisite to move and astonish the minds of
men.

These things therefore so standing, we should, when we enter a young man
into the study of the poets, endeavor to free his mind from that degree
of esteem of the good and great personages in them described as may
incline him to think them to be mirrors of wisdom and justice, the chief
of princes, and the exemplary measures of all virtue and goodness. For
he will receive much prejudice, if he shall approve and admire all that
comes from such persons as great, if he dislike nothing in them himself,
nor will endure to hear others blame them, though for such words and
actions as the following passages import:--

     Oh! would to all the immortal powers above,
     Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove!
     That not one Trojan might be left alive,
     And not a Greek of all the race survive.
     Might only we the vast destruction shun,
     And only we destroy the accursed town!

     Her breast all gore, with lamentable cries,
     The bleeding innocent Cassandra dies,
     Murdered by Clytemnestra's faithless hand:

     Lie with thy father's whore, my mother said,
     That she th' old man may loathe; and I obeyed:

     Of all the gods, O father Jove, there's none
     Thus given to mischief but thyself alone.
     ("Iliad," xvi. 97; "Odyssey," xi. 421; "Iliad," ix, 452;
     Ibid. iii, 365.)

Our young man is to be taught not to commend such things as these,
no, nor to show the nimbleness of his wit or subtlety in maintaining
argument by finding out plausible colors and pretences to varnish over
a bad matter. But we should teach him rather to judge that poetry is an
imitation of the manners and lives of such men as are not perfectly
pure and unblameable, but such as are tinctured with passions, misled by
false opinions, and muffled with ignorance; though oftentimes they may,
by the help of a good natural temper, change them for better qualities.
For the young man's mind, being thus prepared and disposed, will receive
no damage by such passages when he meets with them in poems, but will
on the one side be elevated with rapture at those things which are well
said or done, and on the other, will not entertain but dislike
those which are of a contrary character. But he that admires and is
transported with everything, as having his judgment enslaved by the
esteem he hath for the names of heroes, will be unawares wheedled into
many evil things, and be guilty of the same folly with those who imitate
the crookedness of Plato or the stammering of Aristotle. Neither must he
carry himself timorously herein, nor, like a superstitious person in
a temple, tremblingly adore all he meets with; but use himself to
such confidence as may enable him openly to pronounce, This was ill
or incongruously said, and, That was bravely and gallantly spoken. For
example, Achilles in Homer, being offended at the spinning out that
war by delays, wherein he was desirous by feats of arms to purchase to
himself glory, calls the soldiers together when there was an epidemical
disease among them. But having himself some smattering skill in physic,
and perceiving after the ninth day, which useth to be decretory in such
cases, that the disease was no usual one nor proceeding from ordinary
causes, when he stands up to speak, he waives applying himself to the
soldiers, and addresseth himself as a councillor to the general, thus:--

     Why leave we not the fatal Trojan shore,
     And measure back the seas we cross'd before?
     (For this and the four following quotations, see
     "Iliad," i. 59, 90, 220, 349; ix, 458.)

And he spake well, and with due moderation and decorum. But when the
soothsayer Chalcas had told him that he feared the wrath of the most
potent among the Grecians, after an oath that while he lived no man
should lay violent hands on him, he adds, but not with like wisdom and
moderation,

     Not e'en the chief by whom our hosts are led,
     The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head;

in which speech he declares his low opinion or rather his contempt
of his chief commander. And then, being farther provoked, he drew his
weapon with a design to kill him, which attempt was neither good nor
expedient. And therefore by and by he repented his rashness,--

     He said, observant of the blue-eyed maid;
     Then in the sheath returned the shining blade;

wherein again he did rightly and worthily, in that, though he could not
altogether quell his passion, yet he restrained and reduced it under the
command of reason, before it brake forth into such an irreparable act
of mischief. Again, even Agamemnon himself talks in that assembly
ridiculously, but carries himself more gravely and more like a prince in
the matter of Chryseis. For whereas Achilles, when his Briseis was taken
away from him,

     In sullenness withdraws from all his friends,
     And in his tent his time lamenting spends;

Agamemnon himself hands into the ship, delivers to her friends, and so
sends from him, the woman concerning whom a little before he declared
that he loved her better than his wife; and in that action did nothing
unbecoming or savoring of fond affection. Also Phoenix, when his father
bitterly cursed him for having to do with one that was his own harlot,
says,

     Him in my rage I purposed to have killed,
     But that my hand some god in kindness held;
     And minded me that, Greeks would taunting say,
     Lo, here's the man that did his father slay.

It is true that Aristarchus was afraid to permit these verses to stand
in the poet, and therefore censured them to be expunged. But they were
inserted by Homer very aptly to the occasion of Phoenix's instructing
Achilles what a pernicious thing anger is, and what foul acts men do by
its instigation, while they are capable neither of making use of their
own reason nor of hearing the counsel of others. To which end he also
introduceth Meleager at first highly offended with his citizens, and
afterwards pacified; justly therein reprehending disordered passions,
and praising it as a good and profitable thing not to yield to them, but
to resist and overcome them, and to repent when one hath been overcome
by them.

Now in these instances the difference is manifest. But where a like
clear judgment cannot be passed, there we are to settle the young man's
mind thus, by way of distinction. If Nausicaa, having cast her eyes upon
Ulysses, a stranger, and feeling the same passion for him as Calypso had
before, did (as one that was ripe for a husband) out of wantonness talk
with her maidens at this foolish rate,--

      O Heaven! in my connubial hour decree
      This man my spouse, or such a spouse as he!
      ("Odyssey," vi. 254.)

she is blameworthy for her impudence and incontinence. But if,
perceiving the man's breeding by his discourse, and admiring the
prudence of his addresses, she rather wisheth to have such a one for a
husband than a merchant or a dancing gallant of her fellow-citizens,
she is to be commended. And when Ulysses is represented as pleased with
Penelope's jocular conversation with her wooers, and at their presenting
her with rich garments and other ornaments,

     Because she cunningly the fools cajoled,
     And bartered light words for their heavy gold;
     ("Odyssey," xvii, 282.)

if that joy were occasioned by greediness and covetousness, he discovers
himself to be a more sordid prostituter of his own life than Poliager is
wont to be represented on the stage to have been, of whom it is said,--

     Happy man he, whose wife, like Capricorn,
     Stores him with riches from a golden horn!

But if through foresight he thought thereby to get them the more within
his power, as being lulled asleep in security for the future by the
hopes she gave them at present, this rejoicing, joined with confidence
in his wife, was rational. Again, when he is brought in numbering the
goods which the Phaeacians had set on shore together with himself and
departed; if indeed, being himself left in such a solitude, so ignorant
where he was, and having no security there for his own person, he is yet
solicitous for his goods, lest

     The sly Phaeacians, when they stole to sea,
     Had stolen some part of what they brought away;
     (Ibid. xiii. 216.)

the covetousness of the man deserved in truth to be pitied, or rather
abhorred. But if, as some say in his defence, being doubtful whether or
no the place where he was landed were Ithaca, he made use of the
just tale of his goods to infer thence the honesty of the
Phaeacians,--because it was not likely they would expose him in a
strange place and leave him there with his goods by him untouched, so
as to get nothing by their dishonesty,--then he makes use of a very fit
test for this purpose, and deserves commendation for his wisdom in that
action. Some also there are who condemn that passage of the putting him
on shore when he was asleep, if it really so happened, and they tell
us that the people of Tuscany have still a traditional story among them
concerning Ulysses, that he was naturally sleepy, and therefore a man
whom many people could not freely converse with. But if his sleep
was but shammed, and he made use of this pretence only of a natural
infirmity, by counterfeiting a nap, to hide the strait he was in at the
time in his thoughts, betwixt the shame of sending away the Phaeacians
without giving them a friendly collation and hospitable gifts, and the
fear he had of being discovered to his enemies by the treating such a
company of men together, they then approve it.

Now, by showing young men these things, we shall preserve them from
being carried away to any corruption in their manners, and dispose them
to the election and imitation of those that are good, as being before
instructed readily to disapprove those and commend these. But this
ought with the most care to be done in the reading of tragedies wherein
probable and subtle speeches are made use of in the most foul and wicked
actions. For that is not always true which Sophocles saith, that

     From evil acts good words can never come.

For even he himself is wont to apply pleasant reasonings and plausible
arguments to those manners and actions which are wicked or unbecoming.
And in another of his fellow-tragedians, we may see even Phaedra herself
represented as justifying her unlawful affection for Hippolytus by
accusing Theseus of ill-carriage towards her. And in his Troades, he
allows Helen the same liberty of speech against Hecuba, whom she judgeth
to be more worthy of punishment than herself for her adultery, because
she was the mother of Paris that tempted her thereto. A young man
therefore must not be accustomed to think anything of that nature
handsomely or wittily spoken, nor to be pleased with such colorable
inventions; but rather more to abhor such words as tend to the defence
of wanton acts than the very acts themselves.

And lastly, it will be useful likewise to inquire into the cause why
each thing is said. For so Cato, when he was a boy, though he was wont
to be very observant of all his master's commands, yet withal used to
ask the cause or reason why he so commanded. But poets are not to be
obeyed as pedagogues and promulgators of laws are, except they have
reason to back what they say. And that they will not want, when they
speak well; and if they speak ill, what they say will appear vain and
frivolous. But nowadays most young men very briskly demand the reason
of such trivial speeches as these, and inquire in what sense they are
spoken:--

     It bodes ill, when vessels you set up,
     To put the ladle on the mixing-cup.

     Who from his chariot to another's leaps,
     Seldom his seat without a combat keeps.
     (Hesiod "Works and Days," 744; "Iliad," iv. 306.)

But to those of greater moment they give credence without examination,
as to those that follow:--

     The boldest men are daunted oftentimes,
     When they're reproached with their parents' crimes:
     (Euripides, "Hippolytus," 424.)

     When any man is crushed by adverse fate,
     His spirit should be low as his estate.

And yet such speeches relate to manners, and disquiet men's lives by
begetting in them evil opinions and unworthy sentiments, except they
have learned to return answer to each of them thus: "Wherefore is
it necessary that a man who is crushed by adverse fate should have a
dejected spirit? Yea, why rather should he not struggle against Fortune,
and raise himself above the pressures of his low circumstances? Why, if
I myself be a good and wise son of an evil and foolish father, does it
not rather become me to bear myself confidently upon the account of my
own virtue, than to be dejected and dispirited because of my father's
defects?" For he that can encounter such speeches and oppose them after
this manner, not yielding himself up to be overset with the blast of
every saying, but approving that speech of Heraclitus, that

     Whate'er is said, though void of sense and wit,
     The size of a fool's intellect doth fit,

will reject many such things as falsely and idly spoken.

These things therefore may be of use to preserve us from the hurt we
might get by the study of poems.

Now, as on a vine the fruit oftentimes lies concealed and hidden under
its large leaves and luxuriant branches, so in the poet's phrases and
fictions that encompass them there are also many profitable and useful
things concealed from the view of young men. This, however, ought not to
be suffered; nor should we be led away from things themselves thus, but
rather adhere to such of them as tend to the promoting of virtue and
the well forming of our manners. It will not be altogether useless,
therefore, to treat briefly in the next place of passages of that
nature. Wherein I intend to touch only at some particulars, leaving
all longer discussion, and the trimming up and furnishing them with
a multitude of instances, to those who write more for display and
ostentation.

First, therefore, let our young man be taught to understand good and
bad manners and persons, and from thence apply his mind to the words and
deeds which the poet decently assigns to either of them. For example,
Achilles, though in some wrath, speaks to Agamemnon thus decently:--

     Nor, when we take a Trojan town, can I
     With thee in spoils and splendid prizes vie;
     (For this and the five following quotations,
     see "Iliad," i. 163; ii. 226; i. 128; ii. 231;
     iv. 402 and 404.)

whereas Thersites to the same person speaks reproachfully in this
manner:--

     'Tis thine whate'er the warrior's breast inflames,
     The golden spoil, thine the lovely dames.
     With all the wealth our wars and blood bestow,
     Thy tents are crowded and thy chests o'erflow.

Again, Achilles thus:--

     Whene'er, by Jove's decree, our conquering powers
     Shall humble to the dust Troy's lofty towers;

but Thersites thus:--

     Whom I or some Greek else as captive bring.

Again, Diomedes, when Agamemnon taking a view of the army spoke
reproachfully to him,

     To his hard words forbore to make reply,
     For the respect he bare to majesty;

whereas Sthenelus, a man of small note, replies on him thus:--

     Sir, when you know the truth, what need to lie?
     For with our fathers we for valor vie.

Now the observation of such difference will teach the young man the
decency of a modest and moderate temper, and the unbecoming nauseousness
of the contrary vices of boasting and cracking of a man's own worth. And
it is worth while also to take notice of the demeanor of Agamemnon in
the same place. For he passeth by Sthenelus unspoken to; but perceiving
Ulysses to be offended, he neglects not him, but applies himself to
answer him:--

     Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies.
     ("Iliad," iv. 357. For the four following, see "Iliad," ix. 34
     and 70; iv. 431; x. 325.)

For to have apologized to every one had been too servile and misbecoming
the dignity of his person; whereas equally to have neglected every one
had been an act of insolence and imprudence. And very handsome it is
that Diomedes, though in the heat of the battle he answers the king only
with silence, yet after the battle was over useth more liberty towards
him, speaking thus:--

     You called me coward, sir, before the Greeks.

It is expedient also to take notice of the different carriage of a wise
man and of a soothsayer popularly courting the multitude. For Chalcas
very unseasonably makes no scruple to traduce the king before the
people, as having been the cause of the pestilence that was befallen
them. But Nestor, intending to bring in a discourse concerning the
reconciling Achilles to him, that he might not seem to charge Agamemnon
before the multitude with the miscarriage his passion had occasioned,
only adviseth him thus:--

     But thou, O king, to council call the old....
     Wise weighty counsels aid a state distressed,
     And such a monarch as can choose the best;

which done, accordingly after supper he sends his ambassadors. Now this
speech of Nestor tended to the rectifying of what he had before done
amiss; but that of Chalcas, only to accuse and disparage him.

There is likewise consideration to be had of the different manners of
nations, such as these. The Trojans enter into battle with loud outcries
and great fierceness; but in the army of the Greeks,

     Sedate and silent move the numerous bands;
     No sound, no whisper, but the chief's commands;
     Those only heard, with awe the rest obey.

For when soldiers are about to engage an enemy, the awe they stand in of
their officers is an argument both of courage and obedience. For which
purpose Plato teacheth us that we ought to inure ourselves to fear,
blame and disgrace more than labor and danger. And Cato was wont to say
that he liked men that were apt to blush better than those that looked
pale.

Moreover, there is a particular character to be noted of the men who
undertake for any action. For Dolon thus promiseth:--

     I'll pass through all their host in a disguise
     To their flag-ship, where she at anchor lies.

But Diomedes promiseth nothing, but only tells them he shall fear the
less if they send a companion with him; whereby is intimated, that
discreet foresight is Grecian and civil, but rash confidence is
barbarous and evil; and the former is therefore to be imitated, and the
latter to be avoided.

It is a matter too of no unprofitable consideration, how the minds of
the Trojans and of Hector too were affected when he and Ajax were about
to engage in a single combat. For Aeschylus, when, upon one of the
fighters at fisticuffs in the Isthmian games receiving a blow on the
face, there was made a great outcry among the people, said: "What a
thing is practice! See how the lookers-on only cry out, but the man that
received the stroke is silent." But when the poet tells us, that the
Greeks rejoiced when they saw Ajax in his glistering armor, but

     The Trojans' knees for very fear did quake,
     And even Hector's heart began to ache;
     ("Iliad," vii. 215.  For the three following,
     see "Iliad," ii. 220; v. 26 and 231.)

who is there that wonders not at this difference,--when the heart of
him that was to run the risk of the combat only beats inwardly, as if he
were to undertake a mere wrestling or running match, but the very bodies
of the spectators tremble and shake, out of the kindness and fear which
they had for their king?

In the same poet also we may observe the difference betwixt the humor of
a coward and a valiant man. For Thersites

     Against Achilles a great malice had,
     And wise Ulysses he did hate as bad;

but Ajax is always represented as friendly to Achilles; and particularly
he speaks thus to Hector concerning him:--

     Hector I approach my arm, and singly know
     What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
     Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are
     Not void of soul, and not unskill'd in war:

wherein he insinuates the high commendation of that valiant man. And in
what follows, he speaks like handsome things of his fellow-soldiers in
general, thus:--

     Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast,
     And sends thee one, a sample of her host;

wherein he doth not boast himself to be the only or the best champion,
but one of those, among many others, who were fit to undertake that
combat.

What hath been said is sufficient upon the point of dissimilitudes;
except we think fit to add this, that many of the Trojans came into the
enemy's power alive, but none of the Grecians; and that many Trojans
supplicated to their enemies,--as (for instance) Adrastus, the sons of
Antimachus, Lycaon,--and even Hector himself entreats Achilles for a
sepulture; but not one of these doth so, as judging it barbarous to
supplicate to a foe in the field, and more Greek-like either to conquer
or die.

But as, in the same plant, the bee feeds on the flower, the goat on the
bud, the hog on the root, and other living creatures on the seed and the
fruit; so in reading of poems, one man singleth out the historical
part, another dwells upon the elegancy and fit disposal of words, as
Aristophanes says of Euripides,--

     His gallant language runs so smooth and round,
     That I am ravisht with th' harmonious sound;
     (See "Aristophanes," Frag. 397.)

but others, to whom this part of my discourse is directed, mind only
such things as are useful to the bettering of manners. And such we are
to put in mind that it is an absurd thing, that those who delight in
fables should not let anything slip them of the vain and extravagant
stories they find in poets, and that those who affect language should
pass over nothing that is elegantly and floridly expressed; and that
only the lovers of honor and virtue, who apply themselves to the study
of poems not for delight but for instruction's sake, should slightly
and negligently observe what is spoken in them relating to valor,
temperance, or justice. Of this nature is the following:--

     And stand we deedless, O eternal shame!
     Till Hector's arm involve the ships in flame?
     Haste, let us join, and combat side by side.
     ("Iliad," xi. 313.  For the four following see
     "Odyssey," iii. 52; "Iliad," xxiv. 560 and 584;
     "Odyssey," xvi. 274.)

For to see a man of the greatest wisdom in danger of being totally cut
off with all those that take part with him, and yet affected less with
fear of death than of shame and dishonor, must needs excite in a young
man a passionate affection for virtue. And this,

     Joyed was the Goddess, for she much did prize
     A man that was alike both just and wise,

teacheth us to infer that the Deity delights not in a rich or a proper
or a strong man, but in one that is furnished with wisdom and justice.
Again, when the same goddess (Minerva) saith that the reason why she did
not desert or neglect Ulysses was that he was

     Gentle, of ready wit, of prudent mind,

she therein tells us that, of all things pertaining to us, nothing
is dear to the gods and godlike but our virtue, seeing like naturally
delights in like.

And seeing, moreover, that it both seemeth and really is a great thing
to be able to moderate a man's anger, but a greater by far to guard
a man's self beforehand by prudence, that he fall not into it nor be
surprised by it, therefore also such passages as tend that way are not
slightly to be represented to the readers; for example, that Achilles
himself--who was a man of no great forbearance, nor inclined to such
meekness--yet admonishes Priam to be calm and not to provoke him, thus,

     Move me no more (Achilles thus replies,
     While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes),
     Nor seek by tears my steady soul to bend:
     To yield thy Hector I myself intend:
     Cease; lest, neglectful of high Jove's command,
     I show thee, king, thou tread'st on hostile land;

and that he himself first washeth and decently covereth the body of
Hector and then puts it into a chariot, to prevent his father's seeing
it so unworthily mangled as it was,--

                   Lest the unhappy sire,
     Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ire
     The stern Pelides; and nor sacred age,
     Nor Jove's command, should check the rising rage.

For it is a piece of admirable prudence for a man so prone to anger, as
being by nature hasty and furious, to understand himself so well as to
set a guard upon his own inclinations, and by avoiding provocations to
keep his passion at due distance by the use of reason, lest he should be
unawares surprised by it. And after the same manner must the man that
is apt to be drunken forearm himself against that vice; and he that is
given to wantonness, against lust, as Agesilaus refused to receive a
kiss from a beautiful person addressing to him, and Cyrus would not so
much as endure to see Panthea. Whereas, on the contrary, those that are
not virtuously bred are wont to gather fuel to inflame their passions,
and voluntarily to abandon themselves to those temptations to which of
themselves they are endangered. But Ulysses does not only restrain his
own anger, but (perceiving by the discourse of his son Telemachus,
that through indignation conceived against such evil men he was greatly
provoked) he blunts his passion too beforehand, and composeth him to
calmness and patience, thus:--

     There, if base scorn insult my reverend age,
     Bear it, my son! repress thy rising rage.
     If outraged, cease that outrage to repel;
     Bear it, my son! howe'er thy heart rebel.

For as men are not wont to put bridles on their horses when they are
running in full speed, but bring them bridled beforehand to the race; so
do they use to preoccupy and predispose the minds of those persons with
rational considerations to enable them to encounter passion, whom
they perceive to be too mettlesome and unmanageable upon the sight of
provoking objects.

Furthermore, the young man is not altogether to neglect names themselves
when he meets with them; though he is not obliged to give much heed
to such idle descants as those of Cleanthes, who, while he professeth
himself an interpreter, plays the trifler, as in these passages of
Homer: [Greek omitted], ("Iliad," iii. 320; xvi. 233.) For he will
needs read the two of these words joined into one, and make them [Greek
omitted] for that the air evaporated from the earth by exhalation [Greek
omitted] is so called. Yea, and Chrysippus too, though he does not so
trifle, yet is very jejune, while he hunts after improbable etymologies.
As when he will need force the words [Greek omitted] to import Jupiter's
excellent faculty in speaking and powerfulness to persuade thereby.

But such things as these are fitter to be left to the examination of
grammarians and we are rather to insist upon such passages as are both
profitable and persuasive. Such, for instance, as these;--

     My early youth was bred to martial pains,
     My soul impels me to the embattled plains!

     How skill'd he was in each obliging art;
     The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart.
     (Ibid. vi. 444; xvii. 671.)

For while the author tells us that fortitude may be taught, and that an
obliging and graceful way of conversing with others is to be gotten by
art and the use of reason, he exhorts us not to neglect the improvement
of ourselves, but by observing our teachers' instructions to learn a
becoming carriage, as knowing that clownishness and cowardice argue
ill-breeding and ignorance. And very suitable to what hath been said is
that which is said of Jupiter and Neptune:--

     Gods of one source, of one ethereal race,
     Alike divine, and heaven their native place;

     But Jove the greater; first born of the skies,
     And more than men or Gods supremely wise.
     ("Iliad," xiii. 354.)

For the poet therein pronounceth wisdom to be the most divine and royal
quality of all; as placing therein the greatest excellency of Jupiter
himself, and judging all virtues else to be necessarily consequent
thereunto. We are also to accustom a young man attentively to hear such
things as these:--

     Urge him with truth to frame his fair replies:
     And sure he will, for wisdom never lies:

     The praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain'd,
     An act so rash, Antilochus, has stain'd:

     Say, is it just, my friend, that Hector's ear
     From such a warrior such a speech should hear?
     I deemed thee once the wisest of thy kind,
     But ill this insult suits a prudent mind.
     ("Odyssey," iii. 20; "Iliad," xxiii. 570; xvii. 170.)

These speeches teach us that it is beneath wise men to lie or to deal
otherwise than fairly, even in games, or to blame other men without just
cause. And when the poet attributes Pindarus's violation of the truce to
his folly, he withal declares his judgment that a wise man will not
be guilty of an unjust action. The like may we also infer concerning
continence, taking our ground for it from these passages:--

     For him Antaea burn'd with lawless flame,
     And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame:
     In vain she tempted the relentless youth,
     Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth:

     At first, with worthy shame and decent pride,
     The royal dame, his lawless suit denied!
     For virtue's image yet possessed her mind:
     ("Iliad," vi. 160; "Odyssey," iii. 265.)

in which speeches the poet assigns wisdom to be the cause of continence.
And when in exhortations made to encourage soldiers to fight, he speaks
in this manner:--

     What mean you, Lycians?  Stand! O stand, for shame!

     Yet each reflect who prizes fame or breath,
     On endless infamy, on instant death;
     For, lo! the fated time, the appointed shore;
     Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers roar!
     ("Iliad," xvi. 422; xiii. 121.)

he seems to intimate that prudent men are valiant men; because they fear
the shame of base actions, and can trample on pleasures and stand their
ground in the greatest hazards. Whence Timotheus, in the play called
Persae, takes occasion handsomely to exhort the Grecians thus:--

     Brave soldiers of just shame in awe should stand;
     For the blushing face oft helps the fighting hand.

And Aeschylus also makes it a point of wisdom not to be blown up with
pride when a man is honored, nor to be moved or elevated with the
acclamations of a multitude, writing thus of Amphiaraus:--

     His shield no emblem bears; his generous soul
     Wishes to be, not to appear, the best;
     While the deep furrows of his noble mind
     Harvests of wise and prudent counsel bear.
     (See note in the same passage of
     Aeschylus (Sept. 591), i. 210. (G).)

For it is the part of a wise man to value himself upon the consciousness
of his own true worth and excellency.

Whereas, therefore, all inward perfections are reducible to wisdom, it
appears that all sorts of virtue and learning are included in it

Again, boys may be instructed, by reading the poets as they ought, to
draw even from those passages that are most suspected as wicked and
absurd something that is useful and profitable; as the bee is taught by
Nature to gather the sweetest and most pleasant honey from the harshest
flowers and sharpest thorns. It does indeed at the first blush cast a
shrewd suspicion on Agmemnon of taking a bribe, when Homer tells us that
he discharged that rich man from the wars who presented him with his
fleet mare Aethe:--

     Whom rich Echepolus, more rich than brave,
     To 'scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave
     (Aethe her name), at home to end his days;
     Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
     ("Iliad," xxiii. 297.)

Yet, as saith Aristotle, it was well done of him to prefer a good beast
before such a man. For, the truth is, a dog or ass is of more value than
a timorous and cowardly man that wallows in wealth and luxury. Again,
Thetis seems to do indecently, when she exhorts her son to follow his
pleasures and minds him of companying with women. But even here, on the
other side, the continency of Achilles is worthy to be considered; who,
though he dearly loved Briseis,--newly returned to him too,--yet, when
he knew his life to be near its end, does not hasten to the fruition
of pleasures, nor, when he mourns for his friend Patroclus, does he (as
most men are wont) shut himself up from all business and neglect his
duty, but only bars himself from recreations for his sorrow's sake,
while yet he gives himself up to action and military employments.
And Archilochus is not praiseworthy either, who, in the midst of his
mourning for his sister's husband drowned in the sea, contrives to
dispel his grief by drinking and merriment. And yet he gives this
plausible reason to justify that practice of his,

     To drink and dance, rather than mourn, I choose;
     Nor wrong I him, whom mourning can't reduce.

For, if he judged himself to do nothing amiss when he followed sports
and banquets, sure, we shall not do worse, if in whatever circumstances
we follow the study of philosophy, or manage public affairs, or go to
the market or to the Academy, or follow our husbandry. Wherefore those
corrections also are not to be rejected which Cleanthes and Antisthenes
have made use of. For Antisthenes, seeing the Athenians all in a tumult
in the theatre, and justly, upon the pronunciation of this verse,--

     Except what men think wrong, there's nothing ill,
     (From the "Aeolus" of Euripides, Frag. 19.)

presently subjoined this corrective,

     What's wrong is so,--believe men what they will.

And Cleanthes, hearing this passage concerning wealth:--

     Great is th' advantage that great wealth attends,
     For oft with it we purchase health and friends,
     (Euripides, "Electra," 428.)

presently altered it thus:

     Great disadvantage oft attends on wealth;
     We purchase whores with't and destroy our health.

And Zeno corrected that of Sophocles,

     The man that in a tyrant's palace dwells
     His liberty for's entertainment sells,

after this manner:--

     No: if he came in free, he cannot lose
     His liberty, though in a tyrant's house;

meaning by a free man one that is undaunted and magnanimous, and one of
a spirit too great to stoop beneath itself. And why may not we also, by
some such acclamations as those, call off young men to the better side,
by using some things spoken by poets after the same manner? For example,
it is said,

     'Tis all that in this life one can require,
     To hit the mark he aims at in desire.

To which we may reply thus:--

     'Tis false; except one level his desire
     At what's expedient, and no more require.

For it is an unhappy thing and not to be wished, for a man to obtain and
be master of what he desires if it be inexpedient. Again this saying,

     Thou, Agamemnon, must thyself prepare
     Of joy and grief by turns to take thy share,
     Thy father, Atreus, sure, ne'er thee begat,
     To be an unchanged favorite of Fate:
     (Euripides, "Iphigenia at Aulus," 29.)

we may thus invert:--

     Thy father, Atreus, never thee begat,
     To be an unchanged favorite of Fate:
     Therefore, if moderate thy fortunes are,
     Thou shouldst rejoice always, and grief forbear.

Again it is said,

     Alas! this ill comes from the powers divine
     That oft we see what's good, yet it decline.
     (From the "Chrysippus" of Euripides, Frag. 838.)

Yea, rather, say we, it is a brutish and irrational and wretched fault
of ours, that when we understand better things, we are carried away
to the pursuit of those which are worse, through our intemperance and
effeminacy. Again, one says,

     For not the teacher's speech but practice moves.
     (From Menander.)

Yea, rather, say we, both the speech and practice,--or the practice by
the means of speech,--as the horse is managed with the bridle, and
the ship with the helm. For virtue hath no instrument so suitable and
agreeable to human nature to work on men withal, as that of rational
discourse. Again, we meet with this character of some person:--

     A.  Is he more inclined to male or female love?
     B.  He bends both ways, where beauty moves.

But it had been better said thus:--

     He's flexible to both, where virtue moves.

For it is no commendation of a man's dexterity to be tossed up and down
as pleasure and beauty move him, but an argument rather of a weak and
unstable disposition. Once more, this speech,

     Religion damps the courage of our minds,
     And ev'n wise men to cowardice inclines,

is by no means to be allowed; but rather the contrary,

     Religion truly fortifies men's minds,
     And a wise man to valiant acts inclines,

and gives not occasion of fear to any but weak and foolish persons and
such as are ungrateful to the Deity, who are apt to look on that divine
power and principle which is the cause of all good with suspicion and
jealousy, as being hurtful unto them. And so much for that which I call
correction of poets' sayings.

There is yet another way of improving poems, taught us well by
Chrysippus; which is, by accommodation of any saying, to transfer that
which is useful and serviceable in it to divers things of the same kind.
For whereas Hesiod saith,

     If but a cow miscarry, the common fame
     Upon the next ill neighbor lays the blame;
     (Hesiod, "Work and Days," 348.)

the same may be applied to a man's dog or ass or any other beast of his
which is liable to the like mischance. Again, Euripides saith,

     How can that man be called a slave, who slights
     Ev'n death itself, which servile spirits frights?

the like whereof may be said of hard labor or painful sickness. For as
physicians, finding by experience the force of any medicine in the cure
of some one disease, make use of it by accommodation, proportionably
to every other disease of affinity thereto, so are we to deal with such
speeches as are of a common import and apt to communicate their value to
other things; we must not confine them to that one thing only to which
they were at first adapted, but transfer them to all other of like
nature, and accustom young men by many parallel instances to see the
communicableness of them, and exercise the promptness of their wits in
such applications so that when Menander says,

     Happy is he who wealth and wisdom hath,

they may be able to judge that the same is fitly applicable to glory
and authority and eloquence also. And the reproof which Ulysses gives
Achilles, when he found him sitting in Scyrus in the apartment of the
young ladies,

     Thou, who from noblest Greeks deriv'st thy race,
     Dost thou with spinning wool thy birth disgrace?

may be as well given to the prodigal, to him that undertakes any
dishonest way of living, yea, to the slothful and unlearned person,
thus:--

     Thou, who from noblest Greeks deriv'st thy race,
     Dost thou with fuddling thy great birth disgrace?

or dost thou spend thy time in dicing, or quail-striking, (The word here
used [Greek omitted] denotes a game among the Grecians, which Suidas
describes to be the setting of quails in a round compass or ring and
striking at the heads of them; and he that in the ring struck one had
liberty to strike at the rest in order, but he that missed was obliged
to set up quails for others; and this they did by turns.) or deal in
adulterate wares or griping usury, not minding anything that is great
and worthy thy noble extraction? So when they read,

     For wealth, the God most served, I little care,
     Since the worst men his favors often wear,
     (From the "Aeolus," of Euripides, Frag. 20.)

they may be able to infer, therefore, as little regard is to be had to
glory and bodily beauty and princely robes and priestly garlands, all
which also we see to be the enjoyments of very bad men. Again, when they
read this passage,

     A coward father propagates his vice,
     And gets a son heir to his cowardice,

they may in truth apply the same to intemperance, to superstition,
to envy, and all other diseases of men's minds. Again, whereas it is
handsomely said of Homer,

     Unhappy Paris, fairest to behold!

and

     Hector, of noble form.
     ("Iliad," iii. 39; xvii. 142.)

for herein he shows that a man who hath no greater excellency than that
of beauty to commend him deserves to have it mentioned with contempt
and ignominy,--such expressions we should make use of in like cases to
repress the insolence of such as bear themselves high upon the account
of such things as are of no real value, and to teach young men to look
upon such compellations as "O thou richest of men," and "O thou that
excellest in feasting, in multitudes of attendants, in herds of cattle,
yea, and in eloquent speaking itself," to be (as they are indeed)
expressions that import reproach and infamy. For, in truth, a man
that designs to excel ought to endeavor it in those things that are
in themselves most excellent, and to become chief in the chiefest, and
great in the greatest things. Whereas glory that ariseth from things in
themselves small and inconsiderable is inglorious and contemptible.
To mind us whereof we shall never be at a loss for instances, if, in
reading Homer especially, we observe how he applieth the expressions
that import praise or disgrace; wherein we have clear proof that he
makes small account of the good things either of the body or Fortune.
And first of all, in meetings and salutations, men do not call others
fair or rich or strong, but use such terms of commendation as these:--

     Son of Laertes, from great Jove deriving
     Thy pedigree, and skilled in wise contriving;

     Hector, thou son of Priam, whose advice
     With wisest Jove's men count of equal price;

     Achilles, son of Peleus, whom all story
     Shall mention as the Grecians greatest glory;

     Divine Patroclus, for thy worth thou art,
     Of all the friends I have, lodged next my heart.
     ("Iliad," ii. 173; vii. 47; xix. 216; xi. 608.)

And moreover, when they speak disgracefully of any person, they touch
not at bodily defects, but direct all their reproaches to vicious
actions; as for instance:--

     A dogged-looking, drunken beast thou art,
     And in thy bosom hast a deer's faint heart;

     Ajax at brawling valiant still,
     Whose tongue is used to speaking ill;

     A tongue so loose hung, and so vain withal,
     Idomeneus, becomes thee not at all;

     Ajax thy tongue doth oft offend;
     For of thy boasting there's no end.
     (Ibid. i. 225; xxiii. 483 and 474-479; xiii. 824.)

Lastly, when Ulysses reproacheth Thersites, he objecteth not to him his
lameness nor his baldness nor his hunched back, but the vicious quality
of indiscreet babbling. On the other side, when Juno means to express a
dalliance or motherly fondness to her son Vulcan, she courts him with an
epithet taken from his halting, thus,

     Rouse thee, my limping son!
     (Ibid, xxi. 331.)

In this instance, Homer does (as it were) deride those who are ashamed
of their lameness or blindness, as not thinking anything a disgrace that
is not in itself disgraceful, nor any person liable to a reproach for
that which is not imputable to himself but to Fortune. These two
great advantages may be made by those who frequently study poets;--the
learning moderation, to keep them from unseasonable and foolish
reproaching others with their misfortunes, when they themselves enjoy a
constant current of prosperity; and magnanimity, that under variety of
accidents they be not dejected nor disturbed, but meekly bear the being
scoffed at, reproached, and drolled upon. Especially, let them have that
saying of Philemon ready at hand in such cases:--

     That spirit's well in tune, whose sweet repose
     No railer's tongue can ever discompose.

And yet, if one that so rails do himself merit reprehension, thou mayst
take occasion to retort upon him his own vices and inordinate passions;
as when Adrastus in the tragedy is assaulted thus by Alcmaeon,

     Thy sister's one that did her husband kill,

he returns him this answer,

     But thou thyself thy mother's blood did spill.

For as they who scourge a man's garments do not touch the body, so those
that turn other men's evil fortunes or mean births to matter of reproach
do only with vanity and folly enough lash their external circumstances,
but touch not their internal part, the soul, nor those things which
truly need correction and reproof.

Moreover, as we have above taught you to abate and lessen the credit
of evil and hurtful poems by setting in opposition to them the famous
speeches and sentences of such worthy men as have managed public
affairs, so will it be useful to us, where we find any things in them
of civil and profitable import, to improve and strengthen them by
testimonies and proofs taken from philosophers, withal giving these the
credit of being the first inventors of them. For this is both just and
profitable to be done, seeing by this means such sayings receive an
additional strength and esteem, when it appears that what is spoken
on the stage or sung to the harp or occurs in a scholar's lesson
is agreeable to the doctrines of Pythagoras and Plato, and that the
sentences of Chile and Bias tend to the same issue with those that
are found in the authors which children read. Therefore must we
industriously show them that these poetical sentences,

     Not these, O daughter, are thy proper cares,
     Thee milder arts befit, and softer wars;
     Sweet smiles are thine, and kind endearing charms;
     To Mars and Pallas leave the deeds of arms;

     Jove's angry with thee, when thy unmanaged rage
     With those that overmatch thee doth engage;
     ("Iliad," v. 248; xi. 543.)

differ not in substance but bear plainly the same sense with that
philosophical sentence, Know thyself, And these

     Fools, who by wrong seek to augment their store,
     And know not how much half than all is more;

     Of counsel giv'n to mischievous intents,
     The man that gives it most of all repents;
     (Hesiod, "Works and Days," 40 and 266.)

are of near kin to what we find in the determination of Plato, in his
books entitled Gorgias and Concerning the Commonwealth, to wit, that
it is worse to do than to suffer injury, and that a man more endamageth
himself when he hurts another, than he would be damnified if he were the
sufferer. And that of Aeschylus,

     Cheer up, friend; sorrows, when they highest climb,
     What they exceed in measure want in time,

we must inform them, is but the same famous sentence which is so much
admired in Epicurus, that great griefs are but short, and those that
are of long continuance are but small. The former clause whereof is that
which Aeschylus here saith expressly, and the latter but the consequent
of that. For if a great and intense sorrow do not last, then that which
doth last is not great nor hard to be borne. And those words of Thespis,

     Seest not how Jove,--because he cannot lie
     Nor vaunt nor laugh at impious drollery,
     And pleasure's charms are things to him unknown,--

     Among the gods wears the imperial crown?

wherein differ they from what Plato says, that the divine nature is
remote from both joy and grief? And that saying of Bacchylides,

     Virtue alone doth lasting honor gain,
     But men of basest souls oft wealth attain;

and those of Euripides much of the same import,

     Hence temperance in my esteem excels,
     Because it constantly with good men dwells;

     However you may strive for honor
     And you may seem to have secured by wealth virtue,
     Good men will place you among the miserable;

do they not evidently confirm to us what the philosophers say of riches
and other external good things, that without virtue they are fruitless
and unprofitable enjoyments?

Now thus to accommodate and reconcile poetry to the doctrines of
philosophy strips it of its fabulous and personated parts, and makes
those things which it delivers usefully to acquire also the reputation
of gravity; and over and above, it inclines the soul of a young man to
receive the impressions of philosophical precepts. For he will hereby be
enabled to come to them not altogether destitute of some sort of relish
of them, not as to things that he has heard nothing of before, nor with
an head confusedly full of the false notions which he hath sucked in
from the daily tattle of his mother and nurse,--yea, sometimes too of
his father and pedant,--who have been wont to speak of rich men as the
happy men and mention them always with honor, and to express themselves
concerning death and pain with horror, and to look on virtue without
riches and glory as a thing of nought and not to be desired. Whence it
comes to pass, that when such youths first do hear things of a quite
contrary nature from philosophers, they are surprised with a kind of
amazement, trouble, and stupid astonishment, which makes them afraid to
entertain or endure them, except they be dealt with as those who come
out of very great darkness into the light of the bright sun, that is,
be first accustomed for a while to behold those doctrines in fabulous
authors, as in a kind of false light, which hath but a moderate
brightness and is easy to be looked on and borne without disturbance to
the weak sight. For having before heard or read from poets such things
as these are,--

     Mourn one's birth, as the entrance of all ills;
     But joy at death, as that which finishes misery;

     Of worldly things a mortal needs but two;
     A drink of water and the gift of Ceres:

     O tyranny, to barbarous nations dear!

     This in all human happiness is chief,
     To know as little as we can of grief;

they are the less disturbed and offended when they hear from
philosophers that no man ought to be overconcerned about death; that
riches are limited to the necessities of nature; that the happiness of
man's life doth not consist in the abundance of wealth or vastness
of employments or height of authority and power, but in freedom from
sorrow, in moderation of passions, and in such a temper of mind as
measures all things by the use of Nature.

Wherefore, upon all these accounts, as well as for all the reasons
before mentioned, youth stands in need of good government to manage it
in the reading of poetry, that being free from all prejudicate opinions,
and rather instructed beforehand in conformity thereunto, it may with
more calmness, friendliness, and familiarity pass from thence to the
study of philosophy.


END OF FOURTEEN------------




ABSTRACT OF A COMPARISON BETWEEN ARISTOPHANE AND MENANDER

To speak in sum and in general, he prefers Menander by far; and as
to particulars, he adds what here ensues. Aristophanes, he saith, is
importune, theatric, and sordid in his expression; but Menander not
so at all. For the rude and vulgar person is taken with the things the
former speaketh; but the well-bred man will be quite out of humor with
them. I mean, his opposed terms, his words of one cadence, and his
derivatives. For the one makes use of these with due observance and
but seldom, and bestows care upon them; but the other frequently,
unseasonably, and frigidly. "For he is much commended," said he, "for
ducking the chamberlains, they being indeed not chamberlains [Greek
omitted] but witches."[Greek omitted]. And again,--"This rascal breathes
out nothing but roguery and sycophanty"; and "Smite him well in his
belly with the entrails and the guts"; and, "By laughing I shall get to
Laughington [Greek omitted]"; and, "Thou poor sharded ostracized pot,
what shall I do with thee?" and, "To you women surely he is a mad
plague, for he was brought up among these mad worts";--and, "Look here,
how the moths have eaten away my crest"; and, "Bring me hither the
gorgon-backed circle of my shield"; "Give me the round-backed circle
of a cheese-cake";--and much more of the same kind. (See Aristophanes,
"Knights," 437, 455; "Thesmophoriazusae," 455; Acharnians," 1109,
1124.) There is then in the structure of his words something tragic and
something comic, something blustering and something low, an obscurity, a
vulgarness, a turgidness, and a strutting, with a nauseous prattling and
fooling. And as his style has so great varieties and dissonances in it,
so neither doth he give to his persons what is fitting and proper
to each,--as state (for instance) to a prince, force to an orator,
innocence to a woman, meanness of language to a poor man, and sauciness
to a tradesman,--but he deals out to every person, as it were by lot,
such words as come next to his hand, and you would scarce discern
whether he be a son a father, a peasant, a god, an old woman, or a hero
that is talking.

But now Menander's phrase is so well turned and contempered with itself,
and so everywhere conspiring, that, while it traverses many passions and
humors and is accommodated to all sorts of persons, it still shows the
same, and retains its semblance even in trite, familiar, and everyday
expressions. And if his master do now and then require something of rant
and noise, he doth but (like a skilful flutist) set open all the holes
of his pipe, and their presently stop them again with good decorum
and restore the tune to its natural state. And though there be a great
number of excellent artists of all professions, yet never did any
shoemaker make the same sort of shoe, or tireman the same sort of visor,
or tailor the same sort of garment, to fit a man, a woman, a child, an
old man, and a slave. But Menander hath so addressed his style, as to
proportion it to every sex, condition, and age; and this, though he took
the business in hand when he was very young, and died in the vigor of
his composition and action, when, as Aristotle tells us, authors receive
most and greatest improvement in their styles. If a man shall then
compare the middle and last with the first of Menander's plays, he will
by them easily conceive what others he would have added to them, had he
had but longer life.

He adds further, that of dramatic exhibitors, some address themselves
to the crowd and populace, and others again to a few; but it is a hard
matter to say which of them all knew what was befitting in both the
kinds. But Aristophanes is neither grateful to the vulgar, nor tolerable
to the wise; but it fares with his poesy as it doth with a courtesan
who, when she finds she is now stricken and past her prime, counterfeits
a sober matron, and then the vulgar cannot endure her affectation, and
the better sort abominate her lewdness and wicked nature. But
Menander hath with his charms shown himself every way sufficient for
satisfaction, being the sole lecture, argument, and dispute at theatres,
schools, and at tables; hereby rendering his poesy the most universal
ornament that was ever produced by Greece, and showing what and how
extraordinary his ability in language was, while he passes every
way with an irresistible persuasion, and gains every man's ear and
understanding who has any knowledge of the Greek tongue. And for what
other reason in truth should a man of parts and erudition be at the
pains to frequent the theatre, but for the sake of Menander only? And
when are the playhouses better filled with men of letters, than when his
comic mask is exhibited? And at private entertainments among friends,
for whom doth the table more justly make room or Bacchus give place than
for Menander? To philosophers also and hard students (as painters are
wont, when they have tired out their eyes at their work, to divert them
to certain florid and green colors) Menander is a repose from their
auditors and intense thinkings, and entertains their minds with gay
shady meadows refreshed with cool and gentle breezes.

He adds, moreover, that though this city breeds at this time very many
and excellent representers of comedy, Menander's plays participate of a
plenteous and divine salt, as though they were made of the very sea out
of which Venus herself sprang. But that of Aristophanes is harsh and
coarse, and hath in it an angry and biting sharpness. And for my part I
cannot tell where his so much boasted ability lies, whether in his
style or persons. The parts he acts I am sure are quite overacted and
depraved. His knave (for instance) is not fine, but dirty; his peasant
is not assured, but stupid; his droll is not jocose, but ridiculous; and
his lover is not gay, but lewd. So that to me the man seems not to have
written his poesy for any temperate person, but to have intended his
smut and obscenity for the debauched and lewd, his invective and satire
for the malicious and ill-humored.


END OF FIFTEEN------




THE MALICE OF HERODOTUS.

The style, O Alexander, of Herodotus, as being simple, free, and easily
suiting itself to its subject, has deceived many; but more, a persuasion
of his dispositions being equally sincere. For it is not only (as Plato
says) an extreme injustice, to make a show of being just when one is not
so; but it is also the highest malignity, to pretend to simplicity and
mildness and be in the meantime really most malicious. Now since he
principally exerts his malice against the Boeotians and Corinthians,
though without sparing any other, I think myself obliged to defend our
ancestors and the truth against this part of his writings, since those
who would detect all his other lies and fictions would have need of many
books. But, as Sophocles has it, the face of persuasion, is prevalent,
especially when delivered in the good language, and such as has power
to conceal both the other absurdities and the ill-nature of the writer.
King Philip told the Greeks who revolted from him to Titus Quinctius
that they had got a more polished, but a longer lasting yoke. So the
malice of Herodotus is indeed more polite and delicate than that
of Theopompus, yet it pinches closer, and makes a more severe
impression,--not unlike to those winds which, blowing secretly through
narrow chinks, are sharper than those that are more diffused. Now it
seems to me very convenient to delineate, as it were, in the rough
draught, those signs and marks that distinguish a malicious narration
from a candid and unbiassed one, applying afterwards every point we
shall examine to such as appertain to them.

First then, whoever in relating a story shall use the odious terms
when gentler expressions might do as well, is it not to be esteemed
impartial, but an enjoyer of his own fancy, in putting the worst
construction on things; as if any one, instead of saying Nicias is
too superstitious, should call him fanatic, or should accuse Cleon
of presumption and madness rather than of inconsiderateness in
speech.----------Secondly, when a writer, catching hold of a fault which
has no reference to his story, shall draw it into the relation of such
affairs as need it not, extending his narrative with cicumlocutions,
only that he may insert a man's misfortune, offence, or discommendable
action, it is manifest that he delights in speaking evil. Therefore
Thucydides would not clearly relate the faults of Cleon, which were very
numerous; and as for Hyperbolus the orator, having touched at him in
a word and called him an ill man, he let him go. Philistus also passed
over all those outrages committed by Dionysius on the barbarians which
had no connection with the Grecian affairs. For the excursions
and digressions of history are principally allowed for fables and
antiquities, and sometimes also for encomiums. But he who makes
reproaches and detractions an addition to his discourse seems to incur
the tragedian's curse on the "collector of men's calamities."

Now the opposite to this is known to every one, as the omitting to
relate some good and laudable action, which, though it may seem not to
be reprehensible, yet is then done maliciously when the omission happens
in a place that is pertinent to the history. For to praise unwillingly
is so far from being more civil than to dispraise willingly, that it is
perhaps rather more uncivil.

The fourth sign of a partial disposition in writing of history I take
to be this: When a matter is related in two or more several manners, and
the historian shall embrace the worst. Sophisters indeed are permitted,
for the obtaining either of profit or reputation, to undertake the
defence of the worst cause; for they neither create any firm belief
of the matter, nor yet do they deny that they are often pleased in
maintaining paradoxes and making incredible things appear probable. But
an historian is then just, when he asserts such things as he knows to be
true, and of those that are uncertain reports rather the better than
the worse. Nay, there are many writers who wholly omit the worse. Thus
Ephorus writes of Themistocles, that he was acquainted with the treason
of Pausanias and his negotiations with the King's lieutenants, but that
he neither consented to it, nor hearkened to Pausanias's proffers of
making him partaker of his hopes; and Thucydides left the whole matter
out of his story, as judging it to be false.

Moreover, in things confessed to have been done, but for doing which
the cause and intention is unknown, he who casts his conjectures on the
worst side is partial and malicious. Thus do the comedians, who affirm
the Peloponnesian war to have been kindled by Pericles for the love of
Aspasia or the sake of Phidias, and not through any desire of honor,
or ambition of pulling down the Peloponnesian pride and giving place
in nothing to the Lacedaemonians. For those who suppose a bad cause
for laudable works and commendable actions, endeavoring by calumnies
to insinuate sinister suspicions of the actor when they cannot openly
discommend the act,--as they that impute the killing of Alexander the
tyrant by Theba not to any magnanimity or hatred of vice, but to a
certain feminine jealousy and passion, and those that say Cato slew
himself for fear Caesar should put him to a more shameful death,--such
as these are manifestly in the highest degree envious and malicious.

An historical narration is also more or less guilty of malice, according
as it relates the manner of the action; as if one should be said to have
performed an exploit rather by money than bravery, as some affirm
of Philip; or else easily and without any labor, as it is said of
Alexander; or else not by prudence, but by Fortune, as the enemies of
Timotheus painted cities falling into his nets as he lay sleeping. For
they undoubtedly diminish the greatness and beauty of the actions, who
deny the performer of them to have done them generously, industriously,
virtuously, and by themselves.

Moreover, those who will directly speak ill of any one incur the
reproach of moroseness, rashness, and madness, unless they keep within
measure. But they who send forth calumnies obliquely, as if they were
shooting arrows out of corners, and then stepping back think to conceal
themselves by saying they do not believe what they most earnestly desire
to have believed, whilst they disclaim all malice, condemn themselves
also of farther disingenuity.

Next to these are they who with their reproaches intermix some praises,
as did Aristoxenus, who, having termed Socrates unlearned, ignorant,
and libidinous, added, Yet was he free from injustice. For, as they who
flatter artificially and craftily sometimes mingle light reprehensions
with their many and great praises, joining this liberty of speech as
a sauce to their flattery; so malice, that it may gain belief to its
accusations, adds also praise.

We might here also reckon up more notes; but these are sufficient to let
us understand the nature and manners of Herodotus.

First therefore,--beginning, as the proverb is, with Vesta,--whereas
all the Grecians affirm Io, daughter to Inachus, to have been worshipped
with divine honor by the barbarians, and by her glory to have left her
name to many seas and principal ports, and to have given a source and
original to most noble and royal families; this famous author says of
her, that she gave herself to certain Phoenician merchants, having been
not unwillingly deflowered by a mariner, and fearing lest she should be
found by her friends to be with child (Herodotus, i. 5.) And he belies
the Phoenicians as having delivered these things of her, and says that
the Persian stories testify of her being carried away by the Phoenicians
with other women. (Ibid. i. 1.) Presently after, he gives sentence on
the bravest and greatest exploits of Greece, saying that the Trojan war
was foolishly undertaken for an ill woman. For it is manifest, says he,
that had they not been willing they had never been ravished. (Ibid. i.
4.) Let us then say, that the gods also acted foolishly, in inflicting
their indignation on the Spartans for abusing the daughters of Scedasus
the Leuctrian, and in punishing Ajax for the violation of Cassandra.
For it is manifest, if we believe Herodotus, that if they had not
been willing they had never been defiled. And yet he himself said that
Aristomenes was taken alive by the Spartans; and the same afterwards
happened to Philopoemen, general of the Achaeans; and the Carthaginians
took Regulus, the consul of the Romans; than whom there are not easily
to be found more valiant and warlike men. Nor is it to be wondered,
since even leopards and tigers are taken alive by men. But Herodotus
blames the poor women that have been abused by violence, and patronizes
their ravishers.

Nay, he is so favorable to the barbarians, that, acquitting Busiris of
those human sacrifices and that slaughter of his guests for which he is
accused, and attributing by his testimony to the Egyptians much religion
and justice, he endeavors to cast that abominable wickedness and those
impious murders on the Grecians. For in his Second Book he says, that
Menelaus, having received Helen from Proteus and having been honored by
him with many presents, showed himself a most unjust and wicked man; for
wanting a favorable wind to set sail, he found out an impious device,
and having taken two of the inhabitants' boys, consulted their entrails;
for which villany being hated and persecuted, he fled with his ships
directly into Libya. (See Herodotus, ii. 45.) From what Egyptian this
story proceeds, I know not. For, on the contrary, many honors are even
at this day given by the Egyptians to Helen and Menelaus.

The same Herodotus, that he may still be like himself, says that the
Persians learned the defiling of the male sex from the Greeks. (Ibid,
i. 135.) And yet how could the Greeks have taught this impurity to the
Persians, amongst whom, as is confessed by many, boys had been castrated
before ever they arrived in the Grecian seas? He writes also, that
the Greeks were instructed by the Egyptians in their pomps, solemn
festivals, and worship of the twelve gods; that Melampus also learned of
the Egyptians the name of Dionysus (or Bacchus) and taught it the other
Greeks; that the mysteries likewise and rites of Ceres were brought out
of Egypt by the daughters of Danaus; and that the Egyptians were wont to
beat themselves and make great lamentation, but yet he himself refused
to tell the names of their deities, but concealed them in silence. As to
Hercules and Bacchus, whom the Egyptians named gods, and the Greeks
very aged men, he nowhere has such scruples and hesitation; although he
places also the Egyptian Hercules amongst the gods of the second rank,
and Bacchus amongst those of the third, as having had some beginning
of their being and not being eternal, and yet he pronounces those to be
gods; but to the gods Bacchus and Hercules, as having been mortal
and being now demi-gods, he thinks we ought to perform anniversary
solemnities, but not to sacrifice to them as to gods. The same also he
said of Pan, overthrowing the most venerable and purest sacrifices of
the Greeks by the proud vanities and mythologies of the Egyptians. (For
the passages referred to in this chapter, see Herodotus, ii. 48, 51,
145, 146, 171.)

Nor is this impious enough; but moreover, deriving the pedigree of
Hercules from Perseus, he says that Perseus was an Assyrian, as the
Persians affirm. "But the leaders," says he, "of the Dorians may appear
to be descended in a right line from the Egyptians, reckoning their
ancestors from before Danae and Acrisius." (Herodotus, vi. 53, 54.) Here
he has wholly passed by Epaphus, Io, Iasus, and Argus, being ambitious
not only to make the other Herculeses Egyptians and Phoenicians but to
carry this also, whom himself declares to have been the third, out of
Greece to the barbarians. But of the ancient learned writers, neither
Homer, nor Hesiod, nor Archilochus, nor Pisander, nor Stesichorus, nor
Alcman, nor Pindar, makes any mention of the Egyptian or the Phoenician
Hercules, but all acknowledge this our own Boeotian and Argive Hercules.

Now of the seven sages, whom he calls Sophisters, he affirms Thales to
have been a barbarian, descended of the Phoenicians. (Ibid, i. 170.)
Speaking ill also of the gods under the person of Solon, he has these
words: "Thou, O Croesus, askest me concerning human affairs, who know
that every one of the deities envious and tumultuous." (Ibid, i. 32.)
Thus attributing to Solon what himself thinks of the gods, he joins
malice to blasphemy. Having made use also of Pittacus in some trivial
matters, not worth the mentioning, he has passed over the greatest and
gallantest action that was ever done by him. For when the Athenians and
Mitylenaeans were at war about Sigaeum, Phrynon, the Athenian general,
challenging whoever would come forth to a single combat, Pittacus
advanced to meet him, and catching him in a net, slew that stout
and giant-like man; for which when the Mitylaenans offered him great
presents, darting his javelin as far as he could out of his hand, he
desired only so much ground as he should reach with that throw; and the
place is to this day called Pittacium. Now what does Herodotus, when he
comes to this? Instead of Pittacus's valiant act, he tells us the fight
of Alcaeus the poet, who throwing away his arms ran out of the battle;
by thus not writing of honorable deeds and not passing over such as are
dishonorable, he offers his testimony to those who say, that from one
and the same malice proceed both envy and a rejoicing at other men's
harms. (Herodotus v. 95.)

After this, he accuses of treason the Alcmaeonidae who showed themselves
generous men, and delivered their country from tyranny. (Ibid. i. 61.)
He says, that they received Pisistratus after his banishment and got him
called home, on condition he should marry the daughter of Megacles; but
the damsel saying to her mother, Do you see, mother, how I am known by
Pisistratus contrary to nature? The Alcmaeonidae were so offended at
this villany, that they expelled the tyrant.

Now that the Lacedaemonians might have no less share of his malice than
the Athenians, behold how he bespatters Othryadas, the man most admired
and honored by them. "He only," says Herodotus, "remaining alive of the
three hundred, and ashamed to return to Sparta, his companions being
lost, slew himself on the spot at Thyreae." (Ibid. i. 82.) For having
before said the victory was doubtful on both sides, he here, by making
Othryadas ashamed, witnesses that the Lacedaemonians were vanquished.
For it was shameful for him to survive, if conquered; but glorious, if
conqueror.

I pass by now, that having, represented Croesus as foolish,
vainglorious, and ridiculous in all things, he makes him, when a
prisoner, to have taught and instructed Cyrus, who seems to have
excelled all other kings in prudence, virtue, and magnanimity. (Ibid. i.
155, 156, 207, 208.) Having testified of the same Croesus nothing else
that was commendable but his honoring the gods with many and great
oblations, he shows that very act of his to have been the most impious
of all. For he says, that he and his brother Pantoleon contended for
the kingdom while their father was yet alive; and that Croesus,
having obtained the crown, caused a companion and familiar friend of
Pantoleon's to be torn in pieces in a fulling-mill, and sent presents to
the gods from his property. (Ibid. i. 92.) Of Deioces also, the Median,
who by virtue and justice obtained the government, he says that he got
it not by real but pretended justice. (Ibid. i. 96.)

But I let pass the barbarian examples, since he has offered us plenty
enough in the Grecian affairs. He says, that the Athenians and many
other Ionians were so ashamed of that name that they wholly refused to
be called Ionians; and that those who esteemed themselves the noblest
among them, and who had come forth from the very Prytaneum of Athens,
begat children on barbarian wives whose parents, husbands, and former
children they had slain; that the women had therefore made a law among
themselves, confirmed it by oath, and delivered it to be kept by their
daughters, never to eat with their husbands, nor to call any of them by
his name; and that the present Milesians are descended from these women.
Having afterwards added that those are true Ionians who celebrate the
feast called Apaturia; they all, says he, keep it except the Ephesians
and Colophonians. (Herodotus, i. 143-148.) In this manner does he
deprive these two states of their nobility.

He says moreover, that the Cumaeans and Mitylenaeans agreed with Cyrus
to deliver up to him for a price Pactyas, who had revolted from him. I
know not indeed, says he, for how much; since it is not certain what it
was. Bravo!--not to know what it was, and yet to cast such an infamy on
a Grecian city, without an assured knowledge! He says farther, that
the Chians took Pactyas, who was brought to them out of the temple of
Minerva Poliuchus (or Guardianess of the city), and delivered him up,
having received the city Atarneus for their recompense. And yet Charon
the Lampsacenian, a more ancient writer, relating this matter concerning
Pactyas, charges neither the Mitylenaeans nor the Chians with any such
action. These are his very words: "Pactyas, hearing that the Persian
army drew near, fled first to Mitylene, then to Chios, and there fell
into the hands of Cyrus." (See Herodotus, i. 157. etc.)

Our author in his Third Book, relating the expedition of the
Lacedaemonians against the tyrant Polycrates, affirms, that the Samians
think and say that the Spartans, to recompense them for their former
assistance against the Messenians, both brought back the Samians that
were banished, and made war on the tyrant; but that the Lacedaemonians
deny this, and say, they undertook this design not to help or deliver
the Samians, but to punish them for having taken away a cup sent by them
to Croesus, and besides, a breastplate sent them by Amasis. (Ibid. iii.
47, 48.) And yet we know that there was not at that time any city so
desirous of honor, or such an enemy to tyrants, as Sparta. For what
breastplate or cup was the cause of their driving the Cypselidae out of
Corinth and Ambracia, Lygdamis out of Naxos, the children of Pisistratus
out of Athens, Aeschines out of Sicyon, Symmachus out of Thasus, Aulis
out of Phocis, and Aristogenes out of Miletus; and of their overturning
the domineering powers of Thessaly, pulling down Aristomedes and Angelus
by the help of King Leotychides?--which facts are elsewhere more largely
described. Now, if Herodotus says true, they were in the highest degree
guilty both of malice and folly, when, denying a most honorable and most
just cause of their expedition, they confessed that in remembrance of
a former injury, and too highly valuing an inconsiderable matter, they
invaded a miserable and afflicted people.

Now perhaps he gave the Lacedaemonians this stroke, as directly falling
under his pen; but the city of Corinth, which was wholly out of the
course of his story, he has brought in--going out of his way (as they
say) to fasten upon it--and has bespattered it with a most filthy crime
and most shameful calumny. "The Corinthians," says he, "studiously
helped this expedition of the Lacedaemonians to Samos, as having
themselves also been formerly affronted by the Samians." The matter was
this. Periander tyrant of Corinth sent three hundred boys, sons to the
principal men of Corcyra, to King Alyattes, to be gelt. These, going
ashore in the island of Samos, were by the Samians taught to sit as
suppliants in the temple of Diana, where they preserved them, setting
before them for their food sesame mingled with honey. This our author
calls an affront put by the Samians on the Corinthians, who therefore
instigated the Lacedaemonians against them, to wit, because the Samians
had saved three hundred children of the Greeks from being unmanned.
By attributing this villany to the Corinthians, he makes the city more
wicked than the tyrant. He indeed was revenging himself on those of
Corcyra who had slain his son; but what had the Corinthians suffered,
that they should punish the Samians for putting an obstacle to so great
a cruelty and wickedness?--and this, after three generations, reviving
the memory of an old quarrel for the sake of that tyranny, which
they found so grievous and intolerable that they are still endlessly
abolishing all the monuments and marks of it, though long since extinct.
Such then was the injury done by the Samians to the Corinthians. Now
what a kind of punishment was it the Corinthians would have inflicted on
them? Had they been indeed angry with the Samians, they should not have
incited the Lacedaemonians, but rather diverted them from their war
against Polycrates, that the Samians might not by the tyrant's overthrow
recover liberty, and be freed from their slavery. But (what is most to
be observed) why were the Corinthians so offended with the Samians, that
desired indeed but were not able to save the Corcyraeans children, and
yet were not displeased with the Cnidians, who both preserved them and
restored them to their friends? Nor indeed have the Corcyraeans any
great esteem for the Samians on this account; but of the Cnidians they
preserve a grateful recollection, having granted them several honors
and privileges, and made decrees in their favor. For these, sailing to
Samos, drove away Periander's guards from the temple, and taking the
children aboard their ships, carried them safe to Corcyra; as it is
recorded by Antenor the Cretan, and by Dionysius the Chalcidian in his
foundations. Now that the Spartans undertook not this war on any design
of punishing the Samians, but to save them by delivering them from the
tyrant, we have the testimony of the Samians themselves. For they affirm
that there is in Samos a monument erected at the public charge, and
honors there done to Archias a Spartan, who fell fighting valiantly in
that quarrel; for which cause also his posterity still keep a familiar
and friendly correspondence with the Samians, as Herodotus himself
witnesses.

In his Fifth Book, he says, that Clisthenes, one of the best and noblest
men in Athens, persuaded the priestess Pythia to be a false prophetess,
and always to exhort the Lacedaemonians to free Athens from the tyrants;
calumniating this most excellent and just action by the imputation of so
great a wickedness and imposture, and taking from Apollo the credit of
that true and good prophecy, beseeming even Themis herself, who is also
said to have joined with him. He says farther, that Isagoras prostituted
his wife to Cleomenes, who came to her. (Herodotus, v. 63, 70.) Then,
as his manner is, to gain credit by mixing some praises with his
reproaches, he says: Isagoras the son of Tisander was of a noble family,
but I cannot tell the original of it; his kinsmen, however, sacrifice
to the Carian Jupiter. (Herodotus, v. 66.) O this pleasant and cunning
scoffer of a writer, who thus disgracefully sends Isagoras to the
Carians, as it were to the ravens. As for Aristogiton, he puts him not
forth at the back door, but thrusts him directly out of the gate into
Phoenicia, saying that he had his original from the Gephyraeans, and
that the Gephyraeans were not, as some think, Euboeans or Eretrians, but
Phoenicians, as himself has heard by report. (Ibid, v. 58.) And since
he cannot altogether take from the Lacedaemonians the glory of having
delivered the Athenians from the tyrants, he endeavors to cloud and
disgrace that most honorable act by as foul a passion. For he says, they
presently repented of it, as not having done well, in that they had been
persuaded by spurious and deceitful oracles to drive the tyrants, who
were their allies and had promised to put Athens into their hands, out
of their country, and had restored the city to an ungrateful people. He
adds, that they were about to send for Hippias from Sigeum, and bring
him back to Athens; but that they were opposed by the Corinthians,
Sosicles telling them how much the city of Corinth had suffered under
the tyranny of Cypselus and Periander. (Ibid, v. 90, 91.) And yet there
was no outrage of Periander's more abominable and cruel than his sending
the three hundred children to be emasculated, for the delivering and
saying of whom from that contumely the Corinthians, he says, were angry
and bore a grudge against the Samians, as having put an affront upon
them. With so much repugnance and contradiction is that malice of his
discourse filled, which on every occasion insinuates itself into his
narrations.

After this, relating the action of Sardis, he, as much as in him lies,
diminishes and discredits the matter; being so audacious as to call the
ships which the Athenians sent to the assistance of the Ionians, who had
revolted from the King the beginning of evils, because they endeavored
to deliver so many and so great Grecian cities from the barbarians.
(Ibid, v. 97.) As to the Eretrians, making mention of them only by the
way, he passes over in silence a great, gallant, and memorable action of
theirs. For when all Ionia was in a confusion and uproar, and the King's
fleet drew nigh, they, going forth to meet him, overcame in a sea-fight
the Cyprians in the Pamphylian Sea. Then turning back and leaving their
ships at Ephesus, they invaded Sardis and besieged Artaphernes, who was
fled into the castle, that so they might raise the siege of Miletus. And
this indeed they effected, causing the enemies to break up their camp
and remove thence in a wonderful fright, and then seeing themselves in
danger to be oppressed by a multitude, retired. This not only others,
but Lysanias of Mallus also in his history of Eretria relates, thinking
it convenient, if for no other reason, yet after the taking and
destruction of the city, to add this valiant and heroic act. But this
writer of ours says, they were defeated, and pursued even to their ships
by the barbarians; though Charon the Lampsacenian has no such thing, but
writes thus, word for word: "The Athenians set forth with twenty
galleys to the assistance of the Ionians, and going to Sardis, took all
thereabouts, except the King's wall; which having done, they returned to
Miletus."

In his Sixth Book, our author, discoursing of the Plataeans,--how they
gave themselves to the Lacedaemonians, who exhorted them rather to
have recourse to the Athenians, who were nearer to them and no bad
defenders,--adds, not as a matter of suspicion or opinion, but as a
thing certainly known by him, that the Lacedaemonians gave the Plataeans
this advice, not so much for any goodwill, as through a desire to find
work for the Athenians by engaging them with the Boeotians. (Herodotus,
vi. 108.) If then Herodotus is not malicious, the Lacedaemonians must
have been both fraudulent and spiteful; and the Athenians fools, in
suffering themselves to be thus imposed on; and the Plataeans were
brought into play, not for any good-will or respect, but as an occasion
of war.

He is farther manifestly convinced of belying the Lacedaemonians, when
he says that, whilst they expected the full moon, they failed of giving
their assistance to the Athenians at Marathon. For they not only made
a thousand other excursions and fights at the beginning of the month,
without staying for the full moon; but wanted so little of being
present at this very battle, which was fought the sixth day of the month
Boedromion, that at their coming they found the dead still lying in the
field. And yet he has written thus of the full moon: "It was impossible
for them to do these things at that present, being unwilling to break
the law; for it was the ninth of the month, and they said, they could
not go forth on the ninth day, the orb of the moon being not yet full.
And therefore they stayed for the full moon." (Herodotus, vi. 106.)
But thou, O Herodotus, transferest the full moon from the middle to the
beginning of the month, and at the same time confoundest the heavens,
days, and all things; and yet thou dost claim to be the historian of
Greece!

And professing to write more particularly and carefully of the affairs
of Athens, thou dost not so much as say a word of that solemn procession
which the Athenians even at this day send to Agrae, celebrating a feast
of thanksgiving to Hecate for their victory. But this helps Herodotus
to refel the crime with which he is charged, of having flattered the
Athenians for a great sum of money he received of them. For if he had
rehearsed these things to them, they would not have omitted or
neglected to remark that Philippides, when on the ninth he summoned the
Lacedaemonians to the fight, must have come from it himself, since (as
Herodotus says) he went in two days from Athens to Sparta; unless the
Athenians sent for their allies to the fight after their enemies were
overcome. Indeed Diyllus the Athenian, none of the most contemptible
as an historian, says, that he received from Athens a present of ten
talents, Anytus proposing the decree. Moreover Herodotus, as many say,
has in relating the fight at Marathon derogated from the credit of
it, by the number he sets down of the slain. For it is said that the
Athenians made a vow to sacrifice so many kids to Diana Agrotera, as
they should kill barbarians; but that after the fight, the number of the
dead appearing infinite, they appeased the goddess by making a decree to
immolate five hundred to her every year.

But letting this pass, let us see what was done after the fight. "The
barbarians," say he, "retiring back with the rest of their ships, and
taking the Eretrian slaves out of the island, where they had left them,
doubled the point of Sunium, desiring to prevent the Athenians before
they could gain the city. The Athenians suspected this to have been done
by a plot of the Alcmaeonidae, who by agreement showed a shield to the
Persians when they were got into their ships. They therefore doubled
the cape of Sunium." (Herodotus, vi. 115, 121-124.) Let us in this place
take no notice of his calling the Eretrians slaves, who showed as much
courage and gallantry in this war as any other of the Grecians, and
suffered things unworthy their virtue. Nor let us insist much on the
calumny with which he defames the Alcmaeonidae, some of whom were both
the greatest families and noblest men of the city. But the greatness
of the victory itself is overthrown, and the end of that so celebrated
action comes to nothing, nor does it seem to have been a fight or any
great exploit, but only a light skirmish with the barbarians, as the
envious and ill-willers affirm, if they did not after the battle fly
away, cutting their cables and giving themselves to the wind, to carry
them as far as might be from the Attic coast, but having a shield lifted
up to them as a signal of treason, made straight with their fleet for
Athens, in hope to surprise it, and having at leisure doubled the point
of Sunium, were discovered above the port Phalerum, so that the chief
and most illustrious men, despairing to save the city would have
betrayed it. For a little after, acquitting the Alcmaeonidae, he charges
others with the treason. "For the shield indeed was shown, nor can it
be denied," says he, as if he had seen it himself. But this could no
way be, since the Athenians obtained a solid victory; and if it had been
done, it could not have been seen by the barbarians, flying in a hurry
amidst wounds and arrows into their ships, and leaving every one the
place with all possible speed. But when he again pretends to excuse the
Alcmaeonidae of those crimes which he first of all men objected against
them, and speaks thus: "I cannot credit the report that the Alcmaeonidae
by agreement would ever have lifted up a shield to the Persians,
and have brought the Athenians under the power of the barbarians and
Hippias"; it reminds me of a certain proverbial saving,--Stay and be
caught, crab, and I'll let you go. For why art thou so eager to catch
him, if thou wilt let him go when he is caught? Thus you first accuse,
then apologize; and you write calumnies against illustrious men, which
again you refute. And you discredit yourself; for you heard no one
else but yourself say that the Alcmaeonidae lifted up a shield to the
vanquished and flying barbarians. And in those very things which you
allege for the Alcmaeonidae, you show yourself a sycophant. For if, as
here you write, the Alcmaeonidae were more or no less enemies to tyrants
than Callias, the son of Phaenippus and father of Hipponicus, where will
you place their conspiracy, of which you write in your First Book, that
assisting Pisistratus they brought him back from exile to the tyranny
and did not drive him away till he was accused of unnaturally abusing
his wife? Such then are the repugnances of these things; and by his
intermixing the praises of Callias, the son of Phaenippus, amidst the
crimes and suspicions of the Alcmaeonidae, and joining to him his son
Hipponicus, who was (as Herodotus himself says) one of the richest men
in Athens, he confesses that he brought in Callias not for any necessity
of the story, but to ingratiate himself and gain favor with Hipponicus.

Now, whereas all know that the Argives denied not to enter into the
common league of the Grecians, though they thought not fit to follow
and be under the command of the Lacedaemonians, who were their mortal
enemies, and that this was no otherways, our author subjoins a most
malicious cause for it, writing thus: "When they saw they were comprised
by the Greeks, knowing that the Lacedaemonians would not admit them
into a share of the command, they requested it, that they might have a
pretence to lie still." "And of this," he says, "the Argive ambassadors
afterwards put Artaxerxes in mind, when they attended him at Susa, and
the King said, he esteemed no city more his friend than Argos." Then
adding, as his manner is, to cover the matter, he says: "Of these things
I know nothing certainly; but this I know, that all men have faults, and
that the worst things were not done by the Argives; but I must tell such
things as are reported, though I am not bound to believe them all; and
let this be understood of all my narrations. For it is farther said
that the Argives, when they were not able to sustain the war against
the Lacedaemonians, called the Persians into Greece, willing to suffer
anything rather than the present trouble." (Herodotus, vii. 148-152.)
Therefore, as himself reports the Ethiopian to have said of the ointment
and purple, "Deceitful are the beauties, deceitful the garments of
the Persians," (Herodotus, iii. 22.) may not any one say also of
him, Deceitful are the phrases, deceitful the figures of Herodotus's
speeches; as being perplexed, unsound, and full of ambiguities? For
as painters set off and render more eminent the luminous part of their
pictures by adding shadows, so he by his denials extends his calumnies,
and by his dubious speeches makes his suspicions take deeper impression.
If the Argives joined not with the other Greeks, but stood out through
an emulation of the Lacedaemonians command and valor, it cannot be
denied but that they acted in a manner not beseeming their nobility and
descent from Hercules. For it had been more honorable for the Argives
under the leadership of Siphnians and Cythnians to have defended the
Grecian liberty, than contending with the Spartans for superiority to
have avoided so many and such signal combats. And if it was they
who brought the Persians into Greece, because their war against the
Lacedaemonians succeeded ill, how came it to pass, that they did not
at the coming of Xerxes openly join themselves to the Medes? Or if they
would not fight under the King, why did they not, being left at home,
make incursions into Laconia or again attempt Thyreae or by some other
way disturb and infest the Lacedaemonians? For they might have greatly
damaged the Grecians, by hindering the Spartans from going with so great
an army to Plataea.

But in this place indeed he has highly magnified the Athenians and
pronounced them the saviours of Greece, doing herein rightly and justly,
if he had not intermixed many reproaches with their praises. But
now, when he says (Ibid. vii. 139.) that (but for the Athenians) the
Lacedaemonians would have been betrayed by the other Greeks, and then,
being left alone and having performed great exploits, they would have
died generously; or else, having before seen that the Greeks were
favoring the Medes, they would have made terms with Xerxes; it is
manifest, he speaks not these things to the commendation of the
Athenians, but he praises the Athenians that he may speak ill of all
the rest. For how can any one now be angry with him for so bitterly and
intemperately upbraiding the Thebans and Phocians at every turn, when he
charges even those who exposed themselves to all perils for Greece with
a treason which was never acted, but which (as he thinks) might have
been. Nay, of the Lacedaemonians themselves, he makes it doubtful
whether they might have fallen in the battle or have yielded to
the enemy, minimizing the proofs of their valor which were shown at
Thermopylae;--and these indeed were small!

After this, when he declares the shipwreck that befell the King's fleet,
and how, an infinite mass of wealth being cast away, Aminocles the
Magnesian, son of Cresines, was greatly enriched by it, having gotten
an immense quantity of gold and silver; he could not so much as let this
pass without snarling at it. "For this man," say she, "who had till then
been none of the most fortunate, by wrecks became exceeding rich; for
the misfortune he had in killing his son much afflicted his mind."
(Herodotus, vii. 190.) This indeed is manifest to every one, that he
brought this golden treasure and this wealth cast up by the sea into his
history, that he might make way for the inserting Aminocles's killing
his son.

Now Aristophanes the Boeotian wrote, that Herodotus demanded money of
the Thebans but received none and that going about to discourse and
reason with the young men, he was prohibited by the magistrates through
their clownishness and hatred of learning; of which there is no other
argument. But Herodotus bears witness to Aristophanes, whilst he charges
the Thebans with some things falsely, with others ignorantly, and with
others as hating them and having a quarrel with them. For he affirms
that the Thessalians at first upon necessity inclined to the Persians,
(Ibid, vii. 172.) in which he says the truth; and prophesying of the
other Grecians that they would betray the Lacedaemonians, he added, that
they would not do it willingly, but upon necessity, one city being
taken after another. But he does not allow the Thebans the same plea
of necessity, although they sent to Tempe five hundred men under the
command of Mnamias, and to Thermopylae as many as Leonidas desired, who
also alone with the Thespians stood by him, the rest leaving him after
he was surrounded. But when the barbarian, having possessed himself of
the avenues, was got into their confines, and Demaratus the Spartan,
favoring in right of hospitality Attaginus, the chief of the oligarchy,
had so wrought that he became the King's friend and familiar, whilst the
other Greeks were in their ships, and none came on by land; then at last
being forsaken did they accept conditions of peace, to which they were
compelled by great necessity. For they had neither the sea and ships at
hand, as had the Athenians; nor did they dwell far off, as the Spartans,
who inhabited the most remote parts of Greece; but were not above a day
and half's journey from the Persian army, whom they had already with the
Spartans and Thespians alone resisted at the entrance of the straits,
and were defeated.

But this writer is so equitable, that having said, "The Lacedaemonians,
being alone and deserted by their allies, would perhaps have made a
composition with Xerxes," he yet blames the Thebans, who were forced
to the same act by the same necessity. But when he could not wholly
obliterate this most great and glorious act of the Thebans, yet went he
about to deface it with a most vile imputation and suspicion, writing
thus: "The confederates who had been sent returned back, obeying the
commands of Leonidas; there remained only with the Lacedaemonians the
Thespians and the Thebans: of these, the Thebans stayed against their
wills, for Leonidas retained them as hostages; but the Thespians most
willingly, as they said they would never depart from Leonidas and those
that were with him." (Herodotus, vii. 222.) Does he not here manifestly
discover himself to have a peculiar pique and hatred against the
Thebans, by the impulse of which he not only falsely and unjustly
calumniated the city, but did not so much as take care to render his
contradiction probable, or to conceal, at least from a few men, his
being conscious of having knowingly contradicted himself? For having
before said that Leonidas, perceiving his confederates not to be in good
heart nor prepared to undergo danger, wished them to depart, he a little
after adds that the Thebans were against their wills detained by him;
whereas, if he had believed them inclined to the Persians, he should
have driven them away though they had been willing to tarry. For if he
thought that those who were not brisk would be useless, to what purpose
was it to mix among his soldiers those that were suspected? Nor was the
king of the Spartans and general of all Greece so senseless as to think
that four hundred armed Thebans could be detained as hostages by his
three hundred, especially the enemy being both in his front and rear.
For though at first he might have taken them along with him as hostages;
it is certainly probable that at last, having no regard for him, they
would have gone away from him, and that Leonidas would have more feared
his being encompassed by them than by the enemy. Furthermore, would not
Leonidas have been ridiculous, to have sent away the other Greeks, as
if by staying they should soon after have died, and to have detained
the Thebans, that being himself about to die, he might keep them for the
Greeks? For if he had indeed carried them along with him for hostages,
or rather for slaves, he should not have kept them with those that were
at the point of perishing, but have delivered them to the Greeks that
went away. There remained but one cause that might be alleged for
Leonidas's unwillingness to let them go, to wit, that they might die
with him; and this our historian himself has taken away, writing thus of
Leonidas's ambition: "Leonidas, considering these things, and desirous
that this glory might redound to the Spartans alone, sent away his
confederates rather for this than because they differed in their
opinions." (Herodotus, vii. 220.) For it had certainly been the height
of folly to keep his enemies against their wills, to be partakers of
that glory from which he drove away his confederates. But it is
manifest from the effects, that Leonidas suspected not the Thebans
of insincerity, but esteemed them to be his steadfast friends. For he
marched with his army into Thebes, and at his request obtained that
which was never granted to any other, to sleep within the temple of
Hercules; and the next morning he related to the Thebans the vision that
had appeared to him. For he imagined that he saw the most illustrious
and greatest cities of Greece irregularly tossed and floating up and
down on a very stormy and tempestuous sea; that Thebes, being carried
above all the rest, was lifted up on high to heaven, and suddenly after
disappeared. And this indeed had a resemblance of those things which
long after befell that city.

Now Herodotus, in his narration of that fight, hath obscured also the
bravest act of Leonidas, saying that they all fell in the straits near
the hill. (Herodotus, vii. 225.) But the affair was otherwise managed.
For when they perceived by night that they were encompassed by the
barbarians, they marched straight to the enemies' camp, and got very
near the King's pavilion, with a resolution to kill him and leave their
lives about him. They came then to his tent, killing or putting to
flight all they met; but when Xerxes was not found there, seeking him
in that vast camp and wandering about, they were at last with much
difficulty slain by the barbarians, who surrounded them on every side.
What other acts and sayings of the Spartans Herodotus has omitted, we
will write in the Life of Leonidas; yet that hinders not but we may
here set down also some few. Before Leonidas went forth to that war, the
Spartans exhibited to him funeral spectacles, at which the fathers and
mothers of those that went along with him were spectators. Leonidas
himself, when one said to him, You lead very few with you to the battle,
answered, There are many to die there. When his wife, at his departure,
asked him what commands he had for her; he, turning to her, said, I
command you to marry a good man, and bring him good children. After he
was enclosed by the enemy at Thermopylae, desiring to save two that were
related to him, he gave one of them a letter and sent him away; but
he rejected it, saying angrily, I followed you as a soldier, not as a
postman. The other he commanded to go on a message to the magistrates
of Sparta; but he, answering, that is a messenger's business, took his
shield, and stood up in his rank. Who would not have blamed another that
should have omitted these things? But he who has collected and recorded
the fart of Amasis, the coming of the thief's asses, and the giving of
bottles, and many such like things, cannot seem to have omitted these
gallant acts and these remarkable sayings by negligence and oversight,
but as bearing ill-will and being unjust to some.

He says that the Thebans, being at the first with the Greeks, fought
compelled by necessity. (Ibid, vii. 233.) For belike not only Xerxes,
but Leonidas also, had whipsters following his camp, by whom the Thebans
were scourged and forced against their wills to fight. And what more
ruthless libeller could there be than Herodotus, when he says that they
fought upon necessity, who might have gone away and fled, and that they
inclined to the Persians, whereas not one came in to help them. After
this, he writes that, the rest making to the hill, the Thebans separated
themselves from them, lifted up their hands to the barbarian, and coming
near, cried with a most true voice, that they had favored the Persians,
had given earth and water to the King, that now being forced by
necessity they were come to Thermopylae, and that they were innocent of
the King's wound. Having said these things, they obtained quarter; for
they had the Thessalians for witnesses of all they said. Behold, how
amidst the barbarians, exclamations, tumults of all sorts, flights
and pursuits, their apology was heard, the witnesses examined; and the
Thessalians, in the midst of those that were slain and trodden under
foot, all being done in a very narrow passage, patronized the Thebans,
to wit, because the Thebans had but a little before driven away them,
who were possessed of all Greece as far as, Thespiae, having conquered
them in a battle, and slain their leader Lattamyas! For thus at that
time stood matters between the Boeotians and the Thessalians, without
any friendship or good-will. But yet how did the Thebans escape, the
Thessalians helping them with their testimonies? Some of them, says he,
were slain by the barbarians; many of them were by command of Xerxes
marked with the royal mark, beginning with their leader Leontiades.
Now the captain of the Thebans at Thermopylae was not Leontiades,
but Anaxander, as both Aristophanes, out of the Commentaries of the
Magistrates, and Nicander the Colophonian have taught us. Nor did any
man before Herodotus know that the Thebans were stigmatized by Xerxes;
for otherwise this would have been an excellent plea for them against
his calumny, and this city might well have gloried in these marks, that
Xerxes had punished Leonidas and Leontiades as his greatest enemies,
having outraged the body of the one when he was dead, and caused the
other to be tormented whilst living. But as to a writer who makes the
barbarian's cruelty against Leonidas when dead a sign that he hated him
most of all men when living, (Herodotus, vii. 238.) and yet says that
the Thebans, though favoring the Persians, were stigmatized by them at
Thermopylae, and having been thus stigmatized, again cheerfully took
their parts at Plataea, it seems to me that such a man--like that
Hippoclides (See Herodotus, vi. 126-130.) who gesticulating with his
limbs by standing on his head on a table--would dance away the truth and
say, It makes no difference to Herodotus.

In the Eighth Book our author says, that the Greeks being frighted
designed to fly from Artemisium into Greece, and that, being requested
by the Euboeans to stay a little till they could dispose of their wives
and families, they regarded them not, till such time as Themistocles,
having taken money of them, divided it between Eurybiades and Adimantus,
the captain of the Corinthians, and that then they stayed and had a
sea-fight with the barbarians (Ibid. viii. 4.) Yet Pindar, who was not a
citizen of any of the confederate cities, but of one that was suspected
to take part with the Medians, having made mention of Artemisium, brake
forth into this exclamation: "This is the place where the sons of the
Athenians laid the glorious foundation of liberty." But Herodotus, by
whom, as some will have it, Greece is honored, makes that victory a
work of bribery and theft, saying that the Greeks, deceived by their
captains, who had to that end taken money, fought against their wills.
Nor does he here put an end to his malice. All men in a manner confess
that, although the Greeks got the better at sea, they nevertheless
abandoned Artemisium to the barbarians after they had received the news
of the overthrow at Thermopylae. For it was to no purpose for them to
stay there and keep the sea, the war being already within Thermopylae,
and Xerxes having possessed himself of the avenues. But Herodotus makes
the Greeks contriving to fly before they heard anything of Leonidas's
death. For thus he says: "But they having been ill-treated, and
especially the Athenians, half of whose ships were sorely shattered,
consulted to take their flight into Greece." (Ibid. viii. 18.) But let
him be permitted so to name (or rather reproach) this retreat of theirs
before the fight; but having before called it a flight, he both now
styles it a flight, and will again a little after term it a flight; so
bitterly does he adhere to this word "flight." "Presently after this,"
says he, "there came to the barbarians in the pinnace a man of Hestiaea,
who acquainted them with the flight of the Grecians from Artemisium.
They, because the thing seemed incredible, kept the messenger in
custody, and sent forth some light galleys to discover the truth."
(Herodotus, viii. 23.) But what is this you say? That they fled as
conquered, whom the enemies after the fight could not believe to have
fled, as having got much the better? Is then this a fellow fit to be
believed when he writes of any man or city, who in one word deprives
Greece of the victory, throws down the trophy, and pronounces the
inscriptions they had set up to Diana Proseoa (EASTWARD-FACING) to be
nothing but pride and vain boasting? The tenor of the inscription was as
follows:--

     When Athens youth had in a naval fight
     All Asia's forces on this sea o'verthrown,
     And all the Persian army put to flight,
     Than which a greater scare was ever known,
     To show how much Diana they respected,
     This trophy to her honor they erected.

Moreover, not having described any order of the Greeks, nor told us what
place every city of theirs held during the sea-fight, he says that in
this retreat, which he calls their flight, the Corinthians sailed first
and the Athenians last. (Ibid. viii, 21.)

He indeed ought not to have too much insulted over the Greeks that took
part with the Persians, who, being by others thought a Thurian, reckons
himself among the Halicarnassians, who, being Dorians by descent, went
with their wives and children to the war against the Greeks. But he
is so far from giving first an account of the straits they were in who
revolted to the Persians, that, having related how the Thessalians sent
to the Phocians, who were their mortal enemies, and promised to preserve
their country free from all damage if they might receive from them a
reward of fifty talents, he writ thus of the Phocians: "For the Phocians
were the only people in these quarters who inclined not to the Persians,
and that, as far as I upon due consideration can find, for no other
reason but because they hated the Thessalians; for if the Thessalians
had been affected to the Grecian affairs, I suppose the Phocians would
have joined themselves to the Persians." And yet, a little after he
would say that thirteen cities of the Phocians were burned by the
barbarians, their country laid waste, and the temple which was in Abae
set on fire, and all of both sexes put to the sword, except those that
by flight escaped to Parnassus. (Herodotus, viii. 30-33. Compare ix.
17.) Nevertheless, he puts those who suffered all extremities
rather than lose their honesty in the same rank with those who most
affectionately sided with the Persians. And when he could not blame the
Phocians actions, writing at his desk invented false causes and got up
suspicions against them, and bids us judge them not by what they did,
but by what they would have done if the Thessalians had not taken the
same side, as if they had been prevented from treason because they found
the place already occupied by others! Now if any one, going about to
excuse the revolt of the Thessalians to the Persians, should say
that they would not have done it but for the hatred they bare the
Phocians,--whom when they saw joined to the Greeks, they against their
inclinations followed the party of the Persians,--would not such a one
be thought most shamefully to flatter, and for the sake of others to
pervert the truth, by reigning good causes for evil actions? Indeed, I
think, he would. Why then would not he be thought openly to calumniate,
who says that the Phocians chose the best, not for the love of virtue,
but because they saw the Thessalians on the contrary side? For neither
does he refer this device to other authors, as he is elsewhere wont
to do, but says that himself found it out by conjecture. He should
therefore have produced certain arguments, by which he was persuaded
that they, who did things like the best, followed the same counsels
with the worst. For what he alleges of their hatreds is ridiculous. For
neither did the difference between the Aeginetans and the Athenians, nor
that between the Chalcidians and the Eretrians, nor yet that between the
Corinthians and the Megarians, hinder them from fighting together for
Greece. Nor did the Macedonians, their most bitter enemies, turn the
Thessalians from their friendship with the barbarians, by joining
the Persian party themselves. For the common danger did so bury their
private grudges, that banishing their other passions, they applied their
minds either to honesty for the sake of virtue, or to profit through the
impulse of necessity. And indeed, after that necessity which compelled
them to obey the Persians was over, they returned again to the Greeks,
as Lacrates the Spartan has openly testified of them. And Herodotus, as
constrained to it, in his relation of the affairs at Plataea, confessed
that the Phocians took part with the Greeks. (Herodotus, ix. 31.)

Neither ought it to seem strange to any, if he thus bitterly inveighs
against the unfortunate; since he reckons amongst enemies and traitors
those who were present at the engagement, and together with the other
Greeks hazarded their safety. For the Naxians, says he, sent three
ships to the assistance of the barbarians; but Democritus, one of their
captains, persuaded the others to take the party of the Greeks. (Ibid.
viii. 46.) So unable he is to praise without dispraising, that if he
commends one man he must condemn a whole city or people. But in
this there give testimony against him, of the more ancient writers
Hellanicus, and of the later Ephorus, one of which says that the Naxians
came with six ships to aid the Greeks, and the other with five. And
Herodotus convinces himself of having feigned these things. For the
writers of the Naxian annals say, that they had before beaten back
Megabates, who came to their island with two hundred ships, and after
that had put to flight the general Datis who had set their city on fire.
Now if, as Herodotus has elsewhere said, the barbarians burned their
city so that the men were glad to save themselves by flying into the
mountains, had they not just cause rather to send aid to the destroyers
of their country than to help the protectors of the common liberty?
But that he framed this lie not so much to honor Democritus, as to cast
infamy on the Naxians, is manifest from his omitting and wholly passing
over in silence the valiant acts then performed by Democritus, of which
Simonides gives us an account in this epigram:--

     When as the Greeks at sea the Medes did meet,
     And had near Salamis a naval fight,
     Democritus as third led up the fleet,
     Charging the enemy with all his might;
     He took five of their ships, and did another,
     Which they had taken from the Greeks, recover.

But why should any one be angry with him about the Naxians? If we have,
as some say, antipodes inhabiting the other hemisphere, I believe that
they also have heard of Themistocles and his counsel, which he gave
to the Greeks, to fight a naval battle before Salamis, on which, the
barbarian being overcome, he built in Melite a temple to Diana the
Counsellor. This gentle writer, endeavoring, as much as in him lies, to
deprive Themistocles of the glory of this, and transfer it to another,
writes thus word for word: "Whilst things were thus, Mnesiphilus, an
Athenian, asked Themistocles, as he was going aboard his ship, what had
been resolved on in council. And being answered, that it was decreed
the ships should be brought back to Isthmus, and a battle fought at sea
before Peloponnesus; he said, If then they remove the navy from Salamis,
you will no longer be fighting for one country for they will return
every one to his own city. Wherefore, if there be any way left, go and
endeavor to break this resolution; and, if it be possible, persuade
Eurybiades to change his mind and stay here." Then adding that this
advice pleased Themistocles, who, without making any reply, went
straight to Eurybiades, he has these very expressions: "And sitting by
him he related what he had heard from Mnesiphilus, feigning as if it
came from himself, and adding other things." (Herodotus, viii. 57, 58.)
You see how he accuses Themistocles of disingenuity in arrogating to
himself the counsel of Mnesiphilus.

And deriding the Greeks still further, he says, that Themistocles, who
was called another Ulysses for his wisdom, was so blind that he could
not foresee what was fit to be done; but that Artemisia, who was of the
same city with Herodotus, without being taught by any one, but by her
own consideration, said thus to Xerxes: "The Greeks will not long be
able to hold out against you, but you will put them to flight, and they
will retire to their own cities; nor is it probable, if you march your
army by land to Peloponnesus, that they will sit still, or take care
to fight at sea for the Athenians. But if you make haste to give them
a naval battle, I fear lest your fleets receiving damage may prove
also very prejudicial to your land-forces." (Ibid. viii. 68.) Certainly
Herodotus wanted nothing but verses to make Artemisia another Sibyl, so
exactly prophesying of things to come. Therefore Xerxes also delivered
his sons to her to be carried to Ephesus for he had (it seems) forgot to
bring women with him from Susa, if indeed the children wanted a train of
female attendants.

But it is not our design to search into the lies of Herodotus; we only
make inquiry into those which he invented to detract from the glory
of others. He says: "It is reported by the Athenians that Adimantus,
captain of the Corinthians, when the enemies were now ready to join
battle, was struck with such fear and astonishment that he fled; not
thrusting his ship backward by the stern, or leisurely retreating
through those that were engaged, but openly hoisting up his sails, and
turning the heads of all his vessels. And about the farther part of the
Salaminian coast, he was met by a pinnace, out of which one spake thus
to him: Thou indeed, Adimantus, fliest, having betrayed the Grecians;
yet they overcome, and according to their desires have the better of
their enemies." (Herodotus, viii. 94.) This pinnace was certainly let
down from heaven. For what should hinder him from erecting a tragical
machine, who by his boasting excelled the tragedians in all other
things? Adimantus then crediting him (he adds) "returned to the fleet,
when the business was already done." "This report," says he, "is
believed by the Athenians; but the Corinthians deny it, and say, they
were the first at the sea-fight, for which they have the testimony of
all the other Greeks." Such is this man in many other places. He spreads
different calumnies and accusations of different men, that he may not
fail of making some one appear altogether wicked. And it has succeeded
well with him in this place; for if the calumny is believed, the
Corinthians--if it is not, the Athenians--are rendered infamous. But in
reality the Athenians did not belie the Corinthians, but he hath belied
them both. Certainly Thucydides, bringing in an Athenian ambassador
contesting with a Corinthian at Sparta, and gloriously boasting of many
things about the Persian war and the sea-fight at Salamis, charges not
the Corinthians with any crime of treachery or leaving their station.
Nor was it likely the Athenians should object any such thing against
Corinth, when they saw her engraven in the third place after the
Lacedaemonians and themselves on those spoils which, being taken from
the barbarians, were consecrated to the gods. And in Salamis they had
permitted them to bury the dead near the city, as being men who had
behaved themselves gallantly, and to write over them this elegy:--

     Well-watered Corinth, stranger, was our home;
       Salamis, Ajax's isle, is now our grave;
     Here Medes and Persians and Phoenician ships
       We fought and routed, sacred Greece to save.

And their honorary sepulchre at the Isthmus has on it this epitaph:--

     When Greece upon the point of danger stood,
     We fell, defending her with our life-blood.

Moreover, on the offerings of Diodorus, one of the Corinthian
sea-captains, reserved in the temple of Latona, there is this
inscription:--

     Diodorus's seamen to Latona sent
     These arms, of hostile Medes the monument

And as for Adimantus himself, against whom Herodotus frequently
inveighs,--saying, that he was the only captain who went about to fly
from Artemisium, and would not stay the fight,--behold in how great
honor he is:--

     Here Adimantus rests: the same was he,
     Whose counsels won for Greece the crown of liberty.

For neither is it probable, that such honor would have been shown to a
coward and a traitor after his decease; nor would he have dared to give
his daughters the names of Nausinica, Acrothinius, and Alexibia, and
his son that of Aristeas, if he had not performed some illustrious and
memorable action in that fight. Nor is it credible that Herodotus was
ignorant of that which could not be unknown even to the meanest Carian,
that the Corinthian women alone made that glorious and divine prayer, by
which they besought the Goddess Venus to inspire their husbands with
a love of fighting against the barbarians. For it was a thing divulged
abroad, concerning which Simonides made an epigram to be inscribed on
the brazen image set up in that temple of Venus which is said to have
been founded by Medea, when she desired the goddess, as some affirm, to
deliver her from loving her husband Jason, or, as others say, to free
him from loving Thetis. The tenor of the epigram follows:--

     For those who, fighting on their country's side,
     Opposed th' imperial Mede's advancing tide,
     We, votaresses, to Cythera pray'd;
     Th' indulgent power vouchsafed her timely aid,
     And kept the citadel of Hellas free
     From rude assaults of Persia's archery.

These things he should rather have written and recorded, than have
inserted Aminocles's killing of his son.

After he had abundantly satisfied himself with the accusations brought
against Themistocles,--of whom he says that, unknown to the other
captains, he incessantly robbed and spoiled the islands,--(Herodotus,
viii. 112.) he at length openly takes away the crown of victory from the
Athenians, and sets it on the head of the Aeginetans, writing thus: "The
Greeks having sent the first-fruits of their spoils to Delphi, asked in
general of the god, whether he had a sufficient part of the booty and
were contented with it. He answered, that he had enough of all the other
Greeks, but not of the Aeginetans for he expected a donary of them, as
having won the greatest honor in the battle at Salamis." (Ibid. viii.
122.) See here how he attributes not his fictions to the Scythians, to
the Persians, or to the Egyptians, as Aesop did his to the ravens and
apes; but using the very person of the Pythian Apollo, he takes from
Athens the chief honor of the battle at Salamis. And the second place
in honor being given to Themistocles at the Isthmus by all the other
captains,--every one of which attributed to himself the first degree of
valor, but give the next to Themistocles,--and the judgment not coming
to a determination, when he should have reprehended the ambition of
the captains, he said, that all the Greeks weighed anchor from thence
through envy, not being willing to give the chief honor of the victory
to Themistocles. (Ibid. viii. 123, 124.)

In his ninth and last book, having nothing left to vent his malice on
but the Lacedaemonians and their glorious action against the barbarians
at Plataea, he writes, that the Spartans at first feared lest the
Athenians should suffer themselves to be persuaded by Mardonius to
forsake the other Greeks; but that now, the Isthmus being fortified,
they, supposing all to be safe at Peloponnesus, slighted the rest,
feasting and making merry at home, and deluding and delaying the
Athenian ambassadors. (Herodotus, ix. 8. See also viii. 141.) How then
did there go forth from Sparta to Plataea a thousand and five men,
having every one of them with him seven Helots? Or how came it that,
exposing themselves to so many dangers, they vanquished and overthrew
so many thousand barbarians? Hear now his probable cause of it. "It
happened," says he, "that there was then at Sparta a certain stranger of
Tegea, named Chileus, who had some friends amongst the Ephori, between
whom and him there was mutual hospitality. He then persuaded them to
send forth the army, telling them that the fortification on the Isthmus,
by which they had fenced in Peloponnesus, would be of no avail if the
Athenians joined themselves with Mardonius." (Ibid. ix. 9.) This
counsel then drew Pausanias with his army to Plataea; but if any
private business had kept that Chileus at Tegea, Greece had never been
victorious.

Again, not knowing what to do with the Athenians, he tosses to and fro
that city, sometimes extolling it, and sometimes debasing it. He says
that, contending for the second place with the Tegeatans they made
mention of the Heraclidae, alleged their acts against the Amazons,
and the sepulchres of the Peloponnesians that died under the walls
of Cadmea, and at last brought down their discourse to the battle of
Marathon, saying, however, that they would be satisfied with the command
of the left wing. (Ibid. ix. 26, 27.) A little after, he says, Pausanias
and the Spartans yielded them the first place, desiring them to fight in
the right wing against the Persians and give them the left, who excused
themselves as not skilled in fighting against the barbarians. (Ibid. ix.
46.) Now it is a ridiculous thing, to be unwilling to fight against an
enemy unless one has been used to him. But he says farther, that the
other Greeks being led by their captains to encamp in another place, as
soon as they were moved, the horse fled with joy towards Plataea, and
in their flight came as far as Juno's temple. (Ibid. ix. 52.) In
which place indeed he charges them all in general with disobedience,
cowardice, and treason. At last he says, that only the Lacedaemonians
and the Tegeates fought with the barbarians, and the Athenians with the
Thebans; equally defrauding all the other cities of their part in the
honor of the victory, whilst he affirms that none of them joined in
the fight, but that all of them, sitting still hard by in their arms,
betrayed and forsook those who fought for them; that the Phliasians and
Megarians indeed, when they heard Pausanias had got the better, came
in later, and falling on the Theban horse, were all cut off; that the
Corinthians were not at the battle, and that after the victory, by
hastening on over the hills, they escaped the Theban cavalry. (See
the account of the battle of Plataea, Herodotus, ix, 59-70.) For the
Thebans, after the barbarians were overthrown, going before with their
horse, affectionately assisted them in their flight; to return them
thanks (forsooth) for the marks they had stigmatized them with at
Thermopylae! Now what rank the Corinthians had in the fight at Plataea
against the barbarians, and how they performed their duty, you may hear
from Simonides in these verses:

     I' th' midst were men, in warlike feats excelling,
     Who Ephyre full of springs, inhabited,
     And who in Corinth, Glaucus' city, dwelling,
     Great praise by their great valor merited;
     Of which they to perpetuate the fame,
     To th' gods of well-wrought gold did offerings frame.

For he wrote not these things, as one that taught at Corinth or that
made verses in honor of the city, but only as recording these actions
in elegiac verses. But Herodotus, whilst he desires to prevent that
objection by which those might convince him of lying who should ask,
Whence then are so many mounts, tombs, and monuments of the dead, at
which the Plataeans, even to this day, celebrate funeral solemnities in
the presence of the Greeks?--has charged, unless I am mistaken, a fouler
crime than that of treason on their posterity. For these are his words:
"As for the other sepulchres that are seen in Plataea, I have heard that
their successors, being ashamed of their progenitors' absence from this
battle, erected every man a monument for posterity's sake." (Herodotus,
ix. 85.) Of this treacherous deserting the battle Herodotus was the
only man that ever heard. For if any Greeks withdrew themselves from
the battle, they must have deceived Pausanias, Aristides, the
Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians. Neither yet did the Athenians exclude
the Aeginetans who were their adversaries from the inscription, nor
convince the Corinthians of having fled from Salamis before the victory,
Greece bearing witness to the contrary. Indeed Cleadas, a Plataean,
ten years after the Persian war, to gratify, as Herodotus says, the
Aeginetans, erected a mount bearing their name. Now came it then to pass
that the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, who were so jealous of each other
that they were presently after the war ready to go together by the ears
about the setting up a trophy, did not yet repel those Greeks who fled
in a fear from the battle from having a share in the honor of those that
behaved themselves valiantly, but inscribed their names on the trophies
and colossuses, and granted them part of the spoils? Lastly they set up
an altar, on which was engraven this epigram:

     The Greeks, by valor having put to flight
     The Persians and preserved their country's right,
     Erected here this altar which you see,
     To Jove, preserver of their liberty.

Did Cleadas, O Herodotus, or some other, write this also, to oblige the
cities by flattery? What need had they then to employ fruitless labor in
digging up the earth, to make tombs and erect monuments for posterity's
sake, when they saw their glory consecrated in the most illustrious
and greatest donaries? Pausanias, indeed, when he was aspiring to the
tyranny, set up this inscription in Delphi:--

     Pausanias, of Greeks the general
     When he the Medes in fight had overthrown,
     Offered to Phoebus a memorial
     Of victory, this monumental stone.

In which he gave the glory to the Greeks, whose general he professed
himself to be. Yet the Greeks not enduring but utterly misliking it, the
Lacedaemonians, sending to Delphi, caused this to be cut out, and the
names of the cities, as it was fit, to be engraven instead of it. Now
how is it possible that the Greeks should have been offended that
there was no mention made of them in the inscription, if they had
been conscious to themselves of deserting the fight? or that the
Lacedaemonians would have erased the name of their leader and general,
to insert deserters and such as withdrew themselves from the common
danger? For it would have been a great indignity, that Sophanes,
Aeimnestus, and all the rest who showed their valor in that fight,
should calmly suffer even the Cythnians and Melians to be inscribed on
the trophies; and that Herodotus, attributing that fight only to three
cities, should raze all the rest out of those and other sacred monuments
and donaries.

There having been then four fights with the barbarians; he says, that
the Greeks fled from Artemisium; that, whilst their king and general
exposed himself to danger at Thermopylae, the Lacedaemonians sat
negligent at home, celebrating the Olympian and Carnean feasts; and
discoursing of the action at Salamis, he uses more words about Artemisia
than he does in his whole narrative of the naval battle. Lastly, he
says, that the Greeks sat still at Plataea, knowing no more of the
fight, till it was over, than if it had been a skirmish between mice and
frogs (like that which Pigres, Artemisia's fellow countryman, merrily
and scoffingly related in a poem), and it had been agreed to
fight silently, lest they should be heard by others; and that the
Lacedaemonians excelled not the barbarians in valor, but only got the
better, as fighting against naked and unarmed men. To wit, when Xerxes
himself was present, the barbarians were with much difficulty compelled
by scourges to fight with the Greeks; but at Plataea, having taken other
resolutions, as Herodotus says, "they were no way inferior in courage
and strength; but their garments being without armor was prejudicial to
them, since being naked they fought against a completely armed enemy."
What then is there left great and memorable to the Grecians of those
fights, if the Lacedaemonians fought with unarmed men, and the other
Greeks, though present, were ignorant of the battle; if empty monuments
are set up everywhere, and tripods and altars full of lying inscriptions
are placed before the gods; if, lastly, Herodotus only knows the truth,
and all others that give any account of the Greeks have been deceived
by the fame of those glorious actions, as the effect of an admirable
prowess? But he is an acute writer, his style is pleasant, there is a
certain grace, force, and elegancy in his narrations; and he has, like a
musician, elaborated his discourse, though not knowingly, still clearly
and elegantly. These things delight, please, and affect all men. But
as in roses we must beware of the venomous flies called cantharides; so
must we take heed of the calumnies and envy lying hid under smooth and
well-couched phrases and expressions, lest we imprudently entertain
absurd and false opinions of the most excellent and greatest cities and
men of Greece.


END OF SIXTEEN-----------




INDEX.

Abuse of and by one's enemies.

Achelous, myths of the.

Achilles, Homer's lessons from.

Achilles's Grove.

Acrotatus, saying of.

Actaeon, tragic history of.

Actors, tragic vs. comic.

Administration, caution about.

Admonitions, on hearing.

Adrastea, root of madness.

Adultery and curiosity compared.

Advantage from enemies.

Aeantis, chorus of tribe.

Aegyptus, Nile formerly called.

[Greek],

Aemilii, tyrants called.

Aemilius, Paulus.

Aenianes, the.

Aeschines the Academic, Life of; quoted.

Aeschylus, verses of; quoted; paraphrase of Homer by.

Aesculapius, temple of.

Aesop, at Delphi; at banquet of seven Wise Men.

Agasicles, Spartan king.

Agathocles, king of Sicily.

Age, cause of old.

Aged, the part of the, in state affairs; love of pure wine by;
intoxication among the.

Agenor, grove of.

Agesilaus, sayings of.

Agesipolis, son of Cleombrotus.

Agesipolis, son of Pausanias.

Agis, King; example of; story of.

Agis the Younger.

Air, an element.

Ajax, parents of; place of soul of.

Alalcomenae, city called.

[Greek]

Alcamenes, son of Teleclus.

Alcibiades, stories about.

Alcippus, wife and daughters of.

Alexander the Great, sayings and stories of; and Timoclea; orations on;
remark of Theocritus about; Diogenes and; in India; as a great drinker.

Alexander, tyrant of Pheraeans.

Alexandridas, son of Laid to.

Allegory in Homer.

Almonds for drinkers.

Alpha, position of, in alphabet.

Alpheus, history of.

Altar of ashes at Olympia.

"Alter ego" of Pythagoras, parallel saying in Homer.

Amasis, Herodotus relates a detail concerning.

Amazonian river.

Ambassadors, recording names of.

Ambition, accompaniments of.

America, a hint of.

Ammon, Egyptian name for Jupiter; temple of.

Ammonius the philosopher.

[Greek]

Amoebus, musician.

Amphilochus, oracle of.

Amplification in Homer.

Anatole, mountain.

Anaxagoras, story of.

Anaxander, son of Eurycrates.

Anaxarchus.

Anaxilas, saying of.

Anchus compared with Curtius.

Ancients, council of.

Andocides, Greek orator.

Androclidas, saying of.

Anger, nature of; the restraint of; Homer on.

Animals, human beings born of; self-cures by wild; craftiness of water
and of land; amours of, with human beings; reason in; generation of;
embryos of; method of nutrition and growth of; appetites and pleasures
in; vision of, in the dark.

Answers to questions.

Antalcidas, sayings of.

Anthedon, explanation of.

Anticyra, cure of madness from.

Antigonus the First.

Antigonus the Second.

Antiochus; surnamed the Falcon.

Antiochus Hierax.

Antiochus the third.

Antipater, nickname of.

Antiphon, Greek orator.

Antiphrasis in Homer.

Antithesis, Homer's use of.

Ants, intelligence of.

Apelles and Megabyzus.

Apesantus, mountain.

[Greek], defined.

[Greek]

Aphrodite, epithets of; statue of, at Elis; called "fruitful Cytherea.";
charmed girdle of.

Aphrodite the Murderess, temple of.

Apis.

Apollo, place of birth; temple of, at Delphi; derivation from [Greek]
and [Greek]; titles of; an oracle delivered by; a flatterer the enemy
of; motto in temple of; inventor of music; causes of common diseases are
from.

Apollodorus, painter.

Apollonius, consolation to, on death of son.

Apoplexy produced by fumes of lamp-wick.

{Greek]

Apostrophe, figure of speech called.

Apothegms, of kings and great commanders; Roman; Laconic or Spartan; in
Homer.

Appetites in animals.

Apples and apple-trees.

Araenus, sea shore of.

Arar, river, derivation of name.

Aratus, paraphrase of sayings of Homer by.

Archimedes, story of.

Aregeus, sayings of.

Ares, varying opinions of.

Aretaphila, Cyrenaean woman.

Argive women, the.

Argives, images called; customs of.

Argyllus, mountain in Egypt.

Aristarchus, arrangement of Iliad and Odyssey by.

Aristides the Just.

Aristippus, rebuke of a father by.

Aristo, punishment of.

Aristoclia of Haliartus.

Aristodemus, tyrant of Cumae.

Ariston, sayings of.

Aristophanes, and Socrates; comparison between Menander and.

Aristotimus, tyrant of Elis; daughters of.

Aristotle; on talkativeness; on use and abuse of wealth; on music;
conception of God; views on indignation and mercy held in common with
Homer.

Arithmetic of Pythagoras and in Homer.

Arrangement, Homer's skill in.

Arrhippe, virgin ravished by Tmolus.

Artaxerxes Longimanus, sayings of.

Artaxerxes Mnemon, sayings of.

Artemis, temple of, at Ehpesus.

Asbestos produced by ancients.

Asparagus for brides.

Ass, connection of Typhon with; musical instruments made from bones of.

Aster, stone called.

Astronomy, observations concerning; goats show knowledge of; ancient;
Homer's knowledge of.

Astycratidas, quoted.

Asyndeton in Homer.

Ateas, sayings of.

Atheism and superstition.

Atheists, beliefs of.

Athenaeum, mountain.

Athene Chalcioecus, temple of.

Athenians, decrees proposed to; question of renown of.

Athenodorus and Xeno.

Atoms the final cause.

Attalus.

attention, directions concerning.

Augurs, tenure of office of.

Augustus Caesar, in his later years.

Aurea, cause of the.

Auspices, prohibition of use of, after August.

Autoglyphus, stone called.

Autonamasia in Homer.

Autumn, men's stomachs in; least credit to dreams in.

Axioms, complications of ten.

Bacchus, called Liber Pater; called Bull-begot; Greek and Roman punished
by; identity of Osiris and; feast of; Mithridates called, on account
of great drinking; Adonis identified with; called the good counsellor;
Herodotus' estimate of.

Ballenaeus, mountain.

Banishment, essay on.

Banquets, philosophising at; arranging guests at; consular place at;
position of director of; suitability of chaplets of flowers at; inviting
many guests to; flute-girls at.

Barbers, talkativeness of.

Barley, soil for growing.

Barrenness, in women; of mules.

Bashfulness.

Bathing after exercise.

Baths, hot vs. cold; former compared with present; Homer on.

Bears, paws of, as food.

Bees, Simonides' allusion to; illustrations drawn from; effect of smoke
on; tendency of, to sting the impure; craftiness of Cretan.

Beggars' flesh among Aenianes.

Bellerophon, continence of.

Berecyntus, mountain and priest named.

Bessus, punishment of.

Bias, Spartan leader.

Bird or egg, which was first?

Birds, in soothsaying; wisdom shown by; tree which is a natural snare
for.

Birth, value of good.

Birthdays of famous men.

Births, premature.

Biton and Cleobis.

Boar, characteristics of the.

Boars, trees, sweet.

Bodies, division and mixture of.

Body, definition of a.

Boeotians, sullenness of.

Boeotus, son of Neptune.

Bona, temple of.

Borrowers, treatment of.

Borrowing money.

Bottiaean maids.

Boys, Sepulchre of the; love of; Herodotus on defiling of.

Boys' necklaces.

Brasidas, sayings of; stories of.

Breathing, theory about.

Bridal customs, Roman.

Brides, food for.

Britain, fountain-head of religion; longevity of inhabitants of.

Brixaba, mountain.

Bronze, weapons of.

Broth, Lacedaemonian.

Brotherly love.

Brothers and sisters, Greek and Roman parallels concerning.

Bucephalus, intelligence of.

Bulimy, greedy disease.

Bullae, boys' necklaces.

Bundle of sticks story.

burial, among Lacedaemonians.

Bysius, the month.

Caesar, Augustus, sayings of.

Caesar, Julius, stories and sayings of.

Caicus, river of Mysia.

Callicratidas, Spartan admiral.

Callipides, Greek actor.

Calydon, mountain.

Camillus, dictator.

Camma, story of.

Candles, matter of extinguishing.

Carbonate of soda, ancient use of.

Carmenta, temple of.

Carmina, verses called.

Cases, changes of, in Homer.

Caspian Sea.

Castor and Pollux, statues of; stars called.

Catechresis in Homer.

Cato the Elder, at Utica.

Cats, Egyptian views on; the young of; madness of; caused by perfumes.

Cattle, salt used for.

Catulus, Lutatius.

Caucasus, mountain, story of.

Caudine Forks, Roman hero at.

Causes, definition and division of.

Celtic women, the.

Censors, inauguration ceremonies of.

Ceres, feast in honour of.

Chabrias, sayings of.

Chalcedonian women, custom of.

Chaldeans, belief of.

Changes of gender, number, etc., in Homer.

Charila, sacrificial rites of.

Charillus, King.

Charon, Homer a disciple of.

Chastity, of animals; herb for protection of.

Child-birth, effect of moon on.

Children, time of naming Roman; training of; love of only; conception
and birth of.

Chiomara, story of.

Chios, women of.

[Greek]

Christianity, allusions to.

Chrysermus, History of India by.

Chrysippus, on various virtues; works of.

Cicero, sayings of.

Cios, women of.

Circe and Odysseus.

Cithaeron, mountain.

Civil polity, division of, by Homer.

Claudia, virtues of.

Cleanthes, Athenian philosopher.

Clearchus, tyrant of Heraclea.

Cleomachus the Pharsalian.

Cleombrotus, son of Pausanias.

Cleombrotus the Lacedaemonian.

Cleomenes, quoted.

Cleomenes, son of Anaxandridas.

Cleomenes, son of Cleombrotus.

Clitoris, stone called.

Cloelia, Roman maiden.

Clothing of Lacedaemonians.

Clouds, causes of.

Cnidians, Crown of the.

Coccygium, mountain.

Cocks, use of, according to Chrysippus.

Coeranus, story of.

Coins, images on.

Cold, first principle of; a preserver of health; use of, in Homer.

Coliads, the.

Colour, defined.

Colours of early painters.

Colotes the Epicurean.

Comedy, origin of, with Homer.

Comets, beliefs about.

Commendation, consideration in.

Comminius, story of.

Congelation.

Conjugal precepts.

Constancy, crowns of.

Consualia, feasts called.

Consular place at table.

Copiousness, a character of speech.

Corinthians, Hall of the.

corruption, are animals obnoxious to?

Cotys, sayings of.

Counting, by fives; animals' power of; in Homer.

Cranes, intelligence of; fish compared with.

Crassus, hay bound about horns of.

Crater history, vase called.

Creation of the world.

Crocodiles, intelligence of; the bird trochilus the friend of; customs
of, in breeding.

Croesus, Herodotus on.

Cronium, mountain.

Cronos, festivals of.

Crystallus, river called.

Cuffing, exercise of.

Cupping-glasses, phenomenon in.

Curiosity, essay on.

Curius, M'., story of.

Curtius, Roman knight.

Cuttle-fish, sign of storm; cunning of.

Cybele, worship of.

Cynic and king anecdote.

Cyrenaics, temperance of.

Cyrus, sayings of.

Cyrus the Younger, sayings of.

Daemon of Socrates.

Daemons, remarks on.

Damindas, story of.

Damis, quoted.

Damonidas, sayings of.

Dancing, three parts in.

Darius, sayings of; Alexander the Great and the corpse of; Alexander and
the wife of.

Darkness, visibility of; reason of animals' seeing in.

Daughters sacrificed by fathers.

Day, time of beginning.

Dead, rites of the honoured.

Death, opinions of; remarks on; sleep before; a good thing; cause of;
question of appertaining to soul or body.

deaths of sons, cases of.

debtors, unfortunate lot of.

Decrees proposed to Athenians.

Defamation of character, curiosity results in.

Deity, knowledge of a.

Demaratus, sayings of.

Demeter, wanderings of.

Demetrius, sayings of.

Demetrius Phalereus.

Demetrius the grammarian.

Democracy depicted by Homer.

Democritus, attacked by Colotes the Epicurean; defence of.

Demosthenes, Life of; speech ON THE CROWN; parallel passages in Homer
and.

Dercyllidas, Spartan ambassador.

Destiny, necessity considered the same as.

Dexicrcon, Venus of.

Diana, temples of, in Rome; priestesses of.

Diana Dictynna.

Diana Orthia, rites of.

Diatyposis in Homer.

Didymus the Cynic, surnamed Planetiades.

Diet of Lacedaemonians; in sickness; in health; effect of, on health;
variety in; Homer's views about.

Digestion of food.

Dinarchus, Greek orator.

Diogenes, Alexander and; advice of, to boys; soliloquy of; sayings and
stories of; Melanthius on a tragedy of; eats a raw fish.

Dion, sayings of.

Dionysius, tyrant of Sicily.

Dionysius the Hydragogue.

Dionysius the Younger; Diogenes and.

Diorphus, mountain.

Director of a feast.

Discourse, separating the useful part of a.

Diseases, causes of new.

Divination, art of; Homer's knowledge of.

Dog, Locrians' wooden; Worship of, by Egyptians; power of mimicry in a.

Dogs, set before Lares; sacrifice of, to Mana Geneta; sacrifice of, in
Lupercal games; stone-chasing of; intelligence shown by.

Dolphin, tribute to the.

Domitius, Cneus.

"Do not overdo," saying.

[Greek] defined.

Dreams, origin of.

Drimylus, mountain.

Drinkers, certain great.

"Drink five or three, but not four," saying.

Drinking, references to, in the Iliad.

Drugs in Homer.

Druidical students.

Drunkenness, talkativeness and; of old men as compared with old women;
partial compared with total.

Earth, an element; nature and magnitude of the; figure, site and
position, motion, and zones of. See World.

Earthquakes, cause of.

Ease of mind; in exile.

Echo, production of an.

Eclipse, cause of; shadow in an, in proportion to moon's diameter; of
sun; of moon.

Eclipses in Homer.

Education of children.

{Greek]

Egypt, kings of.

Egyptian gods and myths; legend about Love.

EI the word, on Apollo's temple at Delphi.

Elaeus, founding of.

Elaphebolia, festival of.

Elasii.

Element, difference between principle and.

Elements, Nature viewed as the mixture and separation of the; of members
of human body; and principles.

Elephant, amour of an, with Alexandrian maid.

Elephantiasis.

Elephants, intelligence of; excelled by fishes.

Elephas, mountain.

Eleutheria, origin of festival of.

Ellipse, a figure of speech.

Embryo, nature of human; of animals.

Emetics, use of.

Emmets, intelligence of.

Empedocles, quoted; strictures of Colotes against; defence of.

Emphasis, trope called.

Emprepes, story of.

Enmities accompany friendship.

Enmity, advantage and profit from.

Envy, follows ability; an enemy to peace of mind; and hatred; praising
one's self without exciting; in hearers; the aged most free from attacks
proceeding from; of statesmen.

Epaenetus, on liars.

Epaminoxidas, stories of.

Epicaste.

Epicureans, theories of.

Epicurus, the doctrine of; admits it is pleasanter to do than receive a
kindness; views on the deity; Colotes, disciple of, confuted; followers
of, distinguished by inactivity in public matters.

Epidamnians, POLETES among.

Epigrams in Homer.

Epilepsy, "sacred disease,".

Epiphonesis in Homer.

Epitaphs, uselessness of.

Epithets in Homer.

Eretria, women of.

Eryxo.

[Greek]

Euboidas, saying of.

Eudaemonidas, quoted.

Eudamidas, son of Archidamus.

Eumenes; and Attalus.

Eunostus, hero of Tanagra.

Euphranor, painter.

Euphrates, myths of the.

Euripides, quoted; on banishment; on God; paraphrase of Homer by.

Eurotas, river.

Eurycratidas, son of Anaxandridas.

Euthynous the Italian.

Evenus, quotation from.

Exercise, importance of; Homer's acquaintance with value of.

Exercises, Homer's order of.

Exordiums, Homer's.

Fabius, friend of Augustus Caesar.

Fabius Maximus, heroic act of.

Fabricius, C., and Pyrrhus.

Face in the moon.

Failing sickness.

False modesty.

Fancy, defined.

"Fast from evil," saying.

Fasting, practice of; thirst from.

Fate, necessity considered the same as; the nature of; essay concerning;
pertains to mind of God; Homer's views of.

Fates, province of the.

Fathers, and daughters, certain Greek and Roman cases of; advice to;
love of, for daughters.

Fear, and superstition; Homer on.

Feast of Fools.

Feasts. See Banquets.

February, derivation of.

Fever, cause and nature of.

Fig-leaf as an omen.

Fig-trees, fruit of.

Figures, definition of.

Figures of speech, Homer's.

Fire, compared with water as to usefulness; an element.

Fish, abstention from eating; cunning of; kind of, called remora or
echeneis; eating of, forbidden by Pythagoreans.

Fish-lines, horses' hair for.

Fish-nets, rotting of.

Five, significance of number; the number dedicated by the Wise Men.

Five elements in the world.

Five gods of Rhea.

Fives, counting by.

Five senses, the.

Five Wise Men.

Flamen Dialis, question concerning; rules for.

Flaminian Way.

Flattery vs. friendship.

Flesh, of sacrificed beasts; the eating of.

Flowers, chaplets of, worn at table.

Flute, mentioned by Homer.

Flute-girls at feasts.

Flute-music.

Flutes from asses' bones.

"Follow God," saying.

Food, superstitions about; choice of; digestion of; from the sea vs.
food from land. See Diet.

Fortuna Primigenia, Worship of.

Fortune, temples of; of the Romans; essay on; various opinions of.

Four, the number, venerated by Pythagoreans.

Four species of animals.

Fox, cunning of the.

Freedom of speech, ill-advised.

Friends, folly of seeking many; discerning flatterers from.

Friendship, a dual relation; enmities an accompaniment of; constancy a
requisite in.

Frogs, breeding of.

Frost, hunting impeded by.

Frozen speech.

Fruit, salt lacking in.

Funeral customs in Homer.

Funeral rites, Roman.

Furciferi.

G, the letter, introduction of.

Galatia, heroines of.

Galaxy, or Milky Way.

Galba and Maecenas.

Ganges, river, story of.

Gardens of Adonis.

Garlands, of oaken leaves; in games.

Garlic, scruples concerning.

Garrulity.

Gauran, mountain.

Geese, sacred.

Gelo, sayings of.

Genders, change of, in Homer.

Generation, extent of a.

Generation, and corruption; of human beings; ancient theories of; of
animals; of gods.

Generative seed.

Geneta, dogs sacrificed to.

Geniuses and heroes.

Geometer, God as a.

Gifts, bridal.

Gnome, defined; Homer's use of.

Gnossians, customs among.

God, the tutelary, of Rome; existence and essence of a; what is?;
immortality and eternity of; Platonic conception of; Homer's conception.

Gods, ancients' conception of; generation of; Homer's belief in; piety
toward, taught by Homer.

Gold, scarcity of, in ancient times.

Gracefulness, a character of speech.

Grafting of trees.

Great Trench, battle of the.

Greedy disease.

Greek Questions.

Grief, advice concerning; exhibitions of; Homer on.

Grief-easing stone.

Guests, at wedding suppers; entertainment of many, at a supper; that are
called shadows; who come late. See also Banquets.

Gymnastics in Homer.

Haemus, mountain.

Hail, why round.

Halcyon, virtues of the.

Halinda, plant called.

Halo, cause of the.

Hamaxocylists, race of.

Hannibal, Fabius Maximus and; and the women of Salmantica.

Happiness, true seat of.

Harmony, in music.

Harp-music.

Harps, at entertainments.

Hart, tears of, salt.

Hatred, envy and.

Hay-making, prayers for.

Head, covering and uncovering the.

Health, estimates of; rules for preservation of; preservers of.

Hearing, essay concerning; cause of sense of.

Heart, seat of the emotions according to Stoics, following Homer.

Heat, a first principle; causes premature old age; of women; Homer's
appreciation of.

Heaven, nature end essence of; circles or division of.

Hebrus river.

Hedge-hogs, cunning of; sea hedge-hogs.

Hegesippus, quoted.

Helicon, story of.

Hens, impregnation of, by the wind.

Hera as goddess of marriage.

Heraclides, wrestler, a great drinker.

Herbs growing in certain rivers and mountains.

Hercules, payment of tithes to; swearing by; and the Muses, altar common
to; sacrifices to; Greek and Roman stories of; Herodotus' estimate of.

Herodotus, on modesty of women; criticism of.

Heroes, beliefs concerning; of Homer.

Heroic metre in Homer.

Herondas, saying of.

Hesiod, on gods, daemons, heroes, and men; quoted; on begetting
children; on receiving gifts of fortune.

Hiero, sayings of.

Hippocratidas.

Hippodamus, Spartan commander.

Hippolytus, story of.

Hippothorus, tune called.

Histriones, players called.

Hogs, Jews' antipathy toward.

Homer, on prophets; gives name of friendship to sexual love; quoted;
on bravery; unmetrical line of; on man's wretched lot; on modesty; on
advantages of music; order of different kinds of exercises according to;
on intercourse between men and their wives; calls salt divine; epithets
applied to liquids by; a moot point in third book of Iliad; essay on
life and poetry of; biographical sketch of; the two works of; metre and
dialects used by; epithets used by; tropes found in; figures of speech
in; various styles used by; on constitution of the universe; natural
philosophy of; on God and the gods; on the human soul; places emotions
about the heart; on virtue and vice; mention of arithmetic and music in;
philosophies which found their origin with; sayings of, paraphrased by
later writers; rhetorical art of; types represented in his speakers;
knowledge of laws; civil polity in; experience of, in warlike affairs;
heroes described by; knowledge of medicine, diet, wine, surgery,
etc.; of divination and omens; of tragedy and comedy; mastery of
word-painting.

Homoioptelon in Homer.

Homoioteleuton, Homer's use of.

Honor, the god so called.

Honor to parents, in Homer.

Horatius and Horatia, and Greek parallel.

Horse, cure of a stumbling.

Horse-races, rites of.

Horses called [Greek].

Horta, temple of.

Hostages, Roman virgins as.

Hunger, causes of; allayed by drinking.

Hurricanes, causes of.

Hybristica, rites of.

Hydaspes, river.

Hyperbole in Homer.

Hyperides, Greek orator.

Hysteropotmi.

Ibis, worship of the; use of physic by; figure of, first letter in
Egyptian alphabet.

Ibycus, story of murderers of.

Icarius, story of.

Icebergs, tradition of.

Ichneumon, armor of the; outmatched by the trochilus.

Ida, Mount.

Idathyrsus, sayings of.

Ideas, defined.

Idleness, a gentlemanly crime; and health.

Idola of Democritus originate with Homer.

Imagination, defined.

Immortality of the soul.

Impotency in men.

Inachus, river.

Incense used by Egyptians.

Inclination of the world.

Incongruous, a figure of speech.

India, river and mountain of; Alexaiider the Great in.

Indus, story of the.

Ino.

Inquisitiveness.

Intemperance in eating.

Intercourse between men and their wives.

Interpreters of oracles.

Intoxication, signs of. See Drunkenness. Introductions, Homer's.

Ion the poet, cited.

Iphicrates, sayings of.

Ireland, mention of.

Iris-struck trees.

Irony, use of, in Homer.

Isaeus, Greek orator.

Isis and Osiris, essay on.

Imnenus, river.

Isocrates, Greek orator.

Isosceles triangles.

Isthmian games, crowns at.

Ivy, beliefs concerning; consecrated to Bacchus and to Osirls; the
nature of.

January as the first month.

Janus, double-faced god; image of, on coins.

Jealousy. See Envy.

Jesting at an entertainment.

Jews, allusion to; Spartans of same stock as the; effect of superstition
on; abstention of, from swine's flesh; customs of; God worshipped by.

Jocasta, death of.

Journeys, days for beginning.

Juno, Roman beliefs about; nuptial ceremonies connected with.

Jupiter, priests of; conception of year belonging to; rules or priests
of; statue of, in Caria. See Zeus.

Justice, ancients' conception of.

JUS TRIUM LIBERORUM.

[Greek], Cretans called.

Kingly rule, Homer's praise of.

Kissing, custom of.

"Know thyself," Delphic motto; to be observed by censorious persons.

[Greek] and [Greek].

[Greek].

[Greek].

L, the letter, pronounced R.

Labotus, saying of.

Labradean Jupiter, statue of.

Lacedaemonians, laws and customs of.

Lais, famous courtesan.

Lamachus, story of.

Lamp, the unextinguishable.

Lamps, putting out of.

Lampsace.

Language, care of the. Sea Speech.

Lanthorns of priests.

Lares, customs concerning.

"Larks must have their crests," Greek proverb.

Laurentia, worship of.

Law, power of, over kings; Homer's knowledge of the word.

Leaena, Greek heroine.

Leisure, healthful use of.

Lemnos, women of.

Leo, son of Eucratidas.

Leonidas, hero of Therinopylae.

Leotychidas, son of Aristo.

Leotychidas the First.

Leprosy, from drinking swine's milk; from dewy trees; stone which cures.

Letters, avoidance of haste in opening; of alphabet.

"Let this be ratified," saying.

Leucophyllus, reed with white leaf.

Leucothea, festivals of.

Liars, a saying about.

Libertinism and liberty.

Libitina.

Licinius, Publius.

Lictors, derivation of name.

Lightning, theories concerning.

Lilaeus, mountain.

Lion, tracks of the.

Lions, cunning of.

Liquids, in one's diet; epithets of; passage of, through the lungs.

"Live unknown," precept.

Loadstone, the.

Lochagus, quoted.

Locrians, information about the.

Love, tragical histories of; festival to God of; essay on; brotherly;
men made poets by.

Lovers of boys.

LUCAR, derivation of.

Lucullus.

Lugdunum, mountain and city.

Lungs, passage of drink through.

Lupercal plays.

Lutatius Catulus.

Lute, invention of.

Lycia, women of.

Lycormas, river.

Lycurgus, Life of; teaches brevity and terseness.

Lydian mood in music.

Lyre, playing on the; mention of, by Homer.

Lysander, Lacedaemonian general; stories and sayings of.

Lysias, Greek orator.

Macellum, market called.

Madness, anger and; root and plant for causing and curing.

Maeander, river.

Magpie, story of a.

Manlius, M.

Mare, child horn of a.

Marius, C.; and Sylla.

Marriage customs, Roman.

Marriage of kindred.

Mars, Greek and Roman parallels concerning.

Marsyas, Phrygian river.

Matter, defined; motion and.

"Matters of concern to-morrow,".

Matuta, temple of; festivals of.

Maximus, Fabius, stories of.

May, Roman marriages forbidden during.

Meals, Latin and Greek names of.

Meat, the eating of; putrefaction of, by moon.

Medicine, Homer's familiarity with.

Medietics, harmonical and arithmetical.

Megisto, and Aristotimus.

Melian women, the.

Memnon, sayings of.

Memory, cultivating the.

Men, impotency in.

Menander, quoted; comparison between Aristophanes and.

Mercury, statue of, among the Graces; statues of.

Metageitnia, festival.

Metaphor in Homer.

Metellus, Caecillus.

Metellus Nepos.

Meteors resembling rods.

Metonymy in Homer.

Micca, story of.

Midas fountain of.

Milesian women.

Milky Way.

Mills grinding, listeners to.

Minerals, ancient production of.

Minerva, priestess of.

Minerva of the Brazen House.

Minerva the Artisan and Minerva the Protectress of Cities.

Minstrels, women's dress worn by.

Mirror, comparison of wife and.

Mirrors, rusting of; of the ancients; the working of.

Miscarriage, herb for causing.

Mithridates, and the woman of Pergamus; a great drinker.

Mixarchagetas.

Mnemosyne, mother of Muses.

Mob rule in Homer.

Modesty, the vice of false; of women.

Monarchy, democracy, and oligarchy compared.

Monophagi, the, in Aegina.

Monstrosities, birth of.

Month, relation between Juno and the.

Months, order of; beginnings and periods of.

Moon, relation of Juno to; the face in the; influence of, on tides;
and Styx; essence, size, figure, light of, etc.; putrefaction of flesh
exposed to.

Moons on shoes.

Moon-worship.

Moral virtue.

Mothers, love of, for sons.

Motion, defined; of the soul.

Mountains, names of, and details concerning.

Mourning, white, for women.

Mucius Scaevola.

Mule, an intelligent; fable of, laden with salt; barrenness of the.

Mullets, beliefs regarding.

Muses, derivation of name; observation about the number of.

Mushrooms, produced by thunder.

Music, Lacedaemonian; essay concerning; effect of, on various animals;
pleasures arising from bad; kind of, fittest for entertainments; as
mentioned in Homer.

Musicians, ancient.

Must, effect of cold on.

Mutation, a figure of speech.

Mutilations of mourners.

Mycenae, mountain.

Myenus, mountain of Aetolia.

Myops, magic herb.

Myronides.

Myrrh used for incense.

Namertes, remark of.

Naming Roman children.

Narrative style found in Homer.

Natural philosophy; of Homer.

Natural Questions.

Nature, sentiments concerning; what is?

Necessity, philosophers on.

Necklaces called bullae.

Nestor and Odysseus in Homer.

Nicander, sayings of.

Xicostratus, saying of.

Niger and the fish-bone.

Night, the time for thought; called the good adviser; noises better
heard in, than in day.

Nile, river; the over-flowing of the; use of water of, for drinking.

Nine, most perfect number.

"No," courage to say.

Noisy-with-the-pen, nickname bestowed on Antipater.

Nome, derivation of.

North Pole, Homer's and Plutarch's knowledge of.

"Nothing too much," inscribed in temple of Apollo; in homer.

"Not so had" philosophy.

Nouns and verbs, speech composed of.

Numa, reign of.

Number, the perfect; change of, in Homer.

Numbers, superstitions concerning; in procreation of the soul;
Pythagorean view of nature of; triangular; science of, in Pythagoras and
in Homer.

Nursing of children.

Nutrition and growth of animals.

Nymphs, life of.

Oak, garlands of leaves of; "darkness at the oak,".

Oaths, by Hercules; forbidden to priests.

Ochimus.

Ocresia, Roman virgin.

Ocridion, temple of.

Octaves in music.

Odd and even numbers in Homer.

Odysseus, Circe and; self-control of; Homer's meaning in.

Offspring, affection for one's.

Ogyian isle (Ireland).

Oil, poured on the sea; cause of transparency of; considered as purely
liquid.

Old men, council of. See Aged.

Oligarchy depicted by Homer.

Olympus, inventor of Grecian and nomic music.

Onesicratus.

Onions for lung disease.

Onobatis, woman called.

Onomatopoeia in Homer.

Oracles, essay on the cessation of.

Oracular responses.

Orations, political.

Orators, Lives of the Ten.

Oratory, extempore and studied.

Orestes, story of, and Roman parallel.

Orontes, sayings of.

Orpheus, thrown into the Hebrus.

Oryx, fables of the.

[Greek]

Osiris, Isis and; birth of; death of; derivation of name.

Otus, method of capturing the.

Outspokenness, false and true.

Overeating.

Overturners of wagons.

Ox, sacrifice of, by Pyrrhias; in Egyptian sacrifices; and the camel.

Oxen, hay bound about horns of; counting by.

Oxyrhyncus, worship of the.

Pactolus, river of Lydia.

Paedaretus, anecdote of; sayings of.

Painting, defined as silent poetry; Homer a master in painting by words.

Palaestinus, river, and son of Neptune.

Palillogia, Homer's use of.

[Greek], defined.

Palladium, Greek and Roman parallels relating to.

Palm, garlands of, given in games.

Palms, growth of, increased by weights laid on them.

Pan, Spania derived from.

Panaema, derivation of.

Pangaeus, mountain.

Panthoidas, sayings of.

Parallels drawn between Greek and Roman history.

Paranomasia in Homer.

Paraphrases of Homer by later writers.

Parembole, a figure of speech.

Parents, advice to; honor to, shown in Homer.

Parison, a figure of speech.

Parmenides, on love; an Epicurean's attack on; defence of.

Parsley, crowns of.

Partridges, cunning of.

Parysatis, sayings of.

Passions of the body.

Pater Patratus.

Patres Conscripti distinguished from Patres.

Patricians prohibited to dwell about Capitol.

Pausanias, son of Cleombrotus.

Pausanias, son of Plistonanax.

Pausanias and Cleonice.

Peace of mind; in exile.

Pedagogues, choice of. See Tutors.

Pedetes, Andron in Samos called.

Peeping Girl, the.

Pergamus, the woman of.

Pericles, sayings of.

Peripatetics and Homer.

Periphrasis in Homer.

Persian women, the.

[Greek], defined.

Phallus, festival of the.

Phantom, defined.

Phasis, river.

Philadelphi, stones called.

Philip of Macedon and Arcadio the Achaean.

Philosophers, conversation of; reasonings of, originate with Homer.

Philosophizing at table.

Philosophy, defined; difficulties in, may be overcome.

Phocion the Athenian.

Phocis, women of.

Phocus, daughter of.

Phoebidas, quoted.

Phryne the courtesan.

Phryxa, herb called.

Phylacteries of the Jews.

Physics, use of; animals' use of.

Phyxemelum, defined.

Pieria.

Piety toward the gods taught by Homer.

Pinarii, the.

Pindar, elegy of.

Pine, garlands of.

Pipe, mentioned by Homer; made from asses' bones.

Pipe-music at entertainments.

Pisistratus, tyrant of Athens.

Pittacus, philosophy of.

Place, definition of.

Planets, musical proportions in distances between. See Astronomy.

Plants, with special properties; method of increase of.

Plato, on music; on procreation of the soul; on music of the spheres;
on an oracle delivered by Apollo; on fatigue as the enemy of learning;
quoted; reproof of Socrates by; praise of concise speaking by; on the
immortality of the soul; knowledge of music shown by; on God; statement
of, that drink passes through the lungs; birthday of; Chrysippus' works
against; Colotes' criticisms of; defence of.

Platonic Questions.

Platychaetas.

Pleonasm in Homer.

Plistarchus, son of Leonidas.

Plistoanax, son of Pausanias.

Ploiades, clouds called.

Poetry, Lacedaemonian; rank of music and; and love; parts common to
dancing and; of Homer; how a young man ought to hear.

Poets, greater improbabilities spoken by Stoics than by; prize for, at
games.

Poletes, among Epidamnians.

Political precepts.

Polity, civil, in Homer.

Poltys, sayings of.

Polycratidas.

Polycrita.

Polydorus.

Polypus, the; change of color of.

Pompeius, Cn.

Pontius, C., Roman hero.

Polpilius.

Porsena and the Roman maidens.

Porus.

Posidonius, school of.

Postumia, Vestal Virgin.

Poverty and wealth.

Praise of one's self.

Praising, directions concerning; care to be observed in.

Priest of Hercules at Cos.

Priests, customs of Roman.

Prince, Discourse to an unlearned.

Principle, difference between element and.

Principles, four first; defined.

Prinistum, founding of.

Proanaphonesis in Homer.

Procreation, of the soul; of children.

Prometheus, fate of, and herb named for.

Prosopopoiia, Homer's use of.

Providence, and fate; pertains to mind of God; Homer's views of.

Ptolemies, the, and flatterers; titles of the.

Ptolemy, son of Lagus.

Publius Decius, case of, and Greek parallel.

Pulse, abstention from; use of, by the Trallians.

Punishing, God's delay in.

Putrefaction of flesh.

Pyrrhus the Epirot, surnamed the Eagle; C. Fabricius and.

Pythagoras, discourages cruelty to animals; judgment of music by; on
principles and elements; conception of God; symbols and superstitions
of; doctrines of, which originated with Homer; parallel sayings of Homer
and.

Pythagoreans, beliefs about eating.

Pytheas, story of.

Pythes, the wife of.

Pythia, death of.

Pythian responses.

Quarry of asbestos.

Quaternary of Pythagoreans.

Questions, answers to; the asking of; for discussion at table.

Quickness effected by ellipsis in Homer.

Quince, to be eaten by brides.

Quinctius, T., stories of.

Quintessence, the, of the Aristote1ians.

Quirinalia, the Feast of Fools.

Quiritis and Quirinus.

Raillery at an entertainment.

Rainbow, cause of.

Rains, generation of, known to Homer.

Razor, mentioned by Homer.

Reading by old men.

Reason, paralyzed by fear.

Recapitulation, Homer's use of.

Red Sea, woods and plants in.

Regression, a figure of speech.

Relation, a figure of speech.

Reproofs, on bearing.

Resin used for incense.

Respiration, voice and; cause of.

Restraint, a character of speech.

Rex Sacrorum, king of priests.

Rhea, myth relating to; five gods of.

Rhetoric, Homer a master of.

Rhodope, the courtesan; mountain.

Riches, remarks on.

Rivers and their characteristics.

Rods and axes carried before officers.

Rogue Town, Philip's.

Roman Apothegms.

Roman Questions.

Romans, the fortune of the.

Romulus and Remus; Greek parallel.

Roundelay, Terpander invents.

Roxana.

Rules of health.

Rumina, sacrifices to.

Runners-to-supper.

Rusticus, anecdote of.

Sacred geese, the.

Sacrifices, of human beings by Romans; the result of superstition; flesh
of.

Sagaris, river of Phrygia.

Sailing, rate of, in winter.

St. Elmo's Fire.

Salmantica, women of.

Salt, Egyptian beliefs concerning; use of, for cattle; reasons for lack
of, in fruit; held in honor.

Sambicus, sufferings of.

Same and Other, Plato's.

Samian customs.

Sarcasm, use of, in Homer.

Sardians, sale of.

Saturn, the father of truth; temple of, as treasury and office of
record; star of the Jews.

Saturnalia.

Savings, remarkable; in Homer.

Scamander, river in Boeotia.

Scape-goat, ceremony of, among Egyptians.

Scedasus, daughters of.

Scilurus, sayings of.

Scipio the Elder.

Scipio Junior, sayings of.

Scolding, fault of.

Sea, less salt in winter; water of, poured upon wine; waves of, heated
by motion; calming the, by pouring on oil; composition and other
qualities of: food from the, vs. food from land.

Sea-sickness, degrees of.

Sea-water and trees.

Secret, keeping a.

Seed, generative.

Self-control.

Self-praise.

Semiramis, monument of.

Senses, definition, objects, number, action of, etc.

Septimontium, festival called.

Serapis, Egyptian name for Pluto.

Serpent, amour of a.

Servants' Holiday, origin of.

Servius, Roman king.

Seventeen, superstition concerning the number.

Seven Wise Men, banquet of the.

Sexes, generation of the different.

Shadows, guests called.

Sheep, qualities of flesh of, when bitten by wolves.

Shetland Islands.

Ships, sterns and stems on coins.

Shyness, an excess of modesty.

Sickness, causes of.

Sight, herb for curing weak; cause of; of old men; process of.

Silence, advantages of, contrasted with talkativeness; an answer to wise
men.

Simonides, quotation from.

Sinister, birds called, in soothsaying.

Sipylus, mountain of Asia.

Sirens, music of the.

Skeleton at the feast.

Slave, an obedient but stupid.

Slaves, feast-day of Roman; blinding of.

Sleep, and death; eating ore; cause of; question of, appertaining to
soul or body; Homer's valuation of.

Small Fortune, temple of.

Smelling, means of.

Sneezing, the Daemon of Socrates.

Snoring as a good omen in Homer.

Snow, generation of; preservation of.

Soap, natron the ancient substitute for.

Sober-stone, the.

Socrates, the Daemon of; on training of children; on the seat of true
happiness; quoted; conception of God; birthday of; Colotes' criticisms
of; defence of; "a midwife to others, himself not generating,".

Solon, precept of; and Croesus; on virtue and wealth.

Solstice, winter and summer.

Sons, conspicuous examples of deaths of.

Soos, story of.

Soothsaying, birds for; in Homer.

Sophocles, quotation from; paraphrase of Homer by.

Sorrow, advice on; exhibitions of.

Soul, essay on procreation of; passions of, vs. disorders of body;
nature, essence, parts, motion of, etc.; means by which sensible, and
principal part of; sympathy of, with passions of the body; Plato's
reasoning concerning; immortality of, according to Pythagoras, Plato,
and Homer; transmigration of the; Homer's treatment of powers and
passions of.

Sounds, heard better in the night than in the day; harmonizing of.

Sows, farrowing of.

Space, theories of.

Sparta, customs in.

Spartans, sayings of the; remarkable speeches of some obscure.

Speech, ill-advised freedom of; control of one's; of statesmen; value
of, to the health; composed of nouns and verbs, according to Plato.

Sperm, constitution of.

Spermatic emission of women.

Spiders, as an omen; skill of.

Spies, unpopularity resulting from.

Spoils of war, fate of.

Spurius, significance of name, and reason.

Stars, Egyptian beliefs concerning the; essence and composition; form
of; order and place; motion and circulation, whence their light, and
other qualities; circles about.

Statesmen, may praise themselves.

Stealing, among Lacedaemonians.

Stepmother, flower which dies at name of; the herb phryxa a protection
against.

Steward at banquets.

Stilpo, and Poseidon; references to; attacked by Colotes.

Stoics, views of God; improbabilities spoken by; common conceptions
against; contradictions of the; origin of doctrines of, with Homer.

Stones with special properties.

Stories of rivers and mountains.

Stratonica, Galatian woman.

Strymon, river of Thrace.

Style, types of, in Homer.

Summer, cause of; Stoics' view of.

Sun, titles of the; beliefs concerning the; Homer's opinions about;
identification of Apollo with.

Sun and Wind, fable of.

Sun-worship.

Superstition, essay on.

Surgery in Homer.

Swallows, nests of; superstitions about.

Swine as an unholy animal.

Sword-blades, cold-hammered.

Sycophant, derivation of.

Sylia the Fortunate; Marius's treatment of.

Syllables, number of, possible to make.

Symposiacs.

Synecdoche in Homer.

Table customs, Roman; Greek, see Banquets.

Table-talk (Symposiacs).

Tactics, Homer's knowledge of.

Tagyrae, oracle at.

Talkativeness, essay on.

Tanais, river of Scythia.

Tarpeia, Roman traitress, and Greek parallel.

Taste, cause of.

Taygetus, mountain.

Taylor, Jeremy, a borrower from Plutarch.

Tears of boar and hart.

Teleclus, King.

Telecrus, sayings of.

Telesilla, poetess.

Temper, governing the. See Anger.

Temperance, wisdom of.

Temples, in Rome; traitors walled up in.

Tenes, temple of.

Tenses in Homer.

Teres, saying of.

Terminus, the god.

Terpander, Lacedaemonian musician.

Teuthras, mountain.

Thalassius, name sung at nuptials.

Thales the Milesian; conception of God.

Theagenes, Theban hero.

Theano, wife of Pythagoras.

Thearidas, saying of.

Thectamenes.

Themisteas the prophet.

Themistocles.

Theocritus, unlucky remarks of; paraphrase of Homer by.

Theodorus of Soli, quoted.

Theogony, the ancient.

Theopompus; quoted.

Theoretic style in Homer.

Theoxenia, festival called.

Thermodon river of Scythia.

Theseus and Pirithous.

Thespesius, story of.

Thessaly, enchantments of.

Thiasi, sacrifice called.

Thirst, causes of; increased by eating.

Thorycion.

"Thou art" and "Know thyself,".

Three accords between wine and water.

Three elements necessary for moral excellence.

Three parts in dancing.

Thunder, theories about.

Thunder-showers, water of.

Tiberius and flatterer.

Tides, cause of.

Tigris, myths of the.

Timaeus, on the procreation of the soul; Atlantic by, cited.

Time, defined; substance and nature of.

Timoelea.

Timotheus; sayings of.

Timoxena, daughter of Plutarch, death of.

Tmolus, mountain, story of.

Tobacco, use of, hinted.

Togas without tunics for candidates for office.

Torches at nuptials.

Torture, inventors of engines of, rewarded.

Tracking wild beasts.

Tragedy, origin of, with Homer.

Training of children.

Traitors, parallel cases of Greek and Roman.

Tranquillity of mind.

Transmigration of the soul.

Trees, sea-water and; thrive better with rain than with watering;
grafting of fir, pine, etc.; so-called Iris-struck.

Triangle, revered by Egyptians.

Triangles, Plato's theories about.

Tribune of the people.

Tropes in Homer.

Troy, women of.

Truce from words, Pythagoras'.

Truthfulness, honorableness of, shown in Homer.

Tutors, qualifications of; responsibilities of.

Twins and triplets, causes of.

Typhon, legends of.

Tyranny depicted by Homer.

Tyrrhene women, the.

Ulysses, and the Coliads; temple of, in Lacedaemon; and Circe. See
Odysseus.

Unhappiness caused by vice.

Union results in strength.

Universe, theories of the government of the; conceptions of the;
principles and elements of; question as to whether it is one


++++++++LAST PAGE OF INDEX MISSING+++++++++












